Introduction
The appearance , probably shortly after 4000 BC , of a new lifestyle that was more sedentary than 
that of Mesolithic hunter-fisher-foragers marks the beginning of the Neolithic period in Scotland . 
This lifestyle was based on the use of domesticated plants and animals and featured fresh 
technology ( pottery ) as well as notably different practices , traditions and beliefs . DNA evidence 
has shown that this farming lifestyle was introduced by immigrants from Continental Europe 
( Brace et al . 2019 ) and , as far as Perth and Kinross is concerned , the particular ' strand ' of 
Neolithisation represented in this part of Scotland is the ' Carinated Bowl Neolithic '  , whose 
proximate Continental origin is the Nord-Pas de Calais region of northern France ( Sheridan 
2010a )  . The end of the Neolithic period is conventionally defined as the point at which Beaker 
pottery and associated Continental novelties appeared , during the 25th century BC ( SCARF 
2012 )  ; we know that this was also associated with the arrival of incomers from the Continent . For 
the purposes of this Framework , the Neolithic period is divided into the Early Neolithic , between 
c . 4000 BC and c . 3500 BC ; the Middle Neolithic , between c . 3500 BC and c . 3000 BC , and the Late 
Neolithic , between c . 3000 BC and 2500 / 2450 BC . 
Our understanding of the Neolithic period in Perth and Kinross is perhaps the broadest ( if not the 
deepest ) of any local authority area in Scotland – including Orkney – with a wide range of aspects 
of Neolithic lifeways and material culture identified through a long tradition of sustained 
campaigns of research excavation and , from the 1970s onwards , intense aerial reconnaissance 
and detailed cropmark interpretation . This work has since been supplemented by a broad range 
of important discoveries made during developer-funded archaeological work . There is also a 
strong tradition of ‘ amateur ’ archaeology in Perth and Kinross , underpinning excavation 
campaigns , arable fieldwalking and the identification of rock art . This chapter provides a short 
regional overview for the Neolithic in Perth and Kinross as we currently understand it and includes 
a brief history of archaeological research undertaken in the region as well as a more detailed 
assessment of the current resource . The research agenda provides recommendations for further 
work in the form of research priorities and questions . 
Regional Overview
The diverse natural environment of Perth and Kinross , with its distinctive Highland and Lowland 
landscape character types , has prompted an equally unique historic environment consisting of a 
broad range of Neolithic timber , earthwork and megalithic sites and monuments . These generally 
survive as upstanding archaeological sites in upland areas and as sub-surface remains , often 
made visible as cropmarks , found throughout the more agricultural broad valleys , basins and river 
corridors of the lowlands . Important natural routeways such as the east-west running straths and
Page 2 of 39
river corridors affording access to the Tay estuary and Firth coincide with good quality agricultural 
land , especially in the eastern and southern parts of the region , to make a landscape with 
attractive prospects for Scotland ’ s first farming communities . 
Not surprisingly , since Perth and Kinross is a modern administrative construct , the Neolithic of 
this part of Scotland has seldom been synthesised in isolation , with the area generally considered 
as part of the ‘ Tayside Region ’ or ‘ eastern lowland Scotland ’ as evidenced in many of Barclay ’ s 
publications ( eg Barclay and Maxwell 1998 ; Barclay 1999 ; 2003 )  . Incorporation into a broader 
regional picture is also evident in the Scottish Archaeological Research Framework ( ScARF ) 
where Perth and Kinross features extensively in the Neolithic report as part of an ‘ East and 
Central Scotland between the Great Glen and the Forth ’ synthesis ( ScARF 2012 , section 3 . 3 . 1 )  . 
Valuable insights into various aspects of the region ’ s Neolithic can also be found in edited volume 
chapters such as in Vessels for the Ancestors ( Sharples and Sheridan 1992 ) and The Neolithic 
of Mainland Scotland ( Brophy et al . 2016 )  , as well as throughout Noble ’ s Neolithic Scotland : 
timber , stone , earth and fire ( 2006 )  , within Kinnes ’ thoughtful review of Scottish Neolithic studies 
in the mid-1980s ( Kinnes 1986 )  , and as part of Prehistoric Forteviot ( Brophy and Noble 2020 )  , 
the first monograph of the Strathearn Environs and Royal Forteviot ( SERF ) project . Richard 
Bradley ’ s excavations at Croftmoraig / Croft Moraig , Strathtay are invaluable in revealing that some 
monuments , long considered to be of Neolithic date , are in fact much later ( Bradley and Sheridan 
2005 ; Bradley 2011 ; Bradley and Nimura 2016 )  . As regards Neolithic material culture in Perth 
and Kinross , the axeheads of Alpine jadeitite are covered in the publications concerning the 
French-led , international Projet JADE ( Sheridan et al . 2011 ; Sheridan and Pailler 2012 ; Gauthier 
and Pétrequin 2017 )  , while thin-sectioned axeheads of other kinds of stone are listed in Stone 
Axe Studies II ( Clough and Cummins 1988 ; Ritchie and Scott 1988 ) and the results of National 
Museums ’ Scotland excavations at the stone quarry at Creag Na Caillich near Killin were 
published by Edmonds et al . in 1993 . A review of the Neolithic pottery from central and eastern 
Scotland was published by Trevor Cowie in 1992 and 1994 ( Cowie 1992 ; 1994 ; see also Sheridan 
2016 )  , while the pitchstone finds from Perth and Kinross are covered by Torben Ballin ’ s 
nationwide survey of the use and dating of pitchstone ( Ballin 2009 ; 2015 )  , and maceheads are 
covered in Fiona Roe ’ s nationwide survey ( Roe 1968 ; 1979 )  . 
An ‘ Eastern Lowland ’ Scottish Neolithic
In a sense , the Neolithic of Perth and Kinross , as we currently understand it , forms part of an 
 ‘ eastern lowland ’ Scottish Neolithic which has been defined by Sheridan and Brophy ( ScARF 
2012 ) as consisting of : 
● an extensive array of timber and earthwork monument types , notably cursus monuments , 
palisaded enclosures , timber circles and pre-henge activity ; 
● a burial record dominated by long barrows , mortuary enclosures and , to a lesser extent , 
round mounds / barrows ; 
● cropmark evidence for timber halls ( eg Claish ) and similar rectangular structures ; 
● a settlement record dominated by pits and pit clusters ; 
● a broad selection of material culture including Neolithic pottery traditions from Carinated 
Bowl to Grooved Ware . 
To these can be added Late Neolithic timber structures featuring a central setting of four large 
posts , with one or more surrounding post ring , whose dating has become a little clearer since 
2012 thanks to the excavations at Leadketty ( Wright and Brophy forthcoming )  , Dunning and 
Page 3 of 39
Haughs of Pittentian ( Becket et al . forthcoming )  , Crieff . The function of these structures , however , 
remains a topic of debate . 
An ‘ Upland ’ Neolithic ? 
The evidence for Neolithic activities is somewhat different across the upland areas of the region 
north of the Highland Boundary Fault , and here the Neolithic is characterised by the presence of 
different monuments and site types , namely chambered cairns , long cairns , stone circles , 
standing stones and other stone settings . Rock art appears more common in this part of Perth 
and Kinross than in the lowlands , although that may partly be due to more intensive prospection 
in this area , combined with greater destruction in intensively-farmed areas to the south . The stone 
quarry used for making axeheads and at least one cushion macehead at Creag Na Caillich 
( Edmonds et al . 1993 ) above Killin also lies in this area . It should be noted that standing stones 
are also evident in the lowlands such as around Dunning , Strathearn and lower down the valley 
in the shadow of Moncreiffe Hill and around Mailer Hill ( where there are also flint scatters ) 
although they survive to a much lesser extent than in the uplands . Whether this reflects deliberate 
site construction decisions by Neolithic communities or is a consequence of site preservation , 
with more destruction occurring in the more intensively-farmed lowlands , remains a matter for 
further investigation . The megalithic tradition and the relationships between its occurrence across 
different landscape character types ( uplands and lowlands ) requires more extensive research 
and analysis , although clearly the chambered tombs at Cultoquhey , east of Gilmerton and 
Kindrochat , near Comrie can be understood as easterly outliers of the Clyde cairn tradition of 
south-west Scotland . Careful consideration of chronology is also needed when dealing with 
standing stone monuments , since it is clear that some of these were erected during the Bronze 
Age . While rock art is assumed to date to the Late Neolithic further investigation is required to 
allow accurate chronologies for their creation to be developed . 
History of Research in Perth and Kinross
As with elsewhere in Scotland , Neolithic monuments were the focus of antiquarian inquiry from 
the 19th century onward with Investigation and documentation of megalithic monuments and 
burials being the most common prior to the merger of the Perthshire and Kinross-shire Counties 
in 1975 . In many instances , the sites are only known about through the Ordnance Survey Name 
Book and Statistical Accounts and provide limited input into our contemporary understanding of 
Neolithic Perth and Kinross , in part due to the subsequent loss of recovered material remains . 
Nonetheless , valuable work by the likes of Fred Coles at the turn of the 20th century have offered 
useful building blocks for analysis ( eg Coles 1909 )  . 
In the middle decades of the 20th century , a series of excavations were carried out at Neolithic 
monuments in the County by eminent archaeologists such as V Gordon Childe , Stuart Piggott , 
Derek Simpson and John Coles . Childe , for instance , investigated a Clyde-type chambered cairn 
at Kindrochat with a team of students in 1929–30 ( Childe 1930 ; 1931 ; Ralston 2009 )  . Between 
them , Coles , Piggott and Simpson carried out important excavations at a diverse range of sites 
in Strathtay including Pitnacree round barrow in 1964 ( Coles and Simpson 1965 ) and a complex 
pit cluster at Haugh of Grandtully in 1966–67 ( Simpson et al . 1991 )  . In 1965 Piggott and Simpson 
( 1971 ) also excavated Croftmoraig / Croft Moraig stone circle ; however , their Neolithic 
interpretation has since been overturned by more recent excavations that produced an entirely 
Bronze Age sequence of dates ( see chapters in Bradley and Nimura 2016 )  . 
The early interventions were supplemented by the work of Margaret Stewart MBE and Gordon 
Barclay who focused much of their attention on studying the Neolithic of Perth and Kinross . Both 
Page 4 of 39
have made significant personal contributions to our current understanding of the Neolithic in the 
area through their sustained campaigns of excavation . 
Stewart ( 1907–1986 ) was a student of Childe and a notable figure in the history of the 
archaeology department at the University of Edinburgh ( Ralston 2009 )  . Stewart ’ s activities were 
centred around the pre-1975 County of Perthshire ( Taylor 1989 , 1 ) where she excavated a 
diverse range of Neolithic ( and Bronze Age ) sites and monuments between the 1930s and 1970s 
including stone settings at Monzie , Crieff ( Young and Crichton Mitchell 1939 )  , Sandy Road , 
Scone ( Stewart 1965 )  , and a group of four-post stone settings in Strathtay ( Stewart 1966 ; 1974 ; 
Stewart and Barclay 1997 )  . Together with Audrey Henshall , Stewart investigated the chambered 
cairn at Clach na Tiompan in the Sma ’ Glen ( Henshall and Stewart 1954 ) and a site at Dull near 
Aberfeldy , which she believed to have been a chambered cairn ( Stewart 1959 : 74 ; the 
identification was disputed and not accepted by Henshall )  . She also excavated the complex multiphase ‘ mini ’ henge at Moncreiffe House although most of this site was found to be post-Neolithic 
in date ( Stewart 1986 )  . Stewart also undertook an extensive survey of the prehistoric monuments 
of Perthshire ( Stewart 1959 )  . 
Barclay spent much of his career working with Historic Scotland , and in the early part , from 1977 
onwards , was based in their Central Excavation Unit ( Ralston 2016 )  . This position allowed him 
the opportunity to direct important and large-scale excavations at a range of prehistoric sites and 
monuments across Scotland with some of his most important work being located in Perth and 
Kinross . His excavations at North Mains henge and barrow in Strathearn during the late 1970s 
were amongst the most significant undertaken in modern archaeology in Scotland ( Barclay 1983 ) 
and began an extended interest in cropmark sites of this period and region . In the early 1990s 
Barclay , together with Gordon Maxwell , excavated a Neolithic mortuary enclosure at Inchtuthil , 
the Cleaven Dyke ( Canmore IDs 28473 / 73146 ) cursus , and the timber structure at Littleour
amongst many other sites ( Barclay and Maxwell 1992 ; 1998 )  . His First Farmers project , funded 
by the Arts and Humanities Research Council , endeavoured to identify Neolithic settlement sites 
in Perth and Kinross and included excavations of the Claish timber hall ( now Stirling although 
historically in Perth and Kinross ) in 2001 ( Barclay et al . 2003 )  , the timber structures at Carsie 
Mains in 2002 ( Brophy and Barclay 2004 )  , and other assorted cropmark enclosures , pit clusters 
and lithic scatters with mixed results . His contribution to our understanding of the region ’ s 
Neolithic also included important synthesising studies on settlement , enclosures , cursus 
monuments and henges ( eg Barclay 1999 ; 2001a ; 2003 ; for full bibliography see Ralston 2016 )  . 
Both Stewart and Barclay were strong supporters of the ‘ amateur scene ’ in the County of 
Perthshire and Stewart performed a leading role in the Perthshire Society of Natural Science , 
founding its Archaeological and Historical Section in 1948 ( see ' Archaeology and History –
Perthshire Society of Natural Science '  )  , and was a strong supporter of community excavations 
( Taylor 1989 ; Hall 2018 )  . Barclay was a patron of the ‘ Stones and Bones ’ fieldwalking group who 
were active during his excavations of the 1990s and 2000s ( eg Hallyburton and Brown 2000 )  . 
Following from the work of Barclay , the Strathearn Environs and Royal Forteviot ( SERF ) Project 
delivered a significant , decade-long research-based fieldwork programme ( 2006–2017 ) through 
the University of Glasgow ( and Aberdeen in its initial phase )  . This landscape-scale , multiphase 
approach has added considerably to our understanding of Neolithic monumentality around the 
Forteviot-Leadketty complexes in Strathearn ( Driscoll et al . 2010 ; Noble and Brophy 2011a , 
2011b ; Brophy and Noble 2020 ; Wright and Brophy forthcoming ) as well as Neolithic cremation 
Page 5 of 39
practices ( Noble , Brophy and Younger 2020 ; Noble et al . 2017 )  . SERF has also contributed 
towards research priorities such as the transition between the Neolithic and Chalcolithic periods , 
the chronology of henge monuments , and the general lack of environmental contextualisation for 
Neolithic sites . PhD research has ensued from SERF team members such as Kirsty Millican ’ s 
work on timber monuments ( 2009 ; 2016a ; 2016b ) and Rebecca Younger ’ s thesis on henge 
monuments ( 2015 ; 2016 )  , with the broader project results as they relate to the Neolithic published 
in Prehistoric Forteviot ( Brophy and Noble 2020 )  , the first of four SERF monographs . 
Cropmarks are one of the most significant characteristics of the Neolithic archaeological record 
in Perth and Kinross and , as previously mentioned , were the focus of most of Barclay ’ s work and 
part of the SERF Project ’ s prehistoric excavations ( Brophy and Noble 2020 )  . Early aerial 
reconnaissance in the area where Neolithic sites were documented began with the Cambridge 
University Aerial Photograph Collection ( CUCAP ) as a tertiary output from flights by J . K . St 
Joseph that largely focused on suspected Roman period targets ( Jones 2005 )  , a notable example 
being the palisaded enclosure complex at Forteviot ( Canmore ID 26559 / 296263 ; St Joseph 
1976 )  . The identification and interpretation of cropmarks through broader aerial reconnaissance 
work by the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historic Monuments of Scotland ( RCAHMS , 
now Historic Environment Scotland )  ( Maxwell 1979 ) has radically influenced the way that the 
Neolithic is viewed across large swathes of lowland Scotland ( Barclay 1993 ; Brophy 2007a )  . This 
is especially the case in Perth and Kinross where large numbers of Neolithic sites and types such 
as possible timber halls , four-post structures , cursus monuments , mortuary enclosures , timber 
circles , palisaded enclosures and henges were unknown prior to the sorties commencing in 1976 . 
Crucially , a large number of these cropmarks have been subject to detailed and innovative 
interpretation and synthesis by the RCAHMS as published in their volume South East Perth : an 
archaeological landscape ( RCAHMS 1994 )  . 
Where surveys have taken place in the uplands the mixed results have played a lesser role in our 
understanding of this period and it is likely that Neolithic sites remain undiscovered across much 
of the region ’ s uplands . Possible Neolithic sites were identified in Strathtay in the 1950s ( Stewart 
1959 ) but none was identified by RCAHMS surveys in Strathardle or Glen Shee in the late 1980s 
( RCAHMS 1990 )  . Between 1996 and 2005 , much attention was focused on the environs of Ben 
Lawers as part of the Ben Lawers Historic Landscape project which included an RCAHMS survey 
in addition to the GUARD excavations ( see Atkinson et al . 2016 )  . Possible and probable Neolithic 
sites identified during the RCAHMS survey work included chambered cairns and standing stones 
with the excavations revealing lithics such as leaf-shaped arrowheads and pitchstone blades . 
Submerged woodland remains at Craggantoul ( MPK17641 ) in Loch Tay returned wide-ranging 
radiocarbon dates including those for three Neolithic oaks calibrated to various spans between 
about 3500 cal BC and 3000 cal BC ( Dixon 2007 , Dixon 2016 )  . Over 100 outcrops and boulders 
with rock art were also identified ( albeit their chronology remains unclear )  ( Hale 2003 )  . These 
discoveries were followed up by excavations of several rock art sites in 2007–10 ( Bradley et al . 
2013 )  . Further identifications have since been made by amateur rock art investigator George 
Currie ( regularly reported in Discovery and Excavation in Scotland ) and research into Perth and 
Kinross ’ s extensive rock art record continues through Historic Environment Scotland ’ s Scotland ’ s 
Rock Art Project ( ScRAP )  . Considering these different projects together , it is clear that the 
application of multiple techniques of analysis to the investigation of sites and monuments around 
Ben Lawers and its wider Loch Tay environs have successfully identified Neolithic activity away 
from lowland arable areas . 
Page 6 of 39
Other fieldwork carried out in the uplands above the Highland Boundary Fault was the research 
excavation of the stone quarry , or so-called ‘ axe factory ’  , at Creag Na Caillich above Killin in 
1989 . This was funded by National Museums Scotland ( NMS ) and led by Mark Edmonds , with 
Alison Sheridan ; palaeoenvironmental analysis was undertaken by Richard Tipping ( Edmonds et 
al . 1993 )  . This work followed on from much earlier fieldwork carried out by Roy Ritchie and Euan 
MacKie , as described by Edmonds et al .  ( 1993 )  , and it clarified the nature of the activities that 
took place , the date of these activities ( namely intermittent , small-scale exploitation during the 
third millennium BC and probably also the late fourth millennium BC ) and the environment around 
the time of the quarrying . Petrological research by NMS also confirmed Roy Ritchie ’ s suspicion 
that a cushion macehead found at Knock on the Outer Hebridean isle of Lewis is of Creag na 
Caillich calc-silicate hornfels ( ibid .  )  . 
A notable emergent theme in regional Neolithic studies is developer-funded archaeological work 
which has made a significant contribution to Scotland ’ s archaeology sector since the latter half of 
the 1980s ( Carter 2002 )  . Perth and Kinross features in Scotland-wide reviews of commercially 
delivered fieldwork contributions ( Phillips and Bradley 2005 ; Brophy 2007a ) with an assessment 
by Brophy ( 2007a ) identifying that , between 1985 and 2014 , 50% of the archaeological 
excavations revealing Neolithic dated material were undertaken in advance of development . Work 
by commercial sector organisations is clearly of great importance and continues to be informative 
to our understanding of the period , complementing the result of research-based excavations . The 
excavations at Haughs of Pittentian ( MPK18545 ) between 2011 and 2014 , undertaken as part of 
preparations for the Beauly to Denny overhead electricity cable ( Becket et al . forthcoming )  , are a 
good example of this , as is the recent archaeological work associated with Transport Scotland ’ s 
A9 dualling programme ( Paton and Wilson 2019 )  . 
Major UK-wide and international research projects have also contributed insights into the 
Neolithic period in Perth and Kinross . The Gathering Time chronology project , led by Alasdair 
Whittle with Alex Bayliss and Frances Healy and funded by the Arts and Humanities Research 
Council and English Heritage , has Bayesian-modelled the available radiocarbon dates for 
Neolithic ‘ things and practices ’ in Scotland south of the Great Glen ( Whittle et al . 2011 , chapter 
14 )  . Whittle et al . concluded that ‘ the Neolithic ’ in this part of Scotland began either 3950–3765 
cal BC ( 95 . 4% probability ) or 3835–3760 cal BC ( 95 . 4% probability )  , the different estimates being 
due to the fact that Perth and Kinross straddles their ‘ south Scotland ’ and ‘ north-east Scotland ’ 
regions ( See Sheridan 2012 for a review of their findings , also Sheridan and Schulting 2020 for 
new Bayesian modelling of Scottish funerary monuments )  . Whittle et al . are revisiting their 
chronological models in the light of the new IntCal20 radiocarbon calibration which may alter the 
conclusions thus far drawn . Projet JADE , a major international research project funded by the 
Agence Nationale de la Recherche , France and led by Pierre Pétrequin , has transformed our 
understanding of the small number of Alpine axeheads found in Perth and Kinross by locating the 
source of the rock and situating their arrival in Scotland within a Europe-wide picture of Alpine 
rock exploitation and circulation ( Pétrequin et al . 2012a / b ; 2017a / b )  . This work follows on from an 
earlier tradition of research into the stone axeheads of this part of Scotland ( and the rest of 
Britain )  , undertaken by the Implement Petrology Committee ( now Group ) mostly in the 1970s and 
1980s and involving petrological thin-sectioning of selected axeheads ( Ritchie and Scott 1988 )  . 
Other research that has provided information on Neolithic Perth and Kinross is the long-standing 
radiocarbon dating programme of National Museums Scotland which has produced a date for 
secondary activity at the Early Neolithic round barrow at Pitnacree ( Sheridan 2010b ) and , in 
Page 7 of 39
collaboration with Rick Schulting , has produced a date relating to the use of Cultoquhey 
chambered tomb ( Sheridan and Schulting 2020 )  . 
The Extant Resource
Funerary and Allied Monuments and Funerary Practices
Early Neolithic
The region hosts a variety of Neolithic funerary and allied monuments : the non-megalithic round 
barrow at Pitnacree , several long mounds ( some demonstrably chambered )  , the chambered tomb 
at Cultoquhey ( MPK859 )  ( whose cairn may have been round )  , and rare rectangular ‘ mortuary 
enclosures ’ such as at Inchtuthil . The enormously long ( 342 m )  ‘ bank barrow ’ at Auchenlaich 
( now in Stirling , but formerly in Perthshire )  , the 1 . 8 km long bank barrow-cum-cursus monument 
at Cleaven Dyke ( Canmore IDs 28473 / 73146 ) and the cursus monuments of Perth and Kinross 
may represent aggrandized versions of the long mound and mortuary enclosure monument types 
respectively , being built probably during the second quarter of the fourth millennium BC . These 
sites may have had a function relating to the commemoration of the dead even if they were not 
used to house human remains . 
The non-megalithic round barrow at Pitnacree , which is associated with Carinated Bowl Neolithic 
pottery , could date as early as the 37th ( or possibly late 38th ) century BC , although sadly attempts 
to locate and date the cremated human remains from its initial period of use have so far been 
unsuccessful ( Sheridan 2010b )  . Excavations here in the 1960s ( Coles and Simpson 1965 ) 
showed that this earth and stone mound covered a rectangular mortuary structure which , in its 
earliest phase , was constructed using two massive split-trunk posts . It may be that this had initially 
stood as a free-standing mortuary structure , allowing the decomposition of the small number of 
people placed on or in it .  ( Similar rectangular timber mortuary structures are known from early 
Carinated Bowl Neolithic contexts elsewhere in Britain .  ) A subsequent phase of construction 
involved the erection of a horseshoe-shaped , low stone cairn around the mortuary structure and 
the deposition of the cremated remains of an adult male plus a second adult ( probably female ) 
and a child on the old ground surface in the area of the mortuary structure . The whole was then 
covered by a turf mound ( Coles and Simpson 1965 ; Kinnes 1992 )  . Pitnacree is one of only six 
definite and probable Neolithic round barrows in Scotland ( Sheridan 2010b )  . There are other large 
round mounds located in Strathtay and beyond , several of which are represented in the cropmark 
record , which might prove to be of Neolithic date if excavated ( Barclay 1999 ; Brophy 2010 )  , 
however , an Early Bronze Age date is equally , or arguably , more likely . 
It is unclear whether any non-megalithic long mounds were constructed in Perth and Kinross , 
even though Ian Kinnes listed two long cairns ( at Cairn Wochel [ MPK807 ] and Fortingall 
( MPK460 ]  ) in his review of the non-megalithic long mounds of Britain ( Kinnes 1992a : 18 ; 1992b )  . 
Two candidates for earthen long barrows are known from cropmarks , at Thorn near Auchterarder 
and Haugh of Grandtully , while another two are largely known through antiquarian accounts . 
Herald Hill near Blairgowrie is an example of a possible Neolithic long barrow ( or cairn ) 
augmenting a natural mound . Trapezoidal in plan and around 70–80m long and 15–20m across , 
it was confirmed to be at least partly humanly constructed by test-pitting during the Cleaven Dyke 
project ( Barclay and Maxwell 1997 )  ; it is located just over one kilometre east-south-east of the 
visible traces of the Cleaven Dyke . It has also been suggested that the north-west end of the 
Cleaven Dyke itself is a long barrow , possibly adjacent to an oval barrow ( Barclay and Maxwell 
Page 8 of 39
1998 , 20 )  . Returning to the two long cairns listed by Kinnes in his corpus of non-megalithic long 
mounds in Britain , that at Fortingall in Strathtummel is almost 40m long , and sits on the floor of a 
valley and was proposed as a possible Neolithic monument by Henshall ( 1972 : 478 )  . The 
example at Cairn Wochel , north of Braco was destroyed and is only known from an antiquarian 
account of 1726 where it is reported to have been around 55m long ( ibid .  : 478 )  . Neither has been 
excavated but an 18th century account records the discovery of a ‘ stone coffin , in which there 
was a skeleton 7 feet long ’  , at Cairn Wochel . 
Richard Bradley ( pers . comm .  ) has raised the intriguing question of whether the monument 
excavated at Castle Menzies Home Farm ( Halliday 2002 ) in Strathtay , normally described as a 
post-defined cursus ( eg in Millican 2016 : Fig . 8 . 2 )  , is actually a large , ploughed-out non-megalithic 
long barrow that has been converted into a cursus monument by the addition of an unknown 
length of post-lines . Such an interpretation would account for the concave facade at one end , 
which contrasts the straight ends characteristic of cursus monuments , and the multiple phases of 
construction that are evident ( Halliday 2002 )  . The dimensions ( c . 130x36m to the end of the first 
stretch of roughly parallel posts ) and its early fourth millennium BC radiocarbon dates ( albeit from 
oak charcoal , and thus with a possible ‘ old wood ’ effect ) are also consistent with such an 
hypothesis . Examples are known where long mounds are apparently edged by ditches or postlines ( eg Dalladies , Aberdeenshire [ Kinnes 1992a : Fig . 2 . 4 . 2 ] and Eweford West and Pencraig 
Hill , East Lothian [ Lelong and MacGregor 2007 : 20 , 34 ]  . These enclosing features may have 
defined pre-barrow mortuary enclosures surrounding non-megalithic mortuary structures )  . 
Chambered long cairns are known at Clach na Tiompan ( Henshall 1972 : 468-72 )  , Kindrochat 
( MPK348 ; ibid .  : 472-5 )  , Rottenreoch ( MPK908 ; ibid .  , 475 )  , Middleton of Derculich ( MPK1081 ; 
ibid .  : 478 ) and Carie ( MPK17072 )  . All are located in the upper valleys of the rivers Almond , Earn 
and Tay and , despite Kindrochat having received intrusive attention from Gordon Childe , and 
Clach na Tiompan having been investigated by Audrey Henshall and Margaret Stewart ( Henshall 
and Stewart 1954 )  , none have been excavated in the past 50 years . The example from Carie , on 
the north side of Loch Tay , was recorded as recently as 2000 through an RCAHMS field survey 
undertaken during the Ben Lawers Historic Landscape Project ( referred to as Kiltyrie in 
MacGregor and Toolis 2016 : 9 , 29 )  . Like the monuments at Clach na Tiompan , Kindrochat and 
possibly also Rottenreoch , the chambered cairn at Carie can be related to the Clyde group of 
chambered cairns , whose distribution focuses on south-west and west Scotland . The chambered 
tomb at Cultoquhey ( MPK859 )  , which may have had a round cairn , has also been classified as a 
further eastern outlier of the Clyde group ( Henshall 1972 : 475-7 )  . A fragment of an unburnt human 
bone from Cultoquhey was radiocarbon dated to 4680±40 BP ( GrA-26922 , 3628–3366 cal BC : 
Sheridan and Schulting 2020 ) which accords with the broader picture of Clyde cairn chronology 
in which this style of chambered tomb seems to have emerged 3765–3645 BC ( ibid .  : 203 and 
Fig . 18 . 5 ; date range in italics because it is Bayesian-modelled )  . Clyde cairns are a regional 
development that appears to represent a translation into stone of the earliest Neolithic nonmegalithic funerary structures that are associated with the Carinated Bowl Neolithic . The fact that 
eastern outliers of this monumental tradition are present in Perth and Kinross illustrates that in 
the highland part of this region , at least , there existed contacts with the west and south-west of 
Scotland . To this list of chambered cairns can be added the first-phase of the trapezoidal 
monument at Auchenlaich , near Callander in Stirling ( Foster and Stevenson 2002 ) where the 
monument , with chamber aligned on its shallow facade and a lateral chamber , was subsequently 
enlarged to become a massive 322 metre-long bank barrow . 
Page 9 of 39
The excavated rectangular ‘ mortuary enclosure ’ at Inchtuthil , within the Roman Legionary 
Fortress , was found to be of Early Neolithic date when it was excavated ( Barclay and Maxwell 
1991 )  . It consists of a ditch enclosing a roughly rectangular area 53 . 9m long by 8 . 4m to 10m wide 
in which two fence-like structures supported by substantial upright timbers had been built , one 
after the other , with the later of the two subsequently being burnt down . When extant , the 
continuous fence would have blocked visual access to the interior although some kind of entrance 
presumably existed . Analysis of fragments of the burnt timbers at Inchtuthil revealed all samples 
to be of mature oak , including posts and radially-split planks ( Mills 1992 )  . This latter technology 
contrasts the tangentially-split oak planks that have been excavated at the part-waterlogged Early 
Neolithic long barrow at Haddenham in Cambridgeshire ( Morgan 1990 ; Evans and Hodder 2006 ) 
and shows the potential for recovering information on Neolithic woodland use , character and 
technology even from burnt remains . While no human remains were found in the Inchtuthil 
enclosure , the resemblance of this structure to the post- or ditch- enclosures found surrounding 
mortuary structures and / or long mounds elsewhere ( eg at Dalladies , Aberdeenshire [ Kinnes 
1992a : Fig . 2 . 4 . 3 ] and Eweford West and Pencraig Hill , East Lothian [ Lelong and MacGregor 
2007 : 20 , 34 ]  ) has led to the idea that Inchtuthil could have been used as an area for laying out 
the dead for exposure . Other candidates for Early Neolithic mortuary enclosures in Perth and 
Kinross are known from cropmarks , where they are generally defined by timber posts . A postbuilt rectangular mortuary enclosure is known at Douglasmuir in Angus ( Kendrick 1980 ; note that 
Millican 2016 : Fig . 8 . 2 classes this as a cursus )  , but in general these monuments are rare in 
Britain ( Kinnes 1992a : 19 )  . 
In Scotland cursus monuments have mostly been found in Tayside and Fife , East Lothian and 
the eastern part of Dumfries and Galloway ( Brophy 2015 ) but an example was also found on 
Arran in 2020 . All but one of the region ’ s cursus monuments are known only as cropmarks . They 
are broadly defined as long , rectangular monuments and although their function remains unclear , 
rituals involving processing would undoubtedly have taken place along their length . In the case 
of some post-built examples , deliberate fire setting to create a dramatic conflagration is also likely 
( Thomas 2007 )  . They look like significantly elongated versions of the Early Neolithic rectangular 
mortuary enclosures discussed above and could have been associated with commemorating the 
dead at a societal , possibly ‘ tribal ’  , level . It is unknown whether the dead would have been interred 
within them but examples exist from England where human remains have been found in cursus 
monuments ( Bradley 2019 : 74 )  . As noted above , the likely conversion of an Early Neolithic long 
barrow into a cursus monument at Castle Menzies Home Farm is consistent with the idea that 
there is some element of commemorating the dead at these sites . The dating of Scottish cursus 
monuments , and the style of Carinated Bowl pottery associated with the examples excavated at 
Holywood North and South in Dumfries and Galloway ( Thomas 2007 )  , suggest that they are likely 
to have been constructed during the second quarter of the fourth millennium BC . 
Like the earthwork cursus at Broich in Strathearn ( Cachart and Perry 2009 )  , the Castle Menzies 
Home Farm cursus / long barrow was excavated in advance of development / quarrying . 
Excavations at other cursus sites in the region have revealed variety in monument form and 
context with Milton of Rattray cursus near Blairgowrie defined by pits instead of posts ( Brophy 
2000 ) and Blairhall by Scone revealed as an important hybrid timber-earthwork cursus ( King 
1982 )  . Blairhall sits amidst a rich cropmark complex including a parallel linear barrow cemetery 
of presumably much later date and offers a good example of cropmark potential for broadening 
our understanding of these sites ( Brophy 2015 )  . 
Page 10 of 39
The unique monument known as the Cleaven Dyke , near Blairgowrie ( Barclay and Maxwell 
1998 )  , appears to combine features of a cursus monument ( namely a long pair of parallel ditches ) 
with that of a bank barrow ( namely a long mound , running centrally between the ditches )  . It 
survives to a length of 1 . 8 km and may originally have been longer . One of the most spectacular 
Neolithic earthworks in Europe , it was excavated at least four times during the 20th century , with 
the latest and most conclusive work being carried out in the 1990s by Barclay and Maxwell . This 
demonstrated that the monument was Neolithic and not Roman as previously believed ( ibid .  )  . 
Barclay and Maxwell concluded that the monument was likely to have been built in the 4th 
millennium BC and its construction was not single-phase but involved successive additions and 
continually extended to the south-east ( ibid .  )  . As noted above , it may have been built onto a preexisting Early Neolithic non-megalithic long barrow at its north-westerly end . 
Another example of a bank barrow , formally within the pre-1975 County of Perthshire but now in 
Stirling , is the 322 metre-long rectangular mound at Auchenlaich ( Foster and Stevenson 2002 )  . 
This appears to have started its life as a trapezoidal chambered long mound , up to 48m long . The 
act of aggrandizing the mound will , like the construction of cursus monuments and of the Cleaven 
Dyke , have involved an enormous input of communal labour by a large number of people . It may 
well be , then , that as with cursus building , this was a way for an entire community , or ‘ tribe ’  , to 
commemorate its dead . Bank barrows are rare in Scotland and are scattered from Dumfries and 
Galloway to Moray ( Brophy 2015 )  ; a few have been found elsewhere in Britain ( Bradley 2019 : 
71-6 )  . 
It may well be that the longer ditch- or pit-defined cursus monuments found in Perth and Kinross , 
elsewhere in Scotland ( Brophy 1998 ; 2015 ; Brophy and Millican 2015 ) and indeed the rest of 
Britain ( Bradley 2019 : 71–6 ) constitute aggrandized versions of rectangular mortuary enclosures , 
while bank barrows ( and the hybrid bank barrow / cursus monument at Cleaven Dyke ) may be 
aggrandized versions of long mounds . As noted above , the Cleaven Dyke may have been built 
onto a pre-existing Early Neolithic long barrow at its north-west end , and the Auchenlaich bank 
barrow seems to have been built onto a pre-existing chambered long cairn . This points towards 
a function in commemorating the ancient dead . The communal effort required to construct 
funerary mounds , and the even bigger effort required to construct cursus monuments and bank 
barrows , offers hints as to the nature of Early Neolithic social organisation ( cf . Sheridan and 
Schulting 2020 )  . Memorialising small numbers of individuals inside non-megalithic round and long 
barrows , effectively inaccessible for subsequent interments , may have portrayed them as 
 ‘ founding ancestors ’ and the task of constructing the mound would have involved several 
households . By the time that cursus monuments and bank barrows were constructed , these acts 
of memorialising the ancestors seem to have involved the entirety of the broader community , or 
 ‘ tribe ’  , strengthening the identity and cohesion of this larger social grouping . 
Middle Neolithic
Middle Neolithic funerary practices are represented by structures which , at first sight , appear to 
resemble the large Early Neolithic houses or ‘ halls ’ of the initial farming groups but which are 
believed to be enclosed spaces for raised exposure platforms which would have allowed openair decomposition of the dead . These consist of roughly rectangular post-built structures with 
rounded ends and with further postholes indicating the former existence of massive posts within 
the interior . They measure up to c . 23m in length and c . 9m in width . In at least some cases they 
appear to have been burnt down . Examples at Littleour beside the Cleaven Dyke ( Barclay and 
Maxwell 1998 ) and at Carsie Mains , also near Blairgowrie ( Brophy and Barclay 2004 )  , have been 
Page 11 of 39
excavated . As with the Early Neolithic rectangular mortuary enclosures , no human remains have 
been found although no unburnt bones left in the open air can be expected to have survived in 
the soil conditions of this part of Scotland . A further example known from cropmarks at Balrae 
Cottage near Blairgowrie adds to this small cluster of sites with another possible example was 
excavated in 2020 on the opposite side of the River Tay at the A9 Dualling Stanley Junction 
Borrow Pit ( Airey 2020 )  . This structure consists of six large and four smaller adjacent post holes , 
some of which contained undiagnostic prehistoric pottery . Further afield , two examples of this 
kind of site were excavated at Balfarg Riding School in Fife ( Barclay and Russell-White 1983 )  . 
No parallels for this type of monument can be found outside this part of Scotland and it appears 
to represent a regionally-specific phenomenon . The dating of these monuments relies on the 
apparent pre-dating of deposits of Grooved Ware at Littleour and Balfarg Riding School as well 
as a radiocarbon date of 4640±60 BP ( 3629–3111 cal BC at 95 . 4% , GU-4379 ) obtained from oak 
charcoal from a massive axial post inside Littleour . An ‘ old wood ’ effect may apply to a further 
date ( 4435±70 BP / 3341–2917 cal BC at 95 . 4% , AA-53270B ) obtained from a charred hazel twig 
at Carsie Mains , which may have made its way into one of the small post holes after the post had 
rotted or been removed . 
Late Neolithic
Late Neolithic funerary practices are in evidence at the Forteviot cemetery which features 
deposits of cremated remains ( Noble et al . 2017 ; 2020 )  . Here , nine discrete deposits representing 
18 individuals were found along with a small , undecorated hemispherical cup that could have 
been a chafing vessel for transporting burning embers to light the pyres ( Sheridan 2020 )  , and 
fragments of long bone ‘ skewer ’ pins that had probably fastened funerary garments ( Leach et al . 
2020 )  . A single standing stone , of which only the stump survives , may have been a marker for 
the cemetery . Bayesian dating of radiocarbon dates for the calcined remains indicated a currency 
for this cemetery of between 3080–2900 cal BC and 2890–2650 cal BC ( at 95% : Hamilton 2020a )  . 
This is one of a small number of similar cemeteries in lowland Scotland ( a slightly earlier example 
being known from Cairnpapple , West Lothian ) and it has comparanda in northern and southern 
England ( eg at Duggleby Howe , Yorkshire , and Dorchester upon Thames , Oxfordshire [ Noble et 
al . 2017 ]  )  . 
The Forteviot cemetery doesn ’ t appear to have an association with Grooved Ware pottery and it 
may be that it pre-dated the use of this kind of pottery in Perth and Kinross . Elsewhere in mainland 
Scotland ( in contrast to Orkney ) there are indications that cremation was the funerary rite 
associated with this ceramic tradition ( Sheridan and Schulting 2020 ) but to date there have been 
no finds of human remains associated with Grooved Ware in this region . That said , at Haughs of 
Pittentian ( MPK18545 ) there is a deposit of cremated human remains which have been 
radiocarbon dated to the 30th century BC ( Becket et al . forthcoming )  . Stratigraphically , this 
deposit appears to post-date the construction of the timber ‘ square-in-circle ’ structure excavated 
there ( ibid .  )  . Also present , and loosely associated with the monument , was the base of a single 
Grooved Ware pot . 
Ceremonial Monuments and Neolithic Enclosures
The question of whether any Early Neolithic causewayed enclosures exist in Perth and Kinross 
( and indeed anywhere else in Scotland ) has long been debated ( eg Oswald et al . 2001 )  . Putative 
candidates have been excavated at Loanleven , near Blairgowrie in 2002 ( Barclay pers . comm .  ) 
and Leadketty , Strathearn in 2013 ( Barclay 2001a ; Wright and Brophy forthcoming )  . In terms of 
clarifying chronology and function , however , neither excavation produced any conclusive 
Page 12 of 39
evidence . Barclay also conducted excavations at another possible causewayed enclosure 
identified through the cropmark record at Upper Gothens near Blairgowrie . It was hoped that the 
site would be similar to a cropmark enclosure at Collessie in Fife ( Barclay pers . comm .  ) where 
excavation in the 1980s had produced a date of 3800–3100 cal BC for charcoal from the fill of 
the inner ditch and had also produced some Neolithic pottery ( Barber 1983 ; Cowie 1993 )  . A pit 
containing Late Neolithic Grooved Ware was subsequently found here during fieldwork in 2011 . 
Ultimately , Upper Gothens has proved to be Early Medieval in origin ( Barclay 2001b ) and the 
Collessie enclosure could equally be of Late Bronze Age date with residual Neolithic material in 
the ditch ( see Cowie in Barber 1983 )  . Despite these results , large circular to oval cropmark 
enclosures continue to hold potential as Neolithic sites and should not be discounted from future 
investigation . Indeed , the hilltop enclosure at Dun Knock in Strathearn demonstrates this , where 
the outer ditch ( a cropmark ) of this supposedly Iron Age site contained a complete Carinated 
Bowl pot and was found to date to the Early Neolithic ( Wright and Brophy forthcoming ; Poller 
forthcoming )  . 
During the Late Neolithic , more circular monument forms emerged , with Perth and Kinross 
containing a fair proportion of the known timber circles in Scotland as well as cropmark sites 
categorised as pit-circles ( as discussed by Millican 2008 )  . Excavation of some pit-circles has 
revealed that they occur either in relative isolation ( eg Carsie Mains ( Brophy and Barclay 2004 )  ; 
within henge monuments ( eg North Mains ( Barclay 1983 )  ; or surrounding henge monuments ( eg 
Forteviot Henge 1 ( Brophy and Noble 2012 )  . Where timber circles and henges are found together , 
the timber circles are almost always earlier in date than the henges ( Barclay 2005 )  , and the 
excavated examples from Perth and Kinross conform to this pattern . At Forteviot , for example , 
the timber circle was dated to 2620–2475 cal BC ( from oak charcoal : Brophy and Noble 2020 : 
135 ) while the henge it surrounded was probably constructed 2460–2230 cal BC at 95% 
probability ( modelled dates : Hamilton 2020b )  . That said , given that the timber circle date is from 
old charcoal , the possibility remains that the timber circle , like the henge that succeeded it , was 
constructed during the Chalcolithic period . There are a wide range of henge types known in the 
region , from ‘ mini ’ henges to massive earthworks ( cf . Harding and Lee 1987 ; Younger 2015 )  . 
However , where excavated ( eg Moncreiffe House , North Mains , Forteviot Henge 1 )  , the 
earthworks have dated from the Chalcolithic period or later and are therefore discussed in the 
Chalcolithic and Bronze Age chapter of the Framework . 
At no more than 50m in diameter ( as was the case at Forteviot Henge 1 )  , timber circles are 
dwarfed by palisaded enclosures which were enormous timber-defined arenas that emerged after 
2800 cal BC ( Noble and Brophy 2011a )  . Of the five currently known in Scotland , two are located 
in Perth and Kinross , just 4km apart on the south terrace of the River Earn at Forteviot 
( MPK1882 / Canmore ID 26559 / 296263 ) and at Leadketty ( MPK1961 )  . These massive 
monuments would have consumed huge amounts of oak , labour , time and resources to build and 
maintain , and although superficially similar in plan when compared as cropmarks , the excavations 
have revealed them to be contrasting structures . Forteviot appears to have been a gathering 
place for ceremonial activities , while Leadketty is believed by the excavator to be a fenced 
enclosure that more likely contained settlement and perhaps farm animals ( see Brophy and Noble 
2020 ; Noble and Brophy 2014 )  . 
Standing stones , stone settings , and stone circles are relatively common in the region , with over 
50 stone circles known . However , it remains unclear whether any of the stone circles were erected 
during the Neolithic period since excavated sites have consistently yielded Chalcolithic or Bronze 
Page 13 of 39
Age dates , with the exception of the stump of a standing stone at Forteviot associated with a Late 
Neolithic cemetery featuring cremated remains ( Noble et al . 2017 ; Brophy and Noble 2020 )  . 
Pitnacree is a good example where the cremated human remains found in the pit of a standing 
stone erected on the top of the Early Neolithic round barrow produced a date of 3740±60 BP , 
2340–1960 cal BC ( Sheridan 2010b )  . In discussing the structural sequence at Croftmoraig ( Croft 
Moraig )  , Richard Bradley has argued convincingly that the earliest stone circle there dates no 
earlier than the Early Bronze Age , while the final oval stone ‘ circle ’ was erected during the Late 
Bronze Age ( Bradley and Nimura 2016 ; cf . Bradley and Sheridan 2005 )  . Further , excavated 
evidence for ‘ four-poster ’ stone ‘ circles ’  , of which over 30 have been recorded in Perth and 
Kinross ( Burl 1988 )  , indicated they were erected and used during the Bronze Age . The most 
recently published example is at Na Clachan Aoraidh ( MPK1245 ) above Loch Tummel ( see Ellis 
and Ritchie 2018 )  , and the example excavated by Derek Simpson at Fortingall Church Site A 
( MPK8 ) has produced a radiocarbon date of 1108–901 cal BC ( 2825±30 BP , SUERC-18874 : 
Sheridan 2008 )  . Further discussion on these monument types can be found in the Chalcolithic 
and Bronze Age chapter of the Framework . 
Finally , the question of the nature and function of Late Neolithic structures featuring a central 
square setting of four massive posts surrounded by one or more post rings , such as at Leadketty 
( Wright and Brophy forthcoming )  , remains a topic for debate . While the evidence is presented in 
the section on ‘ Settlement Evidence and Timber ‘ Square-in-circle ’ Structures ’  , it could be argued 
that these structures were anything but domestic in nature , and resolving the issue of their 
function must be one of the key outstanding research questions . 
Rock Art
Over 700 rock art sites are currently known to exist in Perth and Kinross , with notable 
concentrations in the upland valleys of Strathbraan and Strathtay . Through a combination of 
antiquarian , amateur and professional endeavour , an extensive rock art landscape has been 
recorded and partly excavated on the northern side of Loch Tay with the group of prehistoric rock 
carvings located within the Ben Lawers Estate considered one of the most extensive and best 
recorded in Britain ( Bradley and Watson 2012 : 29 )  . Bradley and Watson ’ s investigations of four 
of the decorated rocks in this group , plus two undecorated outcrops for comparison , represents 
a significant contribution to our understanding of prehistoric rock carving , the rock selection 
process , the rock art ’ s wider environmental landscape setting , and the activities associated with 
its production ( see Bradley et al . 2013 ; Bradley and Watson 2012 )  . Analysis of the recovered 
lithics , mainly hammerstones , large quantities of worked and flaked quartz plus two broad blades 
of Arran pitchstone , has presented opportunities for interpretation to extend to the more 
performative aspects of rock art production and maintenance such as the visual effect of 
triboluminescence as quartz glowed after deliberate smashing across a rock ’ s surface ( Bradley 
and Watson 2012 : 59-60 )  . Beyond the two pitchstone broad blades , dated to the Middle or Late 
Neolithic by cross-assemblage comparison ( ibid .  : 49 )  , this project did not produce any datable 
material and therefore also serves as an illustration of the outstanding challenge that remains of 
dating the region ’ s rock art . That said , the fact that the pitchstone blades have signs of wear that 
may indicate that they were used , in some way , to create the designs , accords with the idea that 
Atlantic rock art was created between c . 2900 BC and c . 2500 BC . Nationally , rock art is subject 
to ongoing research by the ScRAP project with future investigation underpinned by a thematic 
national research framework , Future Thinking on Carved Stones in Scotland , which provides 
information on past , present and future carved stone research initiatives . 
Page 14 of 39
Settlement Evidence and Timber ‘ Square-in-circle ’ Structures
Dating to the Early Neolithic , Scotland ’ s large rectangular timber ‘ halls ’ are associated with the 
first few generations of incoming farmers and they may well have served as communal houses 
for several family groups moving into an area , until such time as they felt sufficiently well 
established to separate into individual farming groups ( Sheridan 2013 ; for a discussion of other 
interpretations of these structures , see Brophy 2007b )  . Although now located in the Stirling local 
authority area , but part of the County of Perthshire before 1975 , the timber hall at Claish near 
Callander was excavated in 2001 ( Barclay et al . 2003 ) and found to be a large rectangular timber 
building with bowed ends and internal divisions , of a similar scale to Balbridie , Aberdeenshire . It 
measures c . 25m by c . 9 . 5 m and Bayesian-modelled radiocarbon dates suggest that it was built 
and used between c . 3700 and 3650 cal BC ( Whittle et al . 2011 : 810 , Fig . 14 . 174 )  . A large 
assemblage of traditional Carinated Bowl pottery , cereal grains and hearths exhibiting repeating 
episodes of burning was found . Despite its superficial similarities with the Middle Neolithic 
mortuary enclosures of Tayside and Fife such as Littleour ( discussed in the Funerary Monuments
and Practices section )  , Claish was clearly a roofed structure of Early Neolithic date ( Barclay et 
al . 2002 ; Brophy 2007b )  . 
Several other timber hall sites have been identified across Perth and Kinross from the cropmark 
record , with notable examples at Westerton in Strathearn and Fortingall in Strathtummel . Like 
Claish , these rectangular examples appear to have morphological similarities to the excavated , 
more widely spaced MIddle Neolithic post-built mortuary enclosures at Littleour and Carsie Mains , 
although excavation will be required to determine whether theses sites are roofed timber halls 
from the Early Neolithic , unroofed structures from the Middle Neolithic or indeed Early Medieval 
halls ( as discussed in Millican 2009 ; Brophy 2007b )  . 
Early Neolithic settlement evidence in the form of small rectangular timber buildings is very rare
across mainland Scotland ( cf Brophy 2016 ) and no example is currently known in Perth and 
Kinross . While it ’ s been suggested that the structure at Carsie Mains was a possible house ( Toolis 
2011 )  , it is far more likely to be a Middle Neolithic mortuary structure based on the date of 3341–
2910 cal BC ( discussed in the Funerary Monuments and Practices section ) and the fact that the 
arrangement of posts does not represent a configuration capable of supporting a roof ( Brophy 
and Barclay 2004 )  . 
It has been argued that pits are an indicator of , or proxy for , Neolithic settlement ( Brophy and 
Noble 2011 ) and several instances of individual pits and clusters of pits have been recorded in 
the region . Examples that offer potential in this regard are at Grandtully in Strathtay ( Simpson 
and Coles 1991 ) which produced pottery of Middle Neolithic type , at Wellhill in Strathearn ( Wright 
and Brophy forthcoming )  , and at Bothy Wood , which was excavated in advance of the Logierait 
Reinforcement pipeline construction in 2009 ( Gray and Kirby 2009 )  . Pits were also found during 
excavations in 2018 as part of A9 Dualling between Luncarty and the Pass of Birnam ( Paton and 
Wilson 2019 )  . Over 400 sherds of Neolithic pottery were found in pits during the works ranging 
from four sherds from at least two Early Neolithic Carinated Bowls , 12 sherds representing two 
Middle Neolithic Impressed Ware vessels and the remaining majority of Late Neolithic Grooved 
Ware from at least 23 vessels ( Milburn and McLaren 2021 )  . This material offers further proxy 
evidence for a richly settled Neolithic landscape with the potential for structures surviving and 
awaiting discovery beyond the limits of the development area . Late Neolithic pits are not common
in Perth and Kinross , and so the discovery of several containing Grooved Ware at this site is
noteworthy . In 2017 over 40 pits ( and pits / postholes ) were excavated in advance of the 
Page 15 of 39
construction of an agricultural shed at Hallhole Farm ( MPK19100 )  , a site situated 700m south of 
the Cleaven Dyke which produced 830 sherds of pottery representing c . 130 vessels ( Fyles 2017 )  . 
The assemblage included Early Neolithic modified Carinated Bowl pottery , Middle Neolithic 
Impressed Ware and Late Neolithic Grooved Ware pottery as well as evidence of a knapping floor 
and some 300 lithics and stone tools ( ibid .  )  . 
With more evidence emerging through archaeological investigations , the question arises whether 
a series of Late Neolithic timber ‘ square-in-circle ’ structures , characterised by a central square 
setting of four massive timbers surrounded by one or more circle and often associated with 
Grooved Ware pottery , were places of habitation or solely of ceremony – and indeed whether all , 
or any , were roofed ( cf . Greaney et al . 2020 )  . As indicated elsewhere in this chapter , opinions 
differ . Leadketty ( Wright and Brophy forthcoming ) and Haughs of Pittentian ( MPK18545 )  , Crieff 
( Becket 2014 ; Becket et al . forthcoming ) are excavated examples in Perth and Kinross , and other 
potential examples are evident in the cropmark record ( eg Green of Invermay near Forteviot 
[ MPK1910 ]  )  . The Leadketty structure was associated with Grooved Ware and the flat base of a 
pot that is certain to be Grooved Ware was found at Pittentian . Similar-looking structures have 
been found elsewhere in Scotland , on Machrie Moor , Arran ( Haggarty 1992 ) where one pre-dated 
a stone circle and at Greenbogs , Aberdeenshire ( Noble et al . 2012 ) where a domestic function 
was suggested . Examples found elsewhere in Britain and Ireland include one that formed part of 
a major timber ceremonial complex at Ballynahatty , Co . Down ( Hartwell 2002 )  , another located 
outside the entrance to the Eastern passage tomb at Knowth in the Boyne Valley , Co . Meath 
( Eogan and Roche 1999 )  , and two inside the Durrington Walls ‘ mega henge ’  , Wiltshire ( Thomas 
2010 )  . A discussion of the nature , significance and distribution of the almost 30 examples known 
from Britain and Ireland has recently been published by Susan Greaney et al .  ( 2020 : 228 , Fig . 
17 )  . Discussing the Durrington Walls examples , Julian Thomas argued that these structures were 
possibly lineage shrines or cult houses – monumentalised versions of houses ( Thomas 2010 )  . 
This idea of ‘ Great Houses ’ has also been expressed by others ( Noble et al . 2012 ; Brophy 2016 ) 
but alternative interpretations as other kinds of ceremonial structure , not necessarily roofed , are 
equally plausible . Sixteen of these structures have been dated across Britain and Ireland 
( Greaney et al . 2020 ) and while most appear to date to the second quarter of the third millennium 
BC , the example from Haughs of Pittentian appears to date to the first quarter of that millennium 
( Becket et al . forthcoming )  . The example from Machrie Moor , Arran , also dates to around this 
time , possibly a little earlier ( Copper et al . 2018 )  . The outward-flaring nature of the postpipes at 
this site is also of interest , being suggestive of a roof or the need to support some other heavy 
elevated structure ( Becket 2014 ; Becket et al . forthcoming )  . An unroofed , half-scale re-imagining 
of the structure has been constructed in the grounds of the Strathearn Community Campus . 
Cultivation Remains
Evidence for farming and cultivation has been recovered in a range of forms and indeed there 
are more traces of Neolithic farming here than anywhere else in mainland Scotland ( Brophy and 
Wright 2021 )  . Possible ardmarks of Early Neolithic date were found adjacent to a Mesolithic pitalignment and Neolithic pit cluster at Wellhill , near Dunning . Possible field ditches were also found 
here as well as at nearby Cranberry ( ibid .  )  . Traces of cultivated soils or ridges of probable 
Neolithic date were identified during the excavation of cairns or barrows at North Mains ( Barclay 
1983 ) and Pitnacree ( Coles and Simpson 1965 )  . 
Excavations at the later prehistoric upland settlement site at Carn Dubh ( MPK1752 ) on Moulin 
Moor near Pitlochry , in the 1980s , produced ard-mark evidence . However , this could not be dated 
Page 16 of 39
and although Neolithic lithics were found , no associated settlement evidence was recovered 
( Rideout 1996 )  . 
Archaeological excavation at Hallhole Farm ( MPK19100 ) has provided macrobotanical evidence 
for crop types cultivated during the Neolithic . This multiphase site spanning the Neolithic-Early 
Bronze Age produced emmer wheat , barley ( including naked barley ) and flax seeds from bulk 
soil samples obtained predominantly from a pit also containing Early Neolithic pottery ( Fyles 
2017 )  . Evidence of emmer wheat , bread wheat and barley have also been recovered from Claish , 
and barley ( including naked barley ) from Carsie Mains ( Bishop et al . 2010 )  ; this list is not 
exhaustive . Bread wheat is a rare find from Neolithic sites in Scotland , being found only in Early 
Neolithic contexts ( ibid .  )  , it is thought that its use declined as the farmers adapted their agricultural 
regime to the environments of Scotland . 
Palaeoenvironmental Evidence
Palaeoenvironmental evidence for the Neolithic period is patchy across the region , with a 
summary of the broader context provided by Tipping as part of the ScARF Neolithic Report 
( ScARF 2012 )  . Site-based approaches remain the most common and although in the minority , 
larger scale landscape studies have made a notable contribution to our understanding of the 
Neolithic environment and the contextualising of substantial monuments such as the Cleaven 
Dyke ( Barclay and Maxwell 1998 )  . In the uplands , pollen analysis from the wider study around 
Carn Dubh has provided evidence of Early Neolithic woodland clearance and pasture ( Rideout 
1996 )  , while on Creag Na Caillich above Killin , there is evidence that upland blanket peat started 
to form during the early fourth millennium BC and that during the late fourth millennium BC there 
was clearance of forest and scrub , including by burning , but seemingly not for grazing purposes 
( Tipping in Edmonds et al . 1992 )  . Palaeoenvironmental work over a broad timescale was 
undertaken as part of the Ben Lawers Historic Landscape Project and the discovery of 
waterlogged woodland remains in Loch Tay by that project was especially significant ( Dixon 2007 , 
Dixon 2016 )  . The potential of Craggantoul to contribute tree-ring data to the development of long 
native tree-ring chronologies in this region for dating , environmental and climate research 
applications remains unassessed ( Mills 2021 )  . Most recently , the SERF project undertook 
extensive sampling and archaeobotanical analysis around Forteviot and in Strathearn more 
widely , furthering understanding of how local environmental resources were utilised across a 
broad time frame including the Neolithic ( Brophy and Noble 2020 : 20 , 48 )  . 
Material Culture
Pottery
Finds of Neolithic pottery are not especially numerous in Perth and Kinross , although they span 
the whole of the period , from the Early Neolithic traditional Carinated Bowl pottery found at Claish 
( Sheridan in Barclay et al . 2003 ) to the Late Neolithic Grooved Ware found , for example , at 
Littleour ( Sheridan 1998 ) and Leadketty . Trevor Cowie compiled a useful gazetteer of the 
Neolithic pottery found in central and eastern Scotland over a quarter of a century ago ( Cowie 
1992 ; 1993 )  , listing 12 findspots ( although note that the ‘ plain Grooved Ware ’ found at Croft 
Moraig is now known to be of Late Bronze Age date , and a similar date is highly likely for the 
same kind of pottery from Moncreiffe ( Bradley and Sheridan 2005 ; Bradley and Nimura 2016 )  . 
Since Cowie ’ s review there have been several new finds of Neolithic pottery , but the number of 
findspots is still lower than 25 . 
Page 17 of 39
As far as the Early Neolithic Carinated Bowl tradition is concerned , the assemblage from Claish , 
and the single sherd from a pit from the A9 Dualling Project between Luncarty and Pass of Birnam 
( land parcel 6 . 2 )  , belong to its earliest ,  ‘ traditional ’ form while the assemblage from Pitnacree 
includes one lugged vessel , suggesting that this is an early example of ‘ modified Carinated Bowl ’ 
pottery ( see Sheridan 2016 for an overview of Scottish Neolithic ceramic traditions )  .  ‘ Modified 
Carinated Bowl ’ pottery is also represented in the fairly fine lugged Carinated Bowl with vertical 
ripple burnish from the Clyde-type chamber at Cultoquhey ( Henshall 1972 : 306 )  , although it is 
unlikely to be as late as the human remains from the chamber that have been dated to 3628–
3366 cal BC ( see ‘ Funerary Monuments and Practices ’ for details of this date )  . The assemblage 
of ‘ modified Carinated Bowl ’ pottery from Barbush Quarry , Dunblane ( Cowie 1992 ; 1993 ) is 
further from the ‘ traditional ’ canon , with thick-walled , coarse vessels including one with a lug ( the 
findspot is currently in Stirling but was formerly in the pre-1975 County of Perthshire )  . The 
modified Carinated Bowl pottery found at Hallhole Farm ( MPK19100 ) is similarly divergent from 
the ‘ traditional ’ canon , but in a different way , with the illustrated vessel appearing to be a deepbellied , closed bipartite bowl or jar ( Fyles 2017 : Illus 6 ; see also MacSween in Fyles 2017 : 82-
110 )  . One of the contexts containing modified Carinated Bowl pottery at Hallhole Farm ( Pit 29 ) is 
associated with a radiocarbon date of 3656–3526 cal BC ( SUERC-74463 , 4820 +  / -30 BP )  . This 
brief outline does not cover all of the examples of Carinated Bowl pottery that have been found 
in Perth and Kinross . 
Middle Neolithic pottery is represented by the assemblage from Grandtully ( Simpson and Coles 
1991 ) which appears to be an early version of Impressed Ware pottery with incised and impressed 
decoration . It includes a collared vessel with incised panelled decoration on its collar and rim 
bevel that relates , albeit distantly , to a tradition of pottery expressed in Orkney and the Outer 
Hebrides as Unstan bowls ( Sheridan 2016 )  . A further Impressed Ware assemblage was found in 
pits at Hallhole Farm ( MacSween in Fyles 2017 : 82-110 ; Fyles 2017 : Illus 6 )  , and although none 
of the contexts in question yielded a radiocarbon date , a date within the second half of the fourth 
millennium BC is likely ,  ‘ sandwiched ’ between the modified Carinated Bowl and the Grooved 
Ware that was found in other contexts at the site . It remains to be seen whether the pottery found 
during the A9 Dualling project between Luncarty and the Pass of Birnam ( in Land Parcel 6 . 5 ) is 
of Impressed Ware or Grooved Ware . At the time of writing post-excavation work is not sufficiently 
advanced to clarify the identifications ( Paton and Wilson 2019 )  , but this will doubtless be resolved 
in due course . 
WIthin the region , Late Neolithic Grooved Ware has been found at Littleour , Leadketty , Hallhole 
Farm , Pittentian and the aforementioned A9 Dualling site . The Littleour pottery is of particular 
interest . Here , parts of eight pots were found in a pit within , but post-dating , the Middle Neolithic 
mortuary enclosure and included burnt-on organic residue which has produced the latest date for 
Grooved Ware in Scotland when it was initially dated ( Sheridan 1998 )  . Re-dating of the pottery 
as part of Mike Copper ’ s Tracing the Lines project ( Copper et al . 2018 ; forthcoming ) has 
confirmed that there is a surprisingly ( and unaccountably ) wide date range for vessels from this 
single pit , with the latest dates within the third quarter of the third millennium BC while others 
appear to date to the first half of the third millennium BC . This assemblage is therefore relevant 
to addressing questions surrounding the transition from the Late Neolithic to the Chalcolithic and 
especially with regard to the chronological overlap in the use of Grooved Ware and Beaker 
pottery . The Hallhole Farm Grooved Ware ( MacSween in Fyles 2017 : 82-110 ) is similarly 
associated with a relatively wide date range , with one context ( Pit 65 ) producing a date of 2877–
2635 cal BC ( SUERC-74469 , 4157 +  / -25 BP ) and another ( Pit 16 )  , a date of 2575–2469 cal BC 
Page 18 of 39 
( SUERC-74467 , 3997 +  / -29 BP ) which is one of the latest dates for Grooved Ware in Scotland 
( cf . Copper et al . 2018 )  . Some of the vessels resemble Grooved Ware examples from Littleour , 
and elements of the assemblage ( including those found in Pit 16 ) are comparable with Ian 
Longworth ’ s ‘ Durrington Walls style ’ Grooved Ware which is known from elsewhere in mainland 
Scotland ( eg at Powmyre Quarry by Glamis , Angus ) and in many parts of England . 
There has been a degree of investigation into the contents of some Neolithic pottery from Perth 
and Kinross . Pollen analysis of burnt-on organic residues from four of the Grooved Ware pots 
from Littleour ( Long 1998 ) detected pollen from hazel , ling , nettle , ribwort plantain , dandelion , 
meadowsweet and crucifers , all of which are potentially edible plants . Pollen from birch , sedges , 
buttercup , common vetch , fern , bracken and sphagnum moss were also detected and are likely 
to reflect the environment around the site , although the sphagnum moss may have been collected 
for a specific purpose . Lipid analysis of two Early Neolithic sherds from Claish found abundant 
evidence for saturated animal fat plus possibly some epicuticular wax from a plant ( Cramp and 
Evershed 2010 ; cf . Cramp et al . 2014 )  . The animal fat was ruminant dairy fat in one sherd and 
adipose in another ( Lucy Cramp pers . comm .  )  , and while the species of ruminant cannot be 
determined from the lipids , it is arguably likely to have been cattle . Lipid analysis is a valuable 
source of information on the animals that were consumed since unburnt bone tends not to survive 
in the acid soils of Perth and Kinross . Although over the local authority boundary , burnt fragments 
of pig , cattle and red deer bone excavated from the ‘ hall ’ at Claish indicate the potential for 
recovery from similar environmental conditions to Perth and Kinross ( Barclay et al . 2003 )  . Lipid 
analysis is also important in confirming that the earliest Neolithic husbandry practices involved 
the use of dairy cattle , a point that has been confirmed at a number of sites across Britain ( Cramp 
et al . 2014 )  . 
Lithic artefacts
As regards lithic artefacts , the stone axeheads found in Perth and Kinross and the quarry site on 
Creag na Caillich have received considerable research attention . Axeheads of jadeitite from the 
Alps in north Italy have been found in antiquity at Monzievaird ( Sheridan 1992 )  , from the bank of 
the River Ericht at Rattray , and at Fortingall . One from Lochearnhead is also relevant as the 
findspot was formerly in the County of Perthshire . Thanks to the international research project , 
Projet JADE , we can now say that the jadeitite used for the Monzievaird axehead came from 
Monte Beigua ( and more specifically the western part of the massif )  , above Genoa , while that 
used for the other three came from Monte Viso , south-west of Turin ( Pétrequin et al . 2017 , 
Inventaire on the CD )  . The jadeitite for the Rattray example came from the southern part of that 
massif and the material for the Fortingall example probably came from Bulè ( ibid .  )  . These 
axeheads most likely came to Scotland around 3900 BC as treasured possessions by the 
immigrant farmers from northern France and would have been centuries old by the time they were 
deposited ( Sheridan et al . 2011 ; Sheridan and Pailler 2012 )  . The Rattray example was deposited 
vertically in the bank of the river Ericht , its blade downwards , and the Monzievaird example was 
burnt before it was deposited . Both of these acts are consistent with Continental depositional 
practices involved with returning sacred and special objects to the world of the gods whence they 
were believed to have originated ( Pétrequin et al . 2012a ; 2012b ; 2017a ; 2017b )  . There is no 
precedent in Britain or Ireland which confims that the people who deposited these axeheads were 
indeed Continental immigrants ( or descendants thereof )  . The Lochearnhead axehead is reputed 
to have been found in a ‘ cist ’  , but there is no independent confirmation of this . As for the 
Monzievaird axehead , investigations by Steve Ponsonby of the Archaeological and Historical 
section of the Perthshire Society of Natural Science have uncovered an intriguing reference in 
Page 19 of 39
the Statistical Account of 1793 to the discovery of two axeheads in a barrow :  ‘ about 200 yards 
west of the church of Monievaird [ sic ]  , a barrow was opened some years ago , in which two urns 
were found , each containing a stone of bluish colour , very hard , about 4 inches long , and of 
triangular shape , somewhat resembling the shape of an ax [ sic ]  . One of them is in the possession 
of Peter Murray esq , younger , of Ochtertyre . I am told they are of the same kind of stone and 
shape , with those which the inhabitants of the South Sea Islands fasten to a shaft , and use as a 
weapon of war .  ’  ( Note that the reference to ‘ bluish ’ may be a mis-translation of the Gaedhlig 
adjective ‘ glas ’  , which can also mean green .  ) This description , and the mention of Peter Murray 
of Auchtertyre , fits what we know about the Monzievaird axehead and the reference to South Sea 
Islanders will have been informed by Captain Cook ’ s voyages during which he will have seen 
New Zealand nephrite axe- and adze-heads . Sadly nothing is known of the barrow or the pots 
and the whereabouts of the second axehead are unknown . 
Other stone axeheads found in Perth and Kinross have been studied by Roy Ritchie and Jack 
Scott for the ( formerly-named ) Implement Petrology Group ( Ritchie and Scott 1988 ) with thinsectioned examples listed in Stone Axe Studies 2 ( Clough and Cummins 1988 : 239 )  . Ritchie and 
Scott petrologically identified 20 axeheads , roughouts and axehead flakes from the pre-1975 
County of Perthshire and concluded that nine of these , including the roughout and flake from 
Creag na Caillich , were of the calc-silicate hornfels from the Creag na Caillich quarry above Killin 
to the west of Ben Lawers ; this rock type has been given the IPG Group number XXIV . One other , 
labelled ‘ banded hornfels ’  , might also come from that quarry . Of the other axeheads , five are of 
porcellanite ( Gp IX ) from Tievebulliagh or Rathlin Island , Co . Antrim ; three are of Langdale tuff 
( Gp VI ) from the Lake District ( with a possible fourth example )  ; and one is of a cherty slate . To 
these can be added a further Langdale tuff ( Gp VI ) axehead found at Wellhill . A review of all the 
axeheads found in Perth and Kinross since 1988 would be necessary to establish whether any 
other exotic axeheads have been found . The presence of imported axeheads , like the evidence 
for exportation of Creag na Caillich Group XXIV axeheads to elsewhere in Scotland and England 
( Clough and Cummins 1988 : map 19 ; Edmonds et al . 1993 : Illus . 3 )  , exemplifies the 
interconnected nature of Neolithic farming groups with networks , over which objects , ideas and 
people moved , being established upon the initial arrival of Continental farmers ( Sheridan 2017 )  . 
Information on the exploitation of the Creag Na Caillich Group XXIV calc-silicate hornfels has 
been provided by the National Museums ’ Scotland-funded excavation in 1989 ( Edmonds et al . 
1992 )  . This study concluded that axehead production started late in comparison to the 
exploitation of porcellanite and Langdale tuff and was on a much smaller scale . Exploitation 
seems to have been intermittent and to have taken place during the Middle and Late Neolithic , 
probably from the late fourth and into the third millennium BC . The relatively small number of 
axeheads identified as being Group XXIV are , however , scattered widely and as far as 
Bedfordshire with most coming to light in north-east Scotland . It is clear that Late Neolithic cushion 
maceheads were also made from Group XXIV rock , with a petrologically-confirmed example 
found at Knock in Lewis and a few others suspected ( Ritchie 1992 )  . 
As for other types of ground stone artefact , Middle to Late Neolithic maceheads appear 
conspicuous by their absence from this part of Scotland ( Roe 1968 : Fig . 34 ; 1979 : Fig . 11 ) with 
the miniature pestle macehead found , along with a Food Vessel in a child ’ s cist , over the local 
authority border at Glenhead , Doune being the closest example and dating to the Early Bronze 
Age ( Anderson 1883 : 452-3 , Figs 10 , 11 )  . 
Page 20 of 39
28 carved stone balls , probably dating to c . 3000–2800 BC , are known to exist in the region with 
the majority housed in the collections of Perth Museum and Art Gallery . The most recent addition , 
with six knobs , was found at Sheriffmuir ( MPK20240 ) on the Blackford Estate in 2017 ( AndersonWhymark and Hall 2020 )  . Another six-knobbed ball had previously been found at Sheriffmuir , 
although its precise findspot is unknown and it is likely to have been several miles from the 2017 
findspot . An assemblage of Late Neolithic struck lithics was also recovered from the topsoil 
around the 2017 findspot during fieldwalking by Anderson-Whymark and Hall . This provides both 
circumstantial dating evidence and an indication that carved stone balls were not necessarily 
deposited in isolation but can form part of larger episodes of activity ( ibid .  )  . With fewer than 50 of 
Scotland ’ s known examples ( c . 520 ) having accurate findspots or contextual data ( ibid .  : 1 )  , the 
Sherrifmuir ball is a valuable contributor at a national level to discussions on these enigmatic 
objects , as well as at a local level , in providing an opportunity for future investigation of the wider 
environs of individual findspots . In addition to being a valuable research resource , carved stone 
balls form an important popular entree for the public into engaging with the past ( Hall et al . 2017 )  . 
With the exception of the pitchstone artefacts ( Ballin 2009 ; 2015 )  , the struck lithics of Neolithic 
Perth and Kinross have arguably not received as much attention as they deserve . Dene Wright ’ s 
unpublished report for the Tay Landscape Partnership Scheme ( 2012 ) assessed collections for 
Mesolithic lithics and revealed the majority of finds to be non-diagnostic to any prehistoric 
archaeological period although some were typologically categorised as having Neolithic or 
Bronze Age origins . Beyond this , there is currently no reliable overview of the region ’ s various 
lithic scatters and stray lithic finds , however , some important observations can still be made . The 
presence of pitchstone artefacts from the Isle of Arran in the Early Neolithic ‘ hall ’ at Claish
indicates that pitchstone was being imported to this part of Scotland from at least as early as 
c . 3700 BC . The presence of Middle or Late Neolithic pitchstone associated with rock art at Ben 
Lawers ( Bradley et al . 2013 : 49 ) as well as in a seemingly Late Neolithic context at Sheriffmuir 
( Anderson-Whymark and Hall 2020 )  , demonstrates that it was still being imported several 
centuries later . To Ballin ’ s list of 11 findspots of pitchstone in Perth and Kinross ( and including 
Claish , Stirling ) published in 2009 ( Ballin 2009 , Appendices 1 and 2 ) can be added finds from 
Forteviot ( Brophy and Noble 2020 : 85 , 261 )  , Wellhill , Ben Lawers , Sheriffmuir ( AndersonWhymark and Hall 2020 )  , Freeland Farm ( Nicol and Ballin 2019 ) and Leadketty . 
Regarding the use of other raw material , locally-obtained flint seems to have been used at 
Sheriffmuir ( Anderson-Whymark and Hall 2020 )  , while good-quality translucent dark grey flint , 
believed to have been imported from a chalk zone within England , was used for the Late Neolithic 
artefacts found at Littleour ( Saville 1998 )  . While Saville did not specifically name Yorkshire as a 
candidate source area , Torben Ballin has emphasised the extent to which Yorkshire flint was 
imported into southern Scotland during the Middle and Late Neolithic ( Ballin 2011 )  . A review of 
all the finds of probably imported Neolithic flint in Perth and Kinross would be worth undertaking , 
to gauge the extent of its spread in this part of Scotland . Other non-local lithic resources are the 
quartzite pebble and flint found associated with rock art on Ben Lawers , which are thought to 
have been brought from a coastal deposit ( Bradley et al . 2013 : 49 )  . Other raw materials known 
to have been used during the Neolithic in this part of Scotland include locally-available quartz and 
agate . More information on the choice of raw materials in Neolithic Scotland more generally can 
be found in ScARF 2012 and Warren 2006 . 
Page 21 of 39
Artefacts of organic materials
Artefacts of wood , bone and antler are rarely found in mainland Scotland and this is also the case 
in Perth and Kinross . However , a fine collection of calcined bone ‘ skewer ’ pins was found in 
association with cremated remains in the Late Neolithic Forteviot cemetery ( Leach et al . 2020 ; 
Noble et al . 2007 )  . These survived because they had passed through the funeral pyre , having 
been used to fasten funerary garments . Carbonised wooden fragments found in association with 
the four-post building at Leadketty are still being analysed and are anticipated to be reported as 
part of SERF Monograph 3 ( Wright and Brophy forthcoming )  ; it remains to be seen whether they 
were structural or artefactual . 
Research Agenda
This section presents the agenda themes for the Neolithic in Perth and Kinross . Some are 
nested under the overarching PKARF theme headings , aimed at addressing wider multiperiod priorities , while others are period-based and specific to the scope of this chapter . Where 
appropriate , a short explanatory note is provided , detailing underlying period-based thematic 
priorities which is then followed by the research questions generated to address them . 
Environment
Priority 1 : Although valuable palaeoenvironmental work has been carried out as part of 
landscape and site-based investigations , clarity is still lacking on the overall 
palaeoenvironmental context ( including climate ) of the region ’ s Neolithic . The reliance on 
timber and other woodland resources in Neolithic lifeways is evident ( Noble 2017 )  , but there is 
much to learn about how these resources were obtained and used , what technologies were 
deployed , and what evidence there is for impact on or stewardship of woodland . A better 
understanding of human / climate interactions is needed . 
Questions : 
1 . What is the palaeoenvironmental context for Perth and Kinross ’ Neolithic , and how did it 
change over the course of the Neolithic ? 
2 . What is the relationship between humans and woodlands in Neolithic Perth and Kinross 
and how does that change through space and time ? 
3 . How were woodlands used , impacted upon , stewarded ( if at all ) during the Neolithic and 
what wood technologies were in use ? 
4 . What potential is there to develop prehistoric tree-ring chronologies in Perth and Kinross for 
archaeological dating , climate record and other palaeoenvironmental applications ? 
Upland / Lowland Relationships
Priority 1 : The Upland Neolithic remains poorly understood with relatively few modern 
excavations having been undertaken . There is more needing to be known about the chronology 
of funerary and other ceremonial monument and potentially Neolithic earthworks and hilltop 
enclosures remaining unexplored . Thought processes as followed by Loveday ( 2016 ) have 
proved effective and could be applied here even prior to fieldwork , with an Upland Neolithic 
survey providing an opportunity to answer key questions . 
Page 22 of 39
Questions : 
1 . To what extent can significant differences in Neolithic practices , traditions and settlement 
patterns be identified between the upland and lowland areas of Perth and Kinross and how 
might such differences be explained ? 
2 . How might we best locate and investigate settlement patterns and subsistence activities in 
upland areas , where the scope for fieldwalking may be limited ? 
3 . To what extent , if at all , do hilltop enclosures relate to Neolithic activity and what do they tell 
us about lifeways and practices in this period ? 
4 . To what extent is the apparent upland / lowland divide influenced by differential preservation 
and visibility of archaeological remains ? 
Periods of Transition
The traditional approach to characterising the past in terms of periods ( ie Mesolithic , Neolithic , 
Chalcolithic etc .  ) has its limitations , especially with regard to defining and explaining the 
transition from one period to the next . As far as the Neolithic to Chalcolithic transition is 
concerned , for example , a perspective that considers developments in the centuries before and 
after the first appearance of the ‘ Beaker phenomenon ’ might help us to understand better the 
context in which changes were occurring , the impact of Continental influences ( including new 
people ) and the response to them . Following the approach taken by Rebecca Younger ( 2015 )  , 
one potentially fruitful approach might be to focus attention on henges , since in several cases 
they are known to have been constructed during the second half of the third millennium BC in 
places where earlier monuments , dating to the first half of the third millennium BC , had existed . 
Priority 1 : The transition from the Mesolithic to the Neolithic is an important but poorly 
understood topic , driven in partly due to limited Mesolithic evidence , and requires further study . 
Priority 2 : More work is needed on the 3rd millennium BC and the poorly-understood transition 
from the Neolithic to the Chalcolithic . 
Questions : 
1 . When did farming arrive in Perth and Kinross ? We know people were farming at Claish 
as early as c . 3700 BC , but were farmers present in Perth and Kinross much before 
then ? 
2 . What was the relationship between Mesolithic and Neolithic communities in the region , 
and for how long did the Mesolithic hunting-fishing-foraging lifestyle continue after the 
first farmers appeared ? 
3 . What evidence exists to support a theory of Mesolithic ways of life ending as a result of 
hunter-fisher-foragers becoming acculturated to a farming lifestyle ? 
4 . What does the transition between the Neolithic and Chalcolithic look like , and when –
and over how long – did it occur ? 
5 . What was the chronological overlap in the use of Grooved Ware and Beaker pottery in 
Perth and Kinross ? 
6 . How many Beaker-using Continental immigrants arrived in Perth and Kinross , and why 
did they come to this part of Scotland ? 
7 . What was the impact of the Continental influences , including the new technology of 
using metal , on the resident Neolithic communities and how did they respond to their 
arrival ? 
Page 23 of 39
Cropmarks
Priority 1 : The region ’ s cropmark record is of significant importance to understanding the 
monument landscape of this period and this has been clearly demonstrated through recent 
research such as the SERF project . Although valuable work has been carried out , further 
synthesis and characterisation of the cropmark record is still needed and the potentially 
Neolithic structures that have been identified , such as by Millican ( 2016a , 2016b )  , require 
further assessment and ground-truthing . 
Questions : 
1 . How can an evaluation of all cropmark sites that might be Neolithic assist in our 
understanding of the monument landscape of the region ? 
2 . What can an evaluation of lessons learned from prior excavations of cropmarks in the 
County , and beyond , tell us about Perth and Kinross ’ s Neolithic ? 
3 . How can revisiting sites classed simply as ‘ cropmarks ’ or ‘ enclosure ’ refine our picture of 
the region ’ s Neolithic ? 
4 . To what extent would re-assessing and better characterising the cropmark record in Perth 
and Kinross more generally and in light of excavations , expand our understanding of the 
Neolithic of the region ? 
5 . Which , if any , of the region ’ s cropmark sites , where a resemblance to causewayed 
enclosures exists , date to the Neolithic ? 
Settlements and Timber ‘ Square-in-circle ’ Structures 
Priority 1 : There is a need to improve our currently poor understanding of Neolithic settlements 
and how they changed over time : for example , what was the architecture of houses that 
succeeded the Claish ‘ hall ’  , particularly at sites where only pits are found ? There is currently 
very little evidence for domestic timber structures across the region with knowledge largely 
dependent on pits and cropmarks . 
Priority 2 : The record for the Middle Neolithic ( c . 3500–3000 BC ) is particularly thin . Recent 
developer-funded discoveries and cropmark identifications offer potential targets and present 
opportunities for focusing future research . A systematic fieldwalking campaign , akin to that 
employed by Tim Phillips in Strathtay in 1994 ( Phillips 2002 )  , could help to identify settlement 
sites and contextualise the cropmark record whilst also encouraging community participation 
and skills training . It may also aid identification of lowland late Mesolithic sites . Ground truthing 
by excavation following fieldwalking would be key to capitalising on the information gathered ( cf . 
Barclay and Wickham-Jones 2002 )  . 
Questions : 
1 . What kinds of house structure were used during the Neolithic and how did domestic 
architecture and the size , organisation , temporality and distribution of settlements change 
over the course of the Neolithic ? 
2 . What can be said about the domestic structures that had probably existed at sites where the 
only surviving evidence is in the form of pits and artefact scatters ? 
3 . How can a systematic fieldwalking campaign ( and an assessment of lithic collections already 
held in museums ) assist in the identification of settlements and of individual domestic 
structures ? 
Page 24 of 39
4 . When considering the site of Haughs of Pittentian ( MPK18545 )  , can any of the timber ‘ circleand-square ’ structures of the Late Neolithic ( and possibly Middle Neolithic ) be confidently 
interpreted as houses , as has been claimed ? If so then were they roofed , if ‘ great houses ’ 
then where did the ordinary people live or were these non-domestic special structures , 
roofed or otherwise ? 
Economy , social organisation , material culture and patterns of resource 
use
Priority 1 : Only a vague sense of the agricultural and animal husbandry regime exists and of 
what wild resources were consumed during the Neolithic in Perth and Kinross . 
Priority 2 : There is a need to better understand the nature of social organisation and its 
possible changes over the course of the Neolithic in this part of Scotland . 
Priority 3 : Our understanding of the Middle Neolithic pottery in Perth and Kinross is constrained 
by its paucity . 
Priority 4 : Greater understanding is required concerning the use of resources and the changing 
patterns of connectivity linking the Neolithic inhabitants of Perth and Kinross with each other 
and with people elsewhere . In particular , it would be useful to find out whether any English 
( probably Yorkshire ) flint arrived in this part of Scotland prior to 3000 BC
Questions : 
1 . Beyond a probably early cessation of cultivation of bread wheat , in what other ways did the
subsistence strategy change over the course of the Neolithic ? 
2 . What was the nature of social organisation in Perth and Kinross , and how ( if at all ) did it 
change over the course of the Neolithic ? 
3 . What can we infer about social organisation from the large Late Neolithic palisaded 
enclosures and timber ‘ square-in-circle ’ structures ? 
4 . To what extent can the cursus monuments , bank barrow / s and hybrid cursus / bank barrows 
be interpreted in terms of activities at a tribal level ? 
5 . How do the Middle Neolithic Impressed Ware and Late Neolithic Grooved Ware of Perth 
and Kinross compare with their counterparts elsewhere in Scotland and in Britain more 
widely ? 
6 . What strategy could be used to locate further sites containing Middle Neolithic Impressed 
Ware and Late Neolithic Grooved Ware pottery ? 
7 . What further can be understood about the chronology of exploitation of calc-silicate 
hornfels at Creag na Caillich ? 
8 . What evidence exists for the arrival of English ( probably Yorkshire ) flint in Perth and 
Kinross prior to c . 3000 BC ? 
9 . What is the overall picture of stone exploitation as reflected in the stone axeheads found in 
the region ? In other words , what proportion of all axeheads that have been found belong to 
 ‘ Grouped ’ rock types ? 
Page 25 of 39
Monuments , funerary practices and enclosures 
Priority 1 : The chronology and associated funerary practices of monument types such as long 
mounds , cursus monuments and bank barrows remain poorly understood . A wider assessment 
of of the potential for further Early Neolithic round barrows is also required . 
Priority 2 : Greater clarity of chronology and form of the Cleaven Dyke is required , including 
whether its north-west end consisted of a long barrow with an oval barrow adjacent to it . 
Priority 3 : Very little is known about the funerary practices of the Late Neolithic users of 
Grooved Ware pottery . For example the Forteviot cemetery featuring deposits of cremated 
remains was not associated with this kind of pottery . 
Priority 4 : It still remains unclear as to whether there are any Neolithic causewayed enclosures 
in Perth and Kinross and how many Neolithic enclosures of any type there are in this region . 
Priority 5 : It is unclear whether any standing stones , stone circles or other orthostatic stone 
settings ( apart from the Forteviot standing stone ) were erected in Perth and Kinross during the 
Neolithic . 
Questions : 
1 . What funerary practices were associated with the builders of Early Neolithic long mounds in 
the region and how do they compare to those found in similar monuments elsewhere ? 
2 . What evidence exists for cursus monuments or bank barrows being used for the laying-out 
or burial of the dead ? 
3 . Over what date range were long mounds , cursus monuments and bank barrows 
constructed ? 
4 . In how many cases were cursus monuments built onto pre-existing Early Neolithic long 
mounds ? 
5 . When was the Cleaven Dyke constructed , and could the application of techniques such as 
OSL dating provide new information ? 
6 . What evidence is there for the north-west end of the Cleaven Dyke actually being an Early 
Neolithic long barrow , and for an oval barrow adjacent to it ? 
7 . What evidence is there for the presence of Neolithic causewayed enclosures in Perth and 
Kinross ? 
8 . How many Neolithic enclosures are there in this region , when were they constructed and 
how were they used ? 
9 . What was the nature of Middle Neolithic funerary practices , and of Late Neolithic funerary 
practices associated with the users of Grooved Ware pottery ? 
10 . What evidence exists for standing stones ( other than the Forteviot cemetery-marker stone )  , 
stone circles or stone settings being erected during the Neolithic in Perth and Kinross ? 
Rock Art
Priority 1 : The region has a rich rock art record but its chronology is unclear . Further work is 
required to acquire dating evidence for the lifecycle of decorated stones and practices 
associated with them . 
Page 26 of 39
Priority 2 : Rock art requires better integration into narratives of the period where it can 
contribute more effectively to the understanding of the Neolithic in both the uplands and 
lowlands . 
Questions : 
1 . What is the chronology of the region ’ s rock art ? 
2 . To what extent is rock art associated with Neolithic and Early Bronze Age activities in the 
region , both ritual and domestic ? 
3 . What relationships can be determined between rock art and the natural landscape in the 
region ? 
4 . What is the character of rock art in this region , and what can this tell us about connectivity 
with other regions within and outwith Scotland ? 
5 . How can rock art contribute more holistically to our understanding of the region ’ s Neolithic ? 
Page 27 of 39
REFERENCES ( key publications in bold ) 
Anderson , J . 1883 . Notice of urns in the Museum that have been found with articles of use or 
ornament . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 17 ( 1882–83 )  : 446–59 . 
Accessed 28 June 2021 .  < > 
Anderson-Whymark , A . and Hall , M . A . 2020 . A decorated carved stone ball and associated 
lithic scatter from the Blackford Estate , Sheriffmuir , Perthshire . Tayside and Fife Archaeological 
Journal 26 : 1-6 . Accessed 03 March 2021 .  < content / uploads / 2020 / 11 / V26p1-6-Anderson-WhymarkHall . pdf > 
Airey , A . 2020 . A9 Luncarty to Birnam , Stanley Road Junction Borrow Pit : Archaeological 
Works . Unpublished Data Structure Report . Edinburgh : AOC Archaeology Group . 
Atkinson , J . et al . 2016 . Ben Lawers : An Archaeological Landscape in Time . Results from 
the Ben Lawers Historic Landscape Project , 1996–2005 . Scottish Archaeological Internet 
Reports 62 . DOI : 10 . 9750 / issn . 1473-3803 . 2016 . 62
Ballin , T . B . 2009 . Archaeological Pitchstone in Northern Britain . Characterization and 
interpretation of an important prehistoric source . British Archaeological Report , British Series 
476 . Oxford : Archaeopress . 
Ballin , T . B . 2011 . Overhowden and Airhouse , Scottish Borders : characterization and 
interpretation of two spectacular lithic assemblages from sites near the Overhowden henge . 
Oxford : British Archaeological Reports ( British Series 539 )  . 
Ballin , T . B . 2015 . Arran pitchstone ( Scottish volcanic glass )  : new dating evidence . Journal of 
Lithic Studies 2 ( 1 )  : 5–16 . 
Barber , J . 1983 . The investigation of some plough truncated features at Kinloch Farm , Collessie 
in Fife . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 112 : 524-533 . Accessed 08 March 
2021 .  < > 
Barclay , G . J . 1983 . Sites of the third millennium BC to the first millennium AD at North 
Mains , Strathallan , Perthshire . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 113 : 
122-281 . Accessed 15 February 2021 .  
< > 
Barclay , G . J . 1993 . The Scottish gravels : a neglected resource ? In : Fulford , M . and Nichols , E .  
( eds ) Developing landscapes of Britain : the archaeology of the British gravels : a review : 106–
124 . London : Society of Antiquaries of London . 
Barclay , G . J . 1999 . A hidden landscape : the Neolithic of Tayside . In : Harding , A . F .  ( ed .  ) 
Experiment and design : archaeological studies in honour of John Coles : 20-29 . Oxford : Oxbow 
Books . 
Barclay , G . J . 2001a . Neolithic enclosures in Scotland . In : Darvill , T . and Thomas , J .  ( eds ) 
Neolithic enclosures in Atlantic Northwest Europe : 144-154 Oxford : Oxbow Books . 
Page 28 of 39
Barclay , G .  . 2001b . The excavation of an early medieval enclosure at Upper Gothens , 
Meikleour , Perthshire . Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal 7 : 34-44 . 
Barclay , G . J . 2003 . The Neolithic . In : Edwards , K . J . and Ralston , I . B . M .  ( eds ) Scotland after the 
Ice Age : environment , archaeology and history 8000BC-AD1000 : 127-150 Edinburgh : 
Edinburgh University Press . 
Barclay , G . J . 2005 . The “ henge ” and “ hengiform ” in Scotland . In : Cummings , V . and Pannett , A .  
( eds ) Set in Stone : New Approaches to Neolithic Monuments in Scotland : 81-94 Oxford : Oxbow 
Books . 
Barclay , G . J .  , Brophy , K . and MacGregor , G . 2003 . Claish , Stirling : an early Neolithic structure 
in its context . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 132 : 65-137 . Accessed 15 
February 2021 < > 
Barclay , G . J . and Maxwell , G . S . 1991 . Excavation of a Neolithic long mortuary enclosure within 
the Roman legionary fortress at Inchtuthil , Perthshire . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries 
of Scotland 121 : 27-44 . Accessed 15 February 2021 
< > 
Barclay , G . J . and Maxwell , G . S . 1997 . Herald Hill ( Caputh parish )  , long barrow . Discovery and 
Excavation in Scotland 1997 : 62 . 
Barclay , G . J . and Maxwell , G . S . 1998 . The Cleaven Dyke and Littleour : Monuments in the 
Neolithic of Tayside . Edinburgh : Society of Antiquaries of Scotland . 
Barclay , G . J . and Wickham-Jones , C . 2002 . The investigations of some lithic scatters in 
Perthshire . Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal 8 : 1-10 . 
Becket , A . 2014 . Beauly to Denny 400kv Overhead Transmission Line Access Track 81 - Tower 
TD125 . Report 25 . Unpublished Data Structure Report . Glasgow : Northlight Heritage . 
Becket , A .  , Carson , S .  , Jorge , A .  , Whyte , R . and Wright , D . forthcoming . A Four-Post and 
Timber Circle Structure at Pittentian , Perth and Kinross . In : Sneddon , D .  ( ed .  ) Archaeology on 
the Beauly to Denny 400kV Overhead Line project . Scottish Archaeological Internet Reports . 
Bishop , R . R .  , Church , M . J . and Rowley-Conwy , P . A . 2010 . Cereals , fruits and nuts in the 
Scottish Neolithic . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 139 : 47–103 . 
Accessed 28 June 2021 .  < > 
Brace , S .  , Diekmann , Y .  , Booth , T . J .  , van Dorp , L .  , Faltyskova , Z .  , Rohland , N .  , Mallick , S .  , 
Olalde , I .  , Ferry , M .  , Michel , M .  , Oppenheimer , J .  , Broomandkhoshbacht , N .  , Stewardson , K .  , 
Martiniano , R .  , Walsh , S .  , Kayser , M .  , Charlton , S .  , Hellenthal , G .  , Armit , I .  , Schulting , R .  , Craig , 
O . E .  , Sheridan , J . A .  , Parker Pearson , M .  , Stringer , C .  , Reich , D .  , Thomas , M . G . and Barnes , I . 
2019 . Ancient genomes indicate population replacement in Early Neolithic Britain . Nature 
Ecology & Evolution 3 : 765–71 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41559-019-0871-9
Page 29 of 39
Bradley , R . J . 2011 . Stages and Screens . An Investigation of Four Henge Monuments in 
Northern and North-eastern Scotland . Edinburgh : Society of Antiquaries of Scotland . 
Bradley , R . J . 2019 . The Prehistory of Britain and Ireland . Second Edition . Cambridge : 
Cambridge University Press . 
Bradley , R . J . and Nimura , C .  ( eds ) 2016 . The Use and Reuse of Stone Circles . Fieldwork at 
Five Scottish Monuments and its implications . Oxford : Oxbow Books . 
Bradley , R . J . and Sheridan , J . A . 2005 . Croft Moraig and the chronology of stone circles . 
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 71 : 269–81 . 
Bradley , R . J . and Watson , A . 2012 . Ben Lawers : Carved Rocks on a Loud Mountain . In : Meirion 
Jones , A . and Cochrane , A .  ( eds ) Visualising the Neolithic : abstraction , figuration , performance , 
representation : 64-78 . Oxford : Oxbow . 
Bradley , R . J .  , Watson , A .  , Anderson-Whymark , H .  , and Stewart , R . 2013 . Excavations at four 
prehistoric rock carvings on the Ben Lawers Estate , 2007–2010 . Proceedings of the Society of 
Antiquaries of Scotland 142 : 27-61 . Accessed 2 March 2021 .  
< > 
Brophy , K . 1998 . Cursus monuments and bank barrows of Tayside and Fife . In : G . J . Barclay 
and G . S . Maxwell ( eds ) The Cleaven Dyke and Littleour : monuments in the Neolithic of 
Tayside : 92-108 . Edinburgh : Society of Antiquaries of Scotland . 
Brophy , K . 2000 . Excavations at a cropmark site at Milton of Rattray , Blairgowrie , with a 
discussion of the pit-defined cursus monuments of Tayside . Tayside and Fife Archaeological 
Journal 6 : 8-17 . 
Brophy , K . 2007a . Rethinking Scotland ’ s Neolithic : combining circumstance with context . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 136 : 7-46 . Accessed 20 February 
2021 < > 
Brophy , K . 2007b . From big houses to cult houses : early Neolithic timber halls in Scotland . 
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 73 : 75-96 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / S0079497X00000062
Brophy , K . 2010 .  “ … a place where they tried their criminals ”  : Neolithic round mounds in Perth 
and Kinross . In Leary , J .  , Darvill , T .  , and Field , D .  ( eds ) Round Mounds and Monumentality in 
the British Neolithic and Beyond : 10-27 . Oxford : Oxbow Books . 
Brophy , K . 2015 . Reading between the lines : the Neolithic cursus monuments of 
Scotland . London : Routledge . 
Brophy , K . 2016 On ancient farms : a survey of Neolithic potentially domestic locations in 
lowland Scotland . In : Brophy , K .  , MacGregor , G . and Ralston , I .  ( eds ) The Neolithic of Mainland 
Scotland . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 
Page 30 of 39
Brophy , K . and Barclay , G . J . 2004 . A rectilinear timber structure and post-ring at Carsie Mains , 
Meikleour , Perthshire . Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal 10 : 1-22 . 
Brophy , K .  , MacGregor , G . and Ralston , I .  ( eds ) 2016 . The Neolithic of Mainland Scotland . 
Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 
Brophy , K . and Millican , K . 2015 . Wood and fire : Scotland ’ s timber cursus monuments . 
Archaeological Journal 172 ( 2 )  : 297-324 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00665983 . 2015 . 1025589
Brophy , K . and Noble , G . 2011 . Within and beyond pits : deposition in lowland Neolithic 
Scotland . In Anderson-Whymark , H . and Thomas , J ( eds ) Regional Perspectives on Neolithic 
Pit Deposition : Beyond the Mundane ( Neolithic Studies Group Seminar Papers 12 )  : 63-79 
Oxford : Oxbow Books . 
Brophy , K . and Noble , G . 2012 . Henging , mounding and blocking : the Forteviot henge group . In 
Gibson , A .  ( ed .  ) Enclosing the Neolithic . Recent studies in Britain and Europe .  ( British 
Archaeological Reports International Series 2440 )  : 21-35 Oxford : Archaeopress . 
Brophy , K and Noble , G . 2020 . Prehistoric Forteviot : excavations of a ceremonial 
complex in eastern Scotland . SERF Monograph 1 . CBA Research Report 176 . York : Council 
for British Archaeology . DOI : 10 . 5284 / 1082002
Brophy , K . and Wright , D . 2021 . forthcoming . Possible Neolithic ard marks and field boundaries 
at Wellhill and Cranberry , Perth and Kinross , and an evaluation of current physical evidence for 
Neolithic farming in Scotland . Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society . 
Burl , A . 1988 . Four-Posters . Bronze Age Stone Circles of Western Europe . British 
Archaeological Reports ( British Series ) 195 . Oxford : BAR Publishing . 
Cachart , R . and Perry , D . 2009 . Archaeological works : Strathearn Community Campus ( Crieff 
High School )  , Pittenzie Road , Crieff . Unpublished Data Structure Report . Alder Archaeology . 
Carter , S . 2002 . Contract archaeology in Scotland . Antiquity 76 ( 293 )  : 869-873 . 
Childe , V . G . 1930 Excavations in a chambered cairn at Kindrochat , near Comrie , Perthshire . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 64 ( 1929–30 )  : 264-72 . Accessed 21 
February 2021 < > 
Childe , V . G . 1931 The chambered long cairn at Kindrochat , near Comrie , Perthshire . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 65 ( 1930–31 )  : 281-93 . Accessed 21 
February 2021 < > 
Clough , T . H . McK . and Cummins , W . A .  ( eds ) 1988 . Stone Axe Studies 2 . CBA Research Report 
67 . London : Council for British Archaeology . 
Coles , F . 1909 Report on stone circles surveyed in Perthshire ( Southeast District )  , with 
measured plans and drawings . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 43 ( 1908–
Page 31 of 39
09 )  : 93-130 . Accessed 21 February 2021 .  
< > 
Coles , J . M . and Simpson , D . D . A . 1965 . The excavation of a Neolithic round barrow at 
Pitnacree , Perthshire , Scotland . Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 31 : 34-57 . DOI : 
10 . 1017 / S0079497X00014705
Copper , M .  , Sheridan , J . A .  , Gibson , A . M .  , Tripney , B .  , Hamilton , D .  & Cook , G . 2018 . 
Radiocarbon dates for Grooved Ware pottery from mainland Scotland arising from the project 
Tracing the Lines : Uncovering Grooved Ware Trajectories in Neolithic Scotland . Discovery and 
Excavation in Scotland 19 : 222–5 . 
Copper , M .  , Hamilton , W . D . and Gibson , A . M . forthcoming . Tracing the lines : Scottish Grooved 
Ware trajectories beyond Orkney . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 150 . 
Cowie , T . G . 1992 . Neolithic pottery from Barbush Quarry , Dunblane , Perthshire , with notes on 
the Earlier Neolithic pottery of eastern and central Scotland . In : Sharples , N . M . and Sheridan , 
J . A .  ( eds ) Vessels for the Ancestors : essays on the Neolithic of Britain and Ireland in honour of 
Audrey Henshall : 272–85 . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 
Cowie , T . 1994 . A survey of the Neolithic pottery of eastern and central Scotland . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 123 : 13-41 . Accessed 21 February 2021 .  
< > 
Cramp , L . J . E . and Evershed , R . P . 2010 . Organic residue analysis of Neolithic pottery from 
various sites : an interim report . Unpublished report prepared for National Museums Scotland . 
Cramp , L . J . E .  , Jones , J .  , Sheridan , J . A .  , Smyth , J .  , Whelton , H .  , Mulville , J .  , Sharples , N . M . and 
Evershed , R . P . 2014 . Immediate replacement of fishing with dairying by the earliest farmers of 
the NE Atlantic archipelagos . Proceedings of the Royal Society B 2014 Feb 12 ; 281 ( 1780 )  : 
20132372 . DOI : 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2013 . 2372 . PMID : 24523264 ; PMCID : PMC4027381 . 

Dixon , N . 2007 . Submerged woodland , Craggantoul , Loch Tay : Assessment survey . Discovery 
and Excavation in Scotland ( New Series ) 8 : 162-163 . 
Dixon , N . 2016 . Beneath the Water . In : Atkinson , J .  ( ed .  ) Ben Lawers : An Archaeological 
Landscape in Time : 10 . Scottish Archaeological Internet Reports 62 . DOI : 10 . 9750 / issn . 1473-
3803 . 2016 . 62
Driscoll , S . T .  , Brophy , K . and Noble , G . 2010 . The Strathearn Environs and Royal Forteviot 
Project ( SERF )  . Antiquity Project Gallery [ online ] Accessed 21 February 2021 
< www . antiquity . ac . uk / projgall / driscoll323 /  > 
Edmonds , M .  , Sheridan , J . A . and Tipping , R . 1993 . Survey and excavation at Creag na Caillich , 
Killin , Perthshire . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 122 : 77-112 . Accessed 
21 February 2021 .  < > 
Page 32 of 39
Ellis , C . and Ritchie , M . 2018 . The excavation of Na Clachan Aoraidh , a four poster stone circle 
in northern Perthshire . Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal 24 : 21-38 . Accessed 01 March 
2021 .  < -content / uploads / 2018 / 11 / v24-EllisRitchie-p21-38 . pdf > 
Eogan G . and Roche , H . 1999 . Grooved Ware from Brugh na Bóinne and its wider context . In : 
Cleal , R . and MacSween , A .  ( eds ) Grooved Ware in Britain and Ireland : 98–111 . Neolithic 
Studies Group Seminar Papers 3 . Oxford : Oxbow . 
Evans , C . and Hodder , I . 2006 . A woodland archaeology : Neolithic sites at Haddenham . 
Cambridge : McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research . 
Fyles , C . 2017 . Archaeological Watching Brief and Excavation Hallhole Farm Meikleour , 
Blairgowrie . Unpublished Data Structure Report . Perth : Alder Archaeology Ltd . 
Gauthier , E . and Pétrequin , P . 2017 . Inventaire européen des grandes lames polies en jades 
alpins . In : Pétrequin , P .  , Gauthier , E . and Pétrequin , A . M .  ( eds ) 2017b . JADE . Objets-signes et 
interprétations sociales des jades alpins dans l ’ Europe néolithique . On CD . Les Cahiers de la 
MSHE Ledoux no 27 . Besançon and Gray : Presses universitaires de Franche-Comté and 
Centre de Recherche Archéologique de la Vallée de l ’ Ain . 
Gray , H . and Kirby , M . 2009 . Logierait Reinforcement Pipeline Phase 1 , Pitcaringreen to 
Watermill , Perth and Kinross ( Moneydie / Redgorton parishes )  , watching brief and excavation . 
Discovery and Excavation in Scotland ( New Series ) 10 : 156
Greaney , S .  , Hazell , Z .  , Barclay , A .  , Bronk Ramsey , C .  , Dunbar , E .  , Hajdas , I .  , Reimer , P .  , 
Pollard , J .  , Sharples , N . M . and Marshall , P . 2020 . Tempo of a mega-henge : a new chronology 
for Mount Pleasant , Dorchester , Dorset . Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 86 : 199–236 . 
DOI : 10 . 1017 / ppr . 2020 . 6
Hale , A .  , 2003 . Prehistoric rock carvings in Strath Tay . Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal
9 : 6-13 . 
Hall , M . A .  , Aspöck , E .  , Tait , L . and Weiss-Krejci , E . 2017 . Archaeology Entangled : appropriating 
archaeological narratives , interpreting stone balls and interviewing artists . The Museum 
Archaeologist 36 - With Fresh Eyes - Conference Proceedings Portsmouth 2013 and 
Colchester 2014 : 28-46 . 
Hall , M . A . 2018 . Stewart , Margaret Enid Crichton . In : Ewan , E .  , Pipes , R .  , Rendall , J .  , and 
Reynolds , S .  ( eds ) The New Biographical Dictionary of Scottish Women : 414 . Edinburgh : 
Edinburgh University Press . 
Halliday , S .  , 2002 . Excavations at a Neolithic enclosure at Castle Menzies , Aberfeldy , 
Perthshire . Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal 8 : 11-18 . 
Hallyburton , I . and Brown , R . 2000 . Dunning , Perth and Kinross ( Dunning parish )  , Fieldwalking . 
Discovery and Excavation in Scotland ( New Series ) 1 : 72 . 
Page 33 of 39
Haggarty , A . 1992 . Machrie Moor , Arran : recent excavations at two stone circles . Proceedings 
of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 121 : 51–94 and fiche 1 : A4–A12 . Accessed 28 June 
2021 .  < > 
Hamilton , W . D . 2020a . Dating the cremation cemetery . In : Brophy , K . and Noble , G . Prehistoric 
Forteviot : excavations of a ceremonial complex in eastern Scotland : 128–9 . CBA Research 
Report 176 . York : Council for British Archaeology . 
Hamilton , W . D .  ( with Brophy , K .  ) 2020b . Henge 1 radiocarbon dates and modelling . In : Brophy , 
K . and Noble , G . Prehistoric Forteviot : excavations of a ceremonial complex in eastern 
Scotland : 146–8 . CBA Research Report 176 . York : Council for British Archaeology . 
Harding , A . F . and Lee , G . E . 1987 . Henge Monuments and Related Sites of Great Britain : Air 
Photographic Evidence and Catalogue . British Archaeological Reports , British Series 175 . 
Oxford : BAR Publishing 
Hartwell , B . 2002 . A Neolithic ceremonial timber complex at Ballynahatty , Co . Down . Antiquity
76 : 526–32 . 
Henshall , A . S . 1972 . The Chambered Cairns of Scotland . Volume 2 . Edinburgh : Edinburgh 
University Press . 
Henshall , A . S . and Stewart , M . E . C . 1954 . Excavations at Clach na Tiompan , Wester Glen 
Almond , Perthshire . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 88 ( 1953–55 )  : 112-
24 . Accessed 21 February 2021 .  
< > 
Jones , R . 2005 . The advantages of bias in Roman studies . In : Brophy , K . and Cowley , D . C .  
( eds ) From the air : understanding aerial archaeology . 86-93 . Stroud : Tempus . 
King , M . D . 1992 . Blairhall ( Scone parish )  : cursus : ring-ditches . Discovery and Excavation in 
Scotland 1992 : 79-80 . 
Kinnes , I . 1986 . Circumstance not context : the Neolithic of Scotland as seen from the outside . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 115 : 15-57 . Accessed 21 February 2021 
< > 
Kinnes , I . A . 1992a Non-Megalithic Long Barrows and Allied Structures in the British Neolithic . 
British Museum Occasional Paper 52 . London : The British Museum . 
Kinnes , I . 1992b . Balnagowan and after : the context of non-megalithic mortuary sites in 
Scotland . In : Sharples , N . and Sheridan , J . A .  ( eds ) Vessels for the Ancestors : Essays on the 
Neolithic of Britain and Ireland in Honour of Audrey Henshall : 83-103 . Edinburgh : Edinburgh 
University Press . 
Leach , S .  , Sheridan , J . A . and Brophy , K . 2020 . Bone pins . In : Brophy , K . and Noble , G . 
Prehistoric Forteviot : excavations of a ceremonial complex in eastern Scotland : 123–6 . CBA 
Research Report 176 . York : Council for British Archaeology . 
Page 34 of 39
Lelong , O . and MacGregor , G . 2007 . The Lands of Ancient Lothian : interpreting the 
archaeology of the A1 . Edinburgh : Society of Antiquaries of Scotland . 
Long , D . 1998 . The charred residues on the Littleour Grooved Ware vessels . In : Barclay , G . J . 
and Maxwell , G . S . The Cleaven Dyke and Littleour : monuments in the Neolithic of Tayside : 68–
70 . Edinburgh : Society of Antiquaries of Scotland . 
Loveday , R . 2016 . Hiatus or hidden ? The problem of the missing Scottish upland cursus 
monuments . In : Brophy , K .  , MacGregor , G . and Ralston , I .  ( eds ) The Neolithic of Mainland 
Scotland : 97-115 . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 
MacGregor , G . and Toolis , R . 2016 . Early Settlers in the Valley of the Tay . In : Atkinson , J .  ( ed .  ) 
Ben Lawers : An Archaeological Landscape in Time . Scottish Archaeological Internet Reports 
62 : 7-28 . DOI : 10 . 9750 / issn . 1473-3803 . 2016 . 62
MacSween , A . 2017 . Appendix 4 Ceramics Analysis : Hallhole Farm , Blairgowrie , Perth and 
Kinross . Report on the Pottery . In : Fyles . Archaeological Watching Brief and Excavation 
Hallhole Farm Meikleour , Blairgowrie : 82-110 . Unpublished Data Structure Report . Perth : Alder 
Archaeology Ltd . 
Maxwell , G . S . 1979 . Air photography and the work of the Royal Commission on Ancient and 
Historic Monuments of Scotland . Aerial Archaeology 2 : 37-43 . 
Milburn , P . and McLaren , D . 2021 . A9 Dualling : Luncarty to Pass of Birnam Prehistoric 
ceramics specialist report . Unpublished Specialist Report . Edinburgh : AOC Archaeology Group . 
Millican , K . 2008 . Turning in circles : a new assessment of the Neolithic timber circles of 
Scotland . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 137 : 5-34 . Accessed 21 
February 2021 .  < > 
Millican , K . 2009 . Contextualising the cropmark record : the timber monuments of the Neolithic 
of Scotland . Unpublished PhD thesis in Archaeology . University of Glasgow . 
Millican , K . 2016a . The timber monuments of Neolithic Scotland .  ( British Archaeological Reports 
British Series 623 )  . Oxford : BAR Publishing
Millican , K . 2016b . Seeing the wood in the trees : the timber monuments of Neolithic Scotland . 
In : Brophy , K .  , MacGregor , G . and Ralston , I .  ( eds ) The Neolithic of Mainland Scotland . 139-68 . 
Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 
Mills , C . 1992 . The burnt timbers . In : Barclay , G . J . and Maxwell , G . S . The excavation of a 
Neolithic long mortuary enclosure within the Roman legionary fortress at Inchtuthil , Perthshire . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 121 : 37-38 . Accessed 28 June 2021 .  
< > 
Mills , C . M . 2021 . Big tree-ring country ? Dendrochronology and its potential in Perthshire . 
NWDG Scottish Woodland History Conference 2017 , Notes XXII : 19-26 . 
Page 35 of 39
Morgan , R . 1990 . Tree-ring studies at Haddenham . Current Archaeology 118 : 343-4 . 
Nicol , S . and Ballin , T . B . 2019 . Freeland Farm , Perth and Kinross – a mainly late Mesolithic 
carnelian assemblage from the Lower Strathearn . Archaeology Reports Online 36 . Accessed 22 
July 2019 .  < > 
Noble , G . 2006 . Neolithic Scotland : timber , stone , earth and fire . Edinburgh : Edinburgh 
University Press . 
Noble , G . 2017 . Woodland in the Neolithic of Northern Europe : The forest as ancestor . 
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Noble , G . and Brophy , K . 2011a . Big enclosures : the later Neolithic palisaded enclosures of 
Scotland in their Northwestern European context . European Journal of Archaeology 14 ( 1-2 )  : 
60–87 . 
Noble , G . and Brophy , K . 2011b . Ritual to remembrance at a prehistoric ceremonial complex in 
central Scotland : excavations at Forteviot , Perth and Kinross , Antiquity 85 : 787–804 . 
Noble , G . and Brophy , K . 2014 . Construction , process , environment : altering the landscape in 
Neolithic lowland Scotland . In : Mischka , D .  , Furholt , M .  , Hinz , M .  , Noble G . and Olausson , D .  
( eds ) Landscapes , Histories and Societies in the northern European Neolithic : 65-80 . Kiel 
University . 
Noble , G .  , Brophy , K .  , Hamilton , D .  , Leach , S .  , and Sheridan , J . A . 2017 . Cremation 
Practices and the Creation of Monument Complexes : The Neolithic Cremation Cemetery 
at Forteviot , Strathearn , Perth & Kinross , Scotland , and its comparanda . Proceedings of 
the Prehistoric Society 83 : 213-245 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / ppr . 2017 . 11
Noble , G .  , Greig , M . and Millican , K . 2012 . Excavations at a multi-period site at Greenbogs , 
Aberdeenshire , Scotland , and the four-post timber architecture tradition of the late Neolithic of 
Britain and Ireland . Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 78 : 135-72 . DOI : 
10 . 1017 / S0079497X00027146
Oswald , A .  , Barber , M . and Dyer , C . 2001 . The Creation of Monuments : Neolithic causewayed 
enclosures in the British Isles . London : English Heritage . The Creation of Monuments 
( archaeologydataservice . ac . uk )  , accessed May 2021 . 
Paton , K . and Wilson , S . 2019 . A9 Dualling : Luncarty to Pass of Birnam Post-Excavation 
Assessment and Mitigation Excavation Assessment Report . Unpublished Data Structure 
Report . Edinburgh : AOC Archaeology Group . 
Pétrequin , P .  , Cassen , S .  , Errera , M .  , Klassen , L .  , Sheridan , J . A . and Pétrequin , A . -M .  ( eds ) 
2012a . JADE . Tome 1 . Grandes haches alpines du Néolithique européen , Ve et IVe millénaires 
av . J . -C . Les Cahiers de la MSHE Ledoux no 17 . Besançon and Gray : Presses universitaires de 
Franche-Comté et Centre de Recherche Archéologique de la Vallée de l ’ Ain . 
Page 36 of 39
Pétrequin , P .  , Cassen , S .  , Errera , M .  , Klassen , L .  , Sheridan , J . A . and Pétrequin , A . -M .  ( eds ) 
2012b . JADE . Tome 2 . Grandes haches alpines du Néolithique européen , Ve et IVe millénaires 
av . J . -C . Les Cahiers de la MSHE Ledoux no 17 . Besançon and Gray : Presses universitaires de 
Franche-Comté et Centre de Recherche Archéologique de la Vallée de l ’ Ain . 
Pétrequin , P .  , Gauthier , E . and Pétrequin , A . -M .  ( eds ) 2017a . JADE . Tome 3 . Objets-signes et 
interprétations sociales des jades alpins dans l ’ Europe néolithique . Les Cahiers de la MSHE 
Ledoux no 27 . Besançon and Gray : Presses universitaires de Franche-Comté et Centre de 
Recherche Archéologique de la Vallée de l ’ Ain . 
Pétrequin , P .  , Gauthier , E . and Pétrequin , A . -M .  ( eds ) 2017b . JADE . Tome 4 . Objets-signes et 
interprétations sociales des jades alpins dans l ’ Europe néolithique . Les Cahiers de la MSHE 
Ledoux no 27 . Besançon and Gray : Presses universitaires de Franche-Comté et Centre de 
Recherche Archéologique de la Vallée de l ’ Ain . 
Piggott , S . and Simpson , D . 1971 . The excavation of a stone circle at Croft Moraig , Perthshire , 
Scotland . Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 37 ( 1 )  : 1-15 . DOI : 
10 . 1017 / S0079497X00027146
Phillips , T . and Bradley , R . 2005 . Developer-funded fieldwork in Scotland , 1990-2003 : an 
overview of the prehistoric evidence . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 134 : 
17–51 . Accessed 21 February 2021 .  
< > 
Ralston , I . 2009 . Gordon Childe and Scottish archaeology : the Edinburgh years 1927-46 . 
European Journal of Archaeology 12 ( 1-3 )  : 47-90 . 
Ralston , I . 2016 . Gordon Barclay : a career in the Scottish Neolithic . In : Brophy , K .  , MacGregor , 
G . and Ralston , I .  ( eds ) The Neolithic of Mainland Scotland : 3-20 . Edinburgh : Edinburgh 
University Press . 
RCAHMS . 1990 . North-east Perth : an archaeological landscape . London : HMSO . 
RCAHMS . 1994 . South-east Perth : an archaeological landscape . Edinburgh : HMSO . 
Rideout , J . 1996 . Carn Dubh , Moulin , Perthshire : survey and excavation of an archaeological 
landscape 1987-90 . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 125 : 139-95 . 
Accessed 21 February 2021 < > 
Ritchie , P . R . 1992 . Stone axeheads and cushion maceheads from Orkney and Shetland : some 
similarities and contrasts . In : Sharples , N . M . and Sheridan , J . A .  ( eds ) Vessels for the 
Ancestors : essays on the Neolithic of Britain and Ireland in honour of Audrey Henshall : 213–20 . 
Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 
Ritchie , P . R . and Scott , J . G . 1988 . The petrological identification of stone axes from Scotland . 
In : Clough , T . H . McK . and Cummins , W . A .  ( eds ) 1988 . Stone Axe Studies 2 : 85–91 . CBA 
Research Report 67 . London : Council for British Archaeology . 
Page 37 of 39
Roe , F . E . S . 1968 . Stone mace-heads and the latest neolithic cultures of the British Isles . In : 
Coles , J . M . and Simpson , D . D . A ( eds ) Studies in Ancient Europe . Essays presented to Stuart 
Piggott : 145–72 . Leicester : Leicester University Press . 
Roe , F . E . S . 1979 . Typology of stone implements with shaftholes . In : Clough , T . H . McK and 
Cummins , W . A .  ( eds ) Stone Axe Studies : 23–48 . CBA Research Report 23 . London : Council for 
British Archaeology . 
Saville , A . with Finlayson , B . 1998 . The flint from Littleour . In : Barclay , G . J . and Maxwell , G . S . 
The Cleaven Dyke and Littleour : monuments in the Neolithic of Tayside : 70–73 . Edinburgh : 
Society of Antiquaries of Scotland . 
ScARF . 2012 . Sheridan , J . A .  , and Brophy , K .  ( eds ) Neolithic Panel Report . Scottish 
Archaeological Research Framework : Society of Antiquaries of Scotland . DOI : 
10 . 9750 / scarf . 06 . 2012 . 164
Sharples , N and Sheridan , J . A .  ( eds ) 1992 . Vessels for the Ancestors : Essays on the Neolithic 
of Britain and Ireland in Honour of Audrey Henshall . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 
Sheridan . J . A . 1998 . The pottery from Littleour . In : Barclay , G . J . and Maxwell , G . S . The 
Cleaven Dyke and Littleour : monuments in the Neolithic of Tayside : 62–8 . Edinburgh : Society of 
Antiquaries of Scotland . 
Sheridan , J . A . 2008 . Radiocarbon dates arranged through National Museums Scotland 
Archaeology Department during 2007 / 8 . Discovery and Excavation in Scotland 9 : 201–5 . 
Accessed 28 June 2021 .  < 
1 / dissemination / pdf / 2000 / 2008 . pdf > 
Sheridan , J . A . 2010a . The Neolithisation of Britain and Ireland : the Big Picture . In : Finlayson , 
B . and Warren , G .  ( eds ) Landscapes in Transition : 89–105 . Oxford : Oxbow . 
Sheridan , J . A . 2010b . Dating Scotland ' s Neolithic non-megalithic round mounds : new dates , 
problems , and potential . In : Leary , J .  , Darvill , T . and Field , D .  ( eds ) Round Mounds and 
Monumentality in the British Neolithic and Beyond : 28–52 . Oxford : Oxbow . 
Sheridan , J . A . 2012 . Review of A . Whittle , F . Healy and A . Bayliss , Gathering Time : Dating the 
Early Neolithic Enclosures of Southern Britain and Ireland . Antiquity 86 ( 331 )  : 262–4 . 
Sheridan , J . A . 2013 . Early Neolithic habitation structures in Britain and Ireland : a matter of 
circumstance and context . In : Hofmann , D . and Smyth , J .  ( eds ) Tracking the Neolithic House in 
Europe : 283–300 . New York , Dordrecht , Heidelberg and London : Springer . 
Sheridan , J . A . 2016 . Scottish Neolithic pottery in 2016 : the big picture and some details of the 
narrative . In : Hunter , F . and Sheridan , J . A .  ( eds ) Ancient Lives . Object , people and place in 
early Scotland . Essays for David V Clarke on his 70th Birthday : 189-212 . Leiden : Sidestone 
Press . 
Page 38 of 39
Sheridan , J . A . 2017 . Interdigitating pasts : the Irish and Scottish Neolithics . In : Bickle , P .  , 
Cummings , V .  , Hofmann , D . and Pollard , J .  ( eds ) The Neolithic of Europe . Papers in Honour of 
Alasdair Whittle : 298-313 . Oxford : Oxbow . 
Sheridan , J . A . 2020 . Pottery chafing vessel . In : Brophy , K . and Noble , G . Prehistoric Forteviot : 
excavations of a ceremonial complex in eastern Scotland : 126–7 . CBA Research Report 176 . 
York : Council for British Archaeology . DOI : 10 . 5284 / 1082002
Sheridan , J . A .  , Pailler , Y .  , Pétrequin , P . and Errera , M . 2011 . Old friends , new friends , a longlost friend and false friends : tales from Projet JADE . In : Davis , R . V . and Edmonds , M .  ( eds ) 
Stone Axe Studies III : 411–26 . Oxford and Oakville : Oxbow Books . 
Sheridan , J . A . and Pailler , Y . 2012 . Les haches alpines et leurs imitations en Grande Bretagne , 
Irlande et dans les Iles anglo-normandes . In : Pétrequin , P .  , Cassen , S .  , Errera , M .  , Klassen , L .  , 
Sheridan , J . A . and Pétrequin , A . -M .  ( eds ) JADE . Grandes haches alpines du Néolithique 
européen . Ve et IVe millénaires av . J . -C . Tome 2 : 1046–87 . Cahiers de la MSHE C . N . Ledoux . 
Besançon and Gray : Presses Universitaires de Franche-Comté et Centre de Recherche 
Archéologique de la Vallée de l ’ Ain . 
Sheridan , J . A . and Schulting , R . J . 2020 . Making sense of Scottish Neolithic funerary 
monuments : tracing trajectories and understanding their rationale . In : Gebauer , A . -B .  , 
Sørensen , L .  , Teather , A . and Valera , A . C .  ( eds ) Monumentalising Life in the Neolithic : 
narratives of change and continuity : 195‒215 . Oxford : Oxbow . 
Simpson , D . D . A .  , Coles , J . M . and Denston C . B . 1991 . Excavations at Grandtully , Perthshire . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 120 : 33-44 . Accessed on 21 February 
2021 .  < > 
St . Joseph , J . K . 1976 . Aerial reconnaissance : recent results , Antiquity 50 : 55-7 . 
Stewart , M . E . C . 1959 . Strath Tay in the second millennium BC – a field survey . 
Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 92 ( 1958–59 )  : 71–84 . Accessed on 21 
February 2021 .  < > 
Stewart , M . E . C . 1965 . Excavation of a setting of standing stones at Lundin Farm near 
Aberfeldy , Perthshire . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 98 ( 1964–66 )  : 
126–149 . Accessed on 21 February 2021 .  
< > 
Stewart , M . E . C . 1966 . Excavation of a circle of standing stones at Sandy Road , Scone , 
Perthshire . Transactions of the Perthshire Society of Natural Science 11 : 7-23
Stewart , M . E . C . 1974 . Tirnie Farm :  ‘ Fourposter ’ setting . Discovery and Excavation in Scotland 
1974 : 49 . 
Stewart , M . E . C . 1986 . The excavation of a henge , stone circles and metal-working area at 
Moncreiffe , Perthshire . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 115 : 125-50 . 
Page 39 of 39
Accessed on 21 February 2021 .  
< > 
Stewart , M . E . C . and Barclay , G . J . 1997 . Excavations in burial and ceremonial sites of the 
Bronze Age in Tayside . Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal 3 : 22-54
Taylor , D . B . 1989 . Obituary : Margaret E C Stewart . Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of 
Scotland 118 : 1-2 . Accessed on 21 February 2021 .  
< > 
Thomas , J .  ( ed .  ) 2007 . Place and Memory : excavations at the Pict ’ s Knowe , Holywood and 
Holm Farm , Dumfries and Galloway , 1994–8 . Oxford : Oxbow . 
Thomas , J . 2010 . The Return of the Rinyo-Clacton Folk ? The Cultural Significance of the 
Grooved Ware Complex in Late Neolithic Britain . Cambridge Archaeological Journal 20 ( 1 )  : 1-
15 . 
Toolis , R . 2011 . Neolithic domesticity and other prehistoric anomalies : excavations at Laigh 
Newton , East Ayrshire . Scottish Archaeological Internet Reports 49 . DOI : 10 . 5284 / 1017938 
Warren , G . 2006 . Stone tool industries of the earlier Neolithic in eastern Scotland . Scottish 
Archaeological Journal 28 ( 1 )  : 27-47 . 
Whittle , A .  , Healy , F . and Bayliss , A . 2011 . Gathering Time : dating the early Neolithic 
enclosures of southern Britain and Ireland . Two volumes . Oxford : Oxbow Books . DOI : 
10 . 2307 / j . ctvh1dwp2
Wright , D . 2012 . The Tay Landscape Partnership Scheme : Report on the assessment of 
Mesolithic lithic artefacts . Unpublished report commissioned by the Tay Landscape 
Partnership . 
Wright , D . and Brophy , K . forthcoming . Prehistoric Dunning : excavations of a farming 
and settlement landscape . SERF Monograph 3 . York : Council for British Archaeology . 
Young , A . and Crichton Mitchell , M . E . 1939 . Report on excavation at Monzie . Proceedings of 
the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 73 ( 1938–39 )  : 62-70 . Access on 21 February 2021 
< > 
Younger , R . 2015 . De-henging the henge : a biographical approach to Scotland ’ s henge 
monuments . Unpublished PhD thesis in archaeology . University of Glasgow . 
Younger , R . 2016 . Making memories , making monuments : changing understandings of henges 
in prehistory and the present . In : Brophy , K .  , MacGregor , G . and Ralston , I .  ( eds ) The Neolithic 
of Mainland Scotland : 116-38 . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press . 