Oxford Handbooks Online
Abstract and Keywords
Archaeological fieldwork is normally treated as a matter of applying techniques that are 
designed to recover particular data sets, which have been identified either on the basis of 
research priorities or by the concerns of cultural resource management. The data are 
treated as objectively secure, whilst their interpretation might be open to question. The 
role of theory is widely assigned to the process of interpretation, and therefore often 
treated as an optional aspect of the analysis that is excluded from the process of data 
recovery. We counter this characterization by treating theory as one of the essential tools 
required by the fieldworker to enable the critical evaluation of the procedures by which 
archaeological knowledge is constructed. Such a theorized perspective pre-eminently 
requires that the procedures of fieldwork help fieldworkers to develop an interpretive 
archaeology of people in an informed way at the moment of fieldwork.
Keywords: craft, epistemology, fieldwork, ontology, architectures of life
Introduction
This contribution will not attempt the impossible by using a chapter-sized discussion to 
extensively review the numerous theoretical traditions in archaeology and their potential 
application to various field methodologies. Instead, we make the case that theory is a way 
of clarifying our thinking, expressing our objectives, and making our assumptions explicit, 
and that it is a key component of the toolbox of procedures available for use in field 
archaeology. Nor do we distinguish between fieldwork initiated by institutions assigned to 
either the ‘academic’, ‘commercial’, or ‘cultural resource management’ branches of the 
discipline. This exploration of the issues that confront field archaeology grows out of a 
conversation between the two authors, who in some respects differ in their views on 
where the discipline of archaeology currently ‘is’ in terms of fieldwork and theory, but 
who are united in the belief that field archaeology is central to the exploration of the 
worlds and traditions of people in the past. That exploration is not, in our view, highly 
Theory in the Field
Page 2 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
enough valued. In part this is because much field archaeology is failing to realize the 
potential it offers when addressing the challenge that we all face in striving to 
understand the histories of human diversity. One reason for this failure lies, we believe, in 
the discipline’s desire to establish and maintain over-rigid and exclusive procedures of 
field identification and excavation, and its recording, via fieldwork manuals and 
standardized recording sheets. In Anglo-American field practice, this ongoing rigidity 
exists in tandem with the dominance of processual archaeology—its theory and 
approaches to method. This situation is out of kilter with the wide range of theory 
traditions of archeological synthesis and interpretation that now exist.
The entrenchment of rigidity of practice
UK archaeologists have primacy in the origins of an interest in establishing formal 
procedures of archaeological field practice and recording. This interest stretches back to 
the late nineteenth-century field and finds-recording methods of Pitt Rivers and 
contemporaries (Bowden 1991: 55ff.), and is subsequently expressed in W.M. Flinders 
Petrie’s 1904 book Methods and Aims in Archaeology (particularly chapter 5). The same 
interest intermittently ocurred in early twentieth-century Continental Europe. A notable 
example is the recording forms and small-finds cards developed by French archaeologists
Ferdinand Scheurer and Anatole Lablotier (1914) to document the hundreds of excavated 
graves at the Merovingian cemetery of Bourogne (Belfort) and repurposed in Edouard’s 
Salin’s (1946) Manual of Excavations (see Pavel 2010; 2011). In the United States, the 
influence of George Reisner’s Harvard excavations at Samaria, Palestine (1908–10), with 
their detailed recording of archaeological stratigraphy, are credited with leading to the 
standardized, pre-printed site record forms used by Robert Heizer (1949; discussed by
Pavel 2011: 262). However, the first largely nationwide uptake of preset recording 
procedures lies in the UK’s postwar construction boom of the 1960s and 1970s. Here, the 
rapidly growing need for rescue/salvage excavations led to the setting up of UK 
commercial archaeology units; and in the wake of this, a wealth of pre-formatted field 
recording frameworks and recording sheets were developed (e.g. Stewart 2013). The 
MoLAS (Museum of London Archaeology Service) archaeological site manual, its tradition 
of single-context recording, and its associated use of the Harris Matrix to sequence 
contexts famously became a UK ‘bible’ for urban archaeology recording (Harris 1979;
Westman 1994). Internationally, the establishment of standardized recording formats has 
been more localized, relating to differing field traditions, and to the ease or difficulties of 
identifying archaeological remains. For Continental Europe, Italian superintendencies 
had primacy in taking up the use of pro formas at the end of the 1970s and in adopting 
the Harris Matrix from the mid-1980s (Brown III and Harris 1993: 1), while Catalan 
archaeology was the first in Spain, in the early 1990s, to adopt the Harris Matrix and 
formal recording procedures (Trócoli 1993). Members of the French CNRS (Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique) developed major recording systems and feature 
sheets for the site of Lattara (Bats 1986; Py 1991), and context sheets for the 
international ‘Grand Site de France’ excavations at Bibracte, Burgundy (Pavel 2010, 279). 
Wider dissemination of various formal recording systems was often the circumstantial 
Theory in the Field
Page 3 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
outcome of specific international missions and transnational contacts between 
archaeological teams. For example, MoLAS field archaeologists and MoLAS recording 
methods were introduced into Lebanon in 1994, and MoLAS recording systems were 
subsequently adopted by the Lebanese directorate of antiquities (Perring 1997–1998;
Thorpe 2012: 48).
A trend of regularizing recording systems likewise prevails at a supra-level where 
national and international policy statements focus on necessary general fields, such as 
site categories, for recording field archaeology/heritage remains. For Europe, the Valletta 
Convention of 1992 on the Protection of Archaeological Heritages stipulates, for 
participating European states and federal regions, both the basic principles of developerfunded rescue archaeology and the required norms to be recorded for different 
categories of evidence (Kristiansen 2009). A concern for regularized systems of 
recording, again based on general required fields of recording, prevails in the individual 
Cultural Resource Management (CRM) statements by individual North American states, 
which were variously put in place during the later twentieth and early twenty-first 
centuries; the situation is similar in New Zealand (http://www.heritage.org.nz/protectingheritage/archaeology/archaeological-guidelines-and-templates).
Thus, by the later twentieth century a concern with ultilizing formal, often detailed 
recording systems in field archaeology existed in the UK, parts of Continental Europe, 
North America, and more widely—albeit inconsistently. Some forty years plus of this 
trend of regularizing defined good practice, legitimized by regional, national, and 
international goverment and professional frameworks, has been fundamentally at the 
expense of the questions of past human history being asked, and embedded, from the 
start-point of investigative archaeological fieldwork. The idea that archaeological field 
recording is a neutral mechanical process to register what is uncovered or encountered 
has long been contested (Hill 1972; Pavel 2012; Hodder 1999; Lucas 2001). However, the 
rationale and philosophical underpinning of standardized recording forms, with their 
various prompts and boxes, are the outcomes of a specific theoretical stance on 
archaeology, and structure the process of retrieving and interpreting data by its users. 
The traditional idea of fixed recording methods providing common ground for comparison 
is false. The pro formas or advised fields for recording—such as for contexts and features
— often cannot be neatly compared from project to project within a country, never mind 
from country to country, due to differences in the terminology of the team, unit, region, or 
federal state. Therefore, we assert that theory’s primary role here is to resist this 
increasing closing-down of technique in the name of established professional standards, 
by demonstrating the validity, and potential for co-use, of different paths of field 
investigation, recording, and production of knowledge. (Andrews, Barrett, and Lewis 
2000).
Theory in the Field
Page 4 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
Theory and craft
In this section we make the case that theory and craft (the skills of fieldwork used to 
generate evidence and meaning) should not be separated, but that there should be an 
active, symbiotic relationship between the two.
The critique of the New or Processual Archaeology that developed from the late twentieth 
century did so on two fronts of relevance to field archaeology. One was to question the 
authority of established fieldwork procedures and report writing (Bender, Hamilton, and 
Tilley 2007; Woodward, Barrett, and Freeman 2000). The second was to question the 
interpretation of past human behaviours as being determined by general factors, rather 
than as the expression of specifically motivated strategies (e.g. Hodder 1982; Shanks and 
Tilley 1987). One consequence of the critique was a turning away from archaeology as a 
science of human behaviour and the embracing of archaeology as the study of a culturally 
driven humanity. This ‘humanistic turn’ (cf. Vinsrygg 1988) resulted in an increased 
suspicion amongst a then younger generation of academic, mostly British archaeologists 
of the role of science in contemporary society. To them, scientific explanation was 
restricted to the identification of generalized and deterministic processes, as opposed to 
specific and historically contingent conditions of causation for which a more nuanced 
understanding of the philosophy of science would have been required. In our view, 
science is not a matter of the unquestioning adoption of established techniques and the 
blind acceptance of established laws of process, even if ‘normal science’ as defined by
Kuhn (1970) might sometimes be characterized in this way. Instead it is a commitment to 
the public accountability of its claims about the world, which is fulfilled by making the 
reasoning and methods used in particular field projects explicit and open to assessment 
and replication. This view introduces the idea that the construction and validation of 
knowledge (epistemology) must be relevant to the kinds of reality (ontology) that are 
being investigated, for, as Binford wrote: ‘I cannot make any judgement about the 
rationality of the way you intend to proceed until you tell me what you are trying to 
accomplish’ (Binford 2001: 669).
One way in which the opposition between the procedures of the humanities and those of 
the sciences referred to above might be overcome is to treat both as encompassing a 
diverse range of crafts. Craft concerns the creation and processes of making something. 
Increasingly the case has been made that fieldwork is as much a craft as a mere set of 
techniques (cf. Shanks and McGuire 1996). The skills associated with craft are defined by 
the competence with which procedures are designed that are relevant to the problems 
being investigated. In the first place, it must decided if the problems selected by field 
teams and field directors for investigation are actually worth investigating. This task is 
more demanding than it might initially appear. The problems chosen will tell us 
something about the investigator’s commitment to a particular view as to the way the 
world works, and the priorities this person has in understanding that world—a 
consideration that brings together assumptions about both historical and contemporary 
conditions. Unsurprisingly, this is unlikely to be a matter of consensus. Second, craft 
requires an assessment of whether the product obtained by its implementation is relevant 
Theory in the Field
Page 5 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
to the task at hand. For example, we might wonder whether a written text, a museum 
display, or an enactment is the best product to bring forth an understanding of the 
historical problems under consideration; and we might ask who is doing the 
understanding, since understanding is not absolute but dependent upon the audience. 
Lastly, craft is about engagement with material conditions, in this case the complex 
organization of archaeological fieldwork, which raises the question of who can play a part 
in the various stages of such creativity (Berggren and Hodder 2003). All of this requires 
intellectual clarity in preparing, undertaking, and presenting fieldwork.
Theory cannot be caricatured as speculation about how the past might have been; instead 
it allows us to consider the design and practical consequences of the craft of 
investigation. Nor does theory come after the fact; it is not an optional extra, to be added 
to the recording of material as one means of its interpretation. Facts are pertinent to a 
way of seeing the world, and as such require the kind of evaluation that theory is 
designed to deliver (cf. Latour 2010). This ensures that we are not plunged into an 
incoherent relativism, but that we both recognize and assess that the facts that matter to 
us are the products of our choice to pursue a particular engagement with problems and 
materials.
Fieldwork discovers new things and new relationships (if it did not do so it would not be 
worth undertaking), but, as David Clarke noted in 1973, the developing methodologies 
that are currently ‘detecting more, different and previously unknown data attributes’ and 
extending ‘our capacity for information recovery, manipulation and analysis’ do not in 
themselves drive the rise of ‘vigorous, productive and competitive new 
paradigms’ (Clarke 1973: 7–11). The new and surprising finds have to be brought into 
view from one or more perspectives whence their significance/meaning can be assessed. 
This is a matter of considerable practical importance in commercial archaeology, where 
fixed-price contracts have the potential to render the unsuspected discovery a 
considerable financial risk (McGill 1995: 114). The perspectives from which the 
significance of such finds can be established therefore demand critical attention, and it 
follows that in the best of worlds these perspectives need to be available to all field 
practitioners.
Thus theory can be treated as a tool of enquiry that is situated within the toolbox of the 
craft of field archaeology. ‘Theory’ is not the ‘container’ of the tools, and claims to the 
pre-eminence of a single theoretical position are as barren as the claim to a single 
methodology. We need a plurality of approaches from which to choose. Today, any theory 
of fieldwork involves considerations of the role of the individual in the practical and 
interpretive procedures of fieldwork and of the social dynamics of the communities of 
archaeologists that undertake it (Edgeworth 1990). The craft of fieldwork involves people 
physically encountering and uncovering the material remains of the past in rural and 
urban landscapes. Excavation is often characterized as a process of destruction—features 
are excavated and destroyed and artefacts taken from their contexts, and the integrity of 
their associations disrupted by being physically regrouped by type, and placed in distant 
stores and museum displays. This potentially negative aspect of fieldwork has been 
Theory in the Field
Page 6 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
interestingly salvaged and theorized by Gavin Lucas as a process of construction and 
materialization, in which fieldwork builds an understanding of the past that, with each 
stage, has material outcomes, including the bagged and boxed material in museum 
stores, exhibitions, site reconstructions, digital databases, books, and papers (Lucas 2001). 
The following discussion incorporates these perspectives of fieldwork by understanding it 
to be a process of construction in which the cumulative acts and theoretically informed 
choices of each individual engaged in fieldwork are foremost in the productive 
materialization of the outcome.
A question of purpose
As an example of the conflicting approaches that would either remain hidden or emerge 
as confused terminologies in an archaeology that is defined merely in terms of its 
techniques, let us consider how we might define the object of archaeological study. To 
understand this issue, we must be clear as to the distinction between the question of 
ontology, or what actually exists, and the question of epistemology, which is concerned 
with the theory of knowledge. It follows, as we have already indicated, that 
epistemological procedures should be designed relative to ontological conditions, and we 
presume it is the latter that defines the object of archaeological study. The link is 
obviously complex: epistemologies are the practical acceptance of certain ontologies, 
which means that field methods cannot simply be accepted as unproblematic and selfevident, for the simple reason that they also deliver a particular conception of the reality 
that is being investigated. It is here, at the very heart of archaeological enquiry, that the 
conflict arises between treating the material remains themselves and/or the now extinct 
conditions of past human existence as the object of archaeological study, since these are 
not one and the same thing.
The need to ensure that material remains are unambiguously representative of past 
human behaviours, and to understand their associated site formation processes, remain 
key concerns. In the case of the study of material remains, the ontological issue for 
archaeology appears to be that of considering the patterned variability in the material 
remains to be a manifestation of the human intentions and actions that created it. This 
was addressed most clearly by Lewis Binford in the development of his ‘Middle Range 
Theory’ (Binford 1981). It was by experimentation and replication that Binford 
established a robust framework to enable the archaeological residues of hunter-gatherers 
to be used as tokens of particular activities. Stephen Shennan, from the rather different 
perspective of the dynamics of artefact distribution and the development of these over 
time, has called for ‘programmes of empirical research’ which ‘provide a basis for 
explaining patterns of variation in the world’ (Shennan 2012: 15). In these and other 
cases, the object of study is the variation in archaeological materials as indicative of 
historical processes, in which epistemological procedures are designed to reduce 
uncertainty about the significance of archaeological observations (cf. Renfrew 1984).
Theory in the Field
Page 7 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
If we now turn to the claim that it is the historical conditions of human existence that are 
the reality that concerns us and therefore the object of archaeological study, things look 
rather different (Hodder 1982). A full understanding of formation processes that have 
affected the archaeological record as recovered in the field (Schiffer’s 1987 ‘natural’ and 
‘cultural’ transformations) are indisputably vital to an adequate epistemology; but the 
reality now sought extends beyond the reconstruction of physical processes of production 
and site formation to address the diverse ways different human communities in the past 
might have brought a practical and discursive understanding of the material milieu that 
they inhabited, and coped with, via chosen ways of living. This leads to much greater 
uncertainty in the process of interpretation, not simply because the task is more difficult, 
but because the same material conditions are likely to have been encountered from 
different perspectives—such as the ways symbols of authority might be seen either as 
markers of legitimate power or as the trappings of oppression (Miller and Tilley 1984;
Harrison-Buck 2012). For example, such a duality is expressed by Michael in The 
Archaeology of the Colonized (2004), in which roads built in Anatolia during the early 
Roman empire are interpreted as being constant physical reminders of external power, 
and as routes of access and penetration by administrators and troops.
Theory, therefore, allows us to clarify the different views as to what field archaeology is 
about, and to explore the ways in which each view evaluates its own procedures. As 
researchers, we are likely to find one of these ways more conducive to our own interests 
in archaeology than the other, but we have to be able to understand why that is the case 
and to explore its consequences effectively; and those consequences extend to the 
practices of fieldwork itself. To treat field methodology as if it were innocent of our 
prejudices as to what archaeology might be designed to achieve is clearly nonsense, and 
is certainly not the basis upon which to claim that field methods are objective. Objectivity 
is something that has to be won—the product of self-reflexive enquiry and debate with 
others, rather than of the use of techniques simply because they exist in the textbooks 
and field manuals. Take the example of single-context stratigraphic recording (Harris 
1979) which lies at the heart of modern British excavation procedures and which most UK 
archaeologists now take for granted. The only absolute relationships that can exist 
between deposits, surfaces, and cuts recorded according to standard procedures are 
sequential; most excavation procedures are designed to establish sequences of 
stratigraphic units in these terms, and to link such sequences to a chronological scale and 
to a sequence of formation processes. However, if we are interested in the historical 
conditions of human existence, and thus the material contexts within which human 
communities once operated, then we have to confront the fact that those conditions have 
always been multi-period. The remains of the fifth and sixth century CE in western 
Europe, for example, are always stratigraphically later than the deposits marking the 
final stages of Roman imperial rule, but many of those who lived in these later centuries 
did so amongst still-standing Roman architectural remnants. Certainly, memories of 
Roman rule and such remains will have shaped perceptions of their fifth-/sixth-century 
world. Martin Carver recognized some time ago that this required a significant 
modification of the way stratigraphic sequences should be depicted, for what is gained in 
Theory in the Field
Page 8 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
understanding an inhabited space by separating the floor of a room from its walls, simply 
because the floor was laid down after the walls were built? (Carver 1990: 97).
Fieldwork as a chaîne opératoire
Archaeology in the field cannot be treated as a discrete entity in the overall process of 
historical enquiry. Instead, one way of characterizing archaeological field practice is as a 
form of extended chaîne opératoire—an intertwined sequence of operational, personal, 
and social acts (Lemonnier 1986). The sequence might originate either in an academic 
research programme, in the demands of commercial and cultural resource management, 
or in local initiatives by various archaeological groups and interested communities. Each 
develops a different kind of relationship to current research, philosophical traditions, and 
socioeconomic contexts, and each has its potential conclusions in the various outputs of 
fieldwork, their impact on academia, and the contributions of field interventions to the 
historical awareness of society at large.
To develop the chaîne opératoire analogy, field practice can be conceived of as a craft in 
which you adjust your choice of actions until you become comfortable with what you 
achieve and at the same time sequentially gain a clearer understanding of where you are 
trying to get. In archaeology, it is a concept that has been applied to understanding the 
process of production for artefacts, such as flint tools or pottery (Van Der Leeuw 1993). If 
field archaeology is theorized in this way, it is indisputably a subject (person)-centred 
craft, where options and chains of consequences are continuously brought into 
consideration by the individuals involved in choosing what actions to carry out in the field 
and how to bring the material outcomes together to construct and present 
interpretations. A subject (person)-centred archaeology, as introduced here, is not 
subjective per se because it is subject-centred. It is not an entry into the chaotic world 
where anything goes (Feyerabend 1975) and where all actions and interpretations are 
equally valid. A subject-centred craft involves individuals weighing up all the range of 
options, actions, and possibilities—of how to walk a landscape, how to trowel or mattock 
a layer, how to section a deposit, how to sample or empty a feature, how to connect 
different parts of a site or landscape interpretively, and so on. Resources, finances, time, 
and project hierarchies allowing (and these are big remits), all field archaeologists have 
access to, or can choose to use, environmental data, standard ways of describing and 
recording finds and features, reflexive logs, digital technologies, sensory perspectives, 
and/or a variety of other techniques. Using a phenomenological approach, for instance, 
does not preclude using the available palynological information to inform interpretation, 
and it would be wrong to characterize it as doing so (Chapman and Gearey 2000). 
Similarly, Site Catchment Analysis mapping in the 1970s did not require that topography 
was (senselessly) ignored in characterizing site catchments, although in actuality it often 
was (Hamilton and Whitehouse 2006). The integrity of our line of argument lies in the 
recognition that fieldwork is a subject-centred practice; and therefore to rigidly situate 
field practice in any one framework of prevailing archaeological theory is a cop-out 
because it avoids dealing with the consequences of individual actions and decisions in the 
Theory in the Field
Page 9 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
fieldwork process. Theory at the level of ‘isms’—‘processualism’, ‘post processualism’, 
‘empiricism’, and so on—should not provide single overarching frameworks in which a 
fieldwork project takes place. Instead, theory should be seen as a key resource that field 
archaeologists have to hand. Just as a craftsperson reaches for something that works at 
that moment, so too can those undertaking fieldwork potentially simultaneously draw 
upon a range of theoretical perspectives and practical methodologies.
We need to move to methods of fieldwork that are open to diverse inputs and theoretical 
perspectives in constructing an understanding of sites, places, and the people that lived 
in, and used them, rather than clinging to an academic perspective that is neurotic about 
mixing theoretical stances (Hamilton et al. 2008). Whether all approaches will receive the 
same amount of academic, commercial, or public attention is of course another matter. 
For example, the sequential, chaîne opératoire nature of the fieldwork procedures 
requires critical analysis of the ways in which it tends to structure archaeological career 
prospects. As long as field survey and excavation are treated as the unproblematic 
application of standard techniques to recover data sets that are only subsequently open 
to interpretation, a career distinction in terms of status, reward, and security will 
separate those who are deemed to do the technical work of recovery and those who are 
endowed with the intellectual tasks of interpretation.
It seems strange that those who are involved in crafting the recovery of the material 
conditions of the past are recurrently those who are granted the lowest status, poorest 
working conditions, and weakest job security (e.g. see Zeber 1997 for North American 
archaeology). At each point in the craft sequence of fieldwork there are indisputable 
power hierarchies—for example, relating to the uptake of the interpretive perspectives of 
the experienced and the inexperienced, and to organizational structures of on-site and 
off-site decision making. There have been specific experiments to make the tasks of 
fieldwork a democratic process, more rooted in the communities local to the excavation 
and involving volunteers (e.g. Faulkner 2000 for the UK). However, in parts of the world 
where hired local labour essentially contributes to fieldwork, this becomes a complex and 
highly politicized concept (e.g. Steele 2005: 50ff., discussing the intersection between 
politics, local communities, and archaeology in the Middle East).
Lock-ins (resistance to change)?
Field archaeology’s ever-widening contemporary interest in a mainstream compliance 
with the legal and administratative organizational structures of public policy and the 
commercial world (e.g. EAA 2000, and Gupta 2000 for such a need in India) could be 
argued to have had a catastrophic effect on the development of a theory of field 
archaeology (Webley et al. 2012). For example, it is striking just how long the 
methodologies and procedures of Anglo-American archaeological field practice have 
uniquely remained aligned to an overarching processual framework of enquiry that 
adjourns/postpones interpretation from the primary recognition of adaptive and 
interacting processes. This is in spite of more than three decades of post-processual 
Theory in the Field
Page 10 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
critique of archaeological method, notably in the UK, the Netherlands, and Scandanavia 
(Shanks 2008: 134), and for British prehistory in particular, a large part of archaeological 
synthesis adopting an interpretative, post-processual approach. For UK field archaeology, 
and potentially more widely, this situation could be described as a ‘lock-in’ resulting from 
organizational self-reinforcing feedback. The emergence of post-processual archaeology 
in Britain was concurrent with full recognition in planning procedures of developer-led 
and funded archaeology. This is now where the bulk of field archaeology in Britain takes 
place; it has increasingly become a branch of commercial organization culture, and draws 
the rules, procedures, and standards of the building industry and planning departments 
into the pre-existing methodologies of its fieldwork. The use of ‘scientific’ method aligns 
easily with the need for success in competitive tendering that is reliant on compliance 
with standards set by professional bodies, rigid methodological statements, prescribed 
sampling strategies, and the production of formulaic reports (Hamilton 1996, 1999). In 
Britain, all of this is reinforced by the advisory direction and professional validation 
procedures of the Chartered Institute for Archaeologists and English Heritage (National 
Planning Policy Framework 2011). The contemporary organization and practice of 
development-led archaeology across the Low Countries, France, Germany, Denmark, and 
Ireland, in addition to Britain, varies considerably, but is often simplified as a dichotomy 
between being a public task of state (e.g. Inrap in France, Schlanger 2012) or local 
authorities as against funding supplied by competing commercial developers. Inevitably 
the situation is more complex than this (Kristiansen 2009; Demoule 2012; Webley et al. 
2012), but the overall outcome either way has been increasing static frameworks of 
methods and documentation processes that are directed to satisfying supra-local/regional 
scales of validation. In the business world, formalized systems of work and reporting are 
recognized by organizations to have the advantage/disadvantage of encouraging a high 
level of stability over time. More generally, for academically based field research, it could 
be argued that the required standard formats and expectations of major grant 
applications for fieldwork to public bodies and higher research institutions equally 
creates a resistance to change and general lack of openness to debates and ‘mixed 
methodologies’.
Community responsibility
The involvement of state or regional agencies, either as guardians of the archaeological 
heritage or as funding agencies, and the charitable sponsorship that exists are predicated 
upon the belief that the preservation and study of the material heritage is of public 
benefit. Most people therefore have a varying degree of investment in archaeology, be it 
willing or otherwise, as commercial funders, as taxpayers, and as those in whose name 
conservation and cultural resource management policies are implemented. It would 
therefore seem to be incumbent upon the archaeological discipline to ensure not only that 
the results of its inquiries are made available in terms that are understandable to these 
groups, but also that the procedures of archaeological research and the priorities that 
seek funding are similarly communicated and open to wider assessment. Indeed, such a 
move would seem to be essential if public support for investment in the discipline is to 
Theory in the Field
Page 11 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
continue. Dawdy, for example, has advocated a move towards a ‘futurist archaeology’ that 
has ‘simultaneously a pragmatic, ethical and intellectual appeal’ and ‘intersects with 
contemporary social problems’, and notes that an early twenty-first-century climate of 
crisis pushes archaeology to be relevant and useful to the present (Dawdy 2009: 142). 
Several years down the line, this ethos continues to have a strong currency.
The past is always contentious: historical narratives are open to a number of different 
perspectives that may be culturally, ethnically, and politically charged. However, our 
concern continues to be with the disciplinary procedures of archaeology, as they are 
broadly defined by current intellectual assumptions and methodologies. The wider 
community’s involvement in these archaeological processes requires much more than the 
distillation of results in widely disseminated formats. There needs to be the possibility of 
a general level of engagement with the archaeological procedures by which an 
understanding of the human past is achieved. Given that archaeology is characterized by 
methodological and intellectual diversity, we are not suggesting that by responding to the 
need for a wider community of involvement, we offer a false image of disciplinary unity; it 
is after all debate and disagreement that drive research and foster interest and 
commitment. Nor are we suggesting that the complexity of the issues which archaeology 
addresses should be masked by an oversimplification or a ‘dumbing-down’ of the 
discipline’s demanding intellectual programme. What we seek instead is the development 
of a currency that expresses some of the basic intellectual and analytical procedures of 
archaeology, provides the means of converting complex intellectual priorities into widely 
understood conservation and research priorities, and provides the medium through which 
conflicting claims about the practice of archaeology may be assessed. In other words, this 
is a currency that is required for dialogue and the exchange of ideas between different 
communities of interest right from the point of commencement of fieldwork.
Given that methodological procedures are currently treated as a system of recovery that 
is distinct from what are assumed to be the subsequent processes of historical 
interpretation, three important consequences arise from this separation of observation 
from interpretation. First, it disrupts the theoretically designed bridge that should span 
ontological claims and empirical investigation. As a result, fieldwork procedures tend to 
float free from the wider programme of enquiry. Oddly, as we have already noted, this is 
often welcomed as an indication of the ‘objectivity’ of fieldwork, as if objectivity were a 
quality secured by not knowing why you might be recording what you are recording. 
Second, by marginalizing fieldwork from the process of historical enquiry, those 
undertaking excavation and field recording are themselves similarly marginalized in the 
processes of writing history despite their hands-on engagement with primary data (cf.
Andrews et al. 2000; Berggren and Hodder 2003). They are also, incidentally, relieved 
from the responsibility of evaluating the intellectual and empirical competence of the 
research programme (a position that can hardly be described as ‘objective’). The 
problems accompanying the marginalization of fieldwork from the main task of historical 
enquiry are compounded by the expectations of the wider community—including those 
paying for commercially funded excavations, who are likely to be most interested in the 
discovery procedures employed by archaeology, but might expect those procedures to 
Theory in the Field
Page 12 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
involve discovering something about the past rather than simply discovering what is in 
the ground.
Third, deferring historical interpretation to the period after data recovery, rather than 
developing interpretation in the actual process of recovery, accrues certain dangers. 
Either the interpretation never happens (as witnessed by the unpublished literature of 
reportage accumulating in numerous archives and commercial impact reports), or it 
focuses upon highly specialist analysis of particular data sets, lacking the development of 
a holistic view to illuminate actual historical conditions. It also supports the misplaced 
view that interpretation is of secondary importance to data recording, the latter (falsely) 
regarded as timelessly secure and the former, interpretation, treated as transitory and in 
some way ‘subjective’. This last claim would also, on the face of it, seem to refute the 
possibility that our knowledge of the past is cumulatively improving over time. However, 
we surely do understand more fully today than we did previously the complex nature of 
the past and the quality of the intellectual and practical demands that attend upon its 
study. If it were indeed the case that archaeology were making no progress in better 
understanding the object of its study but simply accumulating more stuff, then it would be 
difficult to justify its continued funding.
An integrated archaeology
In conclusion, we will now offer one strategy for an integrated approach to the evidence 
available in field archaeology that is necessarily based upon a particular ontology—a 
claim about the nature of historical realities. The archaeological record comprises the 
remains of the various material conditions that different human communities once 
occupied, modified, and from which they extracted the means for life. In any one period 
we might characterize the built environment, the technical facilities contained within that 
environment, the relics of earlier activity, the wider topography of landscape, and the 
existing resources of nature as providing an ‘architecture of life’. We here employ this 
concept of ‘architecture’ generically to characterize the materialities within which people 
lived and so found a place for themselves. Human history is made from the living-out of 
routines, the execution of strategic decisions, and the playing-out of conflicts over the 
control of resources, as well as from the long-term trajectories in which, for example, 
resources are accumulated or eroded, populations ebb and flow, and climates change. 
Past forms of life, human identities, their values and demands, and the authorities to 
which they responded were all made with reference to the available material realities 
that were afforded by the existence of other people, the buildings and natural 
surroundings that were inhabited, and the technologies that were available. Accordingly, 
archaeology might now be defined as the empirical investigation of how, given the 
material conditions that defined places and facilities—the ‘architectures of life’ that were 
available at any time—certain forms of humanity became possible. It should seek to 
explore the consequences that arose from the ways in which such particular forms of 
humanity might once have operated.
Theory in the Field
Page 13 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
The base currency for an archaeology and a field archaeology that can be widely 
comprehended could therefore be cast as the investigation of ‘inhabited architectures’. 
Thus, for example, stratigraphic analysis is obviously an essential part of the excavation 
procedure, but only as a preliminary towards building the more holistic view of a period’s 
‘architecture’. Reconstituting the spaces once inhabited and the resources once exploited 
requires that excavation procedures allow for the synthesis of the stratigraphic analysis 
into a history of spatially ordered environments, rather than being a form of analysis that 
disaggregates those environments into a sequence of individual, stratigraphically ordered 
units. Since the late twentieth century, creating such spatial architectures has been 
rendered commonly accessible through the use of machine-based mapping, digital 
reconstruction and GIS. When this mapping data is presented in atlas format, it can be 
rendered understandable by deploying sequential interpretive narratives of the human 
presence. Although a viable possibility, an issue is how much of this interpretation and 
scale of visualization is actually realised ‘on site’ when fieldwork strategies can respond 
to unfolding patterns, rather than after fieldwork. It is an understanding of this spatial 
architecture that can ensure that the historical significance of the material is explored, 
and can secure research priorities in relation to a coherently described material resource. 
The style of presentation needs to be strongly visual, concern itself with the constraints, 
options, and perspectives that informed the performance and labours of the inhabitants, 
and benefit from written commentaries in the active voice of engagement rather than the 
passive voice of description (e.g. Framework Archaeology’s timetravel links for Heathrow 
Terminal 5: http://www.framearch.co.uk/t5/2006/08/23/8500-4000-bc-deep-forest-and-ariver/). This would further extend what we have described above as a ‘subject 
(person-)centred archaeology’, and would provide a visual and textual medium within 
which the significance of archaeological fieldwork could be discussed. Given that 
archaeology and, in the context of the above discussion, field archaeology needs to 
establish the value of its own work in competing for limited funding and has a 
commitment to ensure the widest possible public understanding of its aims and 
achievements, this currency we suggest offers a means of achieving those ends. Indeed, if 
they were written and illustrated in such terms, people might actually start reading 
archaeological fieldwork reports, and this cannot be possible without the pre-theorization 
outlined above.
Further reading
There are numerous textbooks on field archaeology, with one of the best being M. Carver 
(2009), Archaeological Investigation. The major example of a reflexive approach to field 
archaeology remains that of Çatal Höyük, whose updated website is at http://
www.catalhoyuk.com/; but see also B. Bender, S. Hamilton, and C. Tilley (2007),
Stone Worlds: Narrative and Reflexivity in Landscape Archaeology. Various attempts have 
been made to restructure archaeological reportage, including J. C. Barrett, P. W. M. 
Freeman, and A. Woodward (2000), Cadbury Castle Somerset: The Later Prehistoric and 
Early Historic Archaeology; Framework Archaeology (2006), Landscape Evolution in the 
Middle Thames Valley: Heathrow Terminal 5 Excavations, vol. 1; and C. Evans (2009),
Theory in the Field
Page 14 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
Fengate Revisited: Further Fen-Edge Excavations, Bronze Age Fieldsystems and 
Settlement and the Wyman Abbott/Leeds Archives. For the discursive practices of 
archaeology, see R. A. Joyce (2002), The Languages of Archaeology. A wide-ranging 
review of the status of women in archaeological practice and interpretation is given by S. 
Hamilton, R. D. Whitehouse, and K. L. Wright (2007), Archaeology and Women: Ancient 
and Modern Issues. N. Schlanger and K. Aitchison (eds, 2010), Archaeology and the 
Global Economic Crisis: Multiple Impacts, Possible Solutions provide overviews on the 
development of commercial archaeology in numerous European countries including 
Poland, Hungary, and Russia as well as the United States. Other broad overviews of 
commercial archaeology in Europe include K. Kristiansen (2009), ‘Contract 
archaeology in Europe: an experiment in diversity’. Y. Nakanishi (2014) usefully 
summarizes field archaeology in Japan in C. Lewis (ed.), Encylopedia of Global 
Archaeology. M. Carver, B. Gaydarska, and S. Montón-Sublas (2014), Field Archaeology 
from Around the World: Ideas and Approaches provides insights into the theory and 
contextual backgrounds of the world’s varied archaeological fieldwork traditions (see e.g. 
c. 9, L. Zhang, ‘China’). H. Cobb, O. Harris, C. Jones, and P. Richardson (eds, 2012),
Reconsidering Fieldwork: Exploring Onsite Relationships between Theory and Practice
provides a wide ranging look at the ongoing tensions between fieldwork and theory.
References
Andrews, G., Barrett, J. C., and Lewis, J. 2000. Interpretation not record: the practice of 
archaeology. Antiquity 74: 525–530.
Bats, M. 1986. Enregistrer la fouille archéologique: le système élaboré pour le site de 
Lattes Hérault. Lattes: ARALO.
Bender, B.. Hamilton, S., and Tilley, C. 2007. Stone Worlds: Narrative and Reflexivity in 
Landscape Archaeology. Walnut Creek, Calif.: Left Coast Press.
Berggren, Å., and Hodder, I. 2003. Social practice, method and some problems of field 
archaeology. American Antiquity 68: 421–434.
Binford, L. R. 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. New York: Academic Press.
Binford, L. R. 2001. Where do research problems come from? American Antiquity 66: 
669–678.
Bowden, M. 1991. Pitt Rivers: The Life and Archaeological Works of Lieutenant-General 
Augustus Henry Lane Fox Pitt Rivers DLC, FRN, FSA. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Brown, M. R., III and Harris, E. C. 1993. Interfaces in archaeological stratigraphy. In E. C. 
Harris, M. R. Brown III, and G. J. Brown (eds), Practices of Archaeological Stratigraphy, 
1–7. London: Academic Press.
Theory in the Field
Page 15 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
Carver, M. O. H. 1990. Digging for data: archaeological approaches to data definition, 
acquisition and analysis. In R. Francovich and D. Manacorda (eds), Lo scavo archeologico: 
dalla diagnosi all’edizione, 45–120. Florence: All’Insegna del Giglio, 45–120.
Chapman, H., and Gearey, B. 2000. Palaeoecology and the perception of prehistoric 
landscapes: some comments on visual approaches to phenomenology. Antiquity 74: 316–
319.
Clarke, D. 1973. Archaeology: the loss of innocence. Antiquity 47: 6–18.
Dawdy, S. L. 2009. Millennial archaeology: locating the discipline in the age of insecurity.
Archaeological Dialogues 16(2): 131–142.
Demoule, J. P. 2012. Rescue archaeology: a European view. Annual Review of 
Anthropology 44: 611–626.
EAA 2000. Archaeology and development. European Archaeologist 13: 1–4.
Edgeworth, M. 1990. Analogy as practical reason: the perception of objects in excavation 
practice. Archaeological Review from Cambridge 9(2): 243–251.
Faulkner, N. 2000. Archaeology from below. Public Archaeology 1: 21–33.
Feyerabend, P. 1975. Against Method: Outline of an Anarchist Theory of Knowledge. 
London: Humanities Press.
Flinders Petrie, W. 1904. Methods and Aims in Archaeology. New York: Macmillan.
Given, M. 2004. The Archaeology of the Colonized. London: Routledge.
Gupta, S. 2000. Some problems of heritage management and documentation in India.
European Archaeologist 13: 5–6.
Hamilton, S. 1996. Reassessing archaeological illustrations: breaking the mould. Graphic 
Archaeology: 20–27.
Hamilton, S. 1999. Lost in translation: a comment on the excavation report. Papers of the 
Institute of Archaeology 10: 1–8.
Hamilton, S., Harrison, S., and Bender, B. 2008. Conflicting imaginations: archaeology, 
anthropology and geomorphology on Leskernick Hill, Bodmin Moor, southwest Britain.
Geoforum 39: 602–615.
Hamilton, S., and Whitehouse, R. 2006. Phenomenology in practice: towards a 
methodology for a ‘subjective’ approach. European Journal of Archaeology 9(1): 31–71.
Harris, E. C. 1979. Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy, 2nd edn. London: Academic 
Press.
Theory in the Field
Page 16 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
Harrison-Buck, E. (ed.) 2012. Power and Identity in Archaeological Theory and Practice: 
Case Studies from Ancient Mesoamerica. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Heizer, R. 1949 A Manual of Archaeological Field Methods. Milbrae: National Press.
Hill, J. N. 1972. The methodological debate in contemporary archaeology: a model. In D. 
L. Clarke (ed.), Models in Archaeology, 61–107. London: Methuen.
Hodder, I. (ed.) 1982. Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Hodder, I. 1999. The Archaeological Process. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kristiansen, K. 2009. Contract archaeology in Europe: an experiment in diversity. World 
Archaeology 41(4): 641–648.
Kuhn, T. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd edn. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Latour, B. 2010. On the Modern Cult of the Factish Gods. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press.
Lemonnier, P. 1986. The study of material culture today: towards an anthropology of 
technology. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 5: 147–186.
Lucas, G. 2001. Critical Approaches to Fieldwork: Contemporary and Historical 
Archaeological Practice. London: Routledge.
McGill, G. 1995. Building on the Past: A Guide to the Archaeology and Development 
Process. London: E. & F. N. Spon.
Miller, D., and Tilley, C. (eds) 1984. Ideology, Power and Prehistory. Cambridge: Cambride 
University Press.
National Planning Policy Framework. 2011. www.communities.gov.uk/
planningandbuilding/planningsystem/planningpolicy/planningpolicyframework/
Pavel, C. 2010. Describing and Interpreting the Past: European and American Approaches 
to the Written Record of the Excavation. Bucharest: Editura Universităţii din Bucureşti.
Pavel, C. 2011. Recording the excavations in Troy: 1855–2010. Studia Troica 19: 255–283.
Pavel, C. 2012. Archaeological recording: form and content, theory and practice. Atek Na
2: 33–74.
Perring, D. 1997–1998. Excavation of the Souks of Beirut: an introduction to the work of 
the British-Lebanese team and a summary report. Berytus 43: 9–44.
Py, M. (ed.) 1991 Système d’enregistrement, de gestion et d’exploitation de la 
documentation issue des fouilles de Lattes. Lattes: Lattara 4.
Theory in the Field
Page 17 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
Renfrew, C. 1984. Approaches to Social Archaeology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press.
Salin, E. 1946. Les fouilles de sépultures du Ve au VIIIe siècle. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France.
Scheurer, F., and Lablotier, A. 1914. Foules du cimetière Barbare de Bourogne: exécutées 
par MM. Lablotier et Scheurer de 1907 à 1909. Paris: Berger Levrault.
Schiffer, M. B. 1987. Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record. Albuquerque: 
University of New Mexico Press.
Schlanger, N. 2012. Entre la France et l’Angleterre: l’archéologie à l’aune de la crise. Les 
Nouvelles de l’archéologie 127: 16–20.
Shanks, M. 2008. Post processual archaeology and after. In H. Maschner, C. Chippindale, 
and A. Bentley (eds), Handbook of Archaeological Theories, 133–144. Lanham, Md.: 
AltaMira Press.
Shanks, M., and McGuire, R. 1996. The craft of archaeology. American Antiquity 61(1): 
75–88.
Shanks, M., and Tilley, C. 1987. Re-Constructing Archaeology: Theory and Practice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shennan, S. 2012. Darwinian cultural evolution. In I. Hodder (ed.), Archaeological Theory 
Today, 2nd edn, 15–36. Cambridge: Polity.
Steele, C. 2005. Who has not eaten cherries with the devil? Archaeology under challenge. 
In S. Pollock and R. Bernbeck (eds), Archaeologies of the Middle East. Critical 
Perspectives, 45–65. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Stewart, G. 2013. Archaeological Recording Practices: Guidelines for archaeological 
excavation and recording techniques. Hexham: Northumberland National Park.
Thorpe, R. 2012. Often fun, usually messy: fieldwork, recording and higher orders of 
things. In H. Cobb, O. Harris, C. Jones, and P. Richardson (eds), Reconsidering 
Archaeological Fieldwork: Exploring On-Site Relationships Between Theory and Practice, 
31–52. New York: Springer.
Trócoli, I. 1993. The contribution of the Harris Matrix to the development of Catalan 
archaeology. In E. G. Harris, M. R. Brown III, and G. J. Brown (eds), Practices of 
Archaeological Stratigraphy, 44–56. London: Academic Press.
Van Der Leeuw, S. 1993. Giving the potter a choice: conceptual aspects of pottery 
techniques. In P. Lemonnier (ed.), Technological Choices: Transformation in Material 
Cultures since the Neolithic, 238–288. London: Routledge.
Theory in the Field
Page 18 of 18
PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights 
Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in 
Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: University College London; date: 12 April 2019
Vinsrygg, S. 1988. Archaeology—as if people mattered: a discussion of humanistic 
archaeology. Norwegian Archaeological Review 21(1): 1–20.
Webley, L., Linden, M. V., Haselgrove, C., and Bradley, R. 2012. Development-Led 
Archaeology in Northwest Europe. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Westman, A. (ed.) 1994. Archaeological Site Manual. London: Museum of London.
Woodward, A., Barrett, J., and Freeman, P. 2000. Cadbury Castle Somerset: The Later 
Prehistoric and Early Historic Archaeology. London: English Heritage.
Zeber, M. A. 1997. The American Archaeologist: A Profile. Walnut Creek, Calif.: AltaMira 
Press.
John Barrett
Emeritus Professor of Archaeology, Department of Archaeology, University of 
Sheffield
Sue Hamilton
Director and Professor of Prehistory, UCL Institute of Archaeology.