 urban poor ) within 
societies in historical periods . There are various branches of archaeology , 
each with several sub-branches . 
1 . 1 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Understand the meaning and origins of Archaeology
	 •	Establish the relationship between History and Archaeology
	 •	Describe prehistoric archaeology
	 •	Analyse historical archaeology
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
2 Material
1 . 2 MEANING AND ORIGINS OF ARCHAEOLOGY
The word archaeology has its origin from two Ancient Greek words 
 ‘ arkhaios ’  , meaning ancient or old , and ‘ logia ’  , which stand for learning 
or study . Archaeology is the study of the ancient and recent human past 
through the recovery and analysis of material remains . Many consider it to 
be a subfield of anthropology ( the study of all human culture and evolution )  , 
along with many other subfields comprising biological , cultural and linguistic 
anthropology . Archaeology can be considered both a social science and a 
branch of the humanity ( the study of humans and their society )  . However , 
it also uses other branches of learning such as biology , chemistry , geology , 
botany , geography and various other disciplines . By using all these disciplines , 
the archaeologists are able to understand human civilizations of the past and 
recreate main aspects of the environment in which these bygone societies 
lived . 1
Archaeology is the only method available for the study of human 
actions in the material world , when other evidences such as a variety of 
written materials and oral traditions narrating certain phenomenon fail . 
The survival of written documents is relatively limited and hence from the 
time that these documents become available , they provide additional tools 
to archaeology for its interpretation of past activities of man , on the basis 
of material remains . Archaeology , from this point of view , has to not only 
interpret material remains of human activity , but also throw light on the 
literary interpretations of the past phenomenon . 2 
It helps us to appreciate and 
preserve our shared human heritage . It informs us about the past , helps us 
understand where we came from , and shows us how people lived , overcame 
challenges , and developed the societies we have today . 3
The development of the field of archaeology has its roots in history and 
those who were interested in the past , such as kings who wanted to show 
past glories of their respective nations . In the 5th century BC , Herodotus , 
the Greek historian , was the first scholar to systematically study the past 
and perhaps the first to examine artifacts and test their accuracy . In the Song 
Empire ( 960–1279 ) of Imperial China , officials unearthed , studied , and 
catalogued ancient artifacts . In the 15th and 16th centuries , there was a rise 
of antiquarians in Renaissance Europe who were interested in the collection 
of artifacts . The antiquarian movement shifted into nationalism and personal 
collections were used to create national museums . It developed into a much 
more systematic discipline in the late 19th century and became a widely used 
1 Lian Slayford , 2016 ,  “ Archaeology : An Introduction to Archaeology and Important 
Archaeological Sites ”  , Amazon Digital Services LLC , Kindle Edition
2 K . N Mehta , 1979 ,  “ Medieval Archaeology ”  , Ajanta Publications , Delhi , p . 1
3 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 3
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
tool for historical and anthropological research in the 20th century . During this 
time there were also noteworthy advances in the technology used in the field . 
The exact origins of archaeology as a discipline are uncertain . 
Excavations of ancient monuments and collection of antiquities have been 
taking place since times immemorial . In ancient times , the tombs of the 
Pharoahs of Egypt were looted by grave robbers who probably hoped for 
financial gains from selling their plunder . We can distinguish this with 
endeavors of the Italian Renaissance humanist historian , Flavio Biondo , 
who created a systematic and documented guide to the ruins and topography 
of ancient Rome in the early 15th century . He is seen as a candidate for 
consideration as an early founder of archaeology . He was inclined to treat 
the ruins and topography of ancient Rome with great respect . 4
Tentative steps towards archaeology as a science took place during 
the Age of Enlightenment , also called as the Age of Reason , in Europe in 
the 17th and 18th centuries . King Charles of the Two Sicilies employed an 
antiquities expert , Marcello Ventui , in 1738 to excavate the ancient city of 
Herculaneum . This first supervised excavation of an archaeological site 
was likely the birth of modern archaeology . In America , Thomas Jefferson 
supervised the systematic excavation of a Native American burial mound on 
his land in Virginia in 1781 . During the Egyptian campaign in 1801 , Napoleon 
Bonaparte brought many scientists and specialists in the field of biology , 
chemistry and languages with the purpose of carrying out a full study of the 
Egyptian civilization . During these campaigns , some soldiers rebuilding a 
fort discovered an unusual stone on which ancient scripts were engraved . 
This stone was known as the Rosetta Stone . Many decades later , the work 
of Jean-Francois Champollion in deciphering the Rosetta Stone led to the 
discovery of the hidden meaning of hieroglyphics . This discovery proved to 
be the key to the study of Egyptology . 5
However , it was only in the 19th century that the systematic study of 
the past through its physical remains began to be carried out in a manner 
recognizable to modern students of archaeology . Richard Colt-Hoare ( 1758-
1838 ) recorded the past of the countryside near his estate at Stourhead in 
Wiltshire . In his investigations and excavations of such neolithic barrows as 
Silbury Hill , Colt-Hoare used a terminology that was later adopted by other 
archaeologists . 6
In later years archaeology continued as an amateur pastime and was 
pursued by persons such as Augustus Pitt Rivers who collected many artifacts 
and developed a typology scheme for dating archaeological remains in his 
personal collection in the second half of the 19th century . William Flinders 
4 AshishMishra , 2011 ,  “ History of Archaeology ”  , Shakti Publishers & Distributors , Delhi , 
India , p . 1
5 Ibid .  , p . 2
6 Ibid .  , p . 
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
4 Material
Petrie ( 1853-1942 ) was another personality who may rightly be called 
the Father of Archaeology . His work on the ancient Egyptian civilization 
developed the concept of seriation , which allowed accurate dating long before 
scientific methods were evolved to testify his chronologies . 
Mortimer Wheeler was the next popular figure involved in the 
development of archaeology . His highly disciplined approach to excavation 
and systematic coverage of much of Great Britain in the 1920s and 1930s 
brought the science on swiftly . His method of excavation still forms the 
basis of excavation technique . The work of Sir Arthur Evans at Knossos in 
Crete in early 20th century had shed light on the Minoan Civilization . The 
archaeological findings from this site were catalogued and kept in a museum 
at Oxford . 
Archaeology was increasingly becoming a professional activity . 
Although the major chunk of excavation ’ s workforce consisted of volunteers , 
it was mostly led by a professional . Archaeology as a discipline was 
introduced in schools and universities , and by the end of the 20th century , 
nearly all professional archaeologists , at least in the developed countries , 
were graduates in the subject . 
Check Your Progress
1 . What is Rosetta Stone ? 
2 . Who is known as the Father of Archaeology ? 
1 . 3 HISTORY AND ARCHAEOLOGY
Both history and archaeology research the human past . The difference between 
these two disciplines derives from the source materials . The historians use 
written sources while archaeologists concentrate on physical remains . 
Historical sources are committed to dates while archaeological material is 
basically connected to spatial origin . This basic difference explains why 
historians and archaeologists have difficulties in understanding each other . 
Archeology is also related with history in a more particular manner . The 
history of the earliest literate societies such as those of Egypt , Mesopotamia , 
Greece and Rome depends largely on archaeology , which was in the first 
place responsible for the recovery of the written history documents through 
archaeological excavations . 
Archaeology and history complement each other . The two disciplines 
together provide a more comprehensive record of the past . For example , 
some of archaeologically invisible activities may be described in historical 
documents . Also , sometimes history can be used to locate archaeological 
sites . The two disciplines are related with each other in terms of methodology 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 5
An Introduction to 
Archaeology as they use the same method in the finding the past events , such as the use 
of observation to identify a certain place where particular events took place . 
Archaeology has contributed to the study of written history through the study 
of artifacts and structures of literate societies . This has led to the development 
of the new sub-discipline of historical archaeology . 
Many physical remains of the past , such as clay tablets , Egyptian 
choreographic text on papyrus and inscriptions , are historical documents 
just as much as are the books published in the 17thcentury Europe . Many 
historical texts are discovered through archeological research . Archaeology 
also helps in reconstructing the history of particular events in chronological 
order . 
However , history and archaeology also differ from each other in some 
aspects . History deals primarily with written accounts from the past whereas 
archaeology deals with the material remains of the past . These material 
remains are mute , and their meaning and significance depend entirely on the 
interpretation that an archaeologist can make . In contrast , historical records 
contain messages , although their meaning and significance are also subject 
to critical interpretation to discoverer . 
Historical records lay more emphasis on literate and richest communities 
such as kings , queens , and high priests , as the prominence of these people 
could have influenced the storage of their records , while archaeology is less 
partial for the elite class as anyone can contribute to the archaeological record . 
Another distinction is found in the scope of the two disciplines . 
Archaeology covers the period from the beginning of human civilization 
( 2 . 5 million years ago ) to the present , while history covers the period from 
the beginning of written records ( 3000 BC ) to the present . History comprises 
the stories of what happened , how , where , who did it and what happened 
next . Archaeology is concerned with the place where a sample , such as the 
remains of a temple , or an artwork , or an artifact is found . 
Check Your Progress
3 . List two differences between history and archaeology
4 . How do history and archaeology complement each other ? 
1 . 4 PREHISTORIC ARCHAEOLOGY
Prehistoric archaeology is a section of archaeology which studies past 
societies . It is the study of the past before historical records began . It is a 
field of research that looks at all the pre-urban societies of the world . It has 
different procedures for analyzing material remains so that archaeologists 
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
6 Material
can reconstruct their ecological settings . The study of prehistoric archaeology 
reflects the cultural concerns of modern society by showing interpretations of 
time between economic growth and political stability . It is also very closely 
related with biology , biological anthropology , and geology . It is sometimes 
termed as anthropological archaeology because of its indirect traces with 
complex patterns . 
1 . 4 . 1 Relationship between Prehistoric Archaeology and History 
Prehistoric archaeology studies the past cultures based on their material 
remains . It is as much a part of history as it is a section of archaeology . In 
fact , for more than 99 per cent of past material , culture is the main source 
of information if one ignores physical anthropology , which emphasizes on 
biological ( human evolution and variation ) rather than man ’ s works ( sociocultural aspects )  . Colin Renfrew and Paul Bahn opine that the conventional 
history sources begin only with the introduction of written records around 
3000 B . C . in western Asia , and very much later in most other parts of the 
world . Then a pertinent question arises as to how is the history of illiterate 
or preliterate people or country known ? What were its sources ? A prehistoric 
archaeologist will be able to answer this question . Anything that tells us its 
past history i . e . language , place-names and study of the people ’ s physical 
features , customs and manners , legends and traditions , their monuments , 
even a study of landforms , soils and vegetation , and the animals may help 
to demonstrate this story . Therefore , a commonly drawn distinction is 
that prehistoric archaeology deals with the period before written records 
and history deals with the study of the past using written documents . To 
put it in other words , prehistoric archaeology deals with the history of the 
illiterate or preliterate societies . In this way , it contributes substantially in the 
understanding of those periods and places where written records , inscriptions 
and other literary sources are non-existent . It is the responsibility of the 
prehistoric archaeologists to explore , excavate , examine and interpret the 
evidence . 
Although prehistoric archaeology tells the history of preliterate people , 
it is distinct from history proper as the former does not depend on written 
documents or accounts . The artifacts or whatever explored or excavated 
do not reveal anything without proper analysis and interpretation . It is the 
prehistoric archaeologist who has to make sense of these finds . He works 
like a scientist in this respect . He follows a scientific method . He collects 
the evidences ( data )  , conducts experiments or formulates hypothesis ( a 
proposition to account for the data )  , tests hypothesis against more data , and , 
in conclusion , develops a model , a description that seems best to summarize 
the pattern observed in the data . He has to develop a picture of the past , just 
as a scientist has to develop a logical view of the natural world . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 7
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
1 . 4 . 2 Scope of Prehistoric Archaeology
Prehistoric archaeology has become an institution nowadays , encompassing a 
number of different scholars forming sub-disciplines . Each scholar propagates 
new theories and follows different methods having different approaches . In the 
recent past , there has been a growing realization that prehistoric archaeology 
has contributed a lot not only to study the antiquities or relics of the past 
societies but also to study the modern people or contemporary societies with 
simple technology from the light of their practices set in prehistoric times . It 
can also help with specific archaeological studies when the ways of life of the 
modern society are very much similar to those of the past life . It has become 
a current focus of research . In one way or another we compare something 
from the past with an object in use today . For example , megalithism , or using 
megaliths to create monuments , is a dead cultural phenomenon in most parts of 
the world . But it is still practiced by different tribal communities in the same 
way or in some modified form in North-East India , especially in Nagaland , 
Manipur and Meghalaya . Megalithism is a living tradition among these tribal 
communities . Hence many specialists in the field of ethno-archaeology take 
keen interest to reconstruct the past life of the ancient people of these regions 
in the light of this living tradition . 
1 . 4 . 3 Approaches in Prehistoric Archaeology 
Let us analyse the different approaches in Prehistoric Archaeology . 
Ethno-Archaeology : Ethno-archaeology has become a chief specialization 
in modern archaeology . One can understand the archaeological remains or 
records only if one understands its existence and the process of its formation 
in much greater detail . The processes of formation of sites are now a focus 
of intensive study . Ethno-archaeology is the study of living people and their 
material culture conducted with the aim of improving our understanding of 
the archaeological remains or records . For example , the study of butchery 
practices among the living hunter-gatherers , conducted by Lewis Binford 
among the Nunamiut Eskimo of Alaska , has given him many new ideas about 
the way archaeological remains or relics may have been formed , allowing 
him to re-examine the bone remains of animals eaten by very early humans 
elsewhere in the world . Archaeologists believe that the present-day huntergatherers such as the Australian Aborigine or the North American Eskimo , 
and the people who lived during the Neolithic period have a lot in common 
with each other ’ s ways of life . 
Environmental Archaeology : Environmental archaeology is another major 
specialization of prehistoric archaeology . It involves three sub-disciplines of 
archaeology , viz .  , zooarchaeology that deals with the study of ancient animal 
remains , geoarchaeology that deals with the study of soil , sediments , rocks , 
natural deposits , etc .  , and archaeobotany that studies ancient plant remains . 
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
8 Material
Thus , it is an interdisciplinary approach where archaeologists and scientists 
study the human use of plants and animals and how societies adapted to 
the ever-changing environment . Environmental archaeology is a subfield 
of archaeology and is the science of reconstructing the relationships between 
past societies and the environments they lived in . It is now a well-developed 
field in its own right . It views humans as part of the natural world interacting 
with other species in the ecological system or ecosystem . The environment 
governs human life . Geographical features determine the vegetation which in 
turn determines animal life . And all these things collectively determine how 
and where humans have lived , or at least what they did until very recently . 
The task of environmental reconstruction is a fundamental one because if we 
have to understand how humans functioned , and the community of which they 
formed a part , we have to know first what their world was like . Environmental 
archaeology includes field studies along with laboratory experiments . 
Marine Archaeology : Marine archaeology , or maritime archaeology , or 
underwater archaeology , is another field of specialization of prehistoric 
archaeology . It demands great courage as well as skill . There is a lot of danger 
involved when working at low depths and with little visibility . The use of 
robotic divers , armed with strong lights and cameras , helps greatly in the 
safety of underwater archaeology . It specifically studies human interaction 
with the sea , lakes and rivers through the study of associated physical remains 
like vessels , shore-side facilities , port-related structures , cargoes , human 
remains and submerged landscapes . A specialty within marine archaeology 
is nautical archaeology , which studiesship construction and use . It is generally 
considered to have been given its first major impetus during 1853-54 , when a 
particularly low water level in the Swiss lakes laid bare enormous quantities 
of wooden posts , pottery and other artifacts . From the earliest investigation , 
using crude diving belts , it has developed into a valuable complement to 
work on land . 
In the last five decades , it has become a highly scientific practice 
yielding time capsules from the past in the form of shipwrecks and other 
structures that shed new light on ancient life . The inventions of miniature 
submarines , other submersible craft and above all scuba diving gear in recent 
times have been of great value , enabling divers to stay under water much 
longer and to reach sites at previously impossible depths . Consequently , the 
pace and scale of discovery have greatly increased in the last few years . 
Check Your Progress
5 . Why is prehistoric archaeology considered a part of history ? 
6 . What is environmental archaeology ? 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 9
An Introduction to 
1 . 5 HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY Archaeology
Historical archaeology is a sub-discipline of archaeology concerned with 
studying places , things , and issues from the past using physical evidence in 
combination with other types of historical sources such as maps , documents , 
illustrations , photographs and oral history . In the strictest sense , historical 
archaeology is the archaeology of societies that left behind historical records . 
These records can both complement and conflict with the archaeological 
evidence found . It focuses on the objects used by people in the past and the 
places where they lived and worked . It can tell us about the way things were 
made and used and how people lived their daily lives . 7
Historical archaeology emphasizes on literate , historical-period 
societies as opposed to non-literate , prehistoric societies . While they may not 
have produced the records , the lives of people for whom there was little need 
for written records , such as the working class , slaves , indentured labourers , 
and children , during the historical period can also be the subject of study . 
The sites are found on land and underwater . 
Historical archaeologists use written records , but not all research that 
involves written records is classified as historical archaeology . For example , 
the writings of Meso-American cultures are studied by archaeologists , but 
their work is not generally considered to be historical archaeology . The same 
stands true for fields such as Egyptology and Classical ( Greek and Roman ) 
Archaeology . 8 The term historical archaeology most commonly refers to a 
narrower aspect of archaeology , namely the archaeology of the modern period 
with a focus on colonial and post-colonial contexts influenced by European 
Imperialism . 
Historical archaeology pays great attention to the everyday world of 
all people . It is a combination of history and anthropology . The historical 
archaeologist attempts to understand the cultural processes and human 
experiences that produced the world we live in today through examination 
of written records of information by past cultures . Writing in some form or 
another was known to have been used from times immemorial . However , 
historical archaeologists study only recent history . Using only written 
evidence as the foundation of their research , historical archaeologists often 
work in partnership with historians . This type of archaeology developed in 
North America and Britain , where it continues to thrive in academic centres . 
Researchers in this field are particularly interested in books , manuscripts , 
seals , engravings , paintings , drawings and the like . Historical archaeology 
7 
revealinghistarch . pdf
8 
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
10 Material
is , therefore , the study of the material remains of past societies that also 
left behind historical documentary evidence . An interesting subfield of 
archaeology , it studies the emergence , transformation and nature of our 
modern world . 9
Check Your Progress
7 . What is historical archaeology ? 
8 . What is the focus of a historical archaeologist ? 
1 . 6 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . During his Egyptian campaign in 1801 , Napoleon Bonaparte brought 
many experts to carry out a study of the Egyptian civilization . During 
these campaigns , some soldiers discovered an unusual stone on which 
ancient scripts were engraved . This stone was Rosetta Stone . 
2 . William Flinders Petrie ( 1853-1942 ) is called the Father of Archaeology . 
3 . History deals primarily with written accounts from the past whereas 
archaeology deals with the material remains of the past . Historical 
sources are committed to dates while archaeological material is 
basically connected to spatial origin . 
4 . History can be used to locate archaeological sites , and some 
archaeologically invisible activities may be described in historical 
documents . Also , many historical texts are discovered through 
archeological research , and physical remains of the past , such as clay 
tablets , Egyptian choreographic text on papyrus and inscriptions , are 
historical documents . 
5 . Conventional history sources begin only with the introduction of 
written records around 3000 BC in western Asia , and very much later 
in most other parts of the world . It ’ s prehistoric archaeology that can 
tell us anything about the history of illiterate or preliterate people and 
societies . 
6 . Environmental archaeology is the science of reconstructing the 
relationships between past societies and the environments they 
lived in . It involves three sub-disciplines , viz .  , zooarchaeology that 
deals with the study of ancient animal remains , geoarchaeology that 
deals with the study of soil , sediments , rocks , natural deposits , etc .  , 
and archaeobotany that studies ancient plant remains . 
9 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 11
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
7 . Historical archaeology is the archaeology of societies that left behind 
historical records such as maps , documents , illustrations , photographs 
and oral history . 
8 . A historical archaeology pays great attention to the everyday world 
of all people . It is a combination of history and anthropology . The 
historical archaeologist attempts to understand the cultural processes 
and human experiences that produced the world we live in today 
through examination of written records of information by past cultures . 
1 . 7 SUMMARY
	 •	Archaeology is the study of the ancient and recent human past through 
the recovery and analysis of material remains . 
	 •	It can be considered both a social science and a branch of the humanity 
( the study of humans and their society )  . However , it also uses other 
branches of learning . 
	 •	Archaeology is the only method available for the study of human 
actions in the material world , when other evidences such as a variety 
of written materials , and oral traditions narrating certain phenomenon 
fail . 
	 •	It informs us about the past , helps us understand where we came from , 
and shows us how people lived , overcame challenges , and developed 
the societies we have today . 
	 •	The development of the field of archaeology has its roots in history and 
those who were interested in the past , such as kings who wanted to 
show past glories of their respective nations . 
	 •	The exact origins of archaeology as a discipline are uncertain . 
Excavations of ancient monuments and collection of antiquities have 
been taking place since times immemorial . There were a few rulers 
who showed their interest in exploring the past . 
	 •	Tentative steps towards archaeology as a science took place during the 
Age of Enlightenment , also called as the Age of Reason , in Europe in 
the 17th and 18th centuries . 
	 •	However , it was only in the 19th century that the systematic study of the 
past through its physical remains began to be carried out in a manner 
recognizable to modern students of archaeology . 
	 •	Both archaeology and history complement each other . The two 
disciplines together provide a more comprehensive record of the past . 
An Introduction to 
Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
12 Material
	 •	Prehistoric archaeology is a section of archaeology which studies past 
societies . It is the study of the past before historical records began . It 
has a very wide scope . 
	 •	Ethno-archaeology , Environmental Archaeology and Marine 
Archaeology are the three major approaches in prehistoric archaeology . 
	 •	Historical archaeology is a sub-discipline of archaeology concerned 
with studying places , things , and issues from the past using physical 
evidence in combination with other types of historical sources such 
as maps , documents , illustrations , photographs and oral history . It is a 
combination of history and anthropology . 
1 . 8 KEY WORDS
	 •	Anthropology : It is the study of human beings , including their 
behaviour , biology , linguistics and social and cultural variations . 
	 •	Antiquarian : It is a term used to indicate a pre-20th-century collector 
of ancient artifacts before the development of scientific archaeology 
and the establishment of standards for excavating and preserving finds . 
	 •	Artifact : It is portable object manufactured , modified , or used by 
humans . 
	 •	Hunter-gatherers : It refers to a community or group that subsists 
primarily by hunting wild animals and gathering wild plant resources . 
	 •	Neolithic : It refers to the latter portion of the Stone Age , a time period 
beginning around 10 , 000 BCE .  , when many areas were developing 
agriculture , especially the Middle East . 
	 •	Site : It denotes any place where human material remains are found ; 
an area of human activity represented by material culture . 
1 . 9 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Who was the first scholar to systematically examine artifacts from the 
past ? 
2 . What is ethno-archeology ? 
3 . Give a brief description about nautical archeology and its rise to 
prominence . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 13
An Introduction to 
Archaeology Long Answer Questions
1 . Discuss the growth of archaeology as a discipline and list five key 
people and their contribution for its development . 
2 . Compare and contrast history and archaeology with examples . 
3 . Analyse the major approaches in prehistoric archaeology and their 
scope . 
4 . Differentiate between historical archaeology and history . 
1 . 10 FURTHER READINGS
Chakraborti , D . K . 1988 . A History of Indian Archaeology : The Beginning 
to 1947 . Delhi : Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers . 
Childe , V . G . 1956 .  ( First Edition ) Piecing Together the Past . London : 
Routledge & Kegan Paul . 
Kenyon , K . M . 1964 . Beginnings in Archaeology . London : J M Dent & Sons 
Ltd . 
Daniel , Glyn . 1967 . The Origins and Growth of Archaeology . Harmondsworth : 
Penguin Books . 
Markham , C . R . 2004 . A Memoir on the Indian Surveys . Delhi : Manohar 
Publishers & Distributors . 
Srivastava , K . M . 1987 . New Era of Indian Archaeology . Delhi : Cosmo 
Publications . 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
14 Material
UNIT 2 ARCHAEOLOGY : TYPES 
AND CONTEXTS
Structure 
2 . 0 Introduction
2 . 1 Objectives 
2 . 2 Kinds of Archaeology
2 . 2 . 1 Archaeology on the Basis of Work
2 . 2 . 2 On the basis of Historic Time Period
2 . 3 Exploration
2 . 4 Excavation
2 . 5 Cultural and Historical Context
2 . 6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
2 . 7 Summary
2 . 8 Key Words
2 . 9 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
2 . 10 Further Readings
2 . 0 INTRODUCTION
Archaeology is a broad discipline that comprises different points of view 
regarding interpretation of history and also a number of specialisations . 
The sheer variety of archaeology is often underestimated . An archaeologist 
needs to be familiar with other disciplines of archaeology and should have a 
multidisciplinary approach , in which every small thing matters . 
Various methods are employed to unravel the human past through the 
material remains . They include exploration and excavation . Exploration is 
the method by which the archaeologist attempts to detect unknown sites , and , 
in case of known sites , try to know their potentiality by applying different 
techniques . Excavation is the exposure , processing and recording of the 
material remains from archaeological sites . 
On the basis of archaeological findings such as artefacts , features 
and eco-facts during the exploration or excavation of a particular site , 
archaeologists label the assemblage of such material remains as culture . By 
the systematic study of these material remains one can construct some details 
of the culture and history of a period . 
2 . 1 OBJECTIVES 
After going this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Identify the various kinds of archaeologies
	 •	Discuss the different methods of exploration
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 15
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
	 •	State the methods of excavation
	 •	Analyse the cultural and historical context of archaeology
2 . 2 KINDS OF ARCHAEOLOGY
One of the primary aims of archaeology is to unravel the human past through 
material remains . It is an interesting job of interpreting material culture in 
human terms . It requires hard work in field as well as formulating hypothesis 
in the laboratory . Therefore , an archaeologist should be familiar in other 
related disciplines such as history , anthropology , and other related social and 
general sciences . Thus , one should have a multidisciplinary approach while 
practicing archaeology . 
Archaeology is of many kinds , and each type demands either specific 
or multiple specialisations . The different kinds of archaeologies have been 
classified into two broad categories on the basis of the nature of the work 
that is involved , and on the basis of historical time periods . 
2 . 2 . 1 Archaeology on the Basis of Work
Archaeology has been classified into different types based on the nature of 
the work involved in the process of data collection and analysis . This depends 
largely on the place of excavation or exploration , and the point of view of 
the archaeologist who wants to interpret history . 
Environmental Archaeology
Environmental archaeology is a sub-field of archaeology that deals with the study 
of interrelationship between the past societies and their natural environment . 
It is commonly divided into three sub-disciplines viz .  , zooarchaeology that 
deals with the study of ancient faunal remains , geoarchaeology that deals with 
the study of soil , sediments , rocks , natural deposits , etc .  , and their relationship 
to the archaeological record , and archaeobotany that studies ancient floral 
remains . Environmental archaeology answers questions relating to the type of 
natural habitat that the past societies were surrounded by , the flora and fauna 
living in that age , varieties of wild and cultivated crops , animals hunted and 
domesticated , species of plants and animals that are now extinct , climatic 
changes that took place over a period of time , and the effects of changes 
in natural environment on the lives of the people and on their subsequent 
disappearance . Environmental archaeology includes field studies along with 
laboratory experiments . Karl Butzer ( 1934-2016 ) was a pioneer in this field . 
Ethno-archaeology
Ethno-archaeology is the science that deals with the study of past societies , 
focusing on material remains rather than culture . It is sometimes called 
anthropological archaeology as it involves extensive application of 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
16 Material
anthropological methods . By applying ethno-archaeological methods , 
archaeologists , in a way , try to link the past with the present . It can provide 
insight into how the ancient people in a given region may have lived . By the 
application of the principles of ethno-archaeology one can get valuable insight 
into ancient social structures , religious and cultural beliefs , technology , etc . 
However , the connection between modern and ancient societies is certainly 
still very confusing . This is because , even if two societies share some common 
characteristics , they may be distinct from each other in many aspects , which 
tend to change by default over a period of time . Nonetheless , studying 
advanced techniques of modern communities may help to a certain extent 
to provide an insight into the rudimentary techniques , which may have been 
used by the ancients . Lewis Binford ( 1931-2011 ) and Ian Hodder ( born 1948 ) 
have conducted ethno-archaeological studies among the Inuit ( Eskimos ) in 
Canada and in several parts of Africa to make a better understanding of prehistoric hunter-gatherers . 
Settlement archaeology and spatial analysis 
Settlement archaeology is a branch of modern archaeology which was 
started by Bruce G Trigger ( 1937-2006 )  . It is defined as the study of societal 
relationships using archaeological data . It investigates former settlement 
and abandoned areas , forms of housing and settlements , and the prehistoric 
settlements of entire regions . It is the study of spatial distribution of ancient 
human activities and occupation , ranging from the differential location of 
activities within a single room to the arrangement of sites in a region . The 
special model of archaeological features is analysed in order to reconstruct 
past decisions regarding use of environment , allocation of natural resources , 
ritual pattern , social relationships and other related matters . A report by 
Gordon Willey ( 1913-2002 ) on Prehistoric Settlement Pattern in the Viru 
Valley had made a first attempt to study the pre-historic settlement pattern . 
Landscape Archaeology
Landscape archaeology is a broad division in archaeology that deals 
with the study of the ways in which past people constructed and used the 
environment around them . It is the study of the various changes occurring 
in different landscapes , both naturally as well as due to human intervention . 
For archaeological purposes , landscapes have been categorized into natural 
and cultural landscapes . The study of how landscapes and natural habitats 
are interconnected with human behaviour and cultural changes is extensive . 
There are a variety of changes that landscapes may undergo over a period of 
time . These comprise natural changes relating to climate , topography , soil , 
natural calamities such as landslides , floods , tsunamis , rivers changing their 
courses etc .  , and human-induced changes such as agriculture , industrial and 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 17
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts construction activities , clearing of forest areas , etc . Techniques in landscape 
archaeology are also used in order to analyse inequalities that may have 
prevailed in a social structure at a given period of time . 
Household Archaeology
Household archaeology is a relatively recent development in archaeology that 
occurred between the late 1970s and early 1980s . It involves a small-scale 
excavation within a specified area on an archaeological site . It considers each 
household as a social unit that not only depicts the social , cultural , economic , 
and political responsiveness of the people of a particular household / family , 
but also throws light on the affiliation of the society in general . It is also 
helpful in studying features of secular art and architecture , food habits of the 
people , their religious beliefs , and so on . Gender classification in the social 
order is an interesting aspect that can be studied by this kind of archaeological 
method . Different kinds of evidences are taken into consideration in the study 
of household archaeology , which include floral and faunal remains , pottery , 
processes of site formation and so forth . 
Contextual Archaeology
Contextual archaeology is an approach to archaeological interpretation 
proposed by Ian Hodder in the mid-1980s in which stress is laid on methods 
of identifying and studying contexts to facilitate understanding of its meaning . 
This includes two lines of enquiry . The first is to consider the environmental 
and behavioural context of action ; understanding an object , for instance , by 
placing it in relation to the larger functioning whole from which it is drawn . 
Second , look at the networks of links that objects were placed within in the 
past and attempt to read meaning from such groupings as if the objects were 
words in a text . 
Marxist Archaeology 
Marxist archaeology is an archaeological theory that interprets archaeological 
information within the framework of Marxism . It is a move towards 
archaeological interpretation and explanation that is based on the work 
of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels to explore materialist models of 
social change and the central questions of social relations . Although 
neither Marx nor Engels described how archaeology could be understood in a 
Marxist conception of history , it was developed by archaeologists in the Soviet 
Union during the early twentieth century . Knowledge of who has power and 
how that power is exercised are seen as important elements in explaining 
social change . Marxists regard each human society as defined and shaped 
by its ‘ mode of production ’  , which includes both the ‘ forces of production ’  
( i . e . science , technology , and all other human and natural resources )  , and 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
18 Material
the ‘ relations of production ’  ( i . e . the ways in which people relate to one 
another in order to facilitate the production and distribution of goods )  . Social 
organisation and change are seen as conflicts between segments of society : for 
example , those based on class , sex , or age . Gordon Childe ( 1892-1957 ) was 
one of the first western archaeologists to draw heavily on Marxist theory . He 
laid emphasis on the forces of production as being fundamental influences on 
prehistoric economies , societies , and ideologies . In many of his early works , 
Childe effectively challenged the fascist German–based views of pre-history 
prevalent at the time . 
Gender Archaeology
Gender archaeology is a method of studying past societies through 
their material culture by closely investigating the social construction 
of gender identities and relations . It is the study of the roles , activities , 
ideologies and identities of men and women , and the differences between 
them . It is believed that in archaeology , everything is perceived through 
the eyes of men ( this is called androcentrism )  , understanding women only 
in biological roles such as mother and sexual partner , and describing the 
differences between men and women as polar opposites . Margaret Conkey 
( born 1943 ) and Janet D . Spector ( 1944-2011 ) are regarded as the pioneers in 
the Anglo-American field to examine the application of feminist approaches 
and insights to archaeological practice and theory . Gender archaeology was 
created to balance archaeological interest in men and women by directing as 
much attention to women ’ s activities as to men ’ s , to reveal that women are 
not the same in all cultures and their activities are of interest for comparative 
studies , and to help make archaeology into a discipline that concerns people , 
rather than merely artefacts . Sarah Pomeroy ( born 1938 )  , a classicist and 
art historian , is considered a leading authority on women in the ancient 
Mediterranean world . 
Cognitive Archaeology 
Cognitive archaeology is a theoretical point of view in archaeology which 
focuses on the ways ancient societies thought and the symbolic structures 
that can be perceived in past material culture . Collin Renfrew ( born 1937 ) 
and Paul Bahn ( born 1953 ) are the chief propagators of this theory . Cognitive 
archaeologists examine the role that ideology and differing organisational 
approaches would have had on ancient peoples . The way that these abstract 
ideas are visible through the remains that these peoples have left can be 
investigated and debated often by drawing inferences and using approaches 
developed in fields such as semiotics , psychology and the wider sciences . 
Cognitive archaeology is interested in the material expression of human ways 
of thinking about things , such as gender , class , status , and kinship . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 19
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts Underwater Archaeology
Underwater archaeology is also known as marine archaeology or maritime 
archaeology . It is a discipline within archaeology as a whole that particularly 
studies man ’ s interaction with the sea , lakes and river . It is concerned with the 
study of underwater evidences such as shipwrecks , water-buried cities , and 
other inundated archaeological sites . It is an expensive branch of archaeology 
and is much costlier than any terrestrial archaeological excavation . 
Archaeological remains in the sea or in other underwater environments 
are typically subject to different factors than artefacts on land . Underwater 
excavations require knowledge of specific techniques and methods that need 
to be adopted . Underwater archaeologists try to discover submerged evidences 
by diving into the deep waters along with sophisticated archaeological tools . 
Sometimes an underwater excavation may also turn out to be a little risky 
because one cannot guess what the conditions under the sea would be like . 
However , it makes an exciting profession for adventure lovers . Discovery and 
recovery of king Henry VIII ’ s warship Mary Rose and Titanic are considered 
among the extraordinary achievements in the field of underwater archaeology . 
Aviation Archaeology
Aviation archaeology is concerned with discovering historical remains of 
aircraft , air-borne weaponry , abandoned air bases or runways . In brief , it deals 
with everything that has to do with the history of aviation . Sometimes , aircraft 
wrecks are found under the sea , which are ultimately recovered , recorded 
and studied . It is because of this reason that many people consider aviation 
archaeology as a branch of marine archaeology . However , this may only be 
true to a limited extent as there are also numerous aviation archaeological 
remains found on land , in which case , it becomes a separate branch in itself . 
Crash sites vary largely in magnitude and remains . The remains can be 
military remains or civil remnants . Instances of ancient air bases discovered 
by aviation archaeologists have also been recorded . In so far as the actual 
professional practice of aviation archaeology is concerned , there may be 
some legal limitations , which can be overcome through sufficient paperwork 
and permissions . 
Aerial Archaeology
Aerial archaeology is the investigation of archaeological remains from the 
sky . This concept gained momentum after aerial survey and photography 
were considered to be important during the two World Wars . Archaeologists 
attempted to gain a bird ’ s eye view of archaeological sites to get a better 
outlook . Early investigators used hot air balloons , scaffolds , and cameras tied 
to the kites . After the invention of airplane and the military significance placed 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
20 Material
on aerial photography during the World Wars , archaeologists were more 
effectively able to use the technique to discover and record archaeological 
sites . 
Conducting aerial surveys aids archaeologists to discover new sites , 
which otherwise would have been difficult , as some things can be better 
captured in their entirety and within their landscape from a certain height . 
The sites that already exist can be recorded from a different perspective . 
Aerial archaeology does not require actual excavation . On the contrary , it 
involves thorough exploration from an altitude . Currently , the technique of 
satellite imagery also forms part of aerial archaeology . 
Industrial Archaeology 
Industrial archaeology is the methodical study of material evidence concerned 
with the industrial past . The evidence , collectively referred to as industrial 
heritage , comprise buildings , machinery , artefacts , sites , infrastructure , 
documents and other items related to production , manufacture , extraction , 
transport or construction of a product or range of products . The field 
of industrial archaeology encompasses a range of disciplines including 
archaeology , architecture , museology , technology and urban planning and 
other specialties , in order to piece together the history of industrial activities . 
Experimental Archaeology 
Experimental archaeology is a type of archaeology in which the archaeologists 
attempts to figure out how the archaeological deposits are formed . In the 
course of this search , they experiment with different processes that they 
believe people in the past have applied to manufacture all those things which 
make the archaeological deposit . It has been part of archaeology since the 
beginning of the discipline . As artefacts were identified and arranged into 
chronological sequences , so assumptions were made about their manufacture 
and use . Replication of prehistoric stone tools is an interesting activity 
practiced in experimental archaeology . Some of the most methodical 
experiments in pre-historic agriculture were conducted in Denmark in the 
first half of the twentieth century , but the concept became more formally 
recognised as an archaeological tool in the 1960s . The formal recognition 
of experimental archaeology culminated in two important books published 
in the 1970s , by John Coles and Robert Ascher . 
Salvage or Rescue Archaeology
Salvage archaeology or rescue archaeology , is a technique of retrieving the 
data from threatened archaeological sites . Rescue excavation was a term 
coined in the 1960s when development and road building destroyed much of 
our archaeological heritage . Salvage archaeological operations are conducted 
on sites that are on the verge of being destroyed by new road constructions , 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 21
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts dams , buildings , or any other kind of infrastructure development . The duty 
of the archaeologist , then , is to locate maximum possible sites in an assigned 
area , explore them , and excavate them if deemed necessary , and ultimately 
record in detail all the finds that have been obtained . Generally , in the case 
of salvage archaeology , time is a constraint , and so detailed excavation is 
difficult to carry out . Therefore , archaeologists tend to record whatever is 
found on the surface at the time of exploration . But , if it is realized during 
the exploration that the site holds an important place in history , then detailed 
excavation can be carried out and can thus alter the construction plans in 
some way or the other . 
Battlefield Archaeology
Battlefield archaeology , also called military archaeology , is one of the most 
exciting types of archaeologies . It is concerned with excavating battlefields 
of the past and recovering evidences associated with military activities , which 
may have been responsible for subsequent changes in the social , political 
and economic fields of the society . Archaeological evidences obtained from 
battlefields have the potential to change those historical viewpoints which 
have been widely accepted and acknowledged . Evidences on such sites 
comprise remains of war implements , skeletal remains , and various artefacts 
related to military history . These war sites give important evidences to events , 
which occurred not only during a given war , but also before and after it , 
because not only actual battlefields but even military camp sites provide 
valuable evidences . Additionally , just as all the other sites tell us about how 
and when people lived , war sites tell us how and when they died . On the whole , 
battlefield archaeology is an interesting case-study of how written historical 
accounts can undergo changes when actual material remains relating to the 
recorded events are recorded . Battlefield archaeology is not concerned with 
the causes of war but of the sites where the war actually happened , and of 
the archaeology of the event . 
Commercial Archaeology
Commercial archaeology is a branch of archaeology that deals with everything 
that is associated with trade and commerce . This comprises evidences 
regarding the commodities that were traded and bartered , numismatic finds , 
ancient means of transportation that were used for commercial purposes , 
and others . The study of ancient trade routes and sea ports , harbours and 
marketplaces is also incorporated in commercial archaeology . This is a 
fascinating study , as it answers questions such as which countries had 
trade relations and in what commodities , what were the media of exchange 
between them , how the commodities were transported , who and what all 
was involved , how they coordinated , etc . Sometimes , at commercial sites , 
ancient inscriptions are found , which are valuable resources for reconstructing 
economic histories . 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
22 Material
Forensic Archaeology
Forensic archaeology is a recently developed branch of archaeology . It is 
concerned with the use of archaeological methods in finding evidences on 
crime scenes . Forensic archaeologists are generally engaged by the security 
services with the purpose of investigating crimes and catching the offenders . 
Forensic archaeologists collect evidences like human burials , artefacts , 
footprints , tool marks , etc .  , and attempt to understand the situation in which 
a particular crime might have happened ; and to determine the influences on 
the remains of external factors that may have disturbed the crime scene . They 
also attempt to find whether all the remains are in situ , and if not , how and 
when they landed up where they currently lie . The discoveries of forensic 
archaeologists prove to be very valuable in the court of law , and help the 
police to a great extent in the investigation of the committed crime . 
2 . 2 . 2 On the basis of Historic Time Period
The other broad categorization of archaeology is on the basis of historical 
time periods . This categorization is with the purpose of easing the process 
of giving peculiar characteristics to the discoveries of a particular era , a 
particular dynasty , or a particular region . 
Prehistoric Archaeology
Prehistory is the study of past before the invention of writing . Since there 
are no written records or historical accounts from the prehistoric time , 
whatever we know about prehistory is purely on the basis of physical 
archaeological finds . It has very close links with biology , biological 
anthropology and geology . On the basis of the developments that took place 
over a period of time in the human lifestyles , prehistory has been classified 
into Palaeolithic , Mesolithic , Neolithic and Chalcolithic periods . Prehistory 
also comprise periods before the Stone Age , which preceded the human 
existence . Thus , prehistoric archaeology is a vast discipline , and there is a 
lot of scope for original research , as there are numerous prehistoric mysteries 
that are to be yet unravelled . 
Proto-historic Archaeology
Proto-history is the period or stage of human development or of a particular 
culture immediately before the emergence of writing . It is the period that lies 
in between prehistory and history . Though this is a period that emerged after 
the invention of writing , many of the evidences have not yet been deciphered . 
Proto-history includes the Bronze Age and Iron Age , and sometimes even the 
copper age , but this vary from region to region . Determination of dates of this 
period is a difficult job for an archaeologist , as this again depends on regional 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 23
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts and cultural aspects . But we are aware from the available data that it was 
during the proto-historic period that great ancient civilizations of the world 
arose , and the world took its first and prominent steps towards urbanization . 
Therefore , it is an important transitional phase , and sites are full of surprising 
artefacts , which make proto-historic archaeology an interesting option . 
Historical Archaeology
Historical archaeology is a form of archaeology which studies that period 
of the history of mankind from which we have ample written records and 
oral traditions . So , historical archaeology involves the study of not only the 
artefacts obtained from the archaeological sites but also of the documented 
evidences that have been left behind . A large number of sites associated with 
historical archaeology are spread across the world , and each of these helps 
reconstruct different kinds of aspects of human past , such as industries , trade , 
art and architecture , social and cultural history and military history . However , 
it should be kept in mind that historical records are not always accurate , and 
for this reason , it should be supplemented with other evidences . 
Classical Archaeology
Classical archaeology is a sub-field of archaeology which is related only to 
Greece and Rome . It deals with an in-depth study of the ancient civilizations 
of Greece and Rome . The Grecian Empire , the Roman Empire and the 
transitional period between the two , the Greco-Roman Period , together 
permit an almost 2 , 000-years long era of classical history . The period between 
500 BC and 300 BC was known as the Classical period or Golden age of 
Greece . These short years have given us the great monuments , philosophy , 
art , literature and architecture that are now the building blocks of western 
civilization . Classical archaeology not only studies these two civilizations 
independently , but also in relation to other contemporary civilizations of that 
period . It also examines the influences of other civilizations on the ancient 
Greeks and Romans , and vice versa . It is a very exciting field of study , but 
because it pertains to specific regions , is limited in scope . 
Medieval and Modern Archaeology
Medieval archaeology is concerned with the study of material remains of 
human culture belonging to the middle ages . Likewise , modern archaeology 
pertains to the study of the colonial and post-colonial periods in history . 
Material remains of these periods , in most cases , help only to establish firmly 
the facts from the written records of these periods , which are available in 
large numbers . 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
24 Material
Check Your Progress
1 . Name the subfield of archaeology that deals with the study of 
interrelationship between the past societies and their natural 
environment . 
2 . Name the discipline within archaeology as a whole that particularly 
studies man ’ s interaction with the sea , lakes and river . 
3 . Which kind of archaeology is concerned with the use of archaeological 
methods in finding evidences on crime scenes ? 
4 . Define classical archaeology . 
2 . 3 EXPLORATION
Exploration is an interdisciplinary investigation , which endeavours to locate 
and understand the potentials of an archaeological site . An archaeological 
site is based on many factors . Generally , an archaeological site has a deposit 
formed as a result of cultural and natural processes . Different techniques 
are applied for the retrieval of archaeological materials from archaeological 
sites , such as exploration and excavation . Archaeological exploration implies 
non-destructive scientific survey and documentation of sites . 
The important task of an archaeologist is the identification of a site . 
An archaeologist should have an eye to be able to locate the cultural and 
natural processes . So before going for exploration an archaeologist should 
have an overall idea of the region under investigation . Maps can be helpful 
for attaining this knowledge . Maps showing various geographical features 
with the help of symbols can be useful . Other maps include geological maps , 
vegetation maps , agricultural maps , rainfall maps , soil maps , maps depicting 
natural resources and maps that indicate isolated but specialized features . An 
archaeologist should have an ability to understand these maps . 
The nature of an archaeological site changes according to the cultural 
periods . So , when one looks for an archaeological site , the parameters under 
consideration changes from areas to areas , and from cultural periods to 
cultural periods . The artificial mound found in an archaeological site is a relic 
of the original site and differs a lot from the natural mound . Artificial mound 
can be located in several ways . It can be located with the help of religious 
literature . Exploration of Buddhist antiquity sites conducted by Sir Alexander 
Cunningham is the best example of this kind of exploration . It was done by 
using Buddhist sacred literature , Tripitakas and accounts of Chinese travellers 
Fa Hsien and Hiuen Tsang . Another way to locate the mound would be to 
conduct village to village surveys and enquire with the local people about 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 25
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts visible potsherds there . Sometimes , the folklores and certain terms in local 
dialects are useful to locate archaeological sites . 
Different methods are used for exploration of sites : desktop study , 
surface survey , field walking , aerial photography , magnetometer survey , 
electrical resistivity survey , probing , remote sensing , and also with the help of 
Geographical Information System ( GIS ) which are briefly explained as below :  
( i ) Desktop Study : It involves the review of existing records including 
the pioneer studies about the archaeological site if it exists and literary 
references on the site . It involves researching available maps and 
historical or archaeological documents with the purpose of making a 
clear plan of exploration .  
( ii ) Surface Survey : It implies the collection of archaeological finds 
from sites in order to gather representative samples of artefacts 
from the surface . If the surface survey provides sufficient amount of 
material remains from a particular area of the archaeological sites , 
then the archaeologist normally lay down a ‘ Test pit ’  , which is also 
called ‘ Sondage ’  . Test pits are generally placed to understand the 
archaeological viability of a site .  
( iii ) Field Survey : Also called Pedestrian Survey it is one of the oldest and 
authentic site survey methods in archaeological explorations . In this , a 
team of archaeologists surveying an area simply walk over the surface 
of the site covering almost all parts , observes , and collects material 
remains . This method is advantageous in the way that the chances of 
missing out even a small activity area are less .  
( iv ) Aerial Photography : It is the earliest and perhaps the most important 
remote sensing tool available to archaeologists looking for new 
archaeological sites . This survey uses airborne and space borne remote 
sensing tool . It has two components -- Data Collection , which comprise 
capturing photographs or image from aircraft or satellite , and Data 
Analysis , in which such photographs are analysed , interpreted and 
integrated with other evidences . This method allows an archaeologist 
to have a bird ’ s eye view of the mound and gives the outline of any 
aspect . It plays a key role in distinguishing features which are otherwise 
invisible when looked from the ground level .  
( v ) Electrical Resistivity Survey : This method was developed by Atkinson 
that helps the archaeologist to record the geophysical data . It is based 
on the fact that the ground can conduct electricity . The different soils or 
rocks of earth conduct electricity differently , offering varying amounts 
of resistance to the passage of current . The electrical conductivity of 
an archaeological mound differs from area to area . Negative resistivity 
anomaly would exhibit a ditch or pit and a positive anomaly show 
a structure of high resistivity like floor , wall , etc . The most useful 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
26 Material
instrument used for this type of survey is Martin-Clark Meter and 
twin-electron type like the Geoscan Research RM15 . The method of 
exploration helps in tracing the structural activities .  
( vi ) Magnetometer Survey : In this method an instrument known as protonmagnetometer is used to identify structures or features which show the 
property of thermo remnant magnetism ( e . g . hearths , brick structures 
etc .  )  . It detects variance between the general magnetic field of an area 
and the one above or near the buried features or structures . The use of 
proton-magnetometer is based on the electrodes fixed into the ground 
at regular intervals and the variance between the electrodes can then 
be plotted .  
( vii ) Probing : In this type of survey , an apparatus consisting of an iron bar 
with a tapered point and a T-handle is used to probe an activity area . 
The texture of the soil of each stratum emits a different sound and the 
resistance is different .  
( viii ) Remote Sensing : It is a modern technique used to obtain archaeological 
data with the help of aerial photography and satellite imageries . 
This method enables the archaeologists to uncover unique data 
that is unobtainable using traditional archaeological techniques and 
have an overall idea of the features on a given landform , which is 
otherwise difficult to view while standing on the field . A series of 
ground-based geophysical methods such as Ground Penetrating Radar 
( GPR ) and Magnetometry are also used for archaeological imaging .  
( ix ) Geographical Information System ( GIS )  : GIS has been an important 
tool in archaeology since the early 1990s . By using this technique , one 
can capture , store , analyse , manage and present data that are connected 
to locations of archaeological importance . In simple words , it can 
be said as merging of the data derived from cartography , statistical 
analysis and database technology . After the site is located , its position 
is recorded by taking the latitude and longitude of a place either by 
using map or the Global Positioning System ( GPS )  . 
While exploring the site , all available features on the sites as well as 
the features of the surrounding locality need to be recorded . Well-conducted 
exploration helps in the understanding of a number of archaeological issues 
regarding the site and in raising relevant questions that can be answered 
through excavation . During exploration , an archaeologist should also try 
to look for the possible cultural and natural transformations through which 
the sites may have passed over many years . The following information is 
required to be recorded by the investigator while conducting exploration :  
( i ) Date of exploration , name of the site , taluka , district , state , 
geocoordinates ( latitude and longitude )  , how it is reachable and its 
distance from the nearby village or town . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 27
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts ( ii ) The topography , climate , vegetation and natural resources around the 
region . The occupations of people , regional history , population and 
social hierarchy in these villages .  
( iii ) Nature of the archaeological site i . e . a camp , village , town , its condition 
and area .  
( iv ) Details of movable antiquities , methods used for their collection , rough 
sketch of the site and classification of the finds .  
( v ) Details of their packing , labelling and sketches etc . 
The archaeological explorer may use the exploration card given below 
while recording the sites . This would allow the investigator to record a site 
systematically , collect necessary information to ascertain chronology , to 
situate a site in regional cultural context , understand its potentials and raise 
relevant questions for further research . 
Check Your Progress
5 . What do you understand by the term ‘ archaeological exploration ’  ? 
6 . What are the different methods used for exploration of sites ? 
7 . Define remote sensing . 
2 . 4 EXCAVATION
Besides explorations , archaeologists conduct excavations to gather 
information about the past . Excavation is the most systematic and scientific 
method of uncovering buried things of the past societies . Through this process 
the cultural remains are brought out with utmost care . Excavations mainly 
give evidences of :  ( 1 ) human activities at a particular period in the past , 
and ( 2 ) changes in those activities from period to period . In general , we can 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
28 Material
say that contemporary activities occur horizontally in space ; whereas the 
changes in those activities take place vertically through time . It implies that 
in an archaeological excavation pit the horizontal space always represent the 
contemporary period and the material evidences collected from the horizontal 
spaces belongs to a particular period . However , after the excavation when 
we observe all these horizontal evidences vertically , we can see the changes 
occurred in different period . 
Excavation of Mounds
The archaeological mound is a site where continuous human occupations 
occurred in the past . Excavation methods are the different techniques used 
in archaeology to dig , uncover , identify , process , and record archaeological 
remains . Archaeological excavation involves the removal of soil , sediment , 
or rock that covers artefacts or other evidence of human activity . While 
excavating a site , archaeologists resort to two types of digging -- vertical 
and horizontal excavation . 
Vertical Excavation
Vertical excavation , where the archaeologist excavates a significant depth of 
deposits , helps to delineate the total cultural profile of a site up to the natural 
soil . It reveals the total stratigraphy of the site . Vertical digging discloses 
the entire cultural deposit of a site . Vertical excavation generally starts from 
the present surface , which is known as surface humus layer , and ends at the 
natural layer , a sediment layer without human interaction . 
Horizontal Excavation
The horizontal excavation aims at exposing the deposits horizontally . It is 
a method of excavation in which full horizontal extent of an archaeological 
site is cleared and large areas are open while preserving a stratigraphic 
record in the baulks between large squares . A gradual probe may then occur . 
Sir Mortimer Wheeler ( 1890-1976 ) was one of the chief proponents of this 
excavation method . 
Open-Area Excavation
This type of excavation tries to expose a large area of the archaeological 
site without maintaining baulk . Philip Barker ( 1920-2001 ) was the chief 
proponent of this method . This may aid the archaeologist to realize the total 
cultural deposit of a site . 
Grid Excavation
It is an excavation technique developed by Mortimer Wheeler . It is also 
known as Box-Grid System of excavation , to obtain information both 
horizontally and vertically . It involved the retaining of intact baulks of earth 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 29
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts between excavation grid squares so that different stratigraphic layers could 
be correlated across the site in the vertical profiles . This system has been 
used across the world in modern archaeology and , although less popular in 
Europe , it is still the simplest method to ensure a systematic approach . 
Quartering
This is an excavation method which involves cutting archaeological sites in 
to four quadrants to obtain maximum vertical and horizontal information . It 
is generally applied to the excavation of small mounds . 
Quadrant Method
Burial excavation enables us to understand various aspects of the human 
life in the past , including rituals and beliefs . The skeletal remains aid in 
identifying the racial affinities , family groups , age , sex , nutrition , paleodemography , paleo-diseases and other cultural information . Megaliths are the 
most important burials of South India that have archaeological significance . 
Megalithic burials are of different kinds like Umbrella stone , Cap stone , cist , 
dolmen , rock-cut sepulchres , stone circle , urns , sarcophagus , etc . 
In quadrant method , the mound or burial is divided into four segments 
and each quadrant is removed systematically . After removing the soil of one 
quadrant , the archaeologist attempts to understand the actual position of the 
burial and then move on with the removal of remaining three quadrants . Even 
depth is needed to be maintained in the entire quadrant . For example , if one 
attempts to excavate an urn burial , he / she has to remove the four quadrants 
until the capstone is identified and then continue with removal of one or 
two quadrant simultaneously . Once the burial is bare , the entire burial goods 
have to be documented in situ . The documentation comprises drawing or 
illustration , photographs , mapping , etc . The samples , especially bones or 
fossils , charcoal , pottery , etc . have to be scientifically collected . After the 
documentation is completed , then the burial goods are sent to the museum . 
Trench Excavation
It implies a small or sample excavation as opposed to an open area excavation . 
Even a large area excavation is only a sample of archaeological landscape and 
so is really a large trench . Trial trenches , or trial pits , or sondages , are also 
sampling excavation of the sites . They are often small square trenches ( 1m x 
1m ) with the purpose of recognizing the archaeological potentials of the site . 
Sieving
Sieving is the most important part of excavation . This method , also known as 
screening or sifting , is used to recover quantifiable data from excavations . It 
is a technique of particle size analysis used for determining the size grades of 
pebble , gravel , sand , and coarse silt in sediment and soils of archaeological 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
30 Material
deposits . Before New Archaeology of the 1960s , sieving was not commonly 
practiced and usually was limited to the use of coarse mesh sieves for the 
recovery of small artefacts such as coins and beads . However , nowadays 
archaeologists collect and document all artefacts , whether it is small or big , 
from the archaeological sites . 
Stripping
It involves the removal of topsoil accumulations . It is often conducted after 
a series of excavations that had occurred in various parts of the site . It is a 
method of excavation in which a large horizontal area is dug instead of a 
deep vertical one ; clearing excavations in which large areas of overburden 
are removed to expose horizontal distributions of data without leaving baulks . 
For example , in an urban context , this may involve removing the 
remains of recently demolished concrete building . This method is employed 
in contract archaeological work when the time factor is short . 
Stratigraphy 
Stratigraphy is the analysis and interpretation of depositional layers or strata 
in excavated area . It is a process by which layers of soil and debris are laid 
down on top of one another over time . It involves a careful consideration of 
the characteristics of individual soil layers with the purpose of understanding 
the relation of one layer with the other . The relation between the top most 
humus layer and natural layer in an archaeological site explains the continuity 
or break , and changes occurred in the site during the past . This topic is 
discussed in detail in Unit XI . 
Mapping of Sites
Map is one of the important tools in archaeological exploration and 
excavation . It comprises topographic map , site map , aerial map , contour 
map , etc . Topographic map shows the topographical data in combination with 
representation of archaeological features . It aids an archaeologist to view 
the landforms through which he / she may be able to locate an archaeological 
mound before and during the exploration and excavation . The contour map 
represents the elevation or furrow of the landscape . Nowadays , satellite 
maps , Google Earth maps , etc . are also widely used to locate and document 
archaeological sites . 
Excavation Reports
Excavation report is the final product of the excavation . It is generally divided 
into many parts which represents the evidence in a meaningful way and 
placed in logical sequence . The first part is related to the discovery of the 
site , proper identification of the site , previous researches , including rescue 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 31
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts operations , exploration and excavations , stratigraphical record of the site , 
and a detailed description of the site . 
The second part contains a detailed report of trenches with description 
of archaeological layers , material remains , and an analysis of the trench 
supervisor . It reveals the location of the trench and its relation to other trenches 
in the same site , topographical characteristics of the site , the measurement 
of the trench and GPS position of the trench , and the ownership of the land 
where the trench is laid out . The report contains the report of all trenches 
laid out in the site . 
The third part deals with detailed catalogue of artefacts . It comprises 
the list of artefacts and eco-facts collected from the site . 
The last part of the report consists of the result of the samples 
collected during the time of excavation from various experts . It also gives a 
comprehensive conclusion of the excavation . 
Check Your Progress
8 . What is the main objective of the Open-Area Excavation ? 
9 . What is sieving used for ? 
2 . 5 CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL CONTEXT
Cultural-historical context is an approach to archaeological interpretation 
which uses the method of the traditional historian , including stress on 
specific circumstances elaborated with rich detail , and processes of inductive 
reasoning . The notion of archaeological culture developed in the nineteenth 
century . Archaeologists often found material remains such as artefacts , 
features and eco-facts during the exploration or excavation of a particular 
site . They labelled the assemblage of such material remains as culture . Sir 
Edward Burnett Taylor ’ s ideas typify the 19th century cultural evolutionism . In 
his work “ Primitive Culture ”  ( 1871 )  , Taylor defined culture as “ the complex 
whole which includes knowledge , belief , art , morals , law , custom and other 
capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of a society ”  . However , 
in archaeology , culture implies the grouping of archaeological remains from 
a particular site and then labelling the site as a distinct culture like Harappan 
culture , Mohenjo-Daro culture , Lothal culture , Dholavira culture , Kalibangan 
culture , Ropar culture and so on . The assemblage of these cultures stands for 
 ‘ Civilization ’  . For example , the grouping of the above said archaeological 
cultures are labelled as Indus Valley Civilization . The transfer of material 
culture from one culture to another is labelled as diffusion . The diffusion of 
iron technology is often quoted as a good example . 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
32 Material
Archaeologists and anthropologists generally use the term ‘ cultural 
evolution ’ to visualise the long-term trends in human history . It represents 
the evolution of human culture from hunting , food gathering to farming ; from 
farming to the origins of civilization and the state ; from agrarian civilizations 
to industrial and now post-industrial society . Therefore , such development has 
resulted in the increase of population , greater social complexity and inequality , 
and technologies that are more complex . Archaeologists believe that the 
culture is always moved from simple to complex or from one condition to 
another condition . For instance , the state is evolved from tribal society , while 
chiefdoms evolved into kingdoms . 
The concept of cultural evolution has its origins in the 18th century 
Enlightenment period and it is basically influenced by the nineteenth century 
ideology of Karl Marx and Frederic Engels and heavily influenced by L . H . 
Morgan ’ s sequence from savagery to barbarism to civilization . Gordon 
Childe ( 1892-1957 ) in his works “ Man Makes Himself ”  ,  ” What Happened 
in History ” and “ Social Evolution ” clearly showed the changes occurred in 
the human culture due to the changes occurring in the subsistence strategies . 
Childe considered the origins of agriculture ( the Neolithic revolution ) and 
the emergence of urban societies ( the urban revolution ) as major steps in the 
growth of human societies , because they represented improved adaptations 
of humans to their environments . 
Check Your Progress
10 . Who wrote the book Primitive Culture ? 
11 . When did the notion of archaeological culture originate ? 
2 . 6 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Environmental archaeology is the subfield of archaeology that deals 
with the study of interrelationship between the past societies and their 
natural environment . 
2 . Underwater or Marine Archaeology is the discipline within archaeology 
as a whole that particularly studies man ’ s interaction with the sea , lakes 
and river . 
3 . Forensic archaeology is concerned with the use of archaeological 
methods in finding evidences on crime scenes . 
4 . Classical archaeology is a sub-field of archaeology which is related to 
the study of the ancient civilizations of only Greece and Rome . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 33
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
5 . Archaeological exploration implies non-destructive scientific survey 
and documentation of sites . 
6 . Different methods are used for exploration of sites : desktop study , 
surface survey , field walking , aerial photography , magnetometer survey , 
electrical resistivity survey , probing , remote sensing and others . 
7 . Remote sensing is a modern technique used to obtain archaeological 
data with the help of aerial photography and satellite imageries . 
8 . Open-Area Excavation tries to expose a large area of the archaeological 
site without maintaining baulk . 
9 . Sieving is the most important part of excavation . This method , also 
known as screening or sifting , is used to recover quantifiable data from 
excavations . 
10 . Sir Edward Burnett Taylor wrote the book Primitive Culture . 
11 . The notion of archaeological culture developed in the nineteenth 
century . 
2 . 7 SUMMARY
	 •	One of the primary aims of archaeology is to unravel the human 
past through material remains . An archaeologist should be familiar 
with other disciplines which archaeology covers such as history , 
anthropology , and other related social and general sciences . Thus , one 
should have a multidisciplinary approach while practicing archaeology . 
	 •	There are different kinds of archaeologies and these have been classified 
into two broad categories---on the basis of the nature of the work that 
is involved , and on the basis of historical time periods . 
	 •	Kinds of archaeology based on the basis of work involved include 
envoironmental archaeology , ethno-archaeology , settlement 
archaeology , landscape archaeology , household archaeology , contextual 
archaeology , Marxist archaeology , gender archaeology , cognitive 
archaeology , underwater archaeology , aviation archaeology , aerial 
archaeology , industrial archaeology , experimental archaeology , salvage 
archaeology , battlefield archaeology , commercial archaeology and 
forensic archaeology . 
	 •	Kinds of archaeology based on historical time period include prehistoric archaeology , proto-historic archaeology , historical archaeology , 
classical archaeology , and medieval and modern archaeology . 
	 •	Exploration is an interdisciplinary investigation , which endeavours 
to locate and understand the potentials of an archaeological site . A 
variety of techniques are applied for the retrieval of archaeological 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
34 Material
materials from archaeological sites such as exploration and excavation . 
Archaeological exploration implies non-destructive scientific survey 
and documentation of sites . 
	 •	For the exploration of sites , methods like desktop survey , surface 
survey , field walking or survey , aerial photography , magnetometer 
survey , electrical resistivity survey , probing , remote sensing and GIS 
are employed . 
	 •	Besides explorations , the archaeologists conduct excavations to gather 
information about the past . Excavation is the most systematic and 
scientific method of uncovering the buried things of the past societies . 
It involves the removal of soil , sediment , or rock that covers artefacts 
or other evidence of human activity . 
	 •	Archaeologists resort to different kinds of excavations methods to get 
the material remains . These include vertical excavation , horizontal 
excavation , open area excavation , grid excavation , quartering , quadrant 
method , trench excavation , sieving , stripping , stratigraphy and 
mapping . Excavation report is the final product of excavation which 
is divided into many parts . 
	 •	Cultural-historical context is an approach to archaeological 
interpretation which uses the method of the traditional historian . 
	 •	Nineteenth century witnessed the development of the notion of 
archaeological culture . Archaeologists term the material remains 
discovered from sites as culture and try to reconstruct the history of a 
particular society and period . 
	 •	Archaeologists and anthropologists generally use term ‘ cultural 
evolution ’ to visualise the long-term trends in human history . It 
represents the evolution of human culture from the earliest to the 
present and from simple to complex . 
2 . 8 KEY WORDS
	 •	Assemblage : These are artefacts that are found together and most 
probably were used simultaneously or for similar or related tasks . 
	 •	Baulks : It refers to unexcavated walls which may be left between pits 
to provide stratigraphic control . 
	 •	Contour line : It is a line on a map connecting points of equal elevation . 
	 •	Culture : It refers to a set of learned beliefs , values and behaviours–the 
way of life–shared by the members of a society . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 35
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
	 •	Forensic : It relates to the application of science to decide questions 
arising from crime or litigation . 
	 •	Grid : It is a network of uniformly spaced squares that divides a site 
into units ; used to measure and record an object ’ s position in space . 
	 •	In situ : It refers to an article that has been found in its original context . 
Artefacts found in situ mean they have not been removed from the 
position they were in when discovered . 
	 •	Paleo : It is Greek word for old or ancient . 
	 •	Sediment : It refers to material that was suspended in water and that 
settles at the bottom of a body of water . 
	 •	Test pit : It is a small exploratory “ dig ” designed to determine a site ’ s 
depth and contents prior to major excavation . 
2 . 9 SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Write short notes on the following :  
( a ) Environmental Archaeology 
( b ) Ethno-archaeology 
( c ) Contextual Archaeology
2 . Mention the important functions of an archaeologist . 
3 . What is the kind of information required to be recorded by the 
investigator while conducting exploration ? 
4 . What is an archaeological mound ? 
Long Answer Questions
1 .  ‘ Household archaeology is a relatively recent development in 
archaeology that occurred between the late 1970s and early 1980s .  ’ 
Analyse the statement . 
2 . Explain the categorization of archaeology on the basis of historic time 
period . 
3 . Discuss cultural-historical context is an approach to archaeological 
interpretation . 
Archaeology : Types 
and Contexts
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
36 Material
2 . 10 FURTHER READINGS
Chakraborti , D . K . 1988 . A History of Indian Archaeology : The Beginning 
to 1947 . Delhi : Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers . 
Childe , V . G . 1956 .  ( First Edition ) Piecing Together the Past . London : 
Routledge & Kegan Paul . 
Kenyon , K . M . 1964 . Beginnings in Archaeology . London : J M Dent & Sons 
Ltd . 
Daniel , Glyn . 1967 . The Origins and Growth of Archaeology . Harmondsworth : 
Penguin Books . 
Markham , C . R . 2004 . A Memoir on the Indian Surveys . Delhi : Manohar 
Publishers & Distributors . 
Srivastava , K . M . 1987 . New Era of Indian Archaeology . Delhi : Cosmo 
Publications . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 37
Development of 
New Archaeology UNIT 3 DEVELOPMENT OF NEW 
ARCHAEOLOGY
Structure 
3 . 0 Introduction
3 . 1 Objectives 
3 . 2 Heinrich Schliemann
3 . 3 Gertrude Caton Thompson
3 . 4 Development of New Archaeology
3 . 5 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
3 . 6 Summary
3 . 7 Key Words
3 . 8 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
3 . 9 Further Readings
3 . 0 INTRODUCTION
An archaeologist is someone who studies the genesis , development , and 
behaviour of human beings , past and present . They investigate the cultures , 
languages , archaeological remains , and physical characteristics of people 
in different parts of the world . German businessman and archaeologist , 
Heinrich Schliemann established archeology as the science that we know 
today . He discovered Troy and what he thought was the Treasure of Priam . 
Despite his errors and wrong conclusions , the world continued to venerate 
Heinrich Schliemann as one of the most significant archeologists of all times . 
English archaeologist Gertrude Caton Thompson was another explorer and 
archaeologist of repute . Her excavations of Malta , Egypt and Zimbabwe 
opened the unknown world . She got into this profession at a time when 
participation of women in this field was very uncommon . 
New Archaeology or Processual archaeology was an intellectual 
movement of the 1960s , which believed in logical positivism as a guiding 
research philosophy , based on the scientific method . The New Archaeology 
is not really a single concept , but a group of ideas which desired to make 
traditional archaeology more scientific . Therefore , the need to make hypotheses 
clear , the implementation of quantitative methods , the application of different 
modern technologies for characterizing materials and other features of the 
archaeological record , and the adoption of the idea of models for explanation 
of human behavior , all became part of the general sphere of New Archaeology . 
In this unit , you will study about the life and works of German 
archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann and about Gertrude Caton Thompson . 
In addition to this , you will also study about the development of New 
Archaeology . 
Development of 
New Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
38 Material
3 . 1 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
• Examine the life and works of Heinrich Schliemann as an archaeologist
• Analyze the contribution of Thompson as an archaeologist
• Discuss the development of New Archaeology 
3 . 2 HEINRICH SCHLIEMANN
Heinrich Schliemann was a German businessman and a pioneer in the field 
of archaeology . He was born in Neubukow , Mecklenburg-Schwerin ( part of 
the German Confederation )  , in 1822 . His father , Ernst Schliemann , was the 
son of a poor pastor . In 1823 , his family moved to Ankershagen . 
Heinrich ’ s mother died in 1831 , when Heinrich was nine years old . After 
his mother ’ s death , his father sent Heinrich to live with his uncle . When he was 
eleven years old , his father enrolled him in the Gymnasium ( grammar school ) 
at Neustrelitz . Heinrich ’ s interest in history was primarily encouraged by his 
father , who had schooled him in the tales of the Iliad and the Odyssey and 
had given him a copy of Ludwig Jerrer ’ s Illustrated History of the World for 
Christmas in 1829 . 
However , Heinrich had to move to the Realschule ( vocational school ) 
after his father was blamed for misappropriation of church funds and had 
to leave that institution in 1836 . His family could not afford to give him 
university education , so it was Schliemann ’ s early academic experiences 
that influenced the course of his education as an adult . 
At the age of 14 , after leaving Realschule , Heinrich was apprenticed 
to a grocer in Fürstenberg . He later revealed that his passion for Homer 
was born when he heard a drunkard reciting it at the grocer ’ s . He laboured 
for five years , and then determined to emigrate . With this aim Schliemann 
moved to Hamburg in 1841 and became a cabin boy on a ship bound 
for Venezuela . Schliemann became a messenger , office attendant , and later , 
a bookkeeper in Amsterdam . 
In 1844 , he took a position with B . H . Schröder & Co .  , an import / 
export firm . In 1846 , the firm sent him as an agent to St . Petersburg . In time , 
Schliemann represented a number of companies and learned a number of 
languages which was an important part of his career as a businessman in 
the importing trade . Schliemann went to California in 1851 and started a 
bank in Sacramento . In 1852 , he sold his business and returned to Russia 
and married Ekaterina Lyschin . Schliemann made a fortune at the time 
of Crimean War ( 1854–1856 ) as a contractor . He retired from business 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 39
Development of 
New Archaeology at the age of 36 and began to devote his time , energies and money to the 
study of pre-historic archaeology . To train himself , he travelled extensively 
in Greece , Italy , Scandinavia , Germany , and Syria and then went around the 
world , visiting India , China , and Japan . He also studied archaeology in Paris . 
Schleimann ’ s Contribution as an Archaeologist
Schleimann ’ s primary interest of a classical nature appears to have been the 
location of Troy whose very existence at that time was disputed . Perhaps his 
attention was attracted by the first excavations at Santorini in 1862 by French 
geologist Ferdinand Fouque who found fresco-covered wall of houses and 
painted pottery under 26 feet of pumice , the consequence of great eruption 
that divided the original island into Thera and Therasis . On the other hand , 
he may have been inspired by an English archeologist , Frank Calvert , whom 
he met on his first visit to the Hisarlik site in 1868 . 
On the basis of Frank Calvert ’ s work , who had been excavating the 
site in Turkey for over 20 years , Schliemann decided that Hisarlik was the 
site of Troy . In 1868 , he took his large fortune to Greece and published his 
first archaeological book Ithaka , der Peloponnesus und Troja (  ‘ Ithaca , the 
Peloponnese , and Troy ’  ) in which he argued for Hisarlik and not Bunarbashi 
was the site of Troy . 
He further asserted that the graves of the Greek commander 
Agamemnon and his wife , Clytemnestra , at Mycenae , which had been 
described by the Greek geographer Pausanias , were not the tholoi ( vaulted 
tombs ) outside the citadel walls but lay inside the citadel . Later on , he 
managed to prove both his theories by excavation . In 1868 , Schliemann took 
over Calvert ’ s excavations on the eastern half of the Hisarlik site , which 
was on Calvert ’ s property . The Turkish government owned the western half . 
Calvert became Schliemann ’ s collaborator and partner . 
In 1871 , Schliemann began work on Troy . His excavations commenced 
before archaeology had developed as a professional field . He believed that 
Homeric Troy must be in the lowest level , so he and his workers dug hastily 
through the upper levels , reaching fortifications that he took to be his target . 
In 1872 , he and Calvert fell out over this method . Schliemann was angry 
when Calvert published an article stating that the Trojan War period was 
missing from the site ’ s archaeological record . 
In 1873 , Schleimann discovered fortifications and remains of an ancient 
city and discovered gold jewellery which he smuggled out of Turkey . He 
believed that the city he discovered was Homeric Troy ; however , later on it 
was identified as Priam . It was later discovered that Schliemann ’ s claim to 
the treasure had been wrong all along . His findings did not amount to the 
treasure of Priam , but were rather a relic from an unknown culture , which 
had flourished many years before ancient Troy . 
Development of 
New Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
40 Material
When Schliemann proposed to resume work at Hisarlik in 1874 , he 
was delayed by a court case that the Turkish government had brought against 
him about the division of his spoils , particularly the gold treasure , and it was 
not until 1876 that he attained permission to resume work . 
In 1875 , Schliemann published Troja und seine Ruinen (  ‘ Troy and 
Its Ruins ’  ) and in 1876 he began excavation at Mycenae . After discovering 
the Shaft Graves with their skeletons and more regal gold ( including the socalled Mask of Agamemnon )  , he cabled the king of Greece and published his 
results in Mykenal in 1878 . After an unsuccessful excavation in Ithaca designed 
to locate the site mentioned in the Odyssey in 1878 , he resumed work at Hisarlik 
the same year . He conducted a third excavation at Troy in 1882–83 and a fourth 
from 1888 until his death . Émile Burnouf , a classical archaeologist , andRudolf 
Virchow , the famous German pathologist , joined him there in 1879 . In his 
last two seasons Schliemann had the expert assistance of Wilhelm Dörpfeld . 
He brought to Troy the new system and efficiency of the German classical 
archaeologists working in Greece , and he was able to expose the stratigraphy at 
Troy more clearly than before and to revolutionize Schliemann ’ s techniques . 
In 1884 , Schliemann , together with Dorpfeld , excavated Tiryns near Mycenae . 
Criticism
Schliemann was a supporter of the historicity of Homeric sites mentioned in the 
works of Homer and an archaeological excavator of Hisarlik , now presumed 
to be the site of Troy . He believed that Homer ’ s Iliad reflects historical 
events . Schliemann ’ s excavation of nine levels of archaeological remains 
with dynamite has been condemned as destructive of important historical 
artifacts , including the level that is believed to be the historical Troy . His 
methods have been described as savage and brutal . He has been criticized 
for plowing through layers of soil without proper maintenance of records , 
no mapping of finds and few descriptions of discoveries . 
At Troy , Heinrich Schliemann discovered a reserve of gold and other 
artifacts , which he subsequently named as ‘ the Treasure of Priam ’ in 1873 . 
He smuggled the gold treasure out of the country and gave it to the German 
government to showcase . But the treasure got lost during the Second World 
War , only to later resurface in Russia , where it is now being kept at the 
Pushkin Museum . 
Schliemann also commenced and funded the removal of medieval 
structures from the Acropolis of Athens in 1874 . In spite of considerable 
opposition , including from King George I of Greece , Schliemann continued 
with the project which was later described as an act of vandalism . From 1874 
to 1876 Schliemann conducted excavations at the Greek archeological site 
of Mycenae where he drew many wrong conclusions based on his work . 
Schliemann erroneously identified a golden mask as having belonged to the 
ancient Greek military leader Agamemnon . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 41
Development of 
New Archaeology In the last years of his life , Schliemann suffered greatly with ear 
trouble and travelled hoping for a cure but in vain . On 25 December 1890 , 
while walking across a square in Naples , he collapsed and died the next 
day . Schliemann brought conviction , enthusiasm , dedication and a not 
inconsiderable fortune to the work . Schliemann was able to provide both funds 
and publication of results needed for excavations . As a result , he dominated 
the field of Mycenaean archaeology in his lifetime , and , despite his faults , 
still commands the loyalty of classical archaeologists . 
Check Your Progress
1 . Who are archaeologists and what do they study ? 
2 . On the basis of whose work , Schliemann decided that Hisarlik was 
the site of Troy ? 
3 . When did Schliemann , together with Dorpfeld , excavated 
Tiryns near Mycenae ? 
3 . 3 GERTRUDE CATON THOMPSON
Gertrude Caton Thompson was an influential British archaeologist at a time 
when participation by women in the discipline was not common as it was 
dominated by men and by Victorian and Edwardian sensibilities . She was 
born in London on February 1 , 1889 to William Caton Thompson and Ethel 
Page . She attended private schools in Paris and in Eastbourne . She attributed 
her interest in archaeology to her early encounters with antiquity- gained 
on holidays abroad . She went for a trip to Egypt with her mother in 1911 , 
followed by a series of lectures on Ancient Greece given by Sarah Paterson 
at the British Museum . Indeed , a trip to Rome is where Gertrude recalled 
feeling ‘ the first stirrings of interest in past civilizations ’  . 
In 1912 , she received an inheritance which helped ensure her financial 
independence and support her later excavations . In 1914 , she joined the 
First World War effort as she worked for the British Ministry of Shipping . 
Thompson ’ s first experience in the field of archaeology came in 1915 
while working as a bottle washer at a Palaeolithic site being excavated at 
Rochers Rouges in France . This made her decide that she wanted to make 
a serious study of prehistory . In 1921 , she went for studies at University 
College London where she was taught by Margaret Murray , Flinders 
Petrie and Dorothea Bate , excavating in Upper Egypt during the winter of 
that year . 
Development of 
New Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
42 Material
Thompson ’ s Contribution as an Archaeologist 
1 . Excavations in Malta
In 1921 , along with Margaret Murray , Thompson contributed in the 
excavation of the Neolithic and / or Bronze Age temple at Borg-en-Nadur 
near St . George ’ s Bay in Malta and a prehistoric cave at Ghar Dhalam . She 
was assigned with responsibilities of investigating the caves near the temple 
searching for Neanderthal skulls as evidence for a land bridge between Malta 
and the continent of Africa . However , she did not find evidence to support this 
theory . Nevertheless the excavation yielded other notable artifacts , such as 
Bronze Age pottery that closely paralleled Sicilian styles of the same period . 
2 . Work in Egypt
During the 1920s she worked as an archaeologist , mainly in Egypt for 
the British School of Archaeology Egypt , although she also carried on 
fieldwork in Malta . In Egypt she contributed in excavations at many sites 
including Abydos , Badari , and Qau-el-Kebir . She took active interest in all 
facets of prehistoric Egypt and was one of the first archaeologists to look 
at the full-time spectrum from the Palaeolithic through to pre-dynastic 
Egypt . She not only found numerous archaeological artifacts from Egypt 
but also organized their exhibition in the Egyptian Exhibition in England . A 
number of these findings are now housed in the British Museum ’ s collection . 
Thompson teamed with Egyptologist Guy Brunton to explore Neolithic 
settlement remains at Hemamieh while working in the Badari region during 
1923–24 . Her work at the site was distinguished by its meticulousness . She 
began her work by arranging the site into ten by thirty foot intervals . She 
watchfully excavated in arbitrary six-inch levels , and recorded the exact 
position of each artifact . Along with her excavation methods , Thompson 
was also the first to use air surveys to locate archaeological sites . These 
approaches to excavation were in many respects a generation ahead of her 
time and ‘ sets her apart from her contemporaries and the majority of her 
successors ’  . The results of this excavation was published in the classic ,  ‘ The 
Badarian Civilization and the Predynastic Remains near Badari ’  , were near 
revolutionary . 1
In 1925 , Thompson and the geologist Elinor Wight Gardner , another 
woman , commenced the first archaeological and geological survey of 
the northern Fayum , where they wanted to link ancient lake levels with 
archaeological stratification . Thompson found the earliest farming civilization 
so far in the Fayum region of Egypt , estimated to about 4000 BC . They 
continued working in the Fayum over the next two years for the Royal 
1 Linda Ellis , 2003 ,  “ Archaeological Method and Theory : An Encyclopaedia ” Routledge , 
p . 89
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 43
Development of 
New Archaeology Anthropological Institute where they discovered two unknown Neolithic 
cultures . 
Thompson and Gardner also conducted excavations of the pre-historic 
sites at Kharga Oasis in 1930 . Her publication of ‘ Kharga Oasis in Prehistory ’ 
was the first publication of the new Athlone Press of the University of London . 
In addition to this , the flints she was allowed to bring back to London are 
permanently housed in the Institute of Archaeology in London . This led to 
research more broadly on the Paleolithic civilizations of North Africa . In 
1928 , she made her first visit to the Kharga Oasis during her expedition to 
the Zimbabwe excavations . She made three expeditions to the Kharga Oasis 
from 1930 to 1933 . Gardner did the surveying for many of the excavations . 
Thompson had to excavate only for Paleolithic artifacts because there was 
such a variety of pre-historic civilizations at the Kharga Oasis including 
Neolithic artifacts . Thompson found that the Kharga Scarp contained water 
without rainfall , which helped to supply water to a Neolithic civilization . 
Since the Kharga Scarp contained many Paleolithic sites , she was able to 
excavate many implements used by those civilizations . 
3 . Excavations in Zimbabwe
The ruins of Zimbabwe are considered to be the largest ancient stone 
construction south of the Sahara desert . When the British colonial rulers of the 
region discovered the site , they could not believe that the indigenous people 
of the region were proficient of constructing anything as impressive as Great 
Zimbabwe . In 1928 , Thompson was invited by the British Association for 
the Advancement of Science to undertake a politically extremely sensitive 
assignment of investigating the origins of ruins in southeastern Zimbabwe 
near Lake Mutirikwe . The site consisted of three sets of structures which 
contained multiple buildings . 
Great Zimbabwe had been earlier excavated by James Theodore 
Bent and David Randall-MacIver and controversy fumed as to whether the 
site was the work of Africans or of some other civilization . Finally , after years 
of dispute , Thompson arranged an archaeological team consisting only of 
women for the Zimbabwe excavations , which was the first of its kind . She 
used ceramics , which were similar to what modern villagers were using , and 
structures like terrace walls to know who built the structures from the site . 
Thompson along with Kathleen Kenyon conducted excavations that led her 
to the conclusion that Zimbabwe was the product of a ‘ native civilization ’  . 
The findings attracted considerable negative press attention and was 
received negatively by many within the archaeological community . Modern 
archaeologists now hold the view that the city was the outcome of a Shonaspeaking African civilization . 
Thompson retired from fieldwork after the Second World War . She 
went on to have her memoirs released as an autobiography entitled ‘ Mixed 
Development of 
New Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
44 Material
Memoirs ’ in 1983 . She breathed her last in 1985 , in her 97th year at Broadway , 
Worcestershire . 
Check Your Progress
4 . What was Thompson ’ s first experience in the field of archaeology ? 
5 . Why did Thompson teamed up with English Egyptologist Guy 
Brunton ? 
6 . Who was the first archaeologist to use air surveys to locate 
archaeological sites ? 
7 . Name the geologist with whom Thompson commenced the first 
archaeological and geological survey of the northern Fayum . 
3 . 4 DEVELOPMENT OF NEW ARCHAEOLOGY
New Archaeology or Processual Archaeology is a form of archaeological 
theory that has its origins in 1958 with the work of Gordon Willey and 
Philip Phillips ,  ‘ Method and Theory in American Archaeology ’ in which the 
authors stated that ‘ American archaeology is anthropology or it is nothing .  ’ 
Proponents of this archaeology assert that with the rigorous use of the 
scientific method it was possible to cross the limits of the archaeological 
record and know something about how the people who used artifacts lived . 
It was an intellectual movement which believes in logical positivism as a 
guiding research philosophy , modelled on the scientific method—something 
that had never been applied to archaeology before . 
Before the emergence of new archaeology in 1960 , culture-history 
was a dominant point of view . In fact , the century before 1960 was the ‘ long 
sleep ’ of archaeological theory , in which very little explicit discussion of 
theory occurred . The inability of culture-history to answer the ‘ how ’ and 
 ‘ why ’ of the past events was because of its mono-casual explanations and 
the descriptive level of this framework . Together these factors led to the 
emergence of new archaeology . 2
The processualists discarded the cultural-historical belief that culture 
was a set of norms held by a group and communicated to other groups by 
diffusion and instead maintained that the archaeological remains of culture 
were the behavioural results of a population ’ s adaptation to particular 
environmental conditions . Theory in the new archaeology attempts to explain 
change and recognise the process by which it came about . Thus , it represents 
an important movement from the main traditions of archeology , in which 
2 Asish Mishra , 2011 ,  “ History of Archaeology ”  , Shakti Publishers and Distributors , 
Delhi , p . 105
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 45
Development of 
New Archaeology the description was considered to be more important than the explanation of 
change . 3 
It was time for a New Archaeology that would apply the scientific 
method to find and make apparent the laws of cultural growth in the way 
that societies responded to their environment . Archaeologists have generally 
recognised the works of Colin Renfrew , Kent V . Flannary , Ian Hodder and 
L . R Binford as indicative of the growth of processual school of archaeology . 4
The New Archaeology laid emphasis on theory formation , model 
building , and hypothesis testing in the pursuit of general laws of human 
behavior . According to processualists cultural history cannot be repeated : 
it is futile to tell a story about a culture ’ s change unless you are going to 
test its inferences . There is no scientific ground to determine as to whether 
a culture history one has built is correct . The processualists clearly wanted 
to go beyond the cultural-historical methods of the past ( simply building 
a record of changes ) to focus on the processes of culture ( what kinds of 
things happened to make that culture )  . In processual archaeology , culture is 
considered basically as the adaptive mechanism that permits people to adjust 
with their environments . 
The processualists had two tools to strike out in this new archaeology—
Ethno-archaeology and the rapidly growing varieties of statistical techniques . 
Ethno-archaeology is the study of the social organization and other ethnological 
features of present-day societies based on their material culture , in order to 
draw conclusions about past societies from their material remains . It is the 
application of archaeological techniques on deserted villages , settlements , 
and sites of living people . Lewis Binford conducted the classic processual 
ethno-archaeological study by examining the archaeological remains left by 
mobile Inuit Upper Palaeolithic hunters-gatherers . 
Since the processualists uses scientific method so there arose a need 
for examination of huge amounts of data . Processual archaeology came 
about during the quantitative revolution , which comprised an explosion of 
complicated statistical methods fueled by growing computing powers and 
growing access to them . Data collected by processualists ( and still today ) 
comprised both material culture characteristics ( like artifact sizes and shapes 
and locations )  , and data from ethnographic studies about historically known 
population make ups and movements . This data was utilized to build and 
ultimately test a living group ’ s adaptations under particular environmental 
conditions and thus to explain prehistoric cultural systems . 5
Processualists were concerned with the dynamic relationships ( causes 
and effects ) that operate among the components of a system or between 
systematic components and the environment . The process was by definition 
3 Ibid .  , p . 104
4 Vijneshu Mohan , 1998 ,  “ India : 50 Years of Independence ( 1947-97 ) -Status , Growth and 
Development ”  , B . R . Publishing Corporation , Delhi , p . 51
5 
Development of 
New Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
46 Material
repeated and repeatable : first , the archaeologist observed phenomena in 
the archaeological or ethno-archaeological record , then they employ those 
observations to form clear hypotheses about the connection of that data to the 
events or conditions in the past that might have caused those observations . 
Next , the archaeologist would decipher what kind of data might support or 
reject that hypothesis , and finally , the archaeologist would go out , collect 
more data , to test the validity of the hypotheses . If it was found to be valid 
for one site or circumstance , the hypothesis could be tested in another one . 
Since there was a plenty of data and so much variability , the search for 
general laws rapidly became difficult . As a consequence the archaeologists 
found themselves in sub-disciplinary specializations to be able to manage : 
spatial archaeology dealt with spatial relationships at every level from artifacts 
to settlement patterns ; regional archaeology required understanding trade and 
exchange within a region ; inter-site archaeology sought to identify and report 
on socio-political organization and subsistence ; and intra-site archaeology 
planned to understand human activity patterning . 
Before processual archaeology , archaeology was not naturally seen as 
a science , because the conditions on one site or feature are never similar and 
so by definition not repeatable . Richard Gould states that one of the dictums 
of archaeology is that every site is unique . What the new archaeologists did 
was to make the scientific method practical within its limitations . 
However , what processual archaeologists found was that the sites 
and cultures and circumstances varied too much to be simply a reaction 
to environmental conditions . It was a formal , Unitarian principle that 
archaeologist Alison Wylie called the ‘ paralysing demand for certainty ’  . 
There had to be other things going on , including human social behaviors 
that had nothing to do with environmental adaptations . 
The weakness of processual archaeology appeared from the beginning 
of its approach . The archaeologists believe that it is difficult to dig up a social 
system , ideology , a kingship terminology and a philosophy . Apart from this 
it is very complicated to reconstruct the social organisation and ideology of 
a society . This is the most important reason for them to discard processual 
archaeology . 6 
The critical reaction to processualism born in the 1980s was 
called post-processualism , which is a different story but no less influential 
on archaeological science today . 
The post-processual archaeology , which identifies itself as an 
interpretative perspective and is against processualism , stresses the subjectivity 
and historical particular ; anti-science and objectivity ; symbolism , ideology ; 
relative position and highlights the plurality of events and individuality . 
6 Asish Mishra , 2011 , p . 107
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 47
Development of 
Check Your Progress New Archaeology
8 . Who wrote the book ‘ Method and Theory in American Archaeology ’  ? 
9 . Whose works were recognised by whom as indicative of the growth 
of processual school of archaeology ? 
10 . What is Ethno-archaeology ? 
3 . 5 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Archaeologists are scientists who study the genesis , development and 
behaviour of human beings , past and present . They investigate the 
cultures , languages , archaeological remains and physical characteristics 
of people in different parts of the world . 
2 . On the basis of works by Frank Calvert , an English archeologist , 
Heinrich Schliemann decided that Hisarlik was the site of Troy . 
3 . In 1884 , Heinrich Schliemann , together with Dorpfeld , excavated 
Tiryns near Mycenae . 
4 . In 1915 , Thompson got her first experience in the field of archaeology 
while working as a bottle washer at a Palaeolithic site being excavated 
at Rochers Rouges in France . 
5 . Thompson teamed up with English Egyptologist Guy Brunton to 
explore Neolithic settlement remains at Hemamieh while working in 
the Badari region during 1923–24 . 
6 . Gertrude Caton Thompson was the first archaeologist to use air surveys 
to locate archaeological sites . 
7 . Elinor Wight Gardner was the geologist with whom Thompsoncommenced 
the first archaeological and geological survey of the northern Fayum . 
8 . Gordon Willey and Philip Phillips wrote the book ‘ Method and Theory 
in American Archaeology ’  . 
9 . Archaeologists have recognised the works of Colin Renfrew , Kent V . 
Flannary , Ian Hodder and L . R . Binford as indicative of the growth of 
processual school of archaeology . 
10 . Ethno-archaeology is the study of the social organisation and other 
ethnological features of present-day societies based on their material 
culture , in order to draw conclusions about past societies from their 
material remains . 
Development of 
New Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
48 Material
3 . 6 SUMMARY
• Heinrich Schliemann was a German businessman and a pioneer of field 
archaeology . He believed in historical reality of places mentioned in 
the works of Homer . 
• Schliemann was an archaeological excavator of Hisarlik , now supposed 
to be the site of Troy , along with the Mycenaean sites-Mycenae and 
Tiryns . 
• However ’ Schliemann ’ s excavation of nine levels of archaeological 
remains with dynamite has been condemned as damaging to the 
important historical artifacts . Schliemann was amongst the pioneer in 
the study of Aegean civilization in the Bronze Age . 
• In spite of his errors and wrong conclusions , the world continued 
to venerate Heinrich Schliemann as one of the most significant 
archeologists of all times . 
• Gertrude Caton Thompson was great British archaeologist at a time 
when participation by women in this field was not common as it was 
dominated by men and by Victorian and Edwardian sensibilities . She 
attributed her interest in archaeology to her early encounters with 
antiquity- gained on holidays abroad . 
• Although she did considerable archaeological work in Egypt , she also 
went on expeditions in countries like Malta , Zimbabwe and South 
Arabia . Many of her contributions to the field of archaeology comprise 
a technique for excavating archaeological sites and information on 
Paleolithic to Pre-dynastic civilizations in Zimbabwe and Egypt . 
• Thompson was truly a remarkable woman , who helped in shaping the 
future of archaeology . She took the science of archaeology to the next 
level , and was well ahead of her times . Her excavation techniques 
were unique that showed concern for the natural environment around 
the sites she excavated . She was very meticulous in her findings and 
recordings of artifacts . 
• She held many official positions in organizations such as the Prehistoric 
Society and the Royal Anthropological Institute . Even retirement 
couldn ’ t stop her as she continued to perform research and visited the 
sites . 
• New Archaeology or Processual Archaeology is a form of archaeological 
theory that has its origins in 1958 with the work of Gordon Willey and 
Philip Phillips ,  ‘ Method and Theory in American Archaeology ’ in which 
the authors stated that ‘ American archaeology is anthropology or it is 
nothing .  ’ 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 49
Development of 
New Archaeology • Proponents of this archaeology emphasised that with the rigorous 
use of the scientific method it was possible to cross the limits of the 
archaeological record and know something about how the people who 
used artifacts lived . 
• It was an intellectual movement which believed in logical positivism as 
a guiding research philosophy , modelled on the scientific method—
something that had never been applied to archaeology before . 
• Before the emergence of new archaeology in 1960 , culture-history was 
a dominant point of view . The processualists discarded the culturalhistorical belief . 
• The New Archaeology laid emphasis on theory formation , model 
building , and hypothesis testing in the pursuit of general laws of human 
behaviour . 
• The processualists clearly wanted to go beyond the cultural-historical 
methods of the past ( simply building a record of changes ) to focus on 
the processes of culture ( what kinds of things happened to make that 
culture )  . 
• Before processual archaeology , archaeology was not naturally seen 
as a science , because the conditions on one site or feature are never 
similar and so by definition not repeatable . 
• However , what processual archaeologists found was that the sites and 
cultures and circumstances varied too much to be simply a reaction to 
environmental conditions . 
• The weakness of processual archaeology appeared from the beginning 
of its approach . The archaeologists believe that it is difficult to dig up 
a social system , ideology , a kingship terminology and a philosophy . 
• Apart from this it is very complicated to reconstruct the social 
organization and ideology of a society . This is the most important 
reason for them to discard processual archaeology . 
• Post-processualism was a scientific movement in archaeological science 
that took place in 1980s . It was the critical reaction to processualism 
but no less influential on archaeological science today . 
3 . 7 KEY WORDS
• Dictum : It is a formal pronouncement from an authoritative source . 
• Ethnography : It is the scientific description of peoples and cultures 
with their customs , habits , and mutual differences . 
• Oasis : It is a place in a desert where there is a water and therefore 
plants and trees and sometimes a village or town . 
Development of 
New Archaeology
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
50 Material
• Pathologist : It is a person who studies the causes and effects of 
diseases , especially one who check laboratory samples of body tissue 
for diagnostic or forensic purposes . 
• Spatial : It is something relating to space . 
3 . 8 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . What did Heinrich Schliemann discovered at Troy ? What happened to 
the treasure and where it is kept at present ? 
2 . Which work of Heinrich Schleimann was a subject of ample criticism ? 
3 . Briefly discuss the contributions of Thompson as an Archaeologist . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . Discuss the early life and contribution of Heinrich Schliemann to 
archaeology . 
2 . Examine the early life and works of Gertrude Caton Thompson in the 
field of archaeology . 
3 . Elaborate Thompson ’ s excavations in Egypt . 
4 . Define the term ‘ New Archaeology ’ or ‘ Processual Archaeology ’  . 
Discuss the origins and development of new archaeology . 
3 . 9 FURTHER READINGS
Fagan , Brian M . 1996 . The Oxford Companion to Archaeology . Oxford : 
Oxford University Press . 
Taylor , Walter W . 1948 . A Study of Archaeology . Virginia : American 
Anthropological Association . 
Hodder , Ian . 1995 . Theory and Practice in Archaeology . London : Routledge . 
Sorenson , Marie Louise Stig . 2005 . Excavating Women : A History of Women 
in European Archaeology . London : Routledge . 
Traill , David A . 1996 . Schliemann of Troy : Treasure and Deceit . New York : 
St Martin ’ s Press
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 51
Archaeology in India - I
UNIT 4 ARCHAEOLOGY IN 
INDIA - I
Structure 
4 . 0 Introduction
4 . 1 Objectives
4 . 2 The Asiatic Society 
4 . 2 . 1 Contribution of Sir William Jones
4 . 2 . 2 Contribution of James Prinsep
4 . 3 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
4 . 4 Summary
4 . 5 Key Words
4 . 6 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
4 . 7 Further Readings
4 . 0 INTRODUCTION
The urge for archaeological explorations took a very long time to germinate 
on the Indian soil . There are hardly any traces of archaeology in ancient 
India and medieval India too remained practically unaffected by it till the 
end . The earliest work on archaeology was done in the eleventh century 
by a historian , Kalhana , who perhaps seems to have understood , however 
imperfectly , the value of historical reconstruction of the material remains of 
past . He conducted a systematic study of coins and inscriptions , but also made 
it a point to visit ancient monuments and relics , and acquired in addition a 
thorough mastery of the topography of his land which enabled him to produce 
a masterpiece , the Rajtarangini , with a degree of objectivity never met with 
before in India . 1
Alberuni , who came to India during the invasions of Mahmud Ghaznavi 
in the eleventh century , was another historian who showed a scientific 
understanding and an objective approach through his book titled Tehkik-eHind or Kitab-ul-Hind . Later on Abul Fazl ( in the sixteenth century ) displayed 
a more scholarly approach to the national relics of the past and his Ain-iAkbari exemplifies fairly accurate notices of a large number of historical 
monuments and sites . 
Interest in archaeology in India began earlier than the establishment of 
the Asiatic Society . From the sixteenth century onwards , there are numerous 
references to Indian monuments in the writings of European travellers in the 
country . Travelogues thus form the first source material of archaeological 
writings on India . The tradition continued well into the eighteenth century , 
1 S . Roy , 1961 ,  “ The Story of Indian Archaeology ”  , New Delhi , p . 4 . 
Archaeology in India - I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
52 Material
but from about the middle of that century there is clear evidence of the 
beginnings of systematic scholarly attention to archaeology . 
However , a true antiquarian spirit in India ultimately came from the 
West only when the antiquarian wealth of India started attracting the attention 
of the officers of the English East India Company during the last quarter of 
the 18th century . It was Dr . Samuel Johnson , an English litterateur and his 
friend Sir William Jones , the then Supreme Court Judge , who were the first 
to recognize the supreme need for systematic investigations into the remains 
of India ’ s past . In 1784 , Sir William Jones founded the Asiatic Society at 
Calcutta for enquiring into the history , antiquities , arts , sciences and literature 
of Asia . The Society was intended to study the tradition and the history of the 
east and to conserve the remains of its ancient edifices and trace the vestiges 
of its ruined cities . However , the real impetus for archaeological research 
came from James Prinsep . His genius and labours helped archaeology to free 
itself from antiquarian and literary affiliations who assumed the direction of 
virtually the entire field of archaeological work in India . 
In this unit , you will study about archeological exploration and 
development in India . Also , the unit deals with the foundation , objectives 
and members of the Asiatic Society of Bengal . In addition to this , you will 
also learn about the contribution of James Prinsep and Sir William Jones 
towards the Indian Archeology . 
4 . 1 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
• Understand the foundations , aims and objectives of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal
• Analyse the contribution of Sir William Jones to the development of 
Indian Archaeology
• Examine the contribution of James Prinsep towards the Indian 
Archaeology
4 . 2 THE ASIATIC SOCIETY 
The Asiatic Society was founded on 15 January 1784 by Sir William 
Jones in a meeting presided over by Sir Robert Chambers in the Grand Jury 
Room of the Supreme Court at the Fort William in Calcutta , then capital of 
the British , to enhance and further the cause of Oriental research . At the time 
of its foundation , this Society was named as ‘ Asiatick Society ’  . In 1825 , the 
society dropped the antique k without any formal resolution and the Society 
was renamed as ‘ The Asiatic Society ’  . In 1832 , the name was changed to 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 53
Archaeology in India - I ‘ The Asiatic Society of Bengal ’ and again in 1936 it was renamed as ‘ The 
Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal .  ’ Finally , on 1 July1951 the name of the 
society was changed to its present one . The main objectives of the Society 
were as follows : 
• to organize , initiate and promote researches in Humanities and Science 
in Asia
• to establish , build , erect , construct , maintain and run research 
institutions , reading rooms , museums , auditoriums and lecture halls
• to organize lectures , seminars , symposia , discussions , meetings 
and award of medals , prizes and scholarships in furtherance of the 
objectives
On September 29 , 1796 the Society decided to have its own building . 
J . H . Harrington , then Vice-President selected the corner of Park Street and 
Chowringhee Road Kolkata ( present location ) for the Society ’ s house and the 
site was granted to the Society . The original plan for the new building was 
prepared by Captain Thomas Preston and modified by the French architect , 
Jean-Jacques Pichou . The first quarterly meeting of the Society was held 
at its new building on 3 February1808 . The Society is housed in a building 
at Park Street in Kolkata ( Calcutta )  . The Society moved into this building 
during 1808 . In 1823 , the Medical and Physical Society of Calcutta was 
formed and all the meetings of this society were held in the Asiatic Society . 
Charles Wilkins and Alexander Hamilton were the distinguished early 
members of the Society . Initially , the Grand Jury Room of the Supreme 
Court was used for the meetings of the members , who were required to 
pay a quarterly fee of two mohurs . The members were elected by means of 
ballot-voting . 
Initially , only the Europeans were elected members of the Society . 
However , at the initiative of Hoarse Hayman Wilson , a number of Indians 
were elected members in 1829 , which included Dwarakanath Tagore , 
Sivchandra Das , Maharaja Baidyanath Roy , Maharaja Bunwari Govind Roy , 
Raja Kalikrishna Bahadur , Rajchunder Das , Ram Comul Sen and Prasanna 
Coomar Tagore . Ram Comul Sen was elected ‘ Native Secretary ’ on December 
12 , 1832 . Later on , Rajendralal Mitra became the first Indian President of 
the Society in 1885 . Both the orientalist , Brajendranath De , and one of his 
grandsons , the historian , Barun De , were for some time vice president of the 
Asiatic Society . 
Collection of the old manuscripts was one of the main activities of the 
Asiatic Society . There was a vast collection of Sanskrit manuscripts with 
the society . At present , the library of the Asiatic Society has a collection 
of around 117 , 000 books and 79 , 000 journals printed in almost all the 
major languages of the world . It has also a collection of maps , microfilm , 
paintings , pamphlets and photographs . The earliest printed book preserved 
Archaeology in India - I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
54 Material
in this library is Juli Firmici ’ s Astronomicorum Libri which was published 
in 1499 . It also has a large number of books printed in India in the late 18th 
and early 19th centuries . The library also possesses many rare and scarcely 
available books . It has a rich collection of about 47 , 000 manuscripts in 26 
scripts . The most noteworthy amongst them are an illustrated manuscript of 
the Qur ’ an , a manuscript of the Gulistan text , and a manuscript of Padshah 
Nama bearing the signature of Mughal Emperor Shahjahan . At present there 
are around 80 , 000 journals in the library . 
The Society also proved to be a key centre of Oriental studies and 
research and extended its helping hand to the other two major centres of 
activity that paved the way to the Indian Renaissance , namely , the College 
at Fort William and the Serampore Mission of William Carey . A proposal 
came to the Asiatic Society from the Serampore Mission in 1805 to publish 
classical Sanskrit works with their English translations , and Ramayana was 
the first book chosen for this . The Society spent five thousand five hundred 
rupees from its fund for this purpose . From 1788 till its end in 1839 the journal 
Asiatick Researches ran into twenty volumes and was superseded by the 
Journal of the Asiatic Society , henceforth the official organ of the Society . 2
The Library of the Asiatic Society is its most important asset and its 
importance lies not only in numerical strength of its holdings but also in its 
rich and unique contents . 3 
Contribution of the Society members enriched 
the library . Henry Richardson provided seven Persian manuscripts to the 
library on March 25 , 1784 . William Mardsen gifted his book The History 
of Sumatra ( 1783 ) on November 10 , 1784 . Robert Home , the first Libraryin-Charge ( 1804 ) donated his valuable collection of works on art . The first 
accession of importance was a gift from the Seringapatam Committee on 
February 3 , 1808 consisting of a collection from the Palace Library of Tipu 
Sultan . Surveyor-General Colonel Mackenzie contributed to the library by 
donating his collection of manuscripts and drawings in December 1822 . 
Since 1849 , the Society has printed Bibliotheca Indica , a collection of 
rare and unpublished works belonging to Oriental literature and containing 
original text-editions as well as translations into English , and also grammars , 
dictionaries , bibliographies , and studies . 4 
In the 20th century , valuable 
collection of books were donated by Dr . B . C . Law , Dr . G . W . Gurner , Rama 
Prasad Chanda , Dr . Pratul Chandra Gupta , Dr . Nirmal Kumar Bose , Dr . Pratap 
Chandra Chunder and several individuals . 
The Asiatic Society announced its intention of establishing a Museum 
in 1796 and it was actually established in the beginning of 1814 under the 
superintendence of Dr . Nathaniel Wallich , a Danish botanist . The rapid 
2 
3 
4 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 55
growth of its collection is evident from the first catalogue , published in Archaeology in India - I
1849 and other descriptive catalogues of different sections . In 1839 , the 
Society proposed to the Government for setting up a public museum at 
Calcutta and the Indian Museum of Calcutta was established in 1866 . The 
Society handed over its valuable collections to it . The Society however still 
maintains a museum of its own possession of Ashokan Rock Edict ( 250 BC )  , 
copper plates , coins , sculptures , manuscripts and archival records . Some 
works of genius , like Joshua Reynolds ’ Cupid asleep on Cloud , Guido 
Cagnacci ’ s Cleopatra , Thomas Daniell ’ s A Ghat at Benares and Peter Paul 
Rubens ’ Infant Christ are also in the possession of this museum . 
Three historical factors explain the success of Asiatic Society . Firstly , it 
was evident that the early British role of the trader would be replaced by that 
of a territorial ruler , and the time was ripe for a systematic investigation of the 
country . Secondly , as Poliakov has shown , in their effort to free themselves 
from Judaeo-Christian thought , Western philosophical thinking turned to India 
for the origin of culture and religion . This approach is well reflected in the 
works of Voltaire , who was ‘ convinced that everything has come to us from 
the banks of the Ganges , astronomy , astrology , metempsychosis , etc .  ’ This 
image of India considerably influenced German Romanticism . Thirdly , the 
closing years of the 18th century witnessed the growth of many literary and 
philosophic societies in Britain . By 1815 every important provincial town had 
its society , supported by both the local aristocracy and the local manufacturers 
who were equally aware of the social value of scientific discovery .  .  . The 
results of this activity were vast and valuable . The flora and fauna of Britain , 
the nature of its soils and rocks , were examined in detail , catalogued , and 
given a scientific order and arrangement . The foundation of the Asiatic Society 
in Calcutta was totally in keeping with the scientific spirit of late eighteenth 
century Britain . 5
4 . 2 . 1 Contribution of Sir William Jones
Sir William Jones was an English philologist and a student of ancient India , 
particularly known for his proposition of the existence of a relationship among 
Indo-European languages . He was born at Beaufort Buildings , Westminster , 
London on 28 September 1746 . His father William Jones , F . R . S , an able 
mathematician , died in 1749 and William Jones was raised by his mother 
Marie Nix Jones . He was sent to Harrow School in September 1753 and then 
went on to Oxford University . He graduated there in 1768 and completed his 
post-graduate degree in 1773 . 6
5 
20Archaeology%20of%20India%20and%20Pakistan1%20 ( 2 )  . pdf
6 Sailendra Nath Sen , 2010 ,  “ An Advanced History of Modern India ”  , MacMillan 
Publishers Pvt . Ltd , p . 131
Archaeology in India - I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
56 Material
He was a linguistic prodigy . Alongside his studies he learnt Greek , 
Latin , Persian , Arabic and the basics of Chinese items at an early age . He 
then embarked on a career as a tutor and translator . During this time at the 
request of King Christian VII of Denmark he published Histoire de Nader 
Chah ( 1770 )  , a French translation of a work originally written in Persian 
by Mirza Mehdi Khan Astarabadi . At the young age of 24 , he acquired a 
reputation as an orientalist . In 1770 , he joined the Middle Temple and studied 
law which ultimately led to his appointment as puisne judge to the Supreme 
Court of Judicature at Fort William in Calcutta , Bengal in March 1783 . He 
arrived in Calcutta on 25 September1783 . 
As mentioned earlier , Sir William Jones established the Asiatic Society 
in January 1784 . Governor-General Warren Hastings was its patron and 
William Jones was its founding president . Jones was a great philological 
scholar who was proficient in Arabic and Persian languages when he was 
appointed to India and he knew 28 languages by the end of his career there . 
He gradually developed interest in Sanskrit , translating significant pieces of 
Hindu literature and Hindu and Arabic / Muslim legal texts , which contributed 
to the establishment of a civil law code in India . His Digest of Hindu and 
Muslim Laws ( completed by Henry Colebrooke ) was his major contribution . 
The aims of Asiatic Society were to inquire into history , antiquities , arts , 
sciences , and literature of Asia , and from the beginning it was envisioned 
that the learned Indians would become its members . Between 1788 and 
1839 , the Society collected and published on oriental manuscripts , coins and 
antiquities in Society ’ s journal Asiatic Researches which set the standard 
for oriental research of the day . In 1847 , the Society started making a wide 
variety of oriental literature more broadly available in Bibliotheca Indica
series . It served as a model for the foundation of the Royal Asiatic Societies 
in the West . 
The foundation of the Asiatic Society in India was the consequence 
of European Enlightenment . It was the belief in the value and benefits 
of knowledge and science and in universal history . Biblical history and 
chronology was based on the belief that all humans were related and one of 
the major tasks of the Society in India was to prove it . William Jones believed 
that Indian ’ s were descendents of Noah ’ s son Ham and that Sanskrit was 
related to other ancient languages , such as Phoenician , Egyptian , and Celtic . 
He pointed out that Sanskrit was the fountain head of many languages :  “ The 
Sanskrit language whatever be its antiquity , is of a wonderful structure more 
perfect than the Greek , more copious than the Latin , and more exquisitely 
refined than either , yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity , both in the 
roots of verbs and in the forms of grammar , than could possibly have been 
produced by accident .  ” 7
7 Ibid .  , 132
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 57
He further believed that for 3 , 500 years Sanskrit was the language Archaeology in India - I
of philosophy , religion , medicine , astronomy , mathematics , literature and 
of all branches of learning not only in India , but also in every other region 
influenced by the Indian culture until their conquest by Muslims and the 
use of Arabic by the new ruling class and religion . Through his knowledge 
of Sanskrit language , a mixture of many older Indo-Aryan dialects , and by 
comparing it with the history and developments of other languages , he created 
Indo-European linguistics . 8
By associating Sanskrit to the European language family , William Jones 
integrated Hindu civilization to that of Europe . He had an indirect influence 
on the growth of the science of comparative philology . He collected evidences 
to prove that the game of chess was discovered in India . He supported the 
premise that Plato and Pythagoras borrowed their philosophical ideas from 
India . The two principles of non-duality of God ( advaitavada ) and the 
transmigration of the soul of Hinduism fascinated William Jones . He showed 
that India excelled in logic , geometry and arithmetic . In his last discourse 
to the Society he observed that Newton ’ s theory and part of his philosophy 
may be found in the Vedas . 9
By means of his works , William Jones changed the public opinion 
towards India . He showed that the Indians had a civilization when Europe 
did not . He and his co-workers at the Asiatic Society were evidence of a 
type of intellectual archaeology , of exploring and appreciating South Asia 
through the history of its culture . They believed in the great contribution of 
oriental civilization to world history and made it accessible to Europe and to 
India itself . The oriental studies became a respected discipline as a result of 
the efforts of Society ’ s members . 10 Indian archaeology is highly indebted to 
Sir William Jones . His discovery of the synchronism between Chandragupta 
Maurya and Alexander the Great provided Indian archaeology with its first 
positive date i . e .  , 326 BC . In 1788 , Charles Wilkins , a close associate of 
William Jones , revealed the mysteries of the Gupta as well as the Kutila 
scripts and laid the foundation of epigraphical studies in India . 
Thus , William Jones is one of the most interesting figures in the history 
of India . He was not only an erudite scholar who knew more than two dozen 
languages but made a number of great discoveries in Indian studies . He died 
in Calcutta on 27April 1793 at the age of 47 and is buried in South Park Street 
Cemetery . The Asiatic Society survived William Jones ’ s death and opened 
its doors to the members of the Bengali intelligentsia in 1829 . Dwarkanath 
Tagore was among the first Indian members of the Society . By promoting 
Indian culture , William Jones gave India a weapon in their hands which 
8 Tim Murray , 2007 ,  “ Milestones in Archaeology : A Chronological Encyclopedia ”  , ABCCLIO , p . 115-16
9 Sailendra Nath Sen , p . 132
10 Ibid .  , p . 116
Archaeology in India - I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
58 Material
could be used against the Europeans whenever they attempted to belittle the 
Indian civilization . 
4 . 2 . 2 Contribution of James Prinsep
James Prinsep was born on 20 August 1799 to John Prinsep and his wife , 
Sophia Elizabeth Auriol . John Prinsep went to India in 1771 and became a 
successful indigo planter . After earning good money he returned to England in 
1787 and established himself as an East India merchant . He moved to Clifton 
in 1809 after incurring losses . He managed to find work for all his sons and 
several members of the Prinsep family rose to high positions in India . John 
Prinsep later became a Member of Parliament . 
James Prinsep initially went to study in a school in Clifton . He showed 
a flair for detailed drawing and mechanical invention made him study 
architecture under the gifted but eccentricAugustus Pugin , an Anglo-French 
artist , architect and critic . However , due to some problem with his eyesight 
he was unable to take up architecture as a profession . His father knew of an 
opening in the assay department at the mint in India and sent him to train in 
chemistry in a hospital and later as apprentice to Mr Bingley , assay master 
at the Royal Mint in London ( 1818–19 )  . 
Prinsep found the job of an assay master at the Calcutta mint and 
reached Calcutta on 15 September 1819 . A year later he was sent by his 
superior , the eminent orientalist Horace Hayman Wilson , to work as assay 
master at the Benares mint where he stayed till 1830 . He then moved back to 
Calcutta as deputy assay master and when Wilson resigned in 1832 , he was 
promoted as assay master . On his position as assay master he conducted many 
scientific studies . He also formed intimacy with Major Herbert , a scientific 
officer of the East India Company ’ s army , who had started a periodical 
called Gleanings in Science with the proposed object to make known in India , 
the discoveries made in arts and sciences . Prinsep contributed several articles 
to this periodical . In 1831 , Major Herbert was appointed astronomer to the 
king of Avadh and transferred the conduct of his periodical to Prinsep , who 
improved it to rival publications of the same nature in Europe . In 1833 , he 
called for reforms to Indian weights and measures and advocated a uniform 
coinage based on the new silver rupee of the East India Company . 
James Prinsep was a gifted artist and draftsman . He made meticulous 
sketches of ancient monuments , astronomy , instruments , fossils and other 
subjects . He continued to take an interest in architecture at Benares . After 
his eyesight was restored , he studied and demonstrated temple architecture , 
designed the new mint building at Benares in addition to church . In addition 
to his official duties , he improved the drainage of the city by constructing an 
arched tunnel . He helped renovate the dilapidating minarets of mosque built 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 59
by Aurangzeb . He conducted the city ’ s first census , built a church there and Archaeology in India - I
prepared a balance of extraordinary precision to indicate the 3 / 1000th part of 
a grain . He also made a series of sketches related to Benares in pencil and ink 
drawings that were later reproduced as lithographs under the title of Views 
and Illustrations of Benares . 11
In 1832 , Prinsep succeeded H . H . Wilson as secretary of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal . By merging Gleanings in Science with the society he 
became the founding editor of Journal of the Asiatic Society and contributed 
articles on chemistry , mineralogy , numismatics and on the study of Indian 
antiquities . He was also very interested in meteorology and the tabulation of 
observations and the analysis of date from across the country . 
Prinsep showed great interest in numismatics . He used bilingual 
Indo-Greek coins to decipher Kharoshti script . He interpreted coins 
from Bactria and Kushan as well as Indian series coins , including ‘ punchmarked ’ ones from the Gupta series . According to Prinsep there were three 
stages of development of coins--the punch-marked , the die-struck , and the cast 
coins . He initially held the view that ancient India had no native coinage but 
he later modified his view and suggested that old Indian coinage was restricted 
to those ‘ punch-marked ’ on silver and gold . 
James Prinsep provided the real impetus for archaeological research in 
India . Both Alexander Cunningham and Falconer emphasized on his ‘ burning , 
irrepressible enthusiasm ’ which led him to complete the task of a dozen men . 
James Fergusson , a Scottish architectural historian , was of the opinion that 
if James Prinsep would have lived to continue for a few years longer , the 
researches which he commenced and continued with such success , probably 
would have succeeded in raising the veil which still shroud in obscurity the 
antiquities of India . 12
The deciphering of the Indian scripts is a remarkable story . Its 
culmination was reached in Prinsep ’ s deciphering of the Brahmi script in 
1834 , a discovery which can be compared with Henry Rawlinson ’ s reading 
of the cuneiform Sumerian script in 1835 . This was followed up by the 
decipherment of the Ashokan inscription and the establishment of his 
contemporainity with the Greek rulers of the East who are mentioned in the 
inscriptions . Thus , for the first time Indian history was placed on a sound 
chronological basis . Later on , the second script used in the North-West of 
the Indian subcontinent , commonly known as the Kharoshthi script , was 
deciphered . James Prinsep was the man , whose genius and labours helped 
archaeology to free itself from antiquarian and literary affiliation and who 
11 The Tribune , March 28 , 2010 , Spectrum
12 Ravi Prakash , The Journey of Indian Archaeology : From Antiquarianism to Archaeology 
under British Rule , SAJTH , January 2013 , Vol . 6 , No . 1 , © South Asian Journal of 
Tourism and Heritage
Archaeology in India - I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
60 Material
assumed the direction of virtually the entire field of archaeological work in 
India . He encouraged the antiquarian interests of his European contemporaries 
in India and appealed to them to undertake and report on field investigations 
as they travelled around . 
He got an overwhelming response and was flooded with reports of 
archaeological findings , collections of coins and facsimiles of inscriptions 
for study and publication . He even got cooperation from unexpected quarters . 
For instance , Maharaja Ranjit Singh ’ s French General Jean Baptiste Ventura 
who excavated Buddhist stupa at Manikyala , near Rawalpindi , sent his 
findings to James Prinsep . Likewise , Claude Auguste Court , another French 
officer in the Maharaja ’ s army , sent coins and inscriptions from Punjab to 
the Asiatic Society . 13
As we have seen that Prinsep was basically a man of science and he 
brought accuracy to his task and the scientist ’ s mastery of factual details , 
which enabled him to make many discoveries . He not only discovered new 
things , but succeeded in subjecting existing discoveries to an interpretative 
analysis . His research and writings were not confined to India . He conducted 
the exploration of the stupas in Afghanistan , particularly the historical site of 
Begram , which brought to light for the first time the names of the GraecoBactrian and Indo-Scythian dynasties , of whom there were no previous 
historical records . 
Prinsep also undertook the task of conservation of a stone pillar in 
Allahabad which had ancient inscriptions . It was under Prinsep that the task 
translating original material from the authentic records of ancient Hindu 
dynasties of the Southern Peninsula was completed and they were published . 
Prinsep ’ s incessant hard work resulted in an infection of the brain 
that led to his premature death in 1840 ending a glorious phase not only of 
Indological studies but also of the Asiatic Society . As mentioned by Lord 
Curzon in his speech at the meeting of the Asiatic Society in 1900 :  ‘ How 
these men labored is illustrated by the fact that Prinsep died of overwork 
at the age of 40 .  ’ Dr . Huge Falconer ’ s obituary , published in the Colonial 
Magazine , said ,  ‘ Of his intellectual character , the most prominent feature was 
enthusiasm — one of the prime elements of genius ; a burning , irrepressible 
enthusiasm , to which nothing could set bounds . His powers of perception 
were impressed with genius — they were clear , vigorous and instantaneous . 
The extent of his capacity was wonderful , and the number and variety of his 
acquirements no less remarkable .  ’ 14
13 Ibid
14 Ibid
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 61
Archaeology in India - I Check Your Progress
1 . Who founded the Asiatic Society and when ? 
2 . Under whose leadership was the Museum of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal established ? 
3 . Who contributed to the library of the Asiatic Society by donating his 
collection of manuscripts and drawings in December 1822 ? 
4 . Who discovered the synchronism between Chandragupta Maurya 
and Alexander the Great and provided Indian archeology with its 
first positive date , i . e . 326 BC ? 
5 . When did James Prinsep succeed H . H . Wilson as secretary of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal ? 
6 .  ‘ How these men labored is illustrated by the fact that Prinsep died 
of overwork at the age of 40 .  ’ Who spoke this line for James Prinsep 
at a meeting of Asiatic Society in 1900 ? 
4 . 3 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Sir William Jones founded the Asiatic Society on 15 January 1784 in 
Calcutta . 
2 . The museum of the Asiatic Society of Bengal was established under 
the leadership of Dr . Nathaniel Wallich , a Danish botanist . 
3 . Surveyor-General Colonel Mackenzie contributed to the library by 
donating his collection of manuscripts and drawings in December 1822 . 
4 . Sir William Jones discovered the synchronism between Chandragupta 
Maurya and Alexander the Great and provided Indian archeology with 
its first positive date , i . e .  , 326 BC . 
5 . In 1832 , James Prinsep succeeded H . H . Wilson as secretary of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal . 
6 . Lord Curzon said this statement for James Prinsep in his speech at the 
meeting of the Asiatic Society in 1900 . 
4 . 4 SUMMARY
• The urge for archaeological explorations took a very long time to 
germinate on the Indian soil . 
• Interest in archaeology in India began earlier than the establishment 
of the Asiatic Society . From the sixteenth century onwards , there are 
Archaeology in India - I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
62 Material
numerous references to Indian monuments in the writings of European 
travellers in the country . Travelogues thus form the first source material 
of archaeological writings on India . 
• However , a true antiquarian spirit in India ultimately came from the 
West only when the antiquarian wealth of India started attracting the 
attention of the officers of the English East India Company during the 
last quarter of the 18th century . 
• Sir William Jones founded the Asiatic Society in 1784 at Calcutta for 
enquiring into the history , antiquities , arts , sciences and literatures of 
Asia . 
• By associating Sanskrit to the European language family , William 
Jones integrated Hindu civilization to that of Europe . 
• Through his researches , William Jones changed the public opinion 
towards India . He proved the superiority of Indian civilization to that 
of Europe . 
• James Prinsep was another British scholar of repute . He was a 
gifted artist and draftsman . He made meticulous sketches of ancient 
monuments , astronomy , instruments , fossils and other subjects . 
• He showed great interest in numismatics and epigraphy . He deciphered 
many scripts which provided deeper insights into Indian history . 
Prinsep ’ s works provided the real impetus for archaeological research 
in India . 
• To sum up we can say that the works of Sir William Jones and James 
Prinsep under the banner of Asiatic Society contributed immensely to 
the development of Indian Archaeology . 
4 . 5 KEY WORDS
• Cuneiform : It is one of the earliest systems of writing , developed in 
ancient Mesopotamia , which used a reed to impress wedge-shaped 
marks onto the surface of clay tablets . 
• Manuscript : It is a book , document or piece of music written by hand 
rather than typed or printed . 
• Mohur : It is a gold coin that was formerly minted by several 
governments , including British India and some of the princely states . 
• Orientalist : It refers to someone who is from the West and studies the 
language , culture , history , or customs of countries in eastern Asia . 
• Philologist : Philologist is a person who deals with the structure , 
historical development and relationships of a language or languages . 
• Prodigy : It refers to a young person with exceptional qualities or 
abilities . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 63
Archaeology in India - I • Topography : It is the arrangement of the natural and artificial physical 
features of an area . 
4 . 6 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Write a short note on the beginning of archaeology in India . 
2 . Briefly discuss the role of Sir William Jones towards the establishment of 
Asiatic Society of Bengal and the development of Indian Archaeology . 
3 . What was the aim behind setting up the Asiatic Society ? 
4 . Write short notes on the following :  
( a ) Library of the Asiatic Society 
( b ) Museum of the Asiatic Society
Long Answer Questions
1 . Describe the foundations , aims , objectives and activities of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal . 
2 . Explain the reasons for the success of Asiatic Society of Bengal . 
3 . Assess Sir William Jones as a philologer , polymath and orientalist . 
4 . Elaborate the contribution of James Prinsep in the development of 
Archaeological studies in India . 
4 . 7 FURTHER READINGS
Chakraborti , D . K . 1988 . A History of Indian Archaeology : The Beginning 
to 1947 . Delhi : Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers . 
Childe , V . G . 1956 .  ( First Edition ) Piecing Together the Past . London : 
Routledge & Kegan Paul . 
Kenyon , K . M . 1964 . Beginnings in Archaeology . London : J M Dent & Sons 
Ltd . 
Daniel , Glyn . 1967 . The Origins and Growth of Archaeology . Harmondsworth : 
Penguin Books . 
Markham , C . R . 2004 . A Memoir on the Indian Surveys . Delhi : Manohar 
Publishers & Distributors . 
Srivastava , K . M . 1987 . New Era of Indian Archaeology . Delhi : Cosmo 
Publications . 
Archaeology in India - II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
64 Material
BLOCK - II 
THE GREAT ARCHAEOLISTS AND EXCAVATION
UNIT 5 ARCHAEOLOGY IN 
INDIA - II
Structure 
5 . 0 Introduction
5 . 1 Objectives
5 . 2 Colin Mackenzie
5 . 3 Alexander Cunningham
5 . 4 Ancient Monuments Preservation Act
5 . 5 Archaeological Survey of India
5 . 6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
5 . 7 Summary
5 . 8 Key Words
5 . 9 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
5 . 10 Further Readings
5 . 0 INTRODUCTION
Archaeological and historical pursuits in India started with the efforts of Sir 
William Jones . The efforts put by Jones had a long backing , of enthusiasts 
and dilettantes like Tavernier , Finch and Bernier , Thevenot , Careri , Fryer , 
Ovington , Hamilton , Anquetil du Perron , Joseph Tieffenthaler , William 
Chamber , to name a few , who carried out survey of monuments in various 
parts of India , earlier . Colin Mackenzie and Alexander Cunninghum , the 
two military officers of English East India Company in India due to their 
antiquarian interest also surveyed various parts of India and contributed to 
the development of archaeology in India . Their efforts led to the foundations 
of the Archaeological Survey of India in 1861 which was established with 
the objective of conducting archaeological explorations and excavations , 
maintenance , conservation and preservation of centrally protected 
monuments / sites and remains . 
In 18 March 1904 the British government in India enacted and passed 
the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act , 1904 , which was aimed to provide 
for the preservation of ancient monuments and objects of archaeological , 
historical or artistic interest and to prevent the excavation by unauthorized 
persons of sites of historic interest and value . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 65
Archaeology in India - II In this unit , you will study about the contribution of Colonel Colin 
Mackenzie and Alexander Cunninghum in the development of Indian 
Archaeology . This unit will also deal with the enactment of the Ancient 
Monuments Preservation Act , 1904 . In addition to this , you will also learn 
about the origins , development and functions if the Archeological Survey 
of India ( ASI )  . 
5 . 1 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Assess the labors of Colin Mackenzie in the Indian Archaeology
	 •	Recognise the contribution of Alexander Cunninghum in laying the 
foundations of the Archaeological Survey of India 
	 •	Examine the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act , 1904
	 •	Explain the origins and development of the Archaeological Survey of 
India
5 . 2 COLIN MACKENZIE
Colonel Colin Mackenzie was a Scottish army officer in the English East India 
Company who later became the first Surveyor General of India . He was born 
in Stornoway , Scotland in 1754 . Not much is known of his early life but it is 
believed that he started his work as a Comptroller of the Customs at Stornoway 
from 1778 to 1783 . In his youth he had keen interest in mathematics . Lord 
Kenneth Mackenzie ( last Earl of Seaforth ) and Francis ( fifth Lord Napier ) 
sought his help in preparing a biography of John Napier and his work on 
logarithms . Kenneth Mackenzie helped Colin to obtain commission with the 
English East India Company to join the Madras Army . He arrived in Madras 
on 2 September 1783 . He joined as a Cadet in the Infantry division but was 
transferred in 1786 as a Cadet of Engineers . 
When he arrived in India he first met Hester , the daughter of Lord 
Francis Napier , who was married to Samuel Johnston who worked as a civil 
servant at Madurai . Hester introduced Mackenzie to some Brahmins to obtain 
information on Hindu mathematical traditions as part of the biographical 
memoir on John Napier and the history of logarithms . However , the biography 
project was subsequently dropped but Mackenzie continued to take an interest 
in antiquities . 
For more than a decade he was busy with military duties in India . In 
around 1783 , he started military duties in Coimbatore and Dindigul followed 
by engineering duties in Madras , Nellore and Guntur and during the campaign 
against Mysore from 1790 to 1792 . He saw the Siege of Pondicherry in 
Archaeology in India - II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
66 Material
1793 . He prepared sketches on the eve of the Third Mysore War indicating 
the position of the British forces . They were highly appreciated by Lord 
Cornwallis , the Governor-General who conducted the war to success . He 
was posted as a commanding engineer to Ceylon and returned in 1796 . He 
worked his way to become a Major and then a Colonel . He was able to follow 
his interest in antiquities after his return from Ceylon . 
After the defeat of Tipu Sultan in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War in 
1799 , Mackenzie was asked to survey Mysore territories as well as the Ceded 
districts which the Nizam of Hyderabad handed over to the British in 1800 . 
This allowed Mackenzie to have a large team of interpreters , draftsmen and 
illustrators through whom he collected a lot of information on natural history , 
architecture , local history , geography , social customs and folk tales of Mysore 
and Rayalaseema regions . 1 
Mackenzie had a vast collection of inscriptions , 
manuscripts , annals , drawings , maps and coins . His collections of historical 
documents related to India are considered to be the most extensive ever made 
by a single individual in Europe or in India . 
Mackenzie was the first to reveal the rich architectural heritage of 
the Vijayanagara ruins at Hampi . He also visited Amravati near Guntur and 
made 85 sketches of the sculptures . He is also credited with the accurate 
measurement of the giant statue of Gomateshwara at Shravanabelagola . In 
1811 , Mackenzie was deputed to Java , where also he pursued his antiquarian 
interests . He spent two years ( 1811-13 ) in Java where he got married with 
Petronella Jacomina Bartels . His surveyed Java and submitted a report which 
included many watercolors illustrating life during the period . 
In 1757 , the East India Company under Lord Clive had appointed 
James Rennell as Surveyor General for Bengal . In 1810 , Colin Mackenzie 
was appointed as the Surveyor General of Madras Presidency but later these 
posts were abolished . On 26 May 1815 Mackenzie was appointed as the 
Surveyor General of India with his headquarters at Fort William in Calcutta . 2
However , he was allowed to stay in Madras till 1818 to complete his survey 
of South India . Ultimately his antiquarian work received the appreciation of 
the Court of Directors of the East India Company in England and the military 
government was asked to ‘ present him with a sum of 9000 pagodas , as full 
remuneration for his past labours , and as a mark of our approbation of his 
work .  ’ He was also awarded with a certificate acknowledging his collection 
of materials . 3
1 eye-of-a-manuscript-man / article16925797 . ece
2 D . K Chakrabarti , 1988 ,  “ A History of Indian Archaeology ”  , New Delhi , p . 29
3 SAJTH , January 2013 , Vol . 6 , No . 1© South Asian Journal of Tourism and Heritage , The 
Journey of Indian Archaeology :  “ From Antiquarianism to Archaeology under British 
Rule ” RaviPrakash
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 67
R . H Phillimore commented thus ,  ‘ Mackenzie has preserved for Archaeology in India - II
countless students of history an immense mass of interesting and valuable 
material , which otherwise would surely have perished . It is doubtful , 
however , whether his enthusiasm for collecting was tempered with sufficient 
discrimination , or whether he could have dealt with very much of it even had 
he lived to examine it more thoroughly himself .  ’ 
Check Your Progress
1 . Name the two military officers of English East India Company who 
largely contributed to the development of archaeology in India . 
2 . Whose collections of historical documents related to India are 
considered to be the most extensive ever made by a single individual 
in Europe or in India ? 
5 . 3 ALEXANDER CUNNINGHAM
Alexander Cunningham was born in London on 23 January 1814 to Allan 
Cunningham and his wife Jean née Walker . He received his early education 
at Christ ’ s Hospital , London . Through the influence of Sir Walter Scott , 
Alexander Cunningham obtained cadetship at the East India Company ’ s 
Addiscombe Seminary ( 1829–31 )  , and received technical training 
subsequently at the Royal Engineers Estate at Chatham . At the age of 19 , he 
joined the Bengal Engineers as a Second Lieutenant and spent the next 28 
years in the service of British Government of India . 
Cunninghum arrived in India on 9 June 1833 . Those were the days 
of Orientalism in India . He met James Prinsep and during 1837 and 1838 , 
he was in daily communication with Prinsep . Soon , Cunninghum became 
Prinsep ’ s intimate friend , confidant and pupil . Prinsep passed on to him his 
lifelong interest in Indian archaeology and antiquity . 
He served as an aide-de-camp ( ADC ) to Lord Auckland , the then 
Governor-General of India , from 1836 to 1840 . He paid his visit to Kashmir 
during this period . In 1841 , Cunningham was made executive engineer to 
the king of Oudh . In 1842 , he was called by the ruler of Jaipur to serve in 
the army for suppressing an uprising in Bundelkhand . He was then posted 
at Nowgong in Central India before he saw action at the Battle of Punniar 
in December 1843 . Then he joined as an engineer at Gwalior and in 1844-
45 , he got constructed an arched stone bridge over the Morar River . In 
1845–46 , he was sent to Punjab where he helped construct two bridges of 
boats across the Beas river prior to the Battle of Sobraon . In 1846 , he was 
appointed commissioner to demarcate boundaries . Letters were written to 
Archaeology in India - II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
68 Material
the Chinese and Tibetan officials by Lord Hardinge , but no officials joined . 
In 1847 , a second commission was set up which was led by Cunningham to 
establish the Ladakh-Tibet boundary , which also included Henry Strachey 
and Thomas Thomson . The commission aimed at delimiting the northern 
boundaries of the Empire after the First Anglo-Sikh War , concluded with the 
Treaty of Amritsar , which ceded Kashmir as war indemnity expenses to the 
British . His work Essay on the Aryan Order of Architecture ( 1848 ) resulted 
from his visits to the temples in Kashmir and his travels in Ladakh during 
his tenure with the commission . He also explored the Buddhist monuments 
of Central India along with Lieutenant Maisey in 1851 which is mentioned 
in his account . 
In 1856 , he was assigned the duty of Chief Engineer in Burma , which 
had just been annexed by the British . But archaeology remained his obsession . 
He stayed there for two years and from 1858 served for three years on the 
same post in the North-Western Provinces . In both regions , he established 
public works departments . He was therefore absent from India during the 
Revolt of 1857 . In 1860 , he was appointed Colonel of the Royal Engineers 
and retired as Major General on 30 June 1861 . 
Alexander Cunninghum ’ s contribution towards Indian Archaeology
Cunningham had showed keen interest in antiquities early in his career . 
Excavations became a regular activity among British antiquarians after 
Jean-Baptiste Ventura , general of Ranjit Singh , who inspired by the French 
explorers in Egypt had excavated the bases of pillars to discover large stashes 
of Bactrian and Roman coins . In 1834 , Cunninghum wrote to the Journal of 
the Asiatic Society of Bengal , an appendix to James Prinsep ’ s article on the 
relics in the Manikyala Tope . He had conducted excavations at Sarnath in 
1837 and made careful drawings of the sculptures . In 1842 , he excavated at 
Sankissa and at Sanchi in 1851 . He published The Bhilsa Topes in 1854 in an 
attempt to establish the history of Buddhism based on architectural evidence . 
The need for a methodical survey under government sponsorship 
was being increasingly felt by Cunninghum and by 1851 he initiated 
communication with the East India Company on the value of an archaeological 
survey . He provided a justification that could earn the funding needed for the 
endeavour stating that :  
.  .  . would be an undertaking of vast importance to the Indian Government 
politically , and to the British public religiously . To the first body it would show 
that India had generally been divided into numerous petty chiefships , which had 
invariably been the case upon every successful invasion ; while , whenever she had 
been under one ruler , she had always repelled foreign conquest with determined 
resolution . To the other body it would show that Brahmanism , instead of being 
an unchanged and unchangeable religion which had subsisted for ages , was of 
comparatively modern origin , and had been constantly receiving additions and 
alterations ; facts which prove that the establishment of the Christian religion 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 69
in India must ultimately succeed . Archaeology in India - II 4 
In other words , he attempted to justify the 
systematic archaeological exploration of India on the grounds that politically 
it would help the British to rule India and lead to an easier acceptance of 
Christianity in the country . 
After Cunninghum ’ s retirement from the military service , the Viceroy 
of India Lord Canning appointed him as an archaeological surveyor to the 
Government of India in 1861 . He held this post from 1861 to 1865 . Most 
antiquarians of the 19th century who took interest in identifying the major 
cities mentioned in ancient Indian texts did so by gathering clues found in 
classical Graeco-Roman records and the travelogues of travellers to India 
such as Fa-Hein and Hsuan-Tsang . Cunningham succeeded in identifying 
some of the places mentioned by Hsuan-Tsang and counted among his 
major achievements the identification of Aornos , Taxila , Sangala , Srughna , 
Ahichchhatra , Bairat , Sankisa , Shravasti , Kaushambi , Padmavati , Vaishali , 
and Nalanda . 
Cunningham would also regularly corroborate his identifications 
through field surveys unlike his contemporaries . Particularly the identification 
of Taxila was made difficult partly due to miscalculation of the distances 
recorded by Pliny in his Naturalis Historia which pointed to a location 
somewhere on the Haro river , two days march from the Indus . Cunningham 
noticed that this position did not match with the route of Chinese pilgrims . 
His subsequent explorations in 1863-64 testified his hypothesis . 
After his department was disbanded in 1865 due to lack of funds , 
Cunningham returned to England and wrote the first part of his Ancient 
Geography of India ( 1871 )  , covering the Buddhist period ; but failed to 
complete the second part , which covered the Muslim period . In 1870 , Lord 
Mayo revived the Archaeological Survey of India , wherein Cunningham 
served as the Director-General from 1 January 1871 . So he returned to India 
and made field explorations each winter , conducting excavations and surveys 
from Taxila to Gaur . He produced twenty-four reports , thirteen as author and 
the rest under his supervision by others . Other major works included the first 
volume of Corpus inscriptionum Indicarum ( 1877 ) which included copies 
of the edicts of Ashoka , the Stupa of Bharhut ( 1879 ) and the Book of Indian 
Eras ( 1883 ) which allowed the dating of Indian antiquities . No archaeologist 
in India , before or since , has had such a close personal familiarity with such 
an impressive stretch of territory . In his Memorandum of Instructions to his 
assistants written in 1871 , Cunningham set a high ideal for archaeology : 
 ‘ Archaeology is not limited to broken sculptures , old buildings and mounds of 
ruins , but includes everything that belonged to the world ’ s history … . But our 
researches should be extended to all ancient remains whatever that will help to 
illustrate the manners and customs of former times ’  . 
4 
Archaeology in India - II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
70 Material
Cunningham collected a large number of coins , but much of that was 
lost when the steamship he was travelling in , the Indus , was wrecked off the 
coast of Sri Lanka in November 1884 . However , the British Museum obtained 
most of the gold and silver coins . He had suggested to the British Museum 
that they should use the arch from the Sanchi Stupa to mark the entrance of 
a new section on Indian history . He also contributed numerous papers in the 
Journal of the Asiatic Society and the Numismatic Chronicle . He retired from 
the Archaeological Survey on September 30 , 1885 and returned to London 
to continue his research and writing and wrote two books on numismatics . 
He was knighted in 1887 . He died on 28 November 1893 in London . 
Check Your Progress
3 . Who felt the need for a methodical survey under government 
sponsorship for the first time in India ? 
4 . When was the Archaeological Survey of India revived after it was 
disbanded in 1865 due to lack of funds , by whom ? 
5 . 4 ANCIENT MONUMENTS PRESERVATION ACT
 ‘ The purpose of archaeology is to extract history from the monuments and 
artifacts of the past , to write history from the often inadequate relics that time 
has spared .  ’ However , Archaeology has greatly suffered in India because of 
appropriation by private persons of such antiquities as come to light from 
time to time . Sculptures , rings , coins , seals , gems and other remains were 
occasionally carried off by government officers for their friends and to present 
to distinguished visitors and tourists , or to decorate their houses and gardens . 
The demand and prices offered for such relics became so great that the 
natives were induced to search for them everywhere . Due to random fashion 
of making excavations , the sculptors got mixed up , and their history and 
meaning are lost . Dr . Burgess advised an amendment of the Treasure Trove 
Act of 1878 , which could make it illegal to export the antiquities without an 
official permit . The government directed the local government to prepare a 
list of all the ancient monuments in their areas . 
It was only in 1899 , Lord Curzon , the Viceroy of India who saw the 
chaotic condition prevailing in the Archaeological Survey of India and 
the failure of the local government in looking after responsibility of the 
archaeological survey , once again decided to bring explorations , excavations , 
researches , epigraphs , publication and preservation of monuments under 
central government . In 1904 , the central government enacted the Ancient 
Monuments Preservation Act for the first time , which was intended ‘ to provide 
for the preservation of ancient monuments and objects of archaeological , 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 71
historical or artistic interest ’ and to prevent the excavation by unauthorized Archaeology in India - II
persons of sites of historic interest and value . 
The Act was applicable to ancient monuments which had been declared 
as ‘ protected monuments ’ and invested the executive with sufficient legal 
authority in regard to the monuments in private ownership . The conservation 
program received great emphasis during the regime of the Governor-General 
Lord Curzon . A number of monuments and sites were declared , protected 
and brought under the purview of the Ancient Monument Preservation Act . 
In 1921 , under the Government of India Act , 1919 , the archaeology was 
made the central subject . The provinces were left merely with the power 
of declaring monuments and sites protected under the Ancient Monument 
Preservation Act . Even this power was transferred to the centre by the 
Government of India in 1935 . In 1946 , an important decision was taken to 
transfer the maintenance works of ancient monuments from the public works 
department to the Archaeological Survey of India . 
Check Your Progress
5 . Under whose Viceroyalty was the Ancient Monuments Preservation 
Act , 1904 enacted in India for the first time ? 
6 . What was the important decision taken in 1946 regarding the 
maintenance works of ancient monuments ? 
5 . 5 ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
A survey of archaeological remains throughout India is indispensable to the 
study of history . For the period when writing was unknown , we have to rely 
only on archaeological remains to trace the history . Moreover , ancient records 
have perished with the passage of time . The first systematic research into 
the subcontinent ’ s history was conducted by the Asiatic Society , which was 
founded by William Jones on January 15 , 1784 . 
Prominent among the early members of the society was Charles 
Wilkins who published the first English translation of the Bhagavad Gita
in 1785 under the patronage of the then Governor-General of India , Warren 
Hastings . However , the most important of the society ’ s achievements was 
the decipherment of the Brahmi script by James Prinsep . This successful 
decipherment inaugurated the study of Indian palaeography . Alexander 
Cunningham , a protégé of Prinsep , carried out a detailed survey of the 
Buddhist monuments . Inspired by early amateur archaeologists like the 
Italian military officer , Jean-Baptiste Ventura , Cunningham excavated many 
stupas of India . Cunningham funded many of his early excavations himself . 
However , he gradually realized the need for a permanent body to oversee 
Archaeology in India - II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
72 Material
archaeological excavations and the conservation of Indian monuments and 
used his stature and influence in India to lobby for an archaeological survey . 
Thus , the Archaeological Survey of India was eventually formed in 1861 
by an act passed into law by Lord Canning with Cunningham as the first 
Archaeological Surveyor . 
Between 1865 and 1871 , the survey was abolished briefly due to the 
lack of funds but restored by Lord Lawrence , the then Viceroy of India . In 
1871 , the Survey was revived as a separate department and Cunningham was 
appointed as its first Director-General . Continuing until today , Alexander 
Cunningham is regarded as the ‘ Father of Indian Archaeology ’  . 
In 1885 , Cunningham was retired and was succeeded as DirectorGeneral by James Burgess . Burgess started a yearly journal The Indian 
Antiquary ( 1872 ) and an annual epigraphical publication Epigraphia Indica 
( 1882 ) as a supplement to the Indian Antiquary . Under Burgess much attention 
had been devoted to the great monuments of Agra , Jaunpur , Delhi , Lahore 
etc . The post of Director General was permanently suspended in 1889 due to 
paucity of funds and was restored in 1902 . During this period , conservation 
work in the different circles was carried out by the superintendents of the 
individual circles . 
Lord Curzon restored the post of Director-General in 1902 . Breaking 
with tradition , Curzon appointed John Marshall , a professor of classical 
studies at Cambridge University , to head the survey . Marshall served as 
Director-General from 1902 to 1928 . He replenished and revived the survey 
whose activities were fast dwindling into insignificance . He modernized 
the approach to archaeology , introducing a program of cataloguing and 
conservation of ancient monuments and arte facts . He initiated the practice 
of allowing Indians to participate in excavations in their own country . 
Marshall created the post of Government epigraphist and encouraged 
epigraphical studies . However , the most noteworthy event of his tenure 
was the discovery of the Indus Valley Civilization in 1921 . The success and 
level of the discoveries ensured that the progress made in Marshall ’ s tenure 
would remain unsurpassed . Harold Hargreaves succeeded Marshall in 1928 . 
Hargreaves was succeeded by Daya Ram Sahni , supervisor of Marshall ’ s 
excavation of Harappa in 1921 , who in 1931 became the first Indian Director 
General of the Archaeological Survey of India . 
Daya Ram Sahni was succeeded by J . F . Blakiston and K . N . Dikshit 
both of were involved in the excavations at Harappa and Mohenjodaro . In 
1944 , Mortimer Wheeler , a British archaeologist and army officer , took 
over as Director-General and served till 1948 . During his tenure , Wheeler 
excavated the Iron Age site of Arikamedu and the Stone age sites of 
Brahmagiri , Chandravalli and Maski in South India . Wheeler established 
a new archaeological journal , Ancient India in 1946 and presided over 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 73
Archaeology in India - II the partitioning of ASI ’ s property during the Partition of India and helped 
establish an archaeological body for the newly-formed Pakistan . 
Wheeler was succeeded by Niranjan Prasad Chakravarti in 1948 . On 
15 August 1949 , the National Museum was inaugurated in New Delhi to 
house the artifacts displayed at the Indian Exhibition in the United Kingdom . 
Chakravarti was succeeded by Madho Sarup Vats and Amalananda Ghosh . 
Ghosh ’ s tenure , which lasted until 1968 , is renowned for the excavations of 
Indus Valley sites at Kalibangan , Lothal and Dholavira . In 1958 , the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act was passed which 
brought the archaeological survey under the aegis of the Ministry of Culture . 
A . Ghosh was succeeded by Brij Basi Lal who conducted archaeological 
excavations at Ayodhya to examine whether a Ram Temple preceded the 
Babri Masjid . During his tenure , the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act ( 1972 ) 
was passed advocating central protection for monuments considered to be 
 ‘ of national importance ’  . 
Lal was succeeded by Madhusudan Narhar Deshpande whose tenure 
lasts from 1972 to 1978 and Bal Krishan Thapar who served from 1978 to 
1981 . On Thapar ’ s retirement in 1981 , archaeologist Debala Mitra succeeded 
him and became the first woman Director- General of the Archaeological 
Survey of India . Mitra was succeeded by M . S . Nagaraja Rao . Archaeologists 
Jagat Pati Joshi and Munish Chandra Joshi succeeded Rao . When the Babri 
Masjid was demolished in 1992 , Munish Chandra Joshi was the DirectorGeneral of ASI . The demolition generated Hindu-Muslim riots all over 
the India . As a result of the demolition , Joshi was terminated in 1993 and 
controversially replaced as Director-General by Indian Administrative Service 
( IAS ) officer Achala Moulik , a step which initiated a tradition of appointing 
IAS bureaucrats in place of the appointment of archaeologists to head the 
survey . The tradition finally culminated in 2010 when Gautam Sengupta , 
an archaeologist , replaced K . M . Srivastava , an IAS officer , as DirectorGeneral . He was again succeeded by Pravin Srivastava , another IAS officer . 
Srivastava ’ s successor Rakesh Tiwari was also a professional archaeologist . 
He was succeeded by another bureaucrat Usha Sharma who is the present 
Director General of Archaeological Survey of India . 
The Archaeological Survey of India functions as an attached office of 
the Ministry of Culture . Till date , it has declared 3 , 686 monuments to be of 
national importance to the country . The major activities of ASI are1 . Maintenance , conservation and preservation of centrally-protected 
monuments / sites and remains ; 
2 . Conducting archaeological explorations and excavations ; 
3 . Chemical preservation of monuments and antiquarian remains ; 
4 . Architectural survey of monuments ; 
Archaeology in India - II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
74 Material
5 . Development of epigraphical research and publications ; 
6 . Setting up and reorganization of site museums ; 
7 . Training in different areas of Archaeology . 
Check Your Progress
7 . Who is regarded as the ‘ Father of Indian Archaeology ’  ? 
8 . Under whose tenure , as the Director General of the ASI , the discovery 
of Indus Valley Civilization took place in 1921 ? 
9 . Who was the first Indian Surveyor General of independent India ? 
10 . Who is the present Director General of Archaeological Survey of 
India ? 
5 . 6 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Colin Mackenzie and Alexander Cunninghum were the two military 
officers of English East India Company who prominently contributed 
to the development of archaeology in India . 
2 . Colonel Colin Mackenzie ’ s collections of historical Indian documents 
are considered as the most extensive ever made by a single individual 
in Europe or in India . 
3 . For the first time in India , Alexander Cunninghum felt the need for a 
methodical survey under government sponsorship . 
4 . In 1870 , Lord Mayo revived the Archaeological Survey of India after 
it was disbanded in 1865 owing to the paucity of funds . 
5 . Lord Curzon was the Viceroy of India when the central government 
enacted the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act for the first time . 
6 . In 1946 , an important decision took place under which the maintenance 
works of ancient monuments was transferred from the public works 
departments to the Archaeological Survey of India . 
7 . Alexander Cunninghum is regarded as the ‘ Father of Indian 
Archaeology ’  . 
8 . The discovery of Indus Valley Civilization took place in 1921 under 
the tenure of John Marshall who was the then Director General of the 
ASI . 
9 . Niranjan Prasad Chakravarti was the first Indian Surveyor General of 
independent India . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 75
10 . Archaeology in India - II Usha Sharma , a bureaucrat , is the present Director General of 
Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI )  . 
5 . 7 SUMMARY
	 •	The urge for archaeological explorations started with the efforts of Sir 
William Jones with the establishment of Asiatic Society of Bengal in 
1784 . 
	 •	Many European travellers who visited India surveyed monuments of 
various parts of India and wrote their memoirs . 
	 •	Two British military officers namely-Colin Mackenzie and Alexander 
Cunninghum out of their antiquarian interests surveyed extensively 
during their postings in various parts of India . 
	 •	Colonel Colin Mackenzie , a Scottish army officer , had a vast collection 
of inscriptions , manuscripts , annals , drawings , maps and coins . His 
collections of historical documents related to India are considered to 
be the most extensive ever made by a single individual in Europe or 
in India . 
	 •	Colin Mackenzie ’ s antiquarian work earned him appreciation from the 
Court of Directors of the East India Company in England and he was 
awarded for his contribution . 
	 •	Alexander Cunningham led a commission which was set up to establish 
the Ladakh-Tibet boundary . The commission aimed at delimiting the 
northern boundaries of the Empire after the First Anglo-Sikh War . 
	 •	Alexander Cunninghum was another military officer who had great 
antiquarian interests and he was the first to prescribe the need for a 
methodical survey under government sponsorship and by 1851 he also 
initiated communication with the East India Company on the value of 
an archaeological survey . 
	 •	Cunningham founded the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI ) in 1861 
which was established with the objective of conducting archaeological 
explorations and excavations , maintenance , conservation and 
preservation of centrally protected monuments / sites and remains . 
	 •	Cunningham collected a large number of coins , but much of that was 
lost when the steamship he was travelling in , the Indus , was wrecked 
off the coast of Sri Lanka in November 1884 . However , the British 
Museum obtained most of the gold and silver coins . 
	 •	Archaeology has greatly suffered in India because of appropriation by 
private persons of such antiquities as come to light from time to time . 
	 •	Sculptures , rings coins , seals , gems and other remains were occasionally 
carried off by government officers for their friends and to present to 
Archaeology in India - II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
76 Material
distinguished visitors and tourists , or to decorate their houses and 
gardens . 
	 •	In 1904 , the central government enacted , for the first time , the Ancient 
Monuments Preservation Act to provide for the preservation of ancient 
monuments and objects of archaeological , historical or artistic interest 
and to prevent the excavation by unauthorized persons of sites of 
historic interest and value . 
	 •	Since its foundation , ASI had been headed by various Director Generals . 
Till date it has declared 3 , 686 monuments to be of national importance 
to the country . 
5 . 8 KEY WORDS
· Excavation : It is the act or process of digging or removing earth 
carefully from an area in order to find buried remains . 
· Pagoda : It is a unit of currency , a coin made of gold or half-gold minted 
by Indian dynasties as well as the British , the French and the Dutch . 
· Remuneration : It is a payment for work that has been done or services 
that have been provided . 
· Hypothesis : It is a proposed explanation made on the basis of limited 
evidence as a starting point for further investigation . 
· Numismatics : It is the study or collection of coins , tokens , banknotes 
and medals . 
· Palaeography : It is the study of ancient and historical handwriting . 
· Epigraphical : It is the study of ancient inscriptions . 
· Decipherment : It is the analysis of documents written in ancient 
languages , where the language is unknown , or knowledge of the 
language has been lost . 
5 . 9 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Briefly explain the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act , 1904 . 
2 . Who introduced Colin Mackenzie to some Brahmins and for what ? 
3 . Write a short note on the relationship between Alexander Cunningham 
and James Prinsep . 
4 . Make a list of various Director Generals of the Archaeological Survey 
of India . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 77
Long Answer Questions Archaeology in India - II
1 . Discuss in detail the contribution of Colin Mackenzie towards Indian 
Archaeology . 
2 . Describe the role of Alexander Cunninghum in the foundation and 
development of Archaeological Survey of India . 
3 . Trace the evolution of the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI )  . 
4 . Discuss the functions of the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI )  . 
5 . 10 FURTHER READINGS
Edney , Matthew H . 2009 . Mapping an Empire : The Geographical 
Construction of British India ( 1765-1843 )  . Chicago and London : 
University of Chicago Press . 
Barrow , Ian J . 2003 . Making History , Drawing Territory : British Mapping 
in India , C . 1756-1905 . Oxford University Press India 
Kejariwal , O . P . 1988 . The Asiatic Society of Bengal and the Discovery of 
India ’ s Past 1784–1838 . Oxford University Press India
Chakraborti , D . K . 1995 . A History of Indian Archaeology : The Beginning 
to 1947 . Delhi : Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers . 
Chakraborti , D . K . 2009 . India - An Archaeological History : Paleolithic 
Beginnings to Early History Foundation . Oxford University Press
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
78 Material
UNIT 6 ARCHAEOLOGY IN 
INDIA-III
Structure 
6 . 0 Introduction
6 . 1 Objectives
6 . 2 Sir John Marshall
6 . 3 Sir Mortimer Wheeler
6 . 4 Robert Bruce Foote
6 . 5 Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro Excavations
6 . 6 Dwarka Excavations
6 . 7 Answers To Check Your Progress Questions
6 . 8 Summary
6 . 9 Key Words
6 . 10 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
6 . 11 Further Readings
6 . 0 INTRODUCTION
In India , archaeology has progressively transformed from antiquarian pursuit 
to rigorous science . Leading this transformation has been the Archaeological 
Survey of India ( ASI )  . Since its establishment in 1861 , it has been excavating 
the historical sites and deciphering and describing thousands of valuable 
inscriptions . Sir John Marshall who served as Director-General of ASI 
replenished and invigorated the survey whose activities were fast dwindling 
into insignificance . Sir Mortimer Wheeler , in his capacity as Director-General , 
excavated many sites in South India . Robert Bruce Foote was a geologist and 
archaeologist who conducted geological surveys of prehistoric locations in 
India for the Geological Survey of India . 
In the 1920s , Daya Ram Sahni began excavations at Harappa , at almost 
the same time , R . D Banerjee commenced excavations at Mohenjo-Daro . 
These two sites are still considered to be the core of the vast spread of the Indus 
Valley Civilization . The development of aqua-lung and free-diving made it 
possible to view ancient remains . A new branch of submarine archaeology has 
opened new avenues of research . Marine archaeology has begun to provide 
useful information in the Indian context . The ancient port-city of Dwarka 
has been explored by the archaeologists from time to time . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 79
Archaeology in 
6 . 1 OBJECTIVES India-III
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Explain the contribution of Sir John Marshall in the development of 
Archaeological Survey of India
	 •	Understand the role played by Sir Mortimer Wheeler in the growth of 
archaeology in India
	 •	Examine the contribution of Robert Bruce Foote towards Indian 
archaeology
	 •	Analyze the excavations conducted at the Indus Valley Civilization 
sites of Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa
	 •	Examine the excavations conducted at Dwarka
6 . 2 SIR JOHN MARSHALL
Sir John Hubert Marshall was the Director-General of the Archaeological 
Survey of India from 1902 to 1928 . He was born on March 19 , 1876 at Chester 
in England . He was educated at Dulwich College , London as well as King ’ s 
College , Cambridge . In 1902 , the Viceroy of India , Lord Curzon , hired John 
Marshall immediately after he finished his degree at Cambridge on the basis 
of his archaeological experience in Greece and Turkey . He was appointed as 
the Director-General of Archaeology within the British Indian administration . 
Marshall modernized the approach to archaeology introducing a program 
of cataloguing and conservation of ancient monuments and artefacts . He 
was at the forefront of the archaeology era in India becoming a prominent 
scholar who focused on the Indian archaeology scene . It was under the direct 
patronage of Lord Curzon that John Marshall began work . It was he who laid 
down the basic guidelines of this work : 
It is in the exploration and study of purely Indian remains , in the probing 
of archaic mounds , in the excavation of old Indian cities , and in the copying 
and reading of ancient inscriptions , that a good deal of the exploratory work 
of the archaeologist in India will in future lie .  .  . It is in my judgment equally 
our duty to dig and discover , to classify , reproduce , and describe , to copy 
and decipher , and to cherish and conserve .  ” 1
Marshall initiated the practice of permitting Indians to participate in 
excavations in their own country . In 1913 , he started the excavations at Taxila , 
which lasted for two decades . In 1918 , he laid the foundation stone for the 
1 Dilip K . Chakrabarti , 1982 ,  “ The Development of Archaeology in the Indian 
Subcontinent ”  , p . 335-37Author ( s )  : Source : World Archaeology , Vol . 13 , No . 3 , Regional 
Traditions of Archaeological Research II ( Feb .  , 1982 )  , pp . 326-344 Published by : Taylor 
& Francis , Ltd . Stable URL : 
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
80 Material
Taxila Museum , which today hosts many artefacts . He then moved on to 
other sites , including the Buddhist centres of Sanchi and Sarnath . 
Marshall ’ s work gave evidence of the age of Indian civilization 
especially the Indus Valley Civilization and the Mauryan age . He started the 
excavation at Harappa with Daya Ram Sahni as the director and Harappa 
was discovered in 1921 . In 1922 , work began at Mohenjo-Daro with Rakhal 
Das Banerjee . The results of these excavations , which revealed a seeming 
ancient culture with its own writing system , were published in the Illustrated 
London News on September 20 , 1924 . Researchers linked the artefacts found 
at the two sites with the ancient civilization of Sumer in Mesopotamia . 
John Marshall announced the discovery of a new civilization in the Indus 
valley to the world . As S . N . Roy noted in The Story of Indian Archaeology , 
 ‘ Marshall left India three thousand years older than he had found her .  ’ This 
was because similar , till-then-unidentified seals were found at excavations 
at Mesopotamian sites . It was then that the world knew not only of a new 
civilization , but also of one contemporaneous with Mesopotamia . John 
Marshall also conducted excavations at the prehistoric site of Sohr Damb 
mound near Nal in Baluchistan . He is also known for his important role in 
the excavations at Knossos and many other sites on Crete between 1898 
and 1901 . Marshall was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Indian 
Empire ( CIE ) in June 1910 and knighted in January 1915 . 2
A new era of archaeology dawned with John Marshall . He reorganized 
the administrative structure of the Archaeological Survey of India and gave it 
a permanent footing for ,  ‘ the work of the archaeological officers is of a kind 
which cannot be discharged by any other existing agency and it can only cease 
if the government cease to admit their responsibility for the preservation of 
the ancient remains in the country .  ’ 3
Marshall directly shaped the course of Indian archaeology . Conservation 
of ancient monuments and objects was among his main concerns and the 
basic principles of conservation laid down by him in the Indian context 
are still pursued by the survey . The survey was reorganized and centrally 
consolidated . The whole of the Indian sub- continent was divided into a 
number of archaeological circles , each with its complement of officers and 
men . 
Under John Marshall , the Archaeological Survey of India became the 
largest single organization of its kind in the history of archaeological research 
and witnessed it ’ s most magnificent period . The details of the discoveries 
and excavations conducted in India during this period by Marshall and 
his colleagues perhaps do not fit into the present survey of archaeological 
traditions , but a few significant points cannot be ignored . Firstly , the 
2 ( archaeologist ) 
3 Vijai Shankar Śrivastava ( edited )  ,  “ Cultural Contours of India : Dr . Satya Prakash 
Felicitation Volume ”  , Abhinav Publications , p . 21
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 81
Archaeology in 
India-III Annual Reports reveal that each and every part of India was given due 
attention . Secondly , a study of the number of memoirs published shows that 
specialized studies of monuments , sites and areas were not ignored . Thirdly , 
some of the discoveries and excavations revolutionized the study of Indian 
archaeology and ancient history-the discovery of the Indus Valley Civilization , 
explorations of Aurel Stein in Baluchistan and of N . G . Majumdar in Sind , and 
the excavations at Taxila and at some of the most important early historical 
sites of the Gangetic valley . 
Fourthly , it was during this period that the people of the Indian 
subcontinent were appointed to superior positions in the Survey and 
associated with both excavations and discoveries . Many Indian scholars like 
Bhagawanlal Indraji , Ram Raj , and Rajendralal Mitra had shown their merit 
in the field of Indological studies in the nineteenth century and the help of 
the traditional Indian scholars was indispensable for the early decipherment 
of inscriptions . However , it was during this period that archaeology became 
a renowned part of Indian academic thinking . 
Historical scholarship about India had already come of age when John 
Marshall was directing the Indian archaeological scene . Political history , 
religion , economy and culture of ancient India had been established on the 
basis of textual , inscriptional , numismatic , architectural , sculptural and other 
sources . Important sites associated with the course of ancient Indian history 
remained largely unexcavated so the historical image of ancient India was not 
clear . However , the excavations conducted by Marshall at the sites of Taxila , 
Bhita , Sravasti , Vaisali , Rajagriha , Sarnath and Nalanda unveiled the curtains . 
The work started by Marshall suddenly made the Buddhist period alive in the 
Indian cultural consciousness . In the field , Marshall was primarily concerned 
with the horizontal exposure of sites . This had not been earlier attempted in 
the Indian context . In fact , except the work of Bellasis at Brahminabad in 
Sind , no archaeologist had even thought about the total picture of the site . 
Under Marshall ’ s leadership , structures were separately described and 
their positions plotted in relation to the total plan of the site . Their history was 
determined on the basis of successive structural phases . Plans were drawn of 
the excavated settlement all together and the main cultural occupations were 
recreated both on the basis of structural remains and antiquities . 
Marshall ’ s excavation methods have been criticized on the ground 
that the depth of antiquities and ‘ strata ’ was interpreted in relation to a fixed 
bench-level on the top of the mound , in defiance of the principles of modern 
stratigraphic excavation . However , he achieved what he desired : a total 
picture of the site and its main historical-cultural periods . This point was 
later on accepted by Mortimer Wheeler who the strongest critic of Marshall ’ s 
excavations . 4 
He retired in 1928 and passed away on August 17 , 1958 . 
4 Dilip K . Chakravarti , 1982 , op . cited
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
82 Material
6 . 3 SIR MORTIMER WHEELER
Sir Robert Eric Mortimer Wheeler was a British archaeologist and officer in 
the British Army . He was born on September 10 , 1890 in Glasgow to a middle 
class family . He was raised largely in Yorkshire before relocating to London 
in his teenage years . He studied the Classics at University College London 
( UCL ) and started working professionally in archaeology , specializing in 
the Romano-British period . During the First World War he volunteered for 
service in the Royal Artillery . Later on , he obtained his doctorate from UCL 
before taking on a position at the National Museum of Wales . In 1926 , he 
was appointed Keeper of the London Museum . In 1934 , he established the 
Institute of Archaeology as part of the federal University of London , adopting 
the position of Honorary Director . During the Second World War , he re-joined 
the Armed Forces and rose to the rank of brigadier . 
In 1944 , he was appointed as the Director-General of the Archaeological 
Survey of India . From the beginning of his tenure , he sought to distance 
himself from previous Directors-General and their administrations by 
criticizing them and tried to introduce new staff who had no loyalty to his 
predecessors . He was assigned with a four-year contract ( 1944-48 )  . He then 
toured the subcontinent , seeking to meet all of the Survey ’ s staff members . 
He had drafted a prospectus containing research questions that he desired 
the Survey to lay emphasis on . These comprised understanding the period 
between the Indus Valley Civilization and the Achaemenid Empire , discerning 
the socio-cultural background to the Vedas , dating the Aryan invasion , and 
establishing a dating system for southern India before sixth century A . D . His 
tenure also witnessed a 25 per cent budget increase for the Archaeological 
Survey , and convinced the government to agree to the construction of a 
National Museum of Archaeology , to be built in New Delhi . 
His work was exceptional in many respects . First , he took an overall 
view of archaeology beginning with the Palaeolithic Age and stressed the 
need for scientific analyses in archaeology . For example , the study of animal , 
human and crop remains at the Indus Valley cities of Mohenjo-Daro and 
Harappa , and the chemical analyses of metal samples from some sites . It was 
Wheeler who first argued the basic necessity of scientific aids in archaeology 
in India . Second , he emphasized the need for careful archaeological planning 
which was something new for India . Third , by conducting excavations at 
Taxila , Harappa and Arikamedu he not only demonstrated the importance of 
such planning by solving major problems associated with these sites but also 
introduced the modern concept of archaeological stratigraphy to India . He 
also introduced there for the first time the importance of the study of stratified 
ceramic material for determining the cultural succession at excavated sites 
and its importance in comparative study of material between different sites . 
Fourth , he gave field training in his methods to a large number of Indian 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 83
Archaeology in 
India-III students who have kept his excavation techniques alive since then . He also 
wrote many articles on the excavation methods . Fifth , he realized that in such 
a large country like India it was not possible for Archaeological Survey alone 
to do the work . So he introduced effective participation by the universities 
and it was under his guidance and inspiration that several Indian universities 
started archaeological research . 5
Among other innovations , he developed the use of a Cartesian 
coordinate system , or three-dimensional grid , with which the materials found 
in archaeological excavations , could be recorded . Wheeler ’ s final contribution 
to the tradition of Indian archaeological research is something indescribable 
and can be cherished only by those who have felt it , directly or indirectly . 
He was at the helm of the Survey for only four years ; despite this he infused 
an element of urgency into the Indian archaeological research . Archaeology 
in India became more exciting under him . He retired from the University 
of London in 1955 and died on July 22 , 1976 in Leatherhead , near London . 
6 . 4 ROBERT BRUCE FOOTE
Robert Bruce Foote ( September 22 , 1834-December , 29 1912 ) was a British 
geologist and archaeologist who conducted geological surveys of prehistoric 
sites in India for the Geological Survey of India or GSI . Foote joined the GSI 
on December 29 , 1858 as an Assistant under Dr . Charles Oldham . He was 
posted in the Madras Presidency , Hyderabad region and Bombay . In 1887 , 
he became a Director of the GSI . He was one among many geologists in 
British India whose persistent enthusiasm , inexhaustible energy and relentless 
explorations reigned supreme . His integrated approach of geological and 
prehistoric expeditions in different regions of southern and western India 
brought forth significant evidence of prehistoric cultures . 
Foote ’ s explorations in south India was a turning point , from where 
branched off the twin-fields of prehistory and geology . There was a happy 
coincidence of Foote ’ s early discoveries with the establishment of the 
Archaeological Survey of India ( in 1861 )  . It took nearly eight decades for 
the Survey to commence organized expeditions into the prehistory of India . 
In 1942 , at the instance of the Archaeological Survey , the late Professor H . D . 
Sankalia began from where Foote had left Indian prehistory . With equal 
strength he attempted to fill the gaps observed by Foote and largely succeeded 
in placing Indian prehistory on a scientific footing . 
He supported the cause of stratigraphic and economic geology , and 
prehistory of India . Mounted on a horseback he carried the torch of Indian 
prehistory and trekked through the hilly tracts of what is considered to be 
the hottest zone ( the Rayalaseema ) in the south . He travelled around 53 , 000 
5 Dilip K . Chakravarti , 1982 , op . cited , p . 337
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
84 Material
km along with his friend for his findings , on horseback . In the end , he had 
accomplished an inimitable task and had lit many dark areas of India ’ s past . 
Though Foote had several forerunners in Indian prehistoric research , 
his innate search for the prehistoric age opened up an entirely new area of 
research . Within five years of joining the Geological Survey he had reached 
a milestone that ushered in an era of discoveries . He was the first to pick up a 
Palaeolithic find and his modesty prevented him making a sensation . Instead 
he brought this significant discovery to knowledge of his senior geologist , 
Dr . Oldham . 
Foote ’ s account of Palaeolithic finds was first published in 1866 , in the 
Madras Journal of Literature and Science . This heralded the commencement 
of systematic documentation of prehistoric evidences in India . He not only 
described the geological perspective of stone tools but also endeavoured to 
fix their probable age in addition to contemporary climatic conditions . 
He agreed with others that the chipped stone implements were made by 
the ancestors of the modern tribes in India and not by Aryans . Between 1863 
and 1912 , Foote discovered 459 prehistoric sites in various parts of southern 
India . He published comprehensive geological reports of several parts of the 
former Madras Presidency which represent a leading example of European 
dedication towards unravelling India ’ s past in its entirety . 
Between 1879 and 1880 he mapped the geological features along the 
east coast of India . These sites are being revisited by the present-day geoarchaeologists with the purpose of reconstruction of the procedures involved 
in the formation and preservation of stone tools in these deposits . In 1884 , he 
also excavated caves at Billasurgam in Kurnool District of Andhra Pradesh . 
He also stayed in Bellary The Bellary-Raichur-Kurnool area has come to be 
recognized as the centre of Neolithic culture in south India . After becoming 
the first geologist of the Mysore Geological Department , Foote traversed 
through the former Mysore State and published his field notes in the first 
memoir of this Department . 
He laid strong foundation of Indian prehistoric studies over which 
present-day archaeologists have to a large extent succeeded in constructing 
the superstructure and have kept pace with the developments in method and 
theory taking place elsewhere in other parts of the world . 
No stone was left unturned by Foote in fifty years of relentless 
endeavour-both geological and prehistoric . During his nearly six decades of 
stay in India , he lived his relentless geological tours with a missionary zeal , 
considerable intensity and passion for collecting prehistoric tools . He was a 
pioneer in the real sense of the term . He is truly regarded both the ‘ Father of 
Indian Prehistory ’ and ‘ Father of South Indian Geology .  ’ 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 85
Archaeology in 
Check Your Progress India-III
1 . What were Sir John Marshall ’ s main concerns with respect to Indian 
archaeology ? 
2 . Who is regarded as the father of Indian prehistory ? 
6 . 5 HARAPPA AND MOHENJO-DARO EXCAVATIONS
The two principle excavations in the Indus Valley Civilization are at Harappa 
and Mohenjo-Daro which are now in Pakistan . The Indus Civilization was 
put on the ‘ archaeological map ’ by the discovery of seal by Alexander 
Cunninghum in 1873 . In the early twenties of the 20th century Rai Bahadur 
Daya Ram Sahni began excavations at Harappa , at almost the same time 
Rakhal Das Banerjee commenced excavations at Mohenjo-Daro . These two 
sites are still considered to be the core sites of the vast spread of Indus Valley 
Civilization . The civilization extended from northern Baluchistan and the 
Makran coast to the west to Uttar Pradesh in the east and from Manda in the 
north to Daimabad in the south . This vast area is continuously being explored 
and new sites come to light through novel explorations . 6
Harappa Excavations
Harappa is situated in Sahiwal District of Pakistani Punjab on the banks of 
Ravi river . The ruins of Harappa were described by Charles Masson in 1842 
in his Narrative of Various Journeys in Balochistan , Afghanistan , and the 
Punjab . However , the discovery of Charles Masson could not attract any 
archaeological interest for many years . In 1856 , Alexander Cunningham 
visited the site of Harappa where the British engineers John and William 
Brunton were laying the railway line to connect the cities of Lahore and 
Multan . They needed strong bricks for it . They were told of an ancient ruined 
city near the lines , called Harappa . On visiting the city , they found it full of 
hard well-burnt bricks . However , it was badly destroyed by brick robbers . 
Alexander Cunningham noted that the amount of brick taken from the ancient 
site was enough to lay bricks for ‘ about 100 miles ’ of the railway line . Thus , 
many of the ancient structures at the site were damaged . In contrast , MohenjoDaro was far better preserved . 
In 1872 , Sir Alexander Cunningham published the first Harappan 
seal . About 50 years later , in 1912 , more Harappan seals were discovered 
by John Faithfull Fleet which triggered the archaeological campaign under 
John Marshall , Rai Bahadur Daya Ram Sahni and Madho Sarup Vats who 
6 Vijneshu Mohan , 1998 ,  “ India : 50 Years of Independence ( 1947-97 ) -Status , Growth & 
Development-16 : Archaeology ” B . R Publication Corporation , Delhi , p . 30
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
86 Material
began excavating Harappa in 1921 , finding buildings and artefacts indicative 
of an ancient civilization . 
Post-independence , excavations were conducted at Mehrgargh between 
1974 and 1975 . It provided the earliest evidence for settled life in the Indian 
Subcontinent going back to the seventh millennium BC , but also provided 
enough evidence for the steady and gradual emergence of the Harappan 
elements . The evidence from Mehrgarh laid to rest the earlier controversial 
theory of the Western world being responsible for the emergence of the 
Harappan Civilization . The excavationsdemonstrated seven different stages 
of development before the emergence of the Harappan culture in the last 
stage . Identification of the three phases of Harappan culture- Early Harappan 
( 3300-2600 BC )  , Mature Harappan ( 2600-2000 BC ) and Late Harappan 
( 2000-1700 BC ) demonstrate that there was a gradual cultural process of 
origin , development and decline . 
Mohenjo-Daro Excavations
Mohenjo-Daro ( Mound of the Dead ) lies in the Larkana District in Sind 
( Pakistan )  , on the bank of river Indus . John Marshall tended to excavate 
the town along regular horizontal units , measured uniformly throughout the 
mound , ignoring the stratigraphy of the site . This meant that all the artefacts 
recovered from the same unit were grouped together , even if they were found 
at different stratigraphic layers . Thus , valuable information about the context 
of these finds was irretrievably lost . In 1944 , Sir Mortimer Wheelar rectified 
this problem . He recognized that it was necessary to follow the stratigraphy 
of the mound rather than dig mechanically along uniform horizontal lines . 
Moreover , as an ex-army brigadier , he brought with him a military precision 
to the practice of archaeology . 
Nine strata of buildings have been revealed at the site , all belonging to 
the Bronze Age . Perhaps the most unique feature of Indus Valley Civilization 
was the development of urban centres . The settlement is divided into two 
sections , one smaller but higher and the lower . Archaeologists designate these 
as the citadel and the lower town respectively . The citadel owes its height 
to the fact that buildings were constructed on mud brick platforms . It was 
walled , which meant that it was physically separated from the lower town . 
The lower town was also walled . A number of buildings were constructed 
on platforms , which served as foundations . The town was laid out with two 
roads which were 35 feet wide and cutting each other at right angles . The 
streets and lanes branched off these roads , also at right angles . 
The houses were built , like modern oriental houses , round a courtyard . 
The courtyard was probably the centre of activities such as cooking and 
weaving . It is interesting that there was an apparent concern for privacy : 
there are no windows in the walls along the ground level . Besides , the main 
entrance does not give a direct view of the interior or the courtyard . Every 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 87
Archaeology in 
India-III house had its own bathroom paved with bricks , with drains connected through 
the wall to the street drains . Staircases have also been found in some houses 
to reach a second storey or the roof . Many houses had wells , often in a room 
that could be reached from the outside and perhaps used by passers-by . 
On the citadel we find evidences of structures that were probably used 
for special public purposes . These include the Great Bath and the warehouse . 
The Great Bath was an oblong bathing pool surrounded by a corridor on all 
four sides . There were two flights of steps on the north and south leading 
into the tank , which was made watertight by setting bricks on edge and using 
a mortar of gypsum . There were rooms on three sides , in one of which was 
a large well . Water from the tank flowed into a huge drain . Across a lane to 
the north lay a smaller building with eight bathrooms , four on each side of 
a corridor , with drains from each bathroom connecting to a drain that ran 
along the corridor . Like the tank of a Hindu temple , the Great Bath probably 
had a religious purpose . 7
There no metals or stones in the alluvial plains of Mohenjo-Daro so 
these materials had to be imported . Large slabs , used for covering drains and 
similar heavy work , were quarried a hundred miles or farther up the river and 
brought down by boat . Small semi-precious stones with the metals reached 
Mohenjo-Daro from some other part of India , or from Afghanistan . Some of 
the small stone seals found at Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa show connection 
with seals discovered in Mesopotamia and Elam . Other connections with 
Mesopotamia and Elam can be observed in the fragments of steatite vases 
carved with a mat pattern , found in all three places and also the peculiarly 
etched carnelian beads which are known at Mohenjo-Daro and in Mesopotamia 
and Russia . Cotton and not flax was used as the weaving material . The actual 
fibres of the cotton have been found preserved by being corroded on a silver 
vase ; the threads which formed the fabric show its texture . 
The whole civilization discovered at Mohenjo-Daro shows a trading 
town . Everything was severely practical-there was no attempt at art ; 
and though religion was manifest , the great temples with their beautiful 
architecture , which are a feature of Egypt and of latter India , do not occur . 
Mohenjo-Daro existed for trade alone . 
Since the 1980s , there has also been growing international interest 
in Harappan archaeology . Experts from the subcontinent and abroad have 
been jointly working at both Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro . They are using 
modern scientific techniques including surface exploration to recover traces 
of clay , stone , metal and plant and animal remains as well as to minutely 
analyze every bit of available evidence . These explorations promise to yield 
interesting results in the future . 8
7 A . L Basham , 1982 ,  “ The Wonder that was India ”  , Third Revised Edition , Sidwick and 
Jackson , London , p . 18
8 
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
88 Material
6 . 6 DWARKA EXCAVATIONS
Dwarka or Dwaraka is a coastal town situated in Jamnagar district of Gujarat . 
Significant ancient remains have been discovered at Dwarka , both on land 
as well as under water by the Underwater Archaeology Wing ( UAW ) of the 
Archaeological Survey of India . Traditionally , modern Dwarka is identified 
with Dvaraka , mentioned in the Mahabharata as Krishna ’ s city . Dwarka 
was a port , and some scholars have identified it with the island of Barka 
mentioned in the Periplus of Erythrean Sea . Ancient Dwarka sank in sea and 
hence is an important archaeological site . The first clear historical record of 
Dwarka is dated 574 A . D . and occurs in the Palitana inscription of Samanta 
Simhaditya . This inscription refers to Dwaraka as the capital of the western 
coast of Saurashtra and still more important , states that Krishna lived here . 
It is one of the best studied underwater sites in India . 
The first archaeological excavations at Dwaraka were conducted by 
the Deccan College , Pune and the Department of Archaeology , Government 
of Gujarat , in 1963 under the direction of H . D . Sankalia . It revealed artefacts 
which were many centuries old . The UAV of the ASI conducted a second 
round of excavations in 1979 under the supervision of Dr S . R . Rao . He was 
emeritus scientist at the marine archaeology unit of the National Institute of 
Oceanography . Rao has excavated many Harappan sites including the port 
city of Lothal in Gujarat . He observed a different kind of a pottery known 
as lustrous red ware , which could be more than 3 , 000 years old . In his book 
The Lost City of Dwaraka , published in 1999 , Rao writes about his undersea 
findings :  ‘ The discovery is an important landmark in the history of India . It 
has set to rest the doubts expressed by historians about the historicity of the 
Mahabharata and the very existence of the city of Dwaraka .  ’ On the basis of 
the results of these excavations , the search for the sunken city in the Arabian 
Sea began in 1981 . Scientists and archaeologists have incessantly worked 
on the site for many years . 
Underwater exploration project was sanctioned in 1984 , directly by 
the then Prime Minister of India for three years . Excavation under the sea 
is a tough job . The sea offers too much resistance . Excavation is feasible 
only between the months of November and February , during low tide . The 
sea has to be smooth and there should be bright sunshine . In order to make 
the best possible use of the time available , divers use echo sounder to get a 
fairly accurate idea of the location and the depth of the object under water . 
The side scan sonar offers a view of the sea floor . The sonar signals sent 
inside the water return the signals . Reading of the signals discloses the 
broad nature of the object under water . Underwater scooters , besides the 
usual diving equipment are also used . Conducting 12 expeditions between 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 89
Archaeology in 
India-III 1983 and 1990 , S . R . Rao ’ s team came across discoveries that confirmed the 
existence of a submerged city . 
Another significant discovery by the divers was a conch seal that 
established the submerged township ’ s connection with the Dwaraka of the 
Mahabharata . The seal substantiate the mention made in the ancient text , 
the Harivamsa that every citizen of Dwaraka had to carry such a seal for 
purposes of identification . It is believed that Lord Krishna had declared that 
only one who carried such a seal could enter the city . A similar seal has been 
found onshore . 
Many underwater explorations were carried out between 1998 and 2001 
which indicated a highly civilized city which must have existed at that site , 
which had great maritime links with many other countries and which must 
have been washed away by something like a tsunami or some such hurricane . 
Dwaraka was a large well- fortified city with an excellent drainage system , 
massive gates and a wall stretching about hundred eighty miles . 9
In January 2007 , the UAW initiated excavations at Dwaraka again . The 
Superintending Archaeologist of UAW , Alok Tripathi , said that the ancient 
underwater structures found in the Arabian Sea were yet to be identified .  ‘ We 
have to find out what they are . They are fragments . I would not like to call 
them a wall or a temple . They are part of some structure ,  ’ said Dr . Tripathi , 
who is himself a trained diver . He further said that in order to study the 
antiquity of Dwarka in a holistic manner excavations are being conducted 
both on land and undersea at the same time to enable the co-relate and 
scientifically analyze the finds from both the places . 
The purpose of the excavation was to be familiar with the antiquity 
of the site , on the basis of material evidence . In the offshore excavation , the 
ASI ’ s trained underwater archaeologists and the divers of the Indian Navy 
investigated the sunken structural remains . The archaeological finds were 
studied , dated and documented . On land , the excavation was conducted in 
the forecourt of the Dwarakadhish temple . Students from Gwalior , Lucknow , 
Pune , Vadodara , Varanasi and Bikaner also joined in to help the archaeologists 
of the ASI . 
Check Your Progress
3 . When was the Indus Civilization put on the archaeological map ? 
4 . Which organization discovered significant ancient remains at 
Dwarka ? 
9 9-000-bc / dwarka-fortification
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
90 Material
6 . 7 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Conservation of ancient monuments and objects was among Sir John 
Marshall ’ s main concerns and the basic principles of conservation laid 
down by him in the Indian context are still pursued by the survey . 
2 . Robert Bruce Foote is regarded both the father of Indian prehistory 
and father of south Indian geology . 
3 . The Indus Civilization was put on the ‘ archaeological map ’ by the 
discovery of a seal by Alexander Cunninghum in 1873 . 
4 . Significant ancient remains have been discovered at Dwarka , both 
on land as well as under water by the Underwater Archaeology Wing 
( UAW ) of the Archaeological Survey of India . 
6 . 8 SUMMARY
	 •	Since its establishment in India in 1861 , the Archaeological Survey 
of India has been excavating the historical sites and deciphering and 
describing thousands of valuable inscriptions . 
•	In 1902 , the Viceroy of India , Lord Curzon appointed John Marshall 
as the Director-General of ASI . He modernized the approach to 
archaeology introducing a program of cataloguing and conservation 
of ancient monuments and artefacts . 
	 •	Marshall initiated the practice of permitting Indians to participate in 
excavations in their own country . His work gave evidence of the age 
of Indian civilization especially Indus Valley Civilization and the 
Mauryan age . He directly shaped the course of Indian archaeology . 
	 •	In 1944 , Mortimer Wheelar was appointed the Director-General of ASI . 
He first argued the basic necessity of scientific aids in archaeology in 
India . He emphasized the need of careful archaeological planning . 
•	Wheelar also introduced there for the first time the importance of 
the study of stratified ceramic material for determining the cultural 
succession at excavated sites and its importance in comparative study 
of material between different sites . 
•	He gave field training in his methods to a large number of Indian 
students and wrote many articles on the excavation methods . He 
introduced effective participation by the universities in archaeological 
research . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 91
Archaeology in 
India-III
•	He also developed the use of a Cartesian coordinate system , or threedimensional grid , with which the materials found in archaeological 
excavations , could be recorded . 
•	Robert Bruce Foote was a British geologist and archaeologist who 
conducted geological surveys of prehistoric sites in India for the 
Geological Survey of India . 
•	Foote ’ s explorations in south India was a turning point , from where 
branched off the twin-fields of prehistory and geology . Professor H . D . 
Sankalia began from where Foote had left Indian prehistory . 
•	The high point in the history of Archaeological Survey of India was 
the discovery of Indus Valley sites at Harappa by Rai Bahadur Daya 
Ram Sahni in 1921 and at Mohenjo-Daro by Rakhal Das Banerjee in 
1922 . These two sites are still considered to be the core sites of the 
vast spread of Indus Valley Civilization . 
•	Most of what we know about the Indus Valley Civilization comes to us 
from the excavation of city type sites . Many of the ancient structures 
at Harappa were damaged as there was a requirement of strong bricks 
by the railways . In contrast , Mohenjo-Daro was far better preserved . 
•	Many buildings and artefacts found at Harappa were indicative of an 
ancient civilization . 
•	John Marshall tended to excavate the town of Mohenjo-Daro along 
regular horizontal units , ignoring the stratigraphy of the site . 
•	Thus , valuable information about the context of these finds was 
irretrievably lost . However , Sir Mortimer Wheelar rectified this 
problem . 
•	Significant ancient remains have been discovered at Dwarka , both 
on land as well as under water by the Underwater Archaeology Wing 
( UAW ) of the ASI . 
•	The first archaeological excavations at Dwaraka were conducted by the 
Deccan College , Pune and the Department of Archaeology , Government 
of Gujarat , in 1963 under the direction of H . D . Sankalia . 
•	It revealed artefacts which were many centuries old . The UAV of 
the ASI conducted a second round of excavations in 1979 under the 
supervision of Dr S . R . Rao . 
•	Many underwater explorations were carried out between 1998 and 
2001 which indicated a highly civilized city which must have existed 
at that site , which had great maritime links with many other countries
•	The purpose of the excavation was to be familiar with the antiquity of 
the site , on the basis of material evidence . 
Archaeology in 
India-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
92 Material
6 . 9 KEY WORDS
	 •	Grid-System : It is a system of rectangular excavation or sampling 
units laid over a site by strings and stakes . 
	 •	Mound : It is a mound is a heaped pile of earth , gravel , sand , rocks , or 
debris . 
	 •	Palaeolithic : It is something that relates to or denotes the early phase 
of the Stone Age , lasting about 2 . 5 million years , when primitive stone 
implements were used . 
	 •	Seal : It is a device for impressing characteristic marks into a soft 
surface , such as wet clay or wax , to indicate ownership or authenticity . 
	 •	Sonar : It is an acronym for Sound Navigation and Ranging . It is a 
system of detection of objects under water by emitting sound pulses 
and detecting or measuring their return after being reflected . 
	 •	Steatite : It refers to the mineral talc occurring in consolidated form , 
especially as soapstone . 
6 . 10 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Who initiated the practice of permitting Indians to participate in 
archaeological excavations in their own country ? 
2 . Who described the ruins of Harappa in 1842 in his Narrative of Various 
Journeys in Balochistan , Afghanistan , and the Punjab ? 
3 . Write a short note on the first archaeological excavations at Dwaraka . 
4 . Briefly discuss the excavations conducted by the archaeologists at 
Harappa and Mohenjodaro . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . Elaborate the contribution of Sir John Marshall in the development of 
archaeology in India . 
2 . Discuss the role played by Sir Mortimer Wheeler towards the Indian 
archaeology , 
3 . Examine why Robert Bruce Foote is regarded as the Father of Indian 
Prehistory ? 
4 . Discuss in detail the findings of the excavations conducted at Dwarka . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 93
Archaeology in 
6 . 11 FURTHER READINGS India-III
McIntosh , Jane . 2008 . The Ancient Indus Valley : New Perspectives . Santa 
Barbara : ABC-CLIO . 
William Clark , Ronald . 1960 . Sir Mortimer Wheeler . New York : Roy 
Publishers
Raymond Allichin , Richard ( ed .  ) 1995 . The Archaeology of Early Historic 
South Asia : The Emergence of Cities and States . New York : Cambridge 
University Press
D . K . Chakrabarti . 2004 . Indus Civilization Sites in India : New Discoveries . 
Mumbai : Marg Publications . 
Lal , BB . 1998 . India 1947–1997 : New Light on the Indus Civilization . New 
Delhi : Aryan Books International . 
Shikaripura Ranganatha Rao . 1991 . Dawn and Devolution of the Indus 
Civilization . New Delhi : Aditya Prakashan . 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
94 Material
UNIT 7 ARCHAEOLOGY IN 
TAMIL NADU-I
Structure 
7 . 0 Introduction
7 . 1 Objectives 
7 . 2 Prehistoric Sites
7 . 2 . 1 Arikamedu
7 . 2 . 2 Adichanallur
7 . 3 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
7 . 4 Summary
7 . 5 Key Words
7 . 6 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
7 . 7 Further Readings
7 . 0 INTRODUCTION
The core region for the emergence of civilization in the South was the modern 
Tamil Nadu area . In the centuries preceding the Christian era , the Tamils 
composed the Sangam literature in which they refer to affluent towns and 
cities . However , the lack of proper exploration and excavation in this area 
leaves many gaps in our knowledge about the process of the emergence of the 
urban centres in this region . Excavations have been conducted in places like 
Urayur , Kaveripattinam and Korkai , Arikamedu , Adichanallur and others . 
Excavations and explorations in Tamil Nadu have been carried out both in 
the pre-and post-Independence days . The archaeologists have deciphered a 
number of facts about the socio-cultural life that prevailed in the bygone era . 
Relics found in these sites consolidate the fact that the people belonging to 
this region were highly adept in artistry whereas the architectural remains 
exhibit the blend of different architectural styles . This unit will deal with the 
archaeology of two important sites of Arikamedu and Adichanallur . 
7 . 1 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Understand the history of excavations , chronology , stratigraphy , 
locations of artefacts and structures of Arikamedu
	 •	Describe the excavations conducted in two phases in Adichanallur
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 95
Archaeology in 
7 . 2 PREHISTORIC SITES Tamil Nadu-I
Let us discuss some of the prehistoric sites that have been excavated in the 
southern region of India . 
7 . 2 . 1 Arikamedu
The site of Arikamedu is situated on the Coromandel Coast of India , 4 km 
south of Pondicherry , within the Union Territory of Pondicherry . The French 
astronomer Guillaume Le Gentil , who visited Pondicherry , makes the earliest 
mention of Arikamedu . He considered the ruins to be the remains of an ancient 
town or large village which , according to the local residents was known as 
Virampattinam . The historical importance of Arikamedu and its connection 
with the Roman Empire was first recognized by Jouveau-Dubreuil , who had 
started collecting artefacts from the surface of the mound and the river bank as 
early as 1937 . His identification of the Arikamedu site with Poduke emporium 
mentioned in the Periplus of Erythrean Sea is accepted by historians ; thus , 
the name Poduke , perhaps deriving from Tamil Puducheri , meaning new 
hamlet ( the origin of the name Pondicherry )  , must have been in vogue at the 
time of the Periplus . Since the meaning of the Tamil word puducheri means 
a new settlement or , at least a change , it has been suggested that the name 
Puducheri was perhaps given when the settlement was transformed from a 
small village into a centre of commerce . 
Many French and Indian scholars also visited the site of Arikamedu . 
Between 1941 and 1944 , excavations were conducted by French scholars on 
a small-scale under the direction of L . Faucheux and R . Sarleau . They plotted 
two grids , oriented north-south which are regarded as the most significant 
areas for excavations . Parts of the site were also declared protected by the 
French Government . These excavations were published later on . 
However , the most outstanding excavations were carried out by 
Mortimer Wheeler , the Director General of Archaeological Survey of 
India , in 1945 . His excavations at Arikamedu were the most widely known 
partly because of the methodology adopted by him , and partly because of 
the publicity given to the excavations by Wheeler himself in his numerous 
publications . Wheeler ’ s important contribution at Arikamedu was the 
preparation of a contour map of the site and the surrounding area . J . M . Casal 
continued excavations here in 1947 and obtained extremely important data 
but unfortunately his work largely went unnoticed . After a comprehensive 
review of archaeological work at Arikamedu , Vimala Begley started fresh 
excavations between 1989 and 1992 which revealed many new types of 
artefacts and structures . All these discoveries proved that the site was first 
occupied during the second century BC . An underwater survey was also 
conducted by a team of archaeologists from the ASI in 2002 . This survey 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
96 Material
found that impact of erosion on the site and the original extent of the site was 
beyond the present limits . Excavations at Arikamedu have brought to light 
the existence of small and large industries during the Pre- Roman period . 
Large number of shells , beads and pottery clearly indicated the existence of 
indigenous craft traditions before the arrival of Romans . Megalithic sites 
in the Gingee , Vaigai-Tamrapami and Kaveri valleys support the economic 
activity at Arikamedu . 1
Wheeler dated Arikamedu with the help of imported pottery viz .  , 
Arretine Ware and amphora from the Mediterranean . The use of amphora 
indicates that the Indians had developed a taste for foreign wine . He found 
that nearly all the excavated structures were constructed in the post of the 
Arretine ware period which showed that the site came to be occupied during 
the first two centuries AD . The presence of Celadon Ware and Chola coins 
of eleventh century AD indicated that the site was occupied for a long time . 
Excavations conducted later on brought to light evidence of trade with the 
Mediterranean between third to seventh century AD , as well as occupation 
during the Chola period and contact with Southeast Asia through trade . The 
evidence of Celadon Ware evidently supports the assumption that ships from 
India were engaged in trade with China . It is most likely that the site lost its 
importance due to the formation of sand bar at the mouth of Ariyankuppam 
River in the fourteenth century , which resulted in blockage of the entry of 
ships to the river , and this important port was abandoned . 2
The entire site of Arikamedu was divided in two parts by Wheeler—the 
northern sector and southern sector . The nature and date of the structures 
discovered in these two sectors also showed variation . The structures 
discovered at Arikamedu were made of bricks . The northern sector had a 
warehouse which was built in 50 AD on the foreshore of the estuary on which 
apparently timber buildings had already stood . The debris of port penetrated 
into it . The brickwork with mud mortar had tough plaster outside to keep out 
water on this low-lying site which must have been vulnerable to flooding 
and was abandoned at an early date . The warehouse was used for working 
precious and semi-precious stones and exporting it to Rome . 
The southern sector was occupied for about a century . The site 
continued to be occupied till 200 AD . Prominent structures built in the 
southern sector were two walled courtyards , with carefully built dyeing vat 
tanks supplied and drained by a series of brick culverts . Widespread use of 
drain , considerable pavements of large bricks and the absence of domestic 
features suggest its use for industrial purposes . Excavators speculated that 
these tanks and courtyards were used in the preparation of the muslin cloth . 
In addition to this , excavations carried out by French scholars and Wheeler 
revealed numerous other small and fragmentary structures . Some of these 
1 
2 Ibid
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 97
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I fragmentary structures were drains constructed by means of corbelled walls , 
floored and roofed with horizontal bricks , a number of fragmentary walls , 
patches of brick floor , a fragmentary square or oblong structure of uncertain 
purpose , blocks of brickworks and pavements , ring-well or soak-pit built of 
pottery rings . 3
Stratigraphy in the southern and northern sectors also differs . Due 
to haphazard digging and extensive damage caused to it , the stratigraphic 
sequence is not clear . In the southern sector natural soil was found at 3m . 
above the sea level . It was out of reach of flood . Habitation started here later 
but continued after the abandonment of northern sector . The cultural deposits 
were divided into three main phases- Early Middle and Late which were 
further divided in sub-periods . 
In spite of numerous excavations over the past many years there are no 
satisfactory answers to a number of questions regarding origin , development 
and extension of this town , chronology , ancient port , trade mechanism , etc . 
How and why Arikamedu became an important centre of commerce on the 
Coromandal Coast needs to be explained . The excavations were carried out 
in limited area with limited aims . Barring two structures , the other structures 
discovered were fragmentary in nature . Some of the areas excavated by 
Wheeler and Casal have suffered a great deal of damage . Additional , how 
Arikamedu was related to inland interior settlements and what type of political 
or economic organization may have governed the location of the port needs 
to be explained . 
Artefacts discovered from Arikamedu can be found in various museums 
and private collections across the world . Perhaps , no other site can claim the 
distinction of having its artefacts spread among a large number of individuals 
and institutions . Some of Jouveau-Dubreuil ’ s collection are kept in the 
Government Museum at Egmore , Chennai . A few of the early finds by the 
French have been kept in the State Government museums in Bangalore and 
Hyderabad in South India and some were sent to the French Museum at Hanoi 
and Louvre Museum in Paris . Some of the materials from these excavations 
have been lost . A major chunk of the material from Wheeler ’ s excavation 
is in the collection of the ASI at Purana Qila in New Delhi while others are 
in the collection of Institute of Archaeology , London and British Museum , 
London . The materials discovered during the excavations conducted V . 
Begley ’ s team is with ASI , Chennai . A small collection of Arikamedu objects 
is in the Aurobindo Ashram Library at Pondicherry . 4
The history of Arikamedu can be reconstructed by gathering information 
from archaeological and literary sources . The discovery of stone axes with 
pointed butts suggested a Neolithic settlement at the site . The use of such 
3 Ibid
4 Ibid
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
98 Material
stone hand-axes was prevalent during later periods was also known in many 
other South Indian sites . Archaeological evidence suggests that the site was 
first occupied on a regular basis around the late third century or early second 
century BC . This period belongs to the Late Iron Age or Megalithic Age in 
South India . The earliest occupancy was in the Southern sector and not in 
the Northern sector . Fishing and bead-making were important occupations 
of this community . 
Probably , trade with Mediterranean started around the second century 
BC . But trade was at its height from the mid-first century BC to mid- first 
century AD . During this period , the site may have been a part of the Sangam 
Chola Kingdom with its capital at Uraiyur . A square copper coin of this 
dynasty has been found during the excavations at Arikamedu . Alternatively , 
Arikamedu would have been a part of the territory of the Malaiyaman 
chieftain who controlled the regions close to Arikamedu with their capital 
at Tirukoilur . Or else , the Velir chieftains ruled the region . Perhaps , each of 
these dynasties controlled Arikamedu , one after the other . 
During that period , both the Northern and Southern sectors were 
inhabited , probably by different ethnic communities . There was continuous 
interaction between the occupants of the two sectors . Gradually the site 
evolved into an urban industrial centre where different types of pottery , beads , 
ivory artefacts and textiles were manufactured . The industrial area extended 
over both the sectors . The Southern sector was also the main market place . 
However , the port was located in the northernmost part of the Northern 
sector . The settlement of Roman and other foreign traders and merchants 
was located in this sector . 
The quantity of Mediterranean artefacts is much larger in northern than 
in the southern sector . Trade declined towards the end of the first century 
AD probably as a result of changes in the pattern of trade and trade routes . 
However , the settlement continued and new buildings were erected between 
the third and sixth centuries AD . Gradually , the power of the Sangam Cholas 
and Malaiyamans declined and Arikamedu would have been under the control 
of the Pallava dynasty that ruled this region with its capital at Kanchipuram . 
During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries , Arikamedu was a part of the 
Chola Empire . From the Cholas , it may have passed on to the Vijayanagar 
Empire which emerged as a major power in South India from 1336 to 1565 
AD . Chola coins , pottery and mud lamps have been frequently found at 
Arikamedu . 
The site appears to have again emerged as an international trade centre 
during this period . The Chinese ceramics and coins discovered at the site 
indicate that the site had brisk trade with China . Arikamedu port has also 
been mentioned in a Medieval Chinese text . The occurrence of Persian blue 
glazed pottery in Arikmedu testifies its contact with Persia . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 99
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I Perhaps , the site was deserted sometime in the sixteenth -seventeenth 
centuries . There are references to brick-robbing at the site . At the close of the 
18th century , after the French conquest of the area , Arikamedu was reoccupied 
for a short period of time . Between 1771 and 1773 , a seminary and residence 
was constructed for the Jesuit missionaries . The seminary , however , was 
abandoned in 1783 . The locals mention the ruined seminary as the ‘ Mission 
House ’  . Many other buildings were constructed during this period . 
The history of Arikamedu appears vaguer during the nineteenth 
and early twentieth century . Large portions of the site came to be used 
for agricultural purposes during this period . Coconut , Mango and Tapioca 
were cultivated . Cultivation never stopped even after the archaeological 
importance of the site was recognized and some portions of the site were 
declared as protected area . French rule in Pondicherry ended in 1954 . The 
entire Pondicherry region including Arikamedu now joined the Republic of 
India . From that time onwards , Arikamedu has been a protected site of the 
Archaeological Survey of India . 5
7 . 2 . 2 Adichanallur
Adichanallur is an archaeological site located in the Thoothukudi district 
in southern Tamil Nadu and is 15 km away from Korkai , the capital of the 
early Pandyan Kingdom . The town is locally known as Aathichanallur , and 
has been the site of numerous significant archaeological finds . It has been 
an active playground of archaeologists and anthropologists for more than 
150 years . The urn-burial site was brought to light when a German explorer , 
Andreas Fedor Jagor , conducted a random excavation at the place in 1876 . 
At that point of time , he unearthed number of bones , iron artefacts , burial 
urns , and copper objects . An Englishman called Alexander Rea , who was the 
Superintending Archaeologist , excavated the urn-burial site between 1889 
and 1905 . In his article titled ‘ Prehistoric antiquities in Tinnevelly ’  , published 
in the Archaeological Survey of India ’ s annual report in 1902-03 , Rea called 
the Adichanallur site ‘ the most extensive prehistoric site as yet discovered 
in southern if not in the whole of India .  ’ A Frenchman called Louis Lapique 
had also conducted an excavation in 1904 . 
After a gap of 100 years T . Satyamurthy , the Director of Chennai Circle 
of the ASI , started the excavation of Adichanallur in February 2004 . It was 
an extraordinarily large urn-burial site spread over 114 acres on a low , rocky 
hillock on the bank of River Tamiraparani . The first phase of excavation in 
2004 was conducted between February 4 and July 5 . In the six trenches that 
were dug then , the ASI ran into a range of spectacular finds . Each trench was 
a square , 10 metres by 10 metres . 
5 Ibid
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
100 Material
Six trenches yielded a total of 157 burial urns , 57 of them undamaged 
and 15 with complete human skeletons inside . Many of the urns , particularly 
those that contained human skeletons , were covered with another urn , in what 
is called a ‘ twin-pot ’ system . They had been buried after cutting the rock in 
circular pits , into which the urns were lowered in a three-tier formation . The 
earliest burials formed the lowermost tier , which left enough space above to 
accommodate future burials . 
Among the artefacts discovered at the burial site were a large number 
of red ware , black ware , black-and-red ware , copper bangles , copper earrings , iron spear-heads , terracotta lids with tiered knobs , terracotta vessels 
that could be used both as lids and as bowls , globular vessels and long-necked 
utensils . There were vases , pots with beautiful decorations , broken daggers 
and iron swords . There were also Neolithic celts , iron implements , urns with 
clan marks and urns with hooks inside . 
The urns with skeletons had empty miniature vessels , rice , paddy and 
husk inside them . There were three types of miniature vessels : bowls , small 
vases and pots . They were made of polished blackware and were thought to 
have some religious significance . These small vessels invariably had their 
lids on . The painted lids were decorated with dotted , floral or geometrical 
designs . Some lids had tiered knobs that looked like chess pieces . One urn 
contained the skeletons of a mother and a child . Some skulls had disintegrated , 
the bones had become fragile . Some urns were broken , and were filled with 
earth , evidently the handiwork of treasure-hunters . Three copper bangles and 
some copper chisels were also discovered at the site . 
Outside , around the urns , red ware bigger pots , iron implements , 
knives , daggers , spearheads and Neolithic celts used in farming were found . 
Some pots rested on ring stands of different shapes . The lids were differently 
shaped - conical , globular , and so on . More than a thousand undamaged potvessels were unearthed . A number of terracotta beads in conical shape and 
hop-scotches were found . Urns with clan or tribe marks were also discovered . 
The clan marks included three lines separating out from the top , with knobs , 
and garland-like designs . A few ornamented urns were also found . 
Satyamurthy regarded the Adichanallur burial site as the earliest site in 
Tamil Nadu and was confident of its antiquity . He considered it to be as old as 
1000 B . C . According to archaeologists , the Iron Age in South India extended 
between 1000 B . C . and 300 B . C . The Iron Age and the megalithic age were 
contemporaneous in South India . The Iron Age indicates the beginning of 
civilization . 
The major attraction of these discoveries is the potsherd with dramatic 
motifs . It was found inside an urn which had a human skeleton . At the centre 
of the motifs is a tall , slender woman with prominent breasts and wearing a 
knee-length dress . Her hands are clinging to her sides and the palms seem 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 101
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I to be spread out . Next to her is a sheaf of standing paddy , a crane sitting on 
the paddy stalk , a deer with straight horns and so on . 6 Satyamurthy called 
the potsherd ‘ a unique find because no such motifs have been found so far in 
burial sites in Tamil Nadu . These motifs resemble pre-historic cave paintings 
found in central Tamil Nadu , including Erode and Dharmapuri districts .  ’ 
There is a general consensus among the archaeologists that the depiction of 
the woman signifies the mother-goddess / fertility cult . 
G . Thirumoorthy , Assistant Archaeologist of ASI , Chennai Circle said , 
 ‘ Adichanallur shows the importance given to the dead in Tamil society . The 
excavation reveals the mode of burial practice , the disposal of the dead , the 
religious beliefs prevalent then , and the socio-economic conditions of the 
people who lived here at that time .  ’ The people of Adichanallur used a creative 
method to bury their dead . Thirumoorthy pointed out that these megalithic 
people were intelligent and had foresight because they buried their dead in 
barren land and not in agricultural land . Apart from this , the urns were buried 
on a hillock , where they could not be flooded by the nearby river or the lake . 
When the ASI started its excavation at Adichanallur , it had two 
intentions . First , to establish the date of the site and second , to locate the 
place where the people who used the burial site lived . Satyamurthy said ,  ‘ Our 
main aim is to study the site , excavate it thoroughly and give a scientific date 
to it , using the Carbon-14 dating method . We want to know the chronology 
or the sequence of the site and find out the nature of the culture that existed 
then . Another aim is to find out whether there was a habitational site nearby .  ’ 
The second phase of excavation , which started in February 2005 , is 
presently under way on the north and north-western slopes of the urn-burial 
site . If the aim of this excavation was to locate the habitational site of the 
people whose bodies were buried a few hundred metres away , it has succeeded 
in that objective . ASI archaeologists Nambi Rajan , Aravazhi , Arun Malik , A . 
Anil Kumar and C . R . Gayathri are among those taking part in this excavation . 
So far six trenches have been excavated . 
The excavation has revealed the town ’ s fortification / rampart wall , 
which was composed of mud with stone layer in parts . Three potters ’ kilns 
with ash , charcoal and broken pots were discovered which established that 
this was a habitational site . Nambi Rajan said the trenches revealed a manmade floor paved with lime plaster . There were holes on the floor to hold 
posts . A few individual letters in Tamil-Brahmi ( Tamizhi ) script have been 
found on potsherds . 
Some specialists believe that Adichanallur must have been a busy 
mining and industrial centre . The making of bronze figurines , iron implements 
such as swords , daggers and arrow-heads and big urns showed that it was 
a busy industrial township . M . D . Sampath , a retired Director , Epigraphy , 
6 The Hindu , Sunday , April 3 , 2005
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
102 Material
ASI , Mysore , said ,  ‘ The excavated objects at Adichanallur are valuable in 
the sense that a study of the finds will reveal a new vista to know the growth 
and culture of Tamil society , and how this society achieved literacy .  ’ 7
Check Your Progress
1 . Where is the site of Arikamedu located ? 
2 . Name the French astronomer who made the earliest mention of 
Arikamedu . 
3 . Who started the excavation of Adichanallur in 2004 ? 
4 . What is the twin pot system ? 
7 . 3 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . The site of Arikamedu is situated on the Coromandel Coast of India , 4 
km south of Pondicherry , within the Union Territory of Pondicherry . 
2 . Guillaume Le Gentil was the French astronomer who made the earliest 
mention of Arikamedu . 
3 . After a gap of 100 years T . Satyamurthy , the Director of Chennai Circle 
of the ASI , started the excavation of Adichanallur in February 2004 . 
4 . Many of the urns discovered at Adichanallur , particularly those that 
contained human skeletons , were covered with another urn and this 
was called a ‘ twin-pot ’ system . 
7 . 4 SUMMARY
	 •	Tamil Nadu was the core region for the emergence of civilization in 
the South . So far many sites have been excavated in Tamil Nadu before 
and after independence . 
	 •	The prehistoric site of Arikamedu in Pondicherry has been referred by 
Ptolemy in his ‘ Geography ’  . The historical importance of Arikamedu 
and its connection with the Roman Empire was first recognized by 
Jouveau-Dubreuil . However , Wheelar conducted the most extensive 
excavation of the site . 
	 •	The archaeological finds show that Arikamedu was once a considerable 
town with a warehouse , textile manufactory and several bead-making 
establishments . 
7 Frontline , Volume 22 - Issue 13 , Jun 18 - Jul 01 , 2005
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 103
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I
	 •	A kind of red-glazed pottery presumably manufactured in Italy , Roman 
lamps and glasswares , the Mediterranean type amphorae are amongst 
the objects discovered which testifies that Arikamedu was an emporium 
of western trade . 
	 •	Archaeology confirms the evidence of literature . The discovery of 
 ‘ Roman Factory ’ at Arikamedu confirms the correctness of the date 
suggested for the Sangam Age . 
	 •	Arikamedu has also yielded a small number of Chinese Celadon wares 
which confirms its brisk trade with China . 
	 •	Adichanallur is an archaeological site located in Thoothukudi district 
in southern Tamil Nadu . The town is locally known as Aathichanallur , 
and has been the site of numerous significant archaeological finds . It 
has been an active playground of archaeologists and anthropologists 
for more than 150 years . 
•	Four excavations in Adichanallur---by a German ( Andreas Fedor )  , a 
Frenchmen ( Louis Lapique )  , the British ( Alexander Rea )  , and finally 
by Indians—have unearthed hundreds of burial urns , most of them 
several thousand years old , along with skeleton remains and thousands 
of iron and bronze artifacts , including weapons and gold jewellery . 
	 •	Adichanallur has attracted nationwide attention for three important 
findings : an inscription in a rudimentary Tamil-Brahmi ( Tamizhi )  ; a 
potsherd with dramatic motifs ; and the remains of living quarters . 
7 . 5 KEY WORDS
	 •	Amphora : It was a particular pottery used by the Romans for exporting 
wine . 
	 •	Clan : It means a group of people from many lineages who live in one 
place and have a common line of descent , usually under one chieftain . 
	 •	Motif : It refers to a decorative image or design , especially a repeated 
one forming a pattern . 
	 •	Potsherds : It can be defined as broken pieces of ceramic or pottery 
artefacts including storage and cooking vessels , building material and 
occasionally tools and furniture . They are common to nearly every 
digging site . 
	 •	Terracotta : It is a type of fired clay , typically of a brownish-red colour 
and unglazed , used as an ornamental building material and in modelling . 
	 •	Trench : It is a term used to refer to an excavation unit , especially when 
the length is longer than the width . 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
104 Material
7 . 6 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Briefly explain the chronology and structures discovered at Arikamedu . 
2 . Discuss the stratigraphy and location of artefacts of Arikamedu . 
3 . Describe the artefacts discovered from Adichanallur . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . Discuss the excavations conducted at Arikamedu by different 
archaeologists . 
2 . Discuss the history of archaeological excavations conducted at the site 
of Adichanallur . 
7 . 7 FURTHER READINGS
Champakalakshmi , R . 1996 . Trade , Ideology and Urbanization . Delhi : 
Oxford University Press . 
Gurukkal , R . 2010 . Social Formations of Early South India . Delhi : Oxford 
University Press . 
Rajan , K . 1994 . Archaeology of Tamil Nadu ( Kongu Country )  . Delhi : Book 
India Publishing Co . 
Allchin Bridget and Raymond Allchin . 1988 . The Rise of Civilization in India 
and Pakistan . London : Cambridge University Press . 
Chakrabarti , Dilip K . 2006 . The Oxfords Companion to Indian Archaeology , 
The Archaeological Foundation of Ancient India . Oxford : Oxford 
University Press . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 105
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II UNIT 8 ARCHAEOLOGY IN 
TAMIL NADU-II
Structure 
8 . 0 Introduction
8 . 1 Objectives 
8 . 2 Prehistoric Sites
8 . 2 . 1 Uraiyur
8 . 2 . 2 Kaveripattinam
8 . 3 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
8 . 4 Summary
8 . 5 Key Words
8 . 6 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
8 . 7 Further Readings
8 . 0 INTRODUCTION
Five ancient cities in composite Tiruchi district—Alagarai , Tirukkampuliyur , 
Woraiyur ( Uraiyur )  , Karur ( Kaveripattinam ) and Gangaikondacholapuram— 
were excavated in the past . While the first three were excavated by the 
Department of Ancient History and Archaeology , University of Madras and 
the last two by the State Department of Archaeology . The Sangam texts 
mention the dual centres of Chola power—Uraiyur and Kaveripattinam-
-which were located in the Kaveri valley . Uraiyur , at present is a part of 
Tiruchirapalli town and was the ancient Chola capital . Descriptions in 
the texts indicate that it was a very well-defended city , however . no such 
structures have been recovered . Kaveripattinam , located near the mouth of 
river Kaveri and identified with Puhar was a port town and commercial capital 
of the Cholas . Excavations do not reveal relics of the level of magnitude and 
splendour mentioned in the texts . However , certain finds are of significance . 
The excavation of these two sites is discussed in the unit . 
8 . 1 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Understand the archaeological importance of Uraiyur
	 •	Describe the significance of Kaveripattinam in archaeology
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
106 Material
8 . 2 PREHISTORIC SITES
Let us begin this unit by discussing the prehistoric site of Uraiyur . 
8 . 2 . 1 Uraiyur
Uraiyur is located in Tiruchirapalli in the south Indian state of Tamil Nadu . 
It was the capital of the early Chola Empire . It has a history dating back to 
before 2nd century BC . There is definite mention of the Cholas and their 
capital in Ashokan inscriptions in Orissa pushing back the antiquity of the 
Cholas as well as Uraiyur to 272–232 BC . Inscriptions and rock edicts of 
Ashoka and the Satavahanas describe Uraiyur as ‘ the citadel and centre of 
the Cholas ’  . Uraiyur was ruled by Karikala Chola . 
The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea mentions Uraiyur as a trading centre . 
This text uses the term ‘ Aragaru ’ which is a Greco-Roman name for Uraiyur . 
It was a port at which all the pearls from the pearl fisheries of Korkai in 
Tutukudi were gathered . 1 
Ptolemy speaks of ‘ Orthura Regiasornati ’  , which 
is identified as Uraiyur . The account of the foreigners also corroborates 
that Uraiyur was a prosperous city in the ancient time and its importance 
contributed Tiruchirappalli developed gradually into a big town later . The 
local Purana or history mentions a story of the destruction of Uraiyur by a 
shower of sand . Now , Uraiyur is a suburb of Tiruchirappalli , which is a very 
important town in Tamil Nadu . 
Even though it appears that Uraiyur was a very big city with large 
palaces and a thriving population , there is negligible archaeological evidence 
to support this hypothesis . Epigraphy and numismatics from this period are 
completely missing , which leaves us with only the vivid imagination of 
ancient poets to rely on . But the questions arises why haven ’ t we found any 
remnants of a rich kingdom at Uraiyur . The Archaeological Survey of India 
was busy with decoding hundreds of inscriptions across many temples in Tamil 
Nadu , and Uraiyur simply fell to the bottom of the list . The archaeologists 
reached Uraiyur in 1965 , by which time it was a densely populated suburb 
of Tiruchirappalli . A few open fields and school playgrounds were the only 
places to excavate for artefacts , but even those limited excavations were 
successful . Among the items discovered were pottery , terracotta human 
figurines , and small jewellery . Most amusingly , the remains of a brick dyeing 
vat were discovered , confirmed Uraiyur ’ s status as an ancient textile capital . 
Unfortunately , the survey was not very extensive because every available 
piece of land was built upon , probably burying all vestiges of an advanced 
ancient civilization . 
1 Vijaya Ramaswamy , 2017 ,  “ Historical Dictionary of the Tamils ”  , Rowman & Littlefield , 
p . 58
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 107
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II Uraiyur was the unsung capital of the early Cholas which never got 
the same recognition as the later capital , Thanjavur . Historians have placed 
the early Chola period roughly between 200 BC and 300 AD . The precise 
chronology of the early Chola period is vague because all information is based 
solely on literature and poetry . However , it is very apparent that Uraiyur was 
a booming trade centre on the banks of the river Kaveri and was frequently 
visited by Greeks and Romans . A number of Chola kings ruled from this 
city but Karikala stands out prominent . He is described in a poem as the 
descendent of a king who compelled the wind to serve his purposes when he 
sailed his ships on the wide ocean—possibly a reference to the early maritime 
enterprise of the Cholas . 2
When Karikala ’ s father Ilamchetchenni died , there was a war of 
succession as there were many who staked their claim to the throne . Someone 
plotted to kill Karikala by locking him in a room and setting it on fire . 
However , according to the legend , the young prince escaped with a charred 
leg and went on to become the king . Thus , Karikala means ‘ the man with a 
charred leg ’  . Other explanations for the name were invented later on and it 
had also been taken to be a compound word in Sanskrit meaning either ‘ death 
to Kali ’ or ‘ death to ( enemy ) elephants ’  . Although he started ruling at a very 
young age , he took complete control over the justice department , and he was 
the sole decision maker of all criminal cases . He gave a fair hearing , and 
used to announce an instant judgment , greatly speeding up the trial process . 
According to the legend he used to wear a white wig to make him look more 
mature ( and hence more capable ) in front of his ministers when he presided 
over such criminal trials . 
During those times poetry was one of the most cultured amusements 
of the upper classes . The poets were men and women from all classes of 
the society . They composed verses to suit the immediate occasion and were 
often rewarded generously . Karikala is said to have given 1 , 600 , 000 gold 
pieces to the author of Pattinappalai . His generosity spread and many poets 
settled in Uraiyur with the hopes of making quick money . A number of them 
succeeded , and this is reflected in the ancient literature , where several poets 
are addressed with the prefix ‘ Uraiyur ’  . 
Karikala maintained a powerful navy . He actively extended his empire 
using his navy by annexing Sri Lanka from where he brought nearly 12000 
prisoners of war whom he used to construct a huge embankment of 160 km 
called Kallanai ( literal translation- stone dam )  , a brilliant water regulation 
system that transformed Thanjavur into an agricultural hub . Many inscriptions 
have been discovered in northern Sri Lanka that supports the Chola 
inhabitation of the area . Although Raja Raja Chola , the most famous Chola 
2 K . A Nilakanta Sastri , 1976 ,  “ A History of South India : From Prehistoric Times to the 
Fall of Vijaynagar ”  , Fourth Edition , Madras , Oxford University Press , p . 124
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
108 Material
King ( 985-1014 AD )  , gets all the credit for expanding the empire to SouthEast Asia , the achievements of Karikala are unfortunately often overlooked . 
After Karikala , the Chola Empire faced confusion and chaos . The 
successors were quite weak and family members fought for power and 
position . Kopperunjolan was another renowned Chola king who also ruled 
from Uraiyur . It is said that there was a serious quarrel between Kopperunjolan 
and his two sons and the king ultimately committed suicide , along with his 
friend and poet Andai . 
The strategic location of Uraiyur ’ s near the Kaveri River made it an 
international trade centre that was frequently visited by Greeks and Romans . 
The river provided an ideal means of transportation . Small boats carried 
merchandise out of Uraiyur to the legendary port city of Kaveripattinam 
on the Bay of Bengal , where the long-distance international ships were 
stationed . Textiles fabrics from the Chola kingdom were in great demand in 
different countries . Uraiyur ’ s muslin cloth ( called Argaritic by the Greeks ) 
was considered to be the finest in the world , and was the preferred fabric of 
the Greek upper class . The muslin was made very cheaply from the cotton 
that grew around present-day Karur , and then sold at very high rates to foreign 
traders , thereby generating a lot of revenue for the Chola Empire . Apart 
from muslin , spices and incense were the other items sold . The extensive 
international trade further paved the way for Uraiyur to become a flourishing 
city of early Indian history . 
Under the Cholas , Uraiyur remained as the major seat of textile industry 
and remained so even after the transfer of capital to Kaveripattinam . Spinning 
and weaving of cotton and perhaps also of silk had attained a high degree 
of perfection . The weaving of complex patterns on cloth and silk are often 
mentioned in literature . According to Periplus , Uraiyur was a great centre 
of the cotton trade . 3 
The muslin manufactured at Uraiyur was specially 
praised by the Roman writers . Excavations conducted at Uraiyur brought 
to light a brick built dying vat used for dying cotton textiles . As mentioned 
earlier Uraiyur , the suburb of Tiruchirappalli was known from the ancient 
past as a trade metropolis , where traders and merchants from different parts 
of the country and even beyond had assembled and collected products both 
for inland trade and for external distribution . The rich surroundings and 
availability of exportable surplus of cotton materials , and handicraft items 
encouraged foreign trade through the famous seaport at Kaveripattinam . 
8 . 2 . 2 Kaveripattinam
Kaveripattinam ( also called as Pumpuhar or Puhar ) was a major Chola port 
in the ancient times . According to the legends , it had to face the wrath of 
the sea . The contemporary Chola king who was anguished by the death of 
3 Ibid , p . 142
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 109
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II his son , had forgotten to celebrate the annual festival of Lord Indra . This 
infuriated the Gods and caused the destruction of the city by the sea in 300 
BC as described in the famous epic Manimekalai by Chithalai Chatanar . 
However , excavations in the region indicate that there might have been a 
major natural calamity such as periodic sediment erosion or deadly tsunamis 
that had led to the destruction of the city . Thought the remains of the city 
have been discovered in the archaeological excavations we have to rely on 
written accounts to understand the life of the people of that region . 
Old texts refer to Kaveripattinam as Khaberis or Camara . Its details 
have been read in the Brahmi-inscription dating back to the second century 
BC in ‘ Barkuth ’ of north India . It has been described in Periplus of the 
Erythraean Sea , a travelogue by an anonymous merchant written during 
the first century AD . It has provided a brief on the Chola kingdom and its 
towns , ports and trading centres . The famous Greek geographer , Ptolemy 
in his work Geographia describes Kaveripattinam as a well-planned city . 
An entire Sangam text named Pattinappalai has described Kaveripattinam . 
There is a description of its two bustling markets laid out between the two 
sectors of the city , protected by officers of the king , and to its inhabitants 
who spoke different languages . Kaveripumpattinam has been identified with 
Kaveripattinam which is a small fishing village on the Coromandel Coast ( East 
coast )  , located at the point where the Kaveri flows into the Bay of Bengal . The 
author of epic Silappadikaram refers to Kaveripattinam as a Mahanagaram , 
a great city and a busy port where horses were brought by the ships ; bags of 
pepper were brought by carts ; gemstones and gold was imported from the 
northern mountains ; pearls were brought from the southern seas and wheat 
from the Gangetic region . 
The historical details of Kaveripattinam have also been found in the 
inscriptions of Sayavanam Temple located at Kaveripattinam . The ancient 
kings like Musugundam , Sembiyan , Manuneethi Chola and Karikal Chola who 
carried myths with them , added to the glory of the town of Kaveripattinam . 
It grew into a great city during the reign of Karikal Chola . Even after 
Sangam Chola ’ s period Kaveripattinam occupied a significant place during 
the regime of Kalabras . In the 6th century AD , it came under the Pallava 
rulers and during that time the Pallavaneeswaran temple was built by them . 
With the rise of later Cholas in 850 AD the city regained its past glory . It is 
mentioned as “ Rajathiraja Valanaattu Nangoor Naattu Kaveripoompattinam ” 
in the Sayavanam temple inscription of Vikrama Cholan in the same temple , 
calls the town ‘ Puhar Nagaram ’  . Later Kopperunchingan also contributed to 
the grandeur of the place . After the Sangam Chola period the Bay of Bengal 
swallowed a major part of Poompuhar town . Though Poompuhar became a 
prey of times , still a few small villages remain a silent witness to the cruelty 
of times . Thirusaikadu ( Sayavanam )  , Pallavaneeswaram , Melapperumpallam , 
Keelaperumpallam , Keezaiyur and Vanagiri are mortal remains of ancient 
Poompuhar . 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
110 Material
Since 1910 , excavations and explorations were carried out in 
Kaveripattinam along the coast of Tamil Nadu and certain areas in and around 
Karur . The archaeological department has discovered many ring-wells near 
the seashore . Puhar known to Ptolemy and Pliny was a planned city built 
over 2000 years ago . Excavations show an extent of planning that would 
make most modern planners envious . Remains of various buildings were 
found during the excavations . A wharf belonging to the 3rd century BC was 
excavated at Kaveripattinam in 1962-63 and a similar wharf was discovered 
in the subsequent excavation during 1997 . Different types of brick figures and 
copper coins were also found . The structural resemblance and their functional 
viability are studied . The existence of such wharves corroborates the plan of 
ancient Kaveripattinam , which is very well explained by the Pattinappalai . 
The study emphasizes the need for further extensive excavations along the 
course of the palaeo-channel to open up new outlook in the technology 
of marine structures of ancient Kaveripattinam . The National Institute of 
Oceanography , Goa and the Department of Archaeology of Tamil Nadu 
Government have carried out offshore exploration at the site and they have 
contributed a museum . 
Excavations conducted at Kaveripattinam reconstructed the history 
from the 3rd century BC to the 12th century AD , and recognized the growth 
of the settlement from a small village port with a simple dockyard made of 
wood and poles to a large and remarkable port city . Onshore excavations at 
the mouth of river Kaveri have resulted in the discovery of stone structures , 
large fragments of pottery belonging to the fourth and fifth century AD and 
terracotta ring wells . Ancient remains have been found in many nearby 
villages also . A semi-circular brick structure of an artificial channel that 
drew water from the Kaveri into a reservoir for the purpose of irrigation has 
been unearthed at Vanagiri . At Kilayur , archaeological exploration by a team 
led by K . V Sondurajan from 1971 to 1974 yielded copper coins with the 
tiger emblem . This was the royal crest of the early Cholas . Apart from this 
a T-shaped brick wharf was also discovered . The Tamil epic Manimekalai
describes the Buddhist monasteries and monks living in the area during the 
Pallava times . A 3rd century Buddhist temple and monastery have been found 
in the adjoining village of Pallavanesvaram . Numerous early medieval Chola 
coins found at Kaveripattinam indicates that it continued to be an important 
port in the later times as well . 4 
Deposits of Black-and-Red ware and Rouletted 
ware have been found at Manigramam in addition to terracotta figurines and 
Chola coins . The name Manigramam indicates the presence of a merchant 
quarter , bearing important implications for this coastal town that has been 
elaborately described in the texts . 
4 Upinder Singh , 2008 ,  “ A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India : From the Stone 
Age to the 12th Century ” Pearson Education India , p . 402
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 111
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II In 1981 , a joint team of the Department of Archaeology , Tamil Nadu 
and NIO , Goa carried out an underwater excavation offshore survey of 
Tranquebar . A shipwreck at a depth of 19m has been found at a place 5 km 
south of Kaveripattinam which is the first of its kind reported along the east 
coast of India . A thorough survey by using a metal detector indicated that 
the ship might have been 50m long and 15m wide . Later on airlift operations 
were conducted and it was found that the ship was made of wood . Large 
number of lead ingots dating back to 1791 and 1792 were discovered from 
the shipwreck . 
The explorations at Kaveripattinam comprised both visual ( diving ) 
and geophysical surveys . Diving aids in ascertaining the distribution of sites , 
condition of artefacts , their probable age and origin . It is only by diving that 
underwater documentation such as photography , videography and drawings 
are possible . These discoveries have aided the oceanographers to reconstruct 
the history of the Indian coastline . The NIO further intend to study the 
development of boat building and navigational technology by digging the 
underwater ports and sunken cities . 5
Check Your Progress
1 . Which text uses the term ‘ Aragaru ’ which is a Greco-Roman name 
for Uraiyur ? 
2 . What was Uraiyur ’ s muslin cloth called by the Greeks ? 
3 . What was the fate of Uraiyur after the Cholas transferred their capital 
to Kaveripattinam ? 
8 . 3 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Periplus of Erythrean Sea uses the term ‘ Aragaru ’ which is a GrecoRoman name for Uraiyur . 
2 . Uraiyur ’ s muslin cloth was called Argaritic by the Greeks . 
3 . Under the Cholas , Uraiyur remained as the major seat of textile industry 
and remained so even after the transfer of capital to Kaveripattinam . 
8 . 4 SUMMARY
	 •	Even though it appears that Uraiyur was a very big city with large 
palaces and a thriving population , there is negligible archaeological 
evidence to support this hypothesis . 
5 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
112 Material
	 •	The archaeologists were late to reach Uraiyur by which time it was a 
densely populated suburb of Tiruchirappalli . A few open fields and 
school playgrounds were the only places to excavate for artifacts , but 
even those limited excavations were successful . 
	 •	Among the items discovered were pottery , terracotta human figurines , 
and small jewellery . Most amusingly , the remains of a brick dyeing 
vat were discovered , confirmed Uraiyur ’ s status as an ancient textile 
capital . 
	 •	Unfortunately , the survey was not very extensive because every 
available piece of land was built upon , probably burying all vestiges 
of an advanced ancient civilization . 
	 •	The strategic location of Uraiyur ’ s near the Kaveri River made it an 
international trade centre that was frequently visited by Greeks and 
Romans . 
	 •	Under the Cholas , Uraiyur remained as the major seat of textile industry 
and remained so even after the transfer of capital to Kaveripattinam . 
Spinning and weaving of cotton and perhaps also of silk had attained 
a high degree of perfection . 
	 •	Kaveripattinam is a town in the Nagapattinam district in the southern 
Indian state of Tamil Nadu . It was once a flourishing ancient port city 
known as Kaveri poompattinam , which for some time was the capital 
of the early Chola kings in Tamilakam . 
	 •	Puhar is located near the end point of rive Kaveri , aside the sea coast . 
It is mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea . 
	 •	Marine archaeological research ( conducted by the National institute of 
marine archaeology , Goa ) has established that much of the town was 
washed away by progressive erosion and floods . 
	 •	In the 1960s and 70s archaeological researches were conducted under 
the leadership of the noted archaeologist Dr . K . V . Soundararajan . 
	 •	Long submerged wharves of pier walls excavated in recent times have 
corroborated the literary references to Kaveripattinam . It was rebuilt 
several times after that . Ancient pottery dating back to the 4th century 
BC has been discovered by marine archaeologists east of this town . 
8 . 5 KEY WORDS
	 •	Vat Dyeing : It is a process that refers to dyeing that occurs in a bucket 
or vat . Almost any dye can be used in a vat dye . Cotton , wool , leather 
and other fibres can be all dyed with vat dyes . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 113
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-II
	 •	Epigraphy : It refers to the study and interpretation of ancient 
inscriptions . 
	 •	Metropolis : It means a very large and busy city . 
	 •	Numismatics : It is the study or collection of currency , including coins , 
tokens , paper money , and related objects . 
8 . 6 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Briefly discuss how the Greeks described Uraiyur . 
2 . What is the story behind Karikala ’ s name ? 
Long Answer Questions
1 . Explain the significance of Uraiyur in an Archaeological sense . 
2 . Describe the archaeological excavations conducted at Kaveripattinam . 
8 . 7 FURTHER READINGS
Champakalakshmi , R . 1996 . Trade , Ideology and Urbanization . Delhi : Oxford 
University Press . 
Gurukkal , R . 2010 . Social Formations of Early South India . Delhi : Oxford 
University Press . 
Rajan , K . 1994 . Archaeology of Tamil Nadu ( Kongu Country )  . Delhi : Book 
India Publishing Co . 
Allchin Bridget and Raymond Allchin . 1988 . The Rise of Civilization in India 
and Pakistan . London : Cambridge University Press . 
Chakrabarti , Dilip K . 2006 . The Oxfords Companion to Indian Archaeology , 
The Archaeological Foundation of Ancient India . Oxford : Oxford 
University Press . 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
114 Material
BLOCK - III 
NEW EXCAVATION FIELDS
UNIT 9 ARCHAEOLOGY IN 
TAMIL NADU-III
Structure 
9 . 0 Introduction
9 . 1 Objectives 
9 . 2 Prehistoric Sites
9 . 2 . 1 Karur
9 . 2 . 2 Pallavaram
9 . 2 . 3 Kodumanal
9 . 2 . 4 Keezhdi
9 . 3 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
9 . 4 Summary
9 . 5 Key Words
9 . 6 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
9 . 7 Further Readings
9 . 0 INTRODUCTION
As you may have learnt through our discussion in the previous units , the 
history of Tamil Nadu can be traced from the pre-historic period to the 
historic period . Archaeological sites in Tamil Nadu include those places 
which have observed the growth and decline of ancient civilizations and 
houses the remnants of the same . The Archaeological Survey of India has 
conducted extensive excavations in these regions and deciphered a number 
of facts about the socio-cultural life that existed in the past . Remains found 
in these sites consolidate the fact that the people of this region were highly 
skilled in artistry whereas the architectural remains demonstrate the blend of 
different architectural styles . These sites serve the dual purpose of presenting 
a number of evidences to decipher the varied aspects of Indian history and 
popularizing the place as inviting tourist destinations . In this unit , we will 
be discussing the archaeological sites of Karur , Pallavaram , Kodumanal and 
Keezhdi , all of which are relatively new excavation fields . 
9 . 1 OBJECTIVES 
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Understand the archaeological importance of Karur
	 •	Analyse the archaeological excavations conducted at Pallavaram
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 115
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
	 •	Describe the archaeological findings at Kodumanal
	 •	Discuss the significance of Keezhdi in archaeological sense
9 . 2 PREHISTORIC SITES
Let us first begin with a discussion on the archaeological site of Karur . 
9 . 2 . 1 Karur
Karur is the first ever excavated site in Amaravathi river valley . It is closely 
located to the town of Mohanur in the Namakkal district . Karur has been 
identified with Vanchi and Karuvur in which the cultural sequence dates 
from the 2nd century BC to the 14th century AD . The early Sangam texts 
Purananauru , Ahananuru , Kurunthogai , Narrinai and Pathirrupathu refer to 
Karur and Chera kings . The occurrence of several silver coins of the Cheras 
with portraits and various symbols suggests that this could have been a mint 
centre . The literary references to Karur as a centre of jewel making are borne 
out by the finds of rings with intaglios . In addition to the usual ceramic finds 
of this period , Roman amphorae have been discovered indicative of overseas 
trade . No structures have been found in excavations excepting a house-site 
with brick flooring and a drain joining to a brick structure . 
It is located at the confluence of the river Amaravathi with Kaveri . 
In order to ascertain the validity of the literary references and other 
archaeological , epigraphical and numismatic evidences , a systematic spade 
work was conducted in the years 1973-74 , 1977 and 1979 . Six trenches 
laid within the town area yielded important evidences like Tamil-Brahmi 
inscribed potsherds , graffiti marks , Chera coins , Roman artefacts like coins , 
amphorae and brick structures , all indicative of urban nature . The pottery 
assemblage of this period comprised of black-and-red ware , red slipped ware 
and matt designed sherds . The stratified occurrence of a square copper coin 
with an elephant on the obverse and bow and arrow on the reverse is worth 
mentioning . The coin with such symbols indicating the royal insignia of the 
Cheras was the first of its type to occur at Karur in a stratified context . 
Perhaps the most amazing discoveries have been the 1 , 000-odd 
Roman coins dating back to the first century A . D . These include Aure II ( a 
denomination ) bearing the heads of Marcus Aurelius and Augustus Claudius , 
and Denr II ( a denomination ) of Augustus Tiberius . Others bear the insignia 
of several other great Roman emperors . A highly corroded silver Roman 
coin found in the upper levels perhaps point to the survival of external trade 
activities . The occurrence of imported pottery , inscribed shreds and coins on 
the whole has been dated to 1st to 2nd century AD . 1
1 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
116 Material
Regardless of its importance , either Karur or the entire valley did not 
receive proper attention of archaeologists . The region was again excavated 
after 28 years in 2008 . The site Nedungur located 15 km west of Karur was 
excavated . Four trenches in the habitation and one transected grave opened 
at the site provided limited information on the nature of the site . These two 
sites , excavated in the upper Amaravathi river valley , offered a good picture 
on the stratigraphical positions of Iron Age and Early Historic cultures . Both 
the sites were dated on the basis of archaeological stratigraphy . In the basin 
area of the river , the site Porunthal was excavated for two seasons in the 
years 2009 and 2010 . Three trenches and four graves opened respectively 
in habitation mound and grave yard gave some interesting evidences on 
glass bead making and the rituals performed in the graves . The river valley 
could not give a complete picture of any site due to very limited nature of 
material evidence . Nevertheless , the excavations provided a good picture on 
the potentiality of the region . Future excavations may throw much light on 
various features of the society and may strengthen the existing knowledge . 
However , this enormous archaeological wealth is under dire threat of 
being lost to historians and researchers forever . With at least half a dozen 
goldsmiths in Karur buying old coins and other valuable artefacts to sell to 
outsiders , a lot of rare material has passed into private hands . 2
9 . 2 . 2 Pallavaram
Tamil Nadu has a total of 160 megalithic sites dating between 2nd century 
BC and 2nd century AD . Urn burials , stone mounds and stone coffins are 
supposed to be beneath the sites . Pallavaram is considered to be one of the 
oldest inhabited places in South India . One hundred and fifty years ago , 
on May 30 , 1863 , a young geologist Robert Bruce Foote bent down and 
picked up a stone implement from the debris thrown out of a small gravel 
pit at Pallavaram . It proved to be an epochal discovery . Foote ’ s discovery 
revolutionized the study of India ’ s pre-history . Since then , a number of 
Stone Age artefacts have been uncovered . Most of these artefacts have been 
preserved in the Egmore museum , popularly known as the Government 
Museum in Chennai . 
This incredible discovery in the field of prehistoric archaeology pushed 
back the antiquity of man in Tamil Nadu to more than half a million years 
ago and placed this region on the world map of pre historic culture . The stone 
implement discovered by Foote was a hand-axe made of a hard rock called 
quartzite . The Stone Age man had crafted it to dig out tubers and roots from 
the soil , slaughter the hunted animals and take out the meat , and so on . As 
Foote , then an Assistant Geologist in the Geological Survey of India ( GSI )  , 
2 unearthed-plundered-in-karur-in-tamil-nadu-814369-1991-04-30
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 117
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III cradled the hand-axe and looked it as fascinating , he identified it to be of 
Palaeolithic Age . 
At one stroke , Foote ’ s discovery changed the antiquity of humankind 
who lived in the Indian subcontinent . Recent research has established that 
such type of tools use by man in Palaeolithic Age could be dated back to 1 . 5 
million years . Just a few months after this discovery , Foote and his colleague 
in the GSI , William King , made another significant discovery . They found 
many stone implements , including hand-axes , cleavers and flake tools , 
at Attirampakkam , near the river Kortallayar , in Titruvallur district near 
Chennai . The prehistoric man had used them to hunt animals gathering around 
waterholes and exploit plant and aquatic resources . Sometime later , Foote 
discovered some more stone tools at Pallavaram and was thus convinced that 
a Palaeolithic population had lived in India . 
It was not that Foote only discovered the stone tools rather he also 
classified , catalogued and described them scientifically . He made efforts to 
understand the technology that went into their making . He analysed whether 
the tool was made of quartzite , agate , chalcedony or chert . He also tried to 
ascertain whether it belonged to the Palaeolithic , Neolithic or the Iron Age .  , 
the stratigraphy and the sedimentary context in which he found it and the 
geography of the location of its discovery . 3
Recently the ASI has discovered a 2 , 300 year old sarcophagus from 
Pallavaram . It was covered with red ware lid and was damaged by boulders 
which might have rolled down the hillock due to soil erosion . The artefact is 
5 . 6 feet long and 1 . 5 feet wide ; it has a depth of 1 . 64 feet . Two rows of six 
legs , which are supporting the sarcophagus , are hollow type which measures 
16 cm in height and 8 cm in diameter . It has three holes at the bottom besides 
the legs which might have been used to tie ropes to facilitate the easy carriage 
of the sarcophagus . The sarcophagi are of different sizes depending upon the 
height of the deceased . It has the shape of a crescent indicating the belief 
among the people in those days that dead person would remain eternal as long 
as the existence of moon and so the things used by the person were kept in the 
burial with the belief that the person will use the things even after the death . 4
Nearly 140 years ago , a British archaeologist Alexander Rea , had 
unearthed a similar sarcophagus from the hillocks of Pallavaram . It was 6 
feet long , one foot eight inches deep and 1 . 5 feet wide with ten legs . Many 
utensils such as cups , pots , bowls and iron nails were also found during 
the excavations . This established the existence of a megalithic culture in 
Pallavaram . This discovery has brought to light that the area was inhabited 
3 humankind-who-lived-in-indian-subcontinent / article4753744 . ece
4 coffin-at-pallavaram / articleshow / 64754538 . cms
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
118 Material
by the people who were not nomads . They possessed a technology to create 
sarcophagus standing on 12 legs during the 3rd century BC . 
9 . 2 . 3 Kodumanal
The prehistoric site of Kodumanal , in Perundurai taluk in the Erode district 
of Tamil Nadu , is located on the north bank of river Noyyal . It was the site of 
booming ancient trade and finds its mention in Patittrupathu of Sangam texts . 
This ancient city of Chera dynasty was the home of skilled craftsmen who had 
expertise in making high-quality iron and beads . Layers of megalithic-cumearly tombs of historic period have been excavated in Kodumanal . Megalithic 
communities that inhabited in this region belonged to 2nd century BC . 
The significance of Kodumanal ( identified with Kodumanam ) is for 
being a bead manufacturing centre . The literary descriptions are matched 
by the occurrence of beads in different stages of manufacture . Iron was the 
other major industry , as confirmed by a range of iron weapons , spindles , 
and the earliest foundry for melting iron ore . Many coins of the Chera rulers 
have been discovered from the river beds , while the greatest concentration 
of Roman coins in South India has been found from the near vicinity of the 
site . Therefore , its significance as a commercial centre is undoubted . Pottery 
with Tamil-Brahmi script and graffiti marks complement this . Kodumanal 
is one of the few centres where connections between the Megalithic burial 
and habitation sites can be clearly established . 
The antiquity of Kodumanal was first noticed in 1961 by an 
archaeologist of the ASI , V . N Srinivasa Desikan . Later on , a trail excavation 
was conducted by the State Archaeology Department of Tamil Nadu whose 
findings , however , have been report only briefly by the Director of the 
Department , R . Nagaswamy . The real archaeological potential of the site 
was first brought out by Pulavar S . Raju , who was formerly Professor of 
Epigraphy in Tamil University . He paid frequent visits at the site . 
Digging at Kodumanal was conducted in seven seasons during the 
years 1985 , 1986 , 1989 , 1990 , 1997 , 2012 and 2013 . A total of 63 trenches 
and 16 graves were excavated in 15 hectares of the habitation mound and 
40 hectares of the associated graveyard . The ongoing excavations have 
revolutionized our understanding of the cultural transformation which 
comprises the beginning of the early historical period in South India . This , 
in turn , will necessitate reworking our paradigm for understanding the arrival 
of the early historic phase for the Indian subcontinent as a whole . 
There is a general belief that South India got into the historical phase 
around the 3rd century BC . This is because of the mention of kingdoms of 
the deep South in the inscriptions of Emperor Ashoka of the Maurya dynasty . 
Since those epigraphs are found in the adjoining regions of Karnataka and 
Andhra , it has been argued that writing too was introduced into South India 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 119
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III during his reign . The epigraphs of Ashoka are found in the Brahmi script 
which was one of the two earliest writing systems of ancient India . 
However , Kodumanal ’ s diggings have rendered that understanding 
as completely invalid . The site have given five AMS ( Accelerator Mass 
Spectrometry ) dates of 200 BC , 275 BC , 300 BC , 330 BC and 408 BC for 
the samples collected from well stratified layers respectively at the depth of 
15 cm , 60 cm , 65 cm , 80 cm and 120 cm . These are obtained from layers 
which have yielded a significant number of potsherds which bear inscriptions 
in the Tamil-Brahmi script . More than 600 Tamil-Brahmi inscribed sherds 
have been found during the excavations . In many cases , the names of these 
potsherds have connections with names from the North . A couple of NBPW 
sherds associated with the first phase of the early historical period in North 
and Central India have also been discovered in the excavations . 
Many silver punch marked coins in association with NBP have been 
found . There are ample evidences to prove that this commercial centre had 
well established trade and cultural contacts with the middle gangetic plains 
in the 5th century BC . By the way there is still a 65 cm thick cultural deposit 
contained inscribed potsherds below the level that has provided the above 
mentioned dates . Hence , there is every possibility that the beginning of the 
early historic period may be pushed back further . 
Another important discovery at the site was the gemstone industry . 
Beads , discarded chips , raw material blocks , a grooved stone slab was 
unearthed from the habitation mound . Various kinds of stone such as 
sapphire , beryl , agate , carnelian , amethyst , lapis lazuli , jasper , garnet and 
soapstone were also unearthed from the habitation . A crucible furnace used 
for manufacturing steel , iron furnace and copper smelting furnace were also 
discovered from the site . There are evidences of shell industry and textile 
production also . The presence of various industries and trade items in 
Kodumanal evidently advocates that it was a flourishing trade and industrial 
centre in South India during the ancient times . 
The excavations conducted at Kodumanal revealed two cultural 
periods---Megalithic Period and the Early Historic Period . Black and red 
ware , black slipped ware , russet coated ware and red slipped ware were 
discovered in the excavation . Additionally , beads made of quartz and clay , 
inscribed potsherds and graffiti potsherds were unearthed . 
A megalithic cairn circle was also excavated from the site . The grave 
goods such as lids , dishes , bowls , ring stands and four legged jars were found 
placed outside the primary cist . An urn was discovered at the south-eastern 
side of this primary cist which surprisingly yielded 782 beads of carnelian . 
At the eastern side of the main cist , an iron sword measuring 169cm in 
length was also discovered at the eastern side of the main cist . Apart from 
this , four iron swords , a copper toddy filter with lotus and peacock designs , 
small daggers , stirrup like object and double edged axe were also excavated . 
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
120 Material
In totality , the radiometric dates from Kodumanal make it quite evident 
that the beginning of the early history in South India is two centuries earlier 
than it was thought . The beginning of historical period has hardly any 
connection with Ashoka . 
9 . 2 . 4 Keezhdi
Keezhdi also known as Keeladi , is a small village near Silaiman on the 
border between Madurai and Sivaganga districts in Tamil Nadu . This is 
the biggest ancient excavation site in South India . It is considered as the 
parallel of Mohenjo-Daro . For several years , experts had guessed that the 
archaeological site at Keezhdi in Sivaganga district of Tamil Nadu dates 
back to the Sangam Age . 
In 2013-14 , the ASI conducted explorations in 293 sites along 
river Vaigai in the districts of Theni , Dindigul , Madurai , Sivaganga and 
Ramanathapuram . Keezhdi in Sivaganga district was selected for digging and 
artefacts were discovered by the ASI in the second phase of the excavation . 
Carbon dating of charcoal found at the site has confirmed that the settlement 
there belonged to 200 BC . These excavations thus proved that urban 
civilization had existed in Tamil Nadu in the Sangam Age . 
The diggings at Keezhdi were conducted at two localities . Both the 
places have yielded different things and one can guess that they represent a 
social hierarchy . The bigger of the two places with more number of trenches 
has been identified as the settlement of the educated rich people , as many 
precious objects like jewellery , semi-precious stones , fine game stones and 
74 Tamil-Brahmi inscriptions have been discovered . Occurrence of beads of 
agate , quartz and Carnelian testifies that they had trade contacts with Rome 
and other countries . The Tamil-Brahmi letters were inscribed on the pottery 
which suggests that the common man was literate because inscriptions 
commissioned by kings are found in stones and walls of temples . There were 
poetic Tamil names such as Iyanan , Uthiran , Vendhan , Santhanavathi and 
Saathan , on those inscriptions , some of which can be found in the Sangam 
literature . 
The other locality has more of graffiti on pottery , bone tools and iron 
weapons , the fish symbol which was both an art and as a sign representing 
a clan , was also found . Red-and-Black pottery , groove tiles used for laying 
roofs and typical flat brick measuring 38 cm are the other signs that the city 
discovered belongs to the Sangam Age . 5
More than 5600 antiquities and artefacts have been unearthed in 
Keezhdi in the diggings conducted by the State Archaeology Department 
of Tamil Nadu . Hitherto , 102 trenches have been excavated at the site . The 
5 found-and-what-it-means / article18991279 . ece / photo / 1 / 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 121
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III antiquities discovered includes potsherds , terracotta figurines , a ring well , 
terracotta beads , carnelian beads , shell bangles and iron pieces . 6 
One of the 
potsherds is inscribed with an image of a fish which was once the symbol of 
the great Pandya rulers . One of the names on another sherd has been traced 
back to Sri Lanka , indicating a trade link or perhaps a long-ago immigrant . 
Many unearthed potsherds have a roulette design , similar to the kind used 
in ancient Rome . This point to the possibility of foreign trade at that time . 
Other artefacts include stone celts for sharpening tools , circular and 
square coins from the Chola and Pandya period , chess games made of ivory , 
arrowheads made of bones and iron , gold beads , iron implements like knives 
and daggers . 
The use of fired brick , the size of the building complex , an array of 
pots placed in such a way that it must have been used either as a lamp or for 
painting , and other finds suggest that the settlement is of a more civilized 
population than was previously suspected during the Sangam period . 
Keezhdi excavation is significant in the way that it has given 
archaeological evidence for the existence of a secular civilization belonging 
to the Sangam era . If more excavations are conducted there , we will find 
more evidence that will definitely show the trace of a strong secular culture 
once existed in ancient Tamil Nadu known as Thamizhagam . 
Check Your Progress
1 . Name the first ever excavated site in the Amaravathi river valley . 
2 . Who discovered the archaeological remains of Pallavaram for the 
first time in 1863 ? 
3 . What is the significance of Kodumanal ? 
4 . Name the biggest ancient excavation site in South India ? 
9 . 3 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Karur was the first ever excavated site in the Amaravathi river valley . 
2 . Robert Bruce Foote discovered the archaeological remains of 
Pallavaram for the first time in 1863
3 . The significance of Kodumanal ( identified with Kodumanam ) is for 
being a bead manufacturing centre . 
4 . Keezhdi is the biggest ancient excavation site in South India . 
6 in-Keezhdi / article23829818 . ece
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
122 Material
9 . 4 SUMMARY
	 •	The history of Tamil Nadu can be traced to the pre-historic period . 
ASI has conducted extensive excavations in the state and deciphered 
a number of facts about the socio-cultural life that existed in the past . 
	 •	Karur is the first ever excavated site in Amaravathi river valley . 
Important evidences like Tamil-Brahmi inscribed potsherds , graffiti 
marks , Chera coins , Roman artefacts like coins , amphorae and brick 
structures , have been unearthed , all indicative of urban nature . 
	 •	Regardless of its importance , either Karur or the entire valley did not 
receive the proper attention of archaeologists . 
	 •	In 1863 , Robert Bruce Foote discovered the archaeological significance 
of Pallavaram which pushed back the antiquity of man in Tamil Nadu 
to more than half a million years ago and placed this region on the 
world map of pre historic culture . 
	 •	In the recent times 2 , 300 year old sarcophagi have been discovered 
from Pallavaram which is similar to the structure discovered by the 
British archaeologist , Alexander Rea some 140 years ago . 
	 •	The prehistoric site of Kodumanal was the site of booming ancient 
trade and finds its mention in Patittrupathu of Sangam texts . This 
ancient city of Chera dynasty was the home of skilled craftsmen who 
had expertise in making high-quality iron and beads . 
	 •	The antiquity of Kodumanal was first noticed in 1961 by an archaeologist 
of the ASI , V . N Srinivasa Desikan . However , the real archaeological 
potential of the site was first brought out by Pulavar S . Raju . 
	 •	Keeladi or Keezhdi is the biggest ancient excavation site in South India . 
It is considered as the parallel of Mohenjo-Daro . 
	 •	Carbon dating of charcoal found at the site has confirmed that the 
settlement there belonged to 200 BC . These excavations thus proved 
that urban civilization had existed in Tamil Nadu in the Sangam Age . 
	 •	The diggings at Keezhdi were conducted at two localities . Both the 
places have yielded different things and one can guess that they 
represent a social hierarchy . 
	 •	The antiquities discovered from Keezhdi includes potsherds , terracotta 
figurines , a ring well , terracotta beads , carnelian beads , shell bangles 
and iron pieces
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 123
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
	 •	Keezhdi excavation is significant in the way that it has given 
archaeological evidence for the existence of a secular civilization 
belonging to the Sangam era . 
9 . 5 KEY WORDS
	 •	Cairn : It is a mound of rough stones built as a memorial or landmark , 
typically on a hilltop or skyline . 
	 •	Cist : It is an ancient coffin or burial chamber made from stone or a 
hollowed tree . 
	 •	Epoch : It refers to a particular period of time in history or a person ’ s 
life . 
	 •	Graffiti : It means writing or drawings scribbled , scratched , or sprayed 
illicitly on a wall or other surface in a public place . 
	 •	Sarcophagus : It refers to a stone coffin typically adorned with a 
sculpture or inscription and associated with the ancient civilizations . 
9 . 6 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Describe the archaeological excavations conducted at Keezhdi . 
2 . Discuss the archaeological excavations conducted at the site of 
Pallavaram . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . Elaborate on the archaeological significance of Karur . 
2 . Analyze the archaeological findings at the prehistoric site of Kodumanal . 
9 . 7 FURTHER READINGS
T . S . Sridhar . 2004 . Excavations of Archaeological Sites in Tamil Nadu 
( 1969-1995 )  . Chennai : Department of Archaeology , Government of 
Tamil Nadu
Srinivasan Vasanthi , 2011 . Archaeological Excavations of Tamil Nadu : 
Kodumanal , Karur , Poompuhar . Department of Archaeology , 
Government of Tamil Nadu
Archaeology in 
Tamil Nadu-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
124 Material
Gurukkal , R . 2010 . Social Formations of Early South India . Delhi : Oxford 
University Press . 
Rajan , K . 1994 . Archaeology of Tamil Nadu ( Kongu Country )  . Delhi : Book 
India Publishing Co . 
Allchin Bridget and Raymond Allchin . 1988 . The Rise of Civilization in India 
and Pakistan . London : Cambridge University Press . 
Chakrabarti , Dilip K . 2006 . The Oxfords Companion to Indian Archaeology , 
The Archaeological Foundation of Ancient India . Oxford : Oxford 
University Press . 
R . Poonkutran , K . Sridharan , S . Vasanthi , V . Ramamurthi . 2011 . 
Archaeological Excavations of Tamil Nadu . Vol . II
K . Rajan . 1997 . Archaeology Gazetteer of Tamil Nadu . Thanjavur , Tamil 
Nadu : Manoo Pathippakam
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 125
Excavation Methods-I
UNIT 10 EXCAVATION METHODS-I
Structure 
10 . 0 Introduction
10 . 1 Objectives
10 . 2 Site Survey
10 . 3 Geological Survey
10 . 4 Horizontal Excavation
10 . 5 Burial Excavation
10 . 6 Archaeological Recording
10 . 7 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
10 . 8 Summary
10 . 9 Key Words
10 . 10 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
10 . 11 Further Readings
10 . 0 INTRODUCTION
Excavation is the most traditional archaeological tool for understanding the 
human past , and it undoubtedly represents the type of activity that most people 
attribute to archaeology . Excavation methods are the different techniques 
employed within archaeology to dig , expose , identify , process , and record 
archaeological remains . It involves the removal of soil , sediment , or rock that 
covers the artefacts or other evidences of human activity . Early excavation 
methods involved destructive random digging and removal of objects with 
little or no location data recorded . Modern excavations generally involve 
slow , careful withdrawal of sediments in very thin layers , detailed filtering 
of sediment samples , and exacting measurement and recording of artefact 
location . 
An archaeological project often commences with a survey of the site 
under examination . Geological surveys have proved to be useful in various 
archaeological researches . Human burials comprise a major source of 
evidence for human history . Burials excavated by archaeologists may report 
on both the individual commemorated and on society at large . 
Two methods of excavations are generally followed—vertical 
excavation and horizontal excavation . Horizontal excavation refers to 
excavating a broad area with the purpose of exposing the remains of a single 
point in time . Archaeological excavation is innately destructive because it 
permanently removes both artefacts and the surrounding soil matrices from 
their original context . Therefore , responsible and accurate recording is the 
most vital component of any project , and excavation has no meaning without 
written and visual records . 
Excavation Methods-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
126 Material
Archaeology has undergone far-reaching changes since the time when 
an excavation was simply a mining of artefacts . Nowadays , the removal of 
artefacts requires that the spatial relationships and context in which they are 
found be fully documented . 
10 . 1 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Understand the method of site survey
	 •	Examine the process of geological survey
	 •	Discuss horizontal excavation
	 •	Describe burial excavation
	 •	Analyse the process of archaeological recording
10 . 2 SITE SURVEY
An archaeological project often commence with a survey . A regional survey 
is an effort to methodically locate previously unidentified sites in a region . 
A site survey is an attempt to systematically locate features of interest , for 
example , houses and middens , within a site . Each of these two objectives 
may be achieved by more or less the same methods . 
Initially in archaeology , a survey was not much practiced . The 
researchers and historians were generally satisfied with discovering the 
locations of monumental sites from the local people , and excavating only the 
clearly visible features there . Gordon Willey initiated the method of regional 
settlement pattern survey in 1949 in the Viru Valley of coastal Peru , and survey 
of all levels became famous with the rise of processual archaeology later on . 
If conducted as a preliminary exercise , an archaeological survey is more 
beneficial than even the excavation . It needs comparatively less amount of 
time and expense , because it does not require processing large volumes of 
soil to search out the artefacts . However , surveying a large region or site can 
prove to be expensive , so archaeologists often use sampling methods . Just 
like with other types of non-destructive archaeology , survey avoids ethical 
issues related to destruction of a site by means of excavation . It is the sole 
means to gather some forms of information , like settlement patterns and 
settlement structure . Survey data is generally amassed into maps which may 
exhibit surface features or distribution of artefacts . 
Surface survey is the simplest survey method which involves walking 
over the ground surface recording , mapping and collecting artefacts 
encountered . This method cannot notice sites or features that are completely 
buried under earth , or overgrown with vegetation . It may also comprise 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 127
mini-excavation methods like augers , corers , and shovel test pits . In case no Excavation Methods-I
materials are found , the surveyed area is considered to be sterile . 
Aerial survey is carried out by using cameras attached to aeroplanes , 
balloons , or even kites to get a bird ’ s-eye view . It is useful for quick mapping 
of large or complex sites . Aerial photographs are used to document the status 
of the archaeological excavation . Aerial survey also uses infrared , groundpenetrating radar wavelengths and other methods . 
Another very effective survey to see beneath the ground is the 
geophysical survey . Magnetometers detect even slight deviations in the 
Earth ’ s magnetic field caused by iron artefacts , kilns , some types of stone 
structures , and even ditches and middens . Machines that measure the electrical 
resistivity of the soil are also extensively used . Archaeological features whose 
electrical resistivity differs with that of surrounding soils can be detected and 
mapped .  ( See Unit 2 for more details on the topic ) 
10 . 3 GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
For a long time , the study of geology has been basic in answering various 
questions in archaeology . Geological surveys have proved to be useful in 
various archaeological researches . In 1976 , the term Archaeo-geology was , 
for the first time , used by Colin Renfrew to describe the contribution of the 
geological sciences to archaeology . 
To tribute the importance of geology in archaeological tasks , the 
geological society of America ( GSA ) established the Archaeological Geology 
Division in 1977 , with the aim of providing suitable forum for presentation 
of papers on archaeological geology and to encourage research and teaching 
in archaeological geology . The previous documentation of the influence of 
geology in archaeology is supposed to have started in 1830 when Charles Lyell 
published his work Principles of Geology . In 1863 , he published his famous 
book The Geological Evidence of the Antiquity of Man , in which he used 
geological context to document the remains and artefacts of early humans . 
Fagan defines archaeology as the scientific study of the human past , of 
ancient human behaviour , from the earliest time right up to the present . By 
itself , archaeology is part of wider discipline of archaeology which studies 
all aspects of humanity , ancient and modern . However , archaeologists are 
unique among scientists in that they study changes in human culture over 
long period of time . 
Collin and Paul , on the other hand , define archaeology as partly 
discovery of treasures of the past , partly the meticulous work of scientific 
analyst and partly the application of the creative imagination . It is both 
physical activity out in the field and an intellectual quest in the study of 
Excavation Methods-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
128 Material
laboratories . In general , the study of archaeology is concerned with analysis 
of human culture by using cultural remains and other cultural phenomena . 
Geology can be defined as an earth science of solid earth , the rocks of 
which it is composed , and the procedures by which they change with time . 
It can also mean the study of the solid features of any celestial body . It gives 
insight into the history of earth by providing the primary evidence for plate 
tectonics , the evolutionary history of life , and past climates . 
Applied geology is the geology that is used in various areas of practice 
including mining , engineering , hydrology and environmental issues and , 
in due course , archaeology . Norman and Evan , in their book , Geological 
Methods for Archaeology , mention that geology covers considerable roles 
in various archaeological processes . Geology smoothen the progress of 
archaeological sites exploration . The first decision that must be taken in any 
new archaeological venture is where to dig . This decision can be based on 
historical records in many of the cases , by the visible remains of ancient 
construction , or by the discovery of plentiful artefacts . However , to see deep 
enough into the surface so that decision can be taken on particular target areas 
for excavation , and also to get an idea of what artefacts and constructions to 
expect , techniques involving geology are increasingly used . 
In archaeology , landscapes and environment can be reconstructed 
by means of studying of geomorphology and sedimentology entrenched in 
geology . As such , geology is used for the analysis of the deposits found in 
the surface that gives ample evidence for changes in land forms over time . 
These deposits may include residual materials , formed by the weathering 
of underlying formations , or may have been formed elsewhere and then 
transported by wind , water , or humans to their present site of deposition . The 
kind and amount of surficial materials alter with changing land surface and 
climatic conditions and so provide the best evidence regarding the evolution 
of the landscape . An understanding of these changes on a site can be used 
to recreate the palaeo environment at the time of occupation and modelling 
of the prehistoric land-use patterns . Archaeological exploration in an area is 
made convenient by first indicating desirable habitation sites of the time and 
then targeting these sites for geophysical and geological vision . 
Excavation strategies can be developed with the help of excavation 
process , geology and geomorphic-sedimentologic information . This 
information usually allows a better idea of the distribution and nature of buried 
artefacts and may explain irregular surficial redistribution of artefacts . There 
are three major phases involved in this-Geomorphic mapping which furnish 
descriptions of the landforms , drainage pattern , surficial deposits , tectonic 
features and any active geomorphological process ; analysis of the process 
of erosion that carved the land forms-including soil formation , sediment 
removal or deposition and tectonic uplift-are documented ; the land-forms , 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 129
climate , and surficial deposits of today are extrapolated back to recreate Excavation Methods-I
palaeo-environment and palaeo-climate at the time of the habitation of the site . 
Geology aids in analyzing the archaeological artefact since it can 
be used to determine the sources of raw materials used in the artefact . For 
instance , the development and spread of iron technology could be clearly 
seen in the production of pots at different sites in the Tigris-Euphrates 
Valley beginning around 5500 BC . The designs were used across the world 
and originated from single sites , so that archaeologically it appeared that 
the pots were being exported from those sites . However , it was found that 
the materials used at each site were local . This implied that technology was 
exported and not the pottery . 
Both archaeology and geology employ a number of dating techniques 
for determining the dates of various materials . The methods used in dating 
can be explained through various laws or principles that comprise :  
( i ) The Principle of Uniformitarianism : It was a fundamental principle 
of geology advanced by James Hutton which states that the geologic 
processes observed in operation that modify the Earth ’ s crust at present 
have worked in much the same way over geologic time .  
( ii ) The Principle of Intrusive Relationships : In geology , when an 
igneous intrusion cuts across a formation of sedimentary rock , it can be 
determined that the igneous intrusion is younger than the sedimentary 
rock . There are a number of different kinds of intrusions , including 
stocks , laccoliths , batholiths , sills and dikes . Such principle can be 
applied in archaeology to ascertain the age of sediments .  
( iii ) The Principle of Cross-cutting Relationships : This principle is 
concerned with the formation of faults and the age of the sequences 
through which they cut . Faults are younger than the rocks they cut ; 
therefore , if a fault is found that penetrates some formations but not 
those on top of it , then the formations that were cut are older than the 
fault , and the ones that are not cut must be younger than the fault . 
Finding the key bed in these situations may help determine whether 
the fault is a normal fault or a thrust fault . In archaeology , this principle 
enables to determine the age of artefacts found in such fault rocks .  
( iv ) The Law of Superposition : The law of superposition was first 
proposed in the late 17th century by the Danish scientist Nicolas 
Steno . According to this law , sedimentary rock layer in a tectonically 
uninterrupted sequence is younger than the one beneath it and older than 
the one above it . Rationally a younger layer cannot slip underneath a 
layer deposited before . This principle allows sedimentary layers to be 
observed as a form of vertical time line , a partial or complete record 
of the time elapsed from deposition of the lowest layer to deposition 
of the highest bed . 
Excavation Methods-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
130 Material
Stratigraphy can also be used to ascertain the relative age of different 
remains . This is done by means of analysis of stratigraphic position , style 
and absorption of transient elements . Objects found in the same undisturbed 
stratigraphic horizon are supposed to have the same age , those in a lighter 
horizon are perceived to be younger , and those are perceived to be older . 
However , we cannot give specific dates or date ranges to the different episodes 
of deposition . 
Thus , archaeology and geology are closely related disciplines . It is 
not possible to conduct archaeological operations without geology , but the 
whole process of conducting archaeological excavation requires knowledge 
of geology . It is from such understanding that Colin Renfrew in 1976 coined 
the term Archaeo-geology to combine the two disciplines as they were seem 
to be inseparable from one another . 
Check Your Progress
1 . What is a site survey ? 
2 . Who first proposed the law of superposition ? 
10 . 4 HORIZONTAL EXCAVATION
Excavation is a destructive , but a most systematic and scientific , documentation 
of archaeological sites . Through this process the cultural remains are brought 
out very carefully . It is a time consuming and expensive field activity . 
Generally , excavations are team efforts and require enormous funds for their 
successful completion . Augustus Pitt Rivers was the British Archaeologist 
who contributed to the development of different excavation methods . In the 
present scenario of the problem oriented archaeology , archaeologists plan 
excavation according to the imminent problem . For the excavation team , it 
is now almost essential to engage a palaeo-zoologist , palaeo-botanist , geoarchaeologist , archaeological chemist and other such experts . Before the 
commencement of excavation , the contour map of the site is prepared . 
The nature of the excavation depends basically on the character and 
needs of the site and the methods of excavation can also vary depending on 
its objectives . It is very important to have an index trench in any excavation 
which goes up to the natural soil and gives an idea about the cultural sequence 
of the site . On the basis of the nature of the site , such as , architectural features , 
diverse activity areas etc .  , it is to be decided whether the site is needed to be 
excavated horizontally or vertically . Two types of excavations are generally 
conducted—vertical excavation and horizontal excavation . Of these , a vertical 
excavation is generally undertaken at a limited scale . Due to their limited 
nature , these are restricted to providing only patchy information regarding the 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 131
social , economic and religious practices of the people of a particular culture . Excavation Methods-I
Therefore , for getting further details horizontal excavations are meticulously 
planned and conducted in a systematic manner . A horizontal excavation is 
a method of excavation in which full horizontal extent of a site is cleared 
and large areas are open while preserving a stratigraphic record in the balks 
between large squares . A gradual probe may then occur . So the horizontal 
excavation aims at exposing the deposits horizontally . Sir Mortimer Wheeler 
is one of the chief opponents of this excavation by using the grid method . 
Extensive horizontal excavations are conducted to obtain detailed 
knowledge of the cultural periods or phases present at an archaeological 
site . Unlike the vertical excavation which is not extendable towards the 
area away from the parallel peg lines , the horizontal excavation is definitely 
advantageous in that it is extendible in all directions , thus , expanding the 
scope of the excavation . As a result , horizontal type of excavation is followed 
to unearth the town planning of a site . 
Horizontal excavation is generally conducted for a habitation site 
in order to know the area of its extent . 1 
However , to conduct a horizontal 
excavation some fundamentals are required to be considered :  
( i ) Easily and clearly sub-divide the site for record and control ;  
( ii ) Capable of progressive expansion in any direction without 
breaking down or weakening preliminary datum lines ;  
( iii ) Ability of preserving for constant reference at a maximum 
number of points , complete vertical sections until the last phase 
of excavation ;  
( iv ) Capable , ultimately , of easy integration into a continuously 
exposed regional excavation ;  
( v ) Readily accessible at all points for the soil removal , without 
impediment from intervening cuttings or traffic across excavated 
surfaces ; and 
( vi ) Adequately open to the sky to make certain the easy inspection 
of well-lighted sections at all the required depths . 
Laying out a trench
The layout of the horizontal excavation is based upon a square . After the 
contour mapping of the site , the entire mound is divided into a grid of 
square trenches . The squares or grids are separated by a baulk measuring 
around 50cm . the baulk is the unexcavated region and is held intact till the 
end of the excavation and this act as the four sides of each trench . It also 
allows the preservation of the vertical sections of the site . To impose a grid 
of square trenches , reference lines are drawn from the centre of the single 
1 
Excavation Methods-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
132 Material
mound type sites . These lines intersect each other at a right angle leaving the 
mound divisible into four quadrants . Each of these four quadrants is further 
divided into equal sized small squares . Each of these squares is referred by 
the reference peg located towards the left side in the north . The central peg 
marked by the intersection is generally referred to as the peg A1 . Towards the 
south the pegs are traditionally numbered A2 , A3 , A4… .  . from A1 . Towards 
east , the pegs are marked A1 , B1 , C1… .  . It is recommended that the director 
of excavation himself should excavate a small control pit in each trench . Both 
the vertical and horizontal excavations are complimentary to each other . 2
Fig 10 . 1 Trench Layout
10 . 5 BURIAL EXCAVATION
At the archaeological site , burials are also found . Burial excavation enables 
us to understand various facets of human life in the past centuries include 
ritual practices , believes , ancestral belief and belief about life after death . 
The skeletal remains aids in identifying the racial affinities , family groups , 
age , sex , nutrition , palaeo-demography , palaeo-diseases and other cultural 
information . Quartering or quadrant method is generally used for burial 
excavation . The burial is divided into four quarters by two strings , laid to 
the cardinal points of the compass and over the estimated centre . Opposite 
quarters are excavated sequentially . A suitable width of unexcavated area 
is left between each quadrant in such a manner so as to give a complete 
transverse section across the mound in both the directions . After removing 
the soil of one quadrant , the archaeologist attempts to understand the actual 
position of the burial and then proceed with the removal of remaining 
three quadrants . For the purpose of recording the excavated materials from 
the burials , reference points are fixed at successive intervals and the three 
2 Vijneshu Mohan , 1998 ,  “ India : 50 Years of Independence ( 1947-97 ) -Status , Growth & 
Development-16 : Archaeology ” B . R Publication Corporation , Delhi , p . 10
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 133
dimensional aspects of the artefact are recorded in situ with reference to the Excavation Methods-I
abovementioned points . 
Recording of stratigraphy is one of the most significant observations 
required to be made during the excavation . The principle of stratigraphy is 
based on the law of superimposition which means that the earliest deposit is 
at the bottom followed by succeeding deposits . Thus it becomes convenient 
for an archaeologist to make out which is earlier and which is later . The 
periodization is done on the basis of the association of different strata with 
different structural stages . Each layer is assigned by Roman numerals . The 
numbering of layers is always done from the top depending on the border of 
exposing whereas the periodization is done always from the bottom . However , 
in case of secondary deposits , the periodization may adopt a different pattern . 
Pit or dump is the most common feature found during the excavation . In so far 
as the pit is concerned , its date is taken as contemporary to the sealing layer . 
In case of dumps , however , the date is taken as contemporary to the resting 
layer . After the excavation , the data is recorded in a systematic and careful 
manner . In major diggings , which yield numerous ceramics and bones , bone 
yards and pottery yards are constructed to house the bone and pottery finds 
according to its stratigraphic context . This improves the post-excavation data 
processing significantly . 
The data obtained is then subjected to a series of analysis which 
comprise documentation , classification , quantitative and qualitative analysis , 
typo-technological analysis , socio-cultural analysis , and so on . The data 
thus collected is stored in appropriate places with adequate labelling . The 
excavator then writes the final report of the excavation on the basis of the 
daily notes prepared by him . Therefore , while writing daily notes , a common 
understanding is vital among the excavators . 
While excavating and writing the daily notes , the excavator should 
keep the following points in mind :  
( i ) First of all the excavator should be well aware of the background 
of the site . While providing this information all those factors 
which are listed under exploration are required to be included .  
( ii ) The objective of putting the trench , its identification number and 
its association with the surrounding trenches .  
( iii ) Measurements are generally taken in relation with the NorthWestern peg of the trench and the datum line ( depths in a trench 
are measured from the datum line using + and -symbols )  .  
( iv ) After each excavation the newly uncovered surface is scraped , 
brushed and the identifiable features are recorded .  
( v ) To make the things more convenient , the trench is generally divided 
into four sub-squares and each sub-square is dug individually . 
Excavation Methods-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
134 Material 
( vi ) The finds of every excavation is washed , dried , labelled and 
recorded . The depth of each dig is required to be measured . While 
labelling the excavator should mention the name of the site , trench 
number , sub-square locus , depth , layer number and date .  
( vii ) During the excavation , the excavator is required to observe the 
features of the layers , like colour , composition , thickness , texture , 
compactness , disturbances ( e . g . erosion features ) in layers , if any , 
its slope , its continuity and its resemblance and dissimilarity with 
the neighbouring trenches . 
10 . 6 ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORDING
The archaeological record is the body of physical ( not written ) remains 
retrieved from the past . It is the physical record of human prehistory and 
history , of why ancient civilizations prospered or failed and why those cultures 
changed and grew . Archaeological record is the story of the human world . It is 
one of the core concepts in archaeology . For a better understanding of human 
cultures , an archaeological theory is used to interpret the archaeological 
record . It is the duty of all the archaeologists to record precisely what is 
being retrieved during the excavation irrespective of their background 
and experience . Apart from this the recording of what is found has to be 
accurate and clearly understandable by other people . It should always be 
remembered that an excavation destroys the site and that once a context has 
been completely excavated , it can never be re-excavated . The written and 
pictorial record of a site is usually all that is left of the deposits and features 
once an excavation has been completed . 
As soon as the excavation has been initiated , every bit of information 
retrieved from the site must be associated with the layers , finds and structures 
around it , so that the complex relationships that contribute to the interpretation 
of the site can be recorded . For example , the recovery of Roman pottery kilns . 
The location and the quantity of the pottery itself , the kiln structure and the 
waste material from the manufacturing process are mutually essential for 
understanding the site . If an individual piece of pottery is separated from 
this , the other information loses almost all its meaning . 
The archaeological record may comprise the earliest ancient findings 
as well as contemporary artefacts . Human activity has had a large impact 
on the archaeological record . Human activities , such as agriculture and 
land development , might cause damage or destruction of the potential 
archaeological sites . Some other threats to the archaeological record include 
natural phenomena and scavenging . Archaeology might prove to be a 
destructive because it permanently removes both artefacts and the surrounding 
soil matrices from their original context . Therefore , archaeologists restrict the 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 135
amount of excavation that they conduct at each site and keep a meticulous Excavation Methods-I
record of their finds . 
Each layer , structure or deposit discovered during the process of 
excavation is called a ‘ context ’ and is given a unique context number . On large 
or complex sites , these can into thousands . When the site is excavated , each 
context is described and related to artefact finds and surrounding contexts . 
The primary information of the site is recorded on a paper or computer . 
Scale drawings and photography record each context visually . Catalogues 
of contexts , finds , soil samples , drawings and photographs are required to be 
compiled because these will be used later to re-trace the steps followed during 
the excavation . After the completion of excavation , the resulting collection 
of information is still required to be sorted , processed and written-up . This 
is termed as the ‘ post-excavation ’ phase of work . 
When the excavation and post-excavation processes are concluded , 
future researchers should be able to re-examine the archaeology by 
searching the site records and asking probable questions such as the depth 
of stratigraphy , the dimension of structures or the quantity and the content of 
storage pits . The information gathered from the excavations is considered to 
be of permanent value only if it is published and the site records are deposited 
in publicly accessible archives . It has long been said that an archaeological 
discovery has been made only after it has been published . 3
Archaeological Recording System
Wheeler ’ s method of recording the vertical stratigraphy of a site was through 
sections taken from baulks left unexcavated in a grid system across sites . This 
quickly became the standard for the majority of excavations , and is a system 
that is still sometimes used today . However , during the 1960s new techniques 
for the recording of excavations were developed . Ed Harris , working in 
Winchester , took a particularly strong lead in recognizing the need for a 
sound theoretical approach to archaeological stratigraphy . Initially , Ed Harris 
and Patrick Ottaway in 1976 developed the single context recording system 
from a suggestion by Lawrence Keene . The system is the most prevalent in 
Britain today . 
Under this system each excavated context is assigned a unique context 
number and is recorded by type on a context sheet and maybe drawn on a 
plan and / or a section . Depending on time limitations and importance contexts 
may also be photographed , but in this case a grouping of contexts and their 
associations are the objective of the photography . Finds from each context 
are bagged and labelled with their context number and site code for further 
cross reference work carried out after excavation . The height above sea level 
of relevant points on a context , such as the top and bottom of a wall are taken 
3 
Excavation Methods-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
136 Material
and added to plans sections and context sheets . Heights are recorded with 
a dumpy level or total station by relation to the site temporary benchmark . 
Samples of deposits from contexts are occasionally also taken , for later 
environmental analysis or for scientific dating . 4
Check Your Progress
3 . What is excavation ? 
4 . Why are extensive horizontal excavations conducted ? 
5 . During the process of excavation , what is a context ? 
10 . 7 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . A site survey is an attempt to systematically locate features of interest , 
for example , houses and middens , within a site . 
2 . The law of superposition was first proposed in the late 17th century 
by the Danish scientist Nicolas Steno . 
3 . Excavation is a destructive , but a most systematic and scientific , 
documentation of archaeological sites . 
4 . Extensive horizontal excavations are conducted to obtain detailed 
knowledge of the cultural periods or phases present at an archaeological 
site . 
5 . Each layer , structure or deposit discovered during the process of 
excavation is called a ‘ context ’ and is given a unique context number . 
10 . 8 SUMMARY
	 •	Excavation is the most traditional archaeological tool for understanding 
the human past . Excavation methods are the different techniques 
employed within archaeology to dig , expose , identify , process , and 
record archaeological remains . 
	 •	An archaeological project often commence with a survey . Site survey 
is an attempt to systematically locate features of interest , for example , 
houses and middens , within a site . 
	 •	For a long time the study of geology has been basic in answering 
various questions in archaeology . Geological surveys have proved to 
be useful in various archaeological researches . 
4 Ibid
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 137
Excavation Methods-I 	 •	Geology smoothen the progress of archaeological sites exploration . 
It aids in analyzing the archaeological artefact since it can be used to 
determine the sources of raw materials used in the artefact . 
	 •	Excavation is a destructive , but the most systematic and scientific , 
documentation of archaeological sites . Through this process the 
cultural remains are brought out very carefully . 
	 •	Augustus Pitt Rivers was the British Archaeologist who contributed to 
the development of excavation methods . On the basis of the nature of 
the site , such as , architectural features , diverse activity areas etc .  , it is 
to be decided whether the site is needed to be excavated horizontally 
or vertically . 
	 •	Horizontal excavation is a method of excavation in which full horizontal 
extent of a site is cleared and large areas are open while preserving a 
stratigraphic record in the balks between large squares . 
	 •	Extensive horizontal excavations are conducted to obtain detailed 
knowledge of the cultural periods or phases present at an archaeological 
site . 
	 •	At the archaeological site burials are also found . Burial excavation 
enables us to understand various facets of the human life in the past 
centuries include ritual practices , believes , ancestral belief and belief 
on life after death . 
	 •	The archaeological record is the body of physical ( not written ) 
remains retrieved from the past . It is the physical record of 
human prehistory and history , of why ancient civilizations prospered 
or failed and why those cultures changed and grew . 
	 •	As soon as the excavation has been initiated , every bit of information 
retrieved from the site must be associated with the layers , finds and 
structures around it , so that the complex relationships that contribute 
to the interpretation of the site can be recorded . 
	 •	Ed Harris and Patrick Ottaway in 1976 developed the single context 
recording system from a suggestion by Lawrence Keene . The system 
is the most prevalent in Britain today . 
10 . 9 KEY WORDS
	 •	Baulks : They are unexcavated walls which may be left between pits 
to provide stratigraphic control . 
	 •	Contour Map : It is a topographic map showing the shape of land 
surface by contour lines , the relative spacing of the lines indicating 
the relative slope of the surface . 
Excavation Methods-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
138 Material
	 •	Datum Point : It is a specific , fixed reference point on an archaeological 
site from which measurements are taken . 
	 •	Feature : It refers to any physical structure or element that is made or 
altered by humans but is not moveable and cannot be removed from a 
site . For example , wall , pit , floor etc . 
	 •	Midden : It refers to an old dump for domestic waste which may consist 
of animal bone , botanical material , human excrement , mollusc shells , 
sherds , stones , and other artefacts and ecofacts related to past human 
activities . 
	 •	Square : In archaeology , it denotes subdivisions of a site or a larger 
excavation unit . The subdivisions are small regular units often square 
or rectangular in shape . A continuous network of squares is called a 
grid . 
	 •	Test Pit : It refers to an excavation unit used in the initial investigation 
of a site or area , before large-scale excavation begins , that allows the 
archaeologist to preview what lies underneath . 
10 . 10 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Write a short note on site surveys . 
2 . Discuss the process of burial excavation . 
3 . List the principles for dating various artefacts discovered during 
excavations . 
Long Answer Questions . 
1 . Explain how the geological survey has proved to be useful in 
archaeological researches ? 
2 . What is horizontal excavation ? Discuss in detail the method of 
horizontal excavation . 
3 . What do you understand by archaeological recording ? What is its 
significance ? Discuss the archaeological recording system . 
10 . 11 FURTHER READINGS
G . Webster . 1974 . Practical Archaeology , 2nd edition . London : Penguin . 
H . Norman H , and G . Evan . 1998 . Geological Methods for Archaeology . 
Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 139
Jane McIntosh . 1986 . The Practical Archaeologist . Excavation Methods-I London : Facts of File 
Publication . 
M . Fagan . 2009 . Archaeology : A Brief Introduction . California : Prentice 
Hall Press
Martha Jowkousky . 1980 . A Complete Manual of Field Archaeology . New 
Jersey : Prentice Hall Trade . 
Renfrew Colin , P . Bahn . 2008 . Archaeology : Theory , Methods and Practice . 
London Thames and Hudson . 
Excavation Methods-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
140 Material
BLOCK - IV
DATING , SURVEY AND CONSERVATION
UNIT 11 EXCAVATION METHODS-II
Structure 
11 . 0 Introduction
11 . 1 Objectives
11 . 2 Land Survey
11 . 3 Topographical Survey
11 . 4 Stratigraphy and its Importance
11 . 5 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
11 . 6 Summary
11 . 7 Key Words
11 . 8 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
11 . 9 Further Readings
11 . 0 INTRODUCTION
In archaeology , a survey is a field research by which archaeologists explore 
archaeological sites and collect information about the location , distribution 
and organization of past human cultures . Archaeologists conduct surveys to 
search for sites , to identify patterns in the distribution of material culture over 
regions , to make generalizations or test hypotheses about past cultures , and to 
evaluate the risks that development projects will have on the archaeological 
heritage . The surveys may be intrusive or non-intrusive , depending upon the 
needs of the survey team and extensive or intensive , depending on the types 
of research questions being asked of the landscape in question . Surveys can 
be a practical way to decide whether or not to carry out an excavation , but 
may also be ends in themselves , as they produce important information about 
past human activities in a regional context . Land survey and topographical 
survey will be discussed in this unit . Stratigraphy is a key concept to modern 
archaeological theory and practice . Modern excavation techniques are based 
on stratigraphic principles . 
11 . 1 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Understand land survey
	 •	Examine topographical survey
	 •	Discuss stratigraphy and its importance
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 141
Excavation Methods-II
11 . 2 LAND SURVEY
Land surveying is a method , profession , and science of precise determination 
of the terrestrial or three-dimensional location of points and the distances 
and angles between them , generally adopted by licensed surveyors , and 
members of various building professions . These points are by and large on 
the Earth ’ s surface , and they are often used to establish maps and boundaries 
for ownership , locations , such as building corners or the surface location of 
subsurface features , and other or other objectives to be fulfilled by government 
or civil law , such as property sales . 1
Archaeological survey is a special type of land survey carried out 
to report the finds made in an archaeological site or to demonstrate the 
association of the archaeological site to the landscape . This survey is 
generally conducted at the request of archaeologists or government agencies 
and employs GIS , GPS , aerial photography , and other tools for surveying . 
In majority of cases , these surveys are done as remotely as possible to avoid 
disturbing the archaeological site . 2
Even as archaeological land surveys are often carried out at the 
conclusion of an excavation , land surveying methods can prove to be useful 
in identifying the sites before excavation . Previous utilization of the land can 
leave physical marks on the modern landscape , such as raised ridges where 
the walls of buildings once stood . Sometimes , it is not feasible to observe 
these features from the ground . Aerial surveying technique can be utilized to 
create maps that show these markings from an aerial vantage point showing 
elevation changes , which can make such features apparent . This map can then 
be converted into a grid that guides the archaeological excavation of the site . 
Archaeological land surveying attempts to be as non-intrusive as 
possible . Unlike many other types of surveys , it might not be possible 
for the surveyor to go across the entire landscape on foot because of the 
sensitive nature of the archaeological finds . The type of survey conducted on 
archaeological sites is often known as a ‘ geophysical survey ,  ’ and it may be 
carried out with LIDAR or other ultra-modern methods used to survey the area 
without even actually visiting the area . Sometimes , specialized tools can map 
not only the above-ground artefacts but also probable archaeological features 
buried underground . Similarly , as above-ground surveys are conducted , the 
readings taken from the equipment become a dataset , which can then be 
turned into a visible map of the area . 
The result of an archaeological land survey is a high-resolution image of 
the landscape . This display can take several forms depending on the proposed 
purpose of the survey . It may be two-dimensional recording of the location 
1 
2 
Excavation Methods-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
142 Material
of the site and surrounding landscape or may be three-dimensional , offering 
additional information about the layout of the archaeological site , such as the 
height of any walls uncovered . Sometimes this data can be used to create a 
virtual ‘ fly through ,  ’ or a three dimensional image that can be manoeuvred 
to show the view from different points . 
The outcomes of an archaeological land survey become a record of 
the layout that can be compared to later surveys to ascertain the stability 
of the archaeological site and record any damage after excavation . This 
map can also be used as an all-inclusive view of the structures found by an 
archaeological excavation , providing the foundation of research and other 
activities . Sometimes , archaeological land surveys may prove to be an 
evidence for the listing of such sites on registers of historic places . 
11 . 3 TOPOGRAPHICAL SURVEY
A land survey deals basically with defining the boundaries of a parcel of land . 
Topographical surveying , however , is primarily concerned with noting the 
natural and artificial features on the land itself . These may comprise hills , 
streams , ravines , trees , fences , buildings , and other improvements over the 
natural state of the land . A topographic survey demonstrates the location , 
size , and height of these types of improvements , in addition to the gradual 
changes or contours in elevation . A topographic survey emphasizes more on 
elevation than on horizontal measurements . Most of these measurements are 
taken either with a surveying-quality GPS unit , or with an Electronic Distance 
Measurer ( EDM ) device . The results of the topographic survey are drawn as 
contour lines on a map of the land ( topographic surveys are sometimes called 
contour surveys )  . Nowadays , sophisticated computer programs facilitate 
digital versions of these maps , plus interactive elevation views of the land . 
The data may be used in Computer-Aided Design ( CAD ) programs , where 
it can be manoeuvred by engineers or architects to show how the topography 
will transform through planned improvements . 
Topographical survey enables archaeologists to measure and map the 
ground surface , precisely locating archaeological features , structures , finds 
or excavation areas . Topographical survey for military purposes started 
in the late 18th and 19th centuries when the Ordnance Survey ( OS ) was 
established . The early techniques were resorted to archaeological use by 
pioneer archaeologists with a military background such as General Pitt 
Rivers . In the early 20th century , a number of Britain ’ s ancient monuments 
were accurately mapped for the first time by archaeological surveyors such 
as O . G . S Crawford , who was the official Ordnance Survey archaeologist . 
Topographical survey is based on the idea that the earth ’ s surface is 
divided into a regular system of measurement , so that each place has a unique 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 143
position . In British archaeology , the most recognizable use of this idea is in Excavation Methods-II
Ordnance Survey grid references , where depending on the number of figures 
in the reference , a site or find-spot can be located to pin-point accuracy . 
Archaeologists rely on surveying instruments , such as a GPS or Total 
Station , in order to relate what they are measuring to the national system of the 
OS grid . The position of any point on the ground surface can be calculated by 
measuring ( or ‘ triangulating ’  ) from a known point ( such as an OS benchmark 
or corner of a building on an OS map )  , using trigonometry . Formerly , when 
analogue instruments such as theodolites were used in combination with 
traditional distance-measuring devices such as surveying chains , this was 
done manually . During those times , only highly skilled and experienced 
surveyors could work quickly and accurately . Presently , however , computer 
technology has rendered some aspects of surveying a bit less arduous . 
Every archaeological site has its own regular internal system of 
measurements and co-ordinates , called as the site grid . By means of a Total 
Station , the corners of the site grid are precisely positioned by measuring off 
fixed features in the surrounding area such as buildings , or OS bench-marks 
and ‘ trig points ’  . If these fixed points are not available , a GPS can be used to 
locate the site grid corners . Inside the site grid , measurements can be taken 
with a Total Station or measuring tapes . Earthworks , excavation trenches 
and find-spots can be measured and mapped elaborately by using simple 
techniques like off-setting with tapes or a plane-table . For larger areas , a 
Total Station or GPS serves best . All the measurement points have a reading 
for East and North on the site grid , and there should be regular levelling 
measurements . These are either used to compile a drawn plan of the site ( a 
traditional but still important way of presenting data ) or by using a computer 
program to produce a digital plot . 
Methods of Topographic Surveys
A topographic survey includes horizontal and vertical plane surveys . It can 
be carried out using different methods . Some popular methods are explained 
below :  
( i ) Geographic Information Systems ( GIS )  : GIS enables to combine 
layers of digital data from different sources and to manipulate and 
analyze how the different layers are associated with each other . The 
process of converting 3D topographic maps to digital form includes 
raster to vector conversion using CAD-based software such as 
AutoCAD .  
( ii ) Theodolite Surveys : A theodolite is a surveying instrument that 
measures the angles , and the distances are measured with either a 
steel measuring tape or , more commonly , EDM . An EDM can measure 
great distances very quickly and precisely . It measures distance with 
Excavation Methods-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
144 Material
the usage of light and radio waves . Its development is considered as a 
milestone in survey measurement methods .  
( iii ) GPS : A group of Global Positioning System ( GPS ) satellites orbiting 
the earth is used to determine the position ( s ) of GPS ground receivers 
as they are moved from point to point . The data assembled may either 
be processed in the office to produce GPS receiver positions ( control 
surveys ) or in the field to give the field surveyor immediate receiver 
positions ( real time GPS surveys ) for use for example in construction 
or for subdivision layout surveys .  
( iv ) LIDAR : It stands for Light Detection and Ranging and is a method 
of remote sensing that uses light to measure varying distances to the 
Earth . Airborne LIDAR systems can produce very accurate elevation 
models for terrain ( even measuring ground elevation through trees )  , 
while offering a quick and efficient method of surveying terrain that is 
not easily available LIDAR , like the similar radar technology ( which 
uses radio waves instead of light )  , determines the range to an object by 
measuring the time delay between transmission of a pulse and detection 
of the reflected signal .  
( v ) Photogrammetry : It is a technique in which stereographic pairs of 
photographs are used to indirectly measure objects on the ground and 
then calculate point coordinates and height differences . 
Check Your Progress
1 . What is the result of an archaeological land survey ? 
2 . What is a topographical survey based on ? 
3 . What is a theodolite ? 
11 . 4 STRATIGRAPHY AND ITS IMPORTANCE
Stratigraphy simply means the science or study of rock strata or layers . It 
is concerned with all characters and attributes of rocks as strata and their 
interpretation in terms of mode of origin and geologic history . Stratigraphy is 
an important concept to modern archaeological theory and practice . Modern 
excavation techniques are based on principles of stratigraphy . It is derived 
from the idea that sedimentation occurs according to uniform principles . 
When archaeological finds are beneath the ground , the identification of 
the context of each find is crucial in enabling the archaeologist to draw 
conclusions about the site and about the nature and date of its occupation . It 
is the role of the archaeologist to make an effort to discover what contexts 
exist and how they are formed . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 145
The artefacts that are found in successive undisturbed cultural layers Excavation Methods-II
can be dated relatively on the basis of stratigraphic principles . The principle 
of cultural / archaeological stratification is fundamental and it plays a pivotal 
role in archaeological investigations . The method is borrowed from geology . 
Sir Charles Lyell shaped the concept of stratigraphy in geology and published 
it in his outstanding book Principles of Geology in 1830 . This notion was 
introduced in archaeology by the scholars like C . J . Thomsen , J . J . Worsaae , 
Kathleen M . Kenyon and Mortimer Wheeler . There are certain fundamental 
laws and notions adopted in identifying and studying stratigraphy . These 
are : Laws of Superposition , Laws of Original Horizontality , Laws of 
Original Continuity , Laws of Stratigraphical Succession and Laws of Faunal 
Succession as are explained below :  
 ( i ) The Law of Superposition states that strata and features found in them 
are in same position as to when they were first deposited . Thus , with a 
series of layers , the upper layers are younger and the lower are older .  
( ii ) The Law of Horizontality states that layers of sediment were originally 
deposited horizontally under the action of gravity . Archaeological 
layers are split up when laid down and thus have a natural tendency 
towards a horizontal position , as well accommodating to the position 
of pre-existing layers .  
( iii ) The Law of Original Continuity states that each stratigraphic layer 
originally extended spatially as a whole , continuous sheet or lens and 
that any discontinuities or edges that now exist are due to erosion , 
faulting , and other processes that dislocate or remove portions of the 
layer .  
( iv ) The Law of Stratigraphical Succession states that any given unit of 
archaeological stratification exists within the stratigraphic sequence 
from its position between the under most of all higher units and the 
uppermost of all lower units and with which it has a physical contact .  
( v ) The Law of Faunal Succession is based on the observation that 
sedimentary rock strata contain fossilized flora and fauna , and that 
these fossils succeed each other vertically in a specific , reliable order 
that can be identified over wide horizontal distances . 
Contribution of Edward C . Harris
Stratigraphy was later on developed to suit the needs of archaeology by 
Edward C . Harris in 1970s . In his book Principles of Archaeological 
Stratigraphy ( 1979 )  , Harris questioned the application of geological laws 
directly in archaeology . He worked out a new method in the interpretation 
of archaeological stratification which is popularly called as Harris matrix . It 
works on a simple fundamental principle that if one cultural layer lies upon 
another , then the lower layer must have been deposited before the upper 
Excavation Methods-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
146 Material
layer . The time interval between the depositions of two cultural layers may 
be a century or a millennium depending upon the nature of cultural deposit . 
According to this concept , the contextual layer on the top is regarded as 
younger than the layer that is found below . Therefore , a succession of 
layers would give a relative chronological sequence from earliest to latest . 
Any cultural material found in a particular contextual layer can be dated 
relatively younger and older based on from which layer the particular artefact 
is recovered . The artefacts recovered from orderly placed stratified layers 
would help to classify them in certain chronological order . For example , the 
collection of Stone Age tools such as Palaeolithic tools , Micro lithic tools and 
Neolithic tools in different cultural layers helps to determine the approximate 
date of a particular cultural layer . 
Importance of Stratigraphy
As you know that stratigraphy is the natural and cultural deposition of 
sediment , debris , and other materials in separate layers , or strata . In order to 
understand the method by which these deposits have accumulated to form 
the layers of archaeological site the knowledge of stratigraphy is essential . 
Archaeologists rely a lot on stratigraphy to reconstruct the history of the sitebefore during and after they were inhabited by the humans . Stratigraphy is 
an important relative dating technique i . e . it does not give you an absolute 
date , but indicates something is older or younger than things found above 
or below it . It gives the proper cultural sequence and aids in understanding 
of different cultures . 
Generally we excavate from the most recent ( usually the uppermost ) 
layers down to the earliest ( which tend to be the lowest ) ones . Merely depth 
of burial , however , is not by itself a reliable guide to age . For example , a 
Victorian cellar could be cut through the foundations of a Roman building . In 
this case , the Victorian deposits in the cellar would be at a lower depth than 
the surrounding Roman foundations , despite of being much more recent in 
age . Utmost care must be taken to identify any such ‘ cuts ’ and to make sure 
that finds or soil samples collected from them are not mixed with materials 
collected from outside the cut . 
During excavation , complex changes of texture , colour and content of 
layers are observed . These are recorded horizontally in plans and vertically 
in sections . By detecting cuts and fills , superimposition and episodes of soil 
removal and re-deposition , we can tell the order in which the deposits were 
laid down . This is termed as the ‘ sequence ’  . The sequence aids in establishing 
the chronology of activity on the site by allowing dating evidence such as 
artefacts or scientific dating samples to be related to the build-up of layers 
across the area under investigation . 
A majority of the archaeological sites have been dated by using 
stratigraphy . For instance , the existence of Mesolithic phase in between 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 147
Excavation Methods-II the earlier upper Palaeolithic and later Neolithic phase was realized by this 
method only . Stratigraphic technique can also be applied in open air sites 
due to successive occupation of these areas , layers may be formed one after 
another and some mound may be formed . 
However , stratigraphic method has its own limitations also . The type 
of chronology one can derive by means of stratigraphy surmise a culture in 
terms of older or younger than the other one . But it cannot determine the 
exact date for any of these cultures . Apart from this , it is not possible to obtain 
stratigraphic sequence everywhere ; therefore its applicability is restricted . 
In many places stratigraphic sequence can be exposed only by excavation , 
which is very time consuming and expensive . 
Check Your Progress
4 . What are modern excavation principles based on ? 
5 . What is stratigraphy ? 
11 . 5 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . The result of an archaeological land survey is a high-resolution image 
of the landscape . 
2 . A topographical survey is based on the idea that the earth ’ s surface is 
divided into a regular system of measurement , so that each place has 
a unique position . 
3 . A theodolite is a surveying instrument that measures the angles , and 
the distances are measured with either a steel measuring tape or , more 
commonly , EDM . 
4 . Modern excavation techniques are based on principles of stratigraphy . 
5 . Stratigraphy is the natural and cultural deposition of sediment , debris , 
and other materials in separate layers , or strata . 
11 . 6 SUMMARY
	 •	Land surveying is a method , profession , and science of precise 
determination of the terrestrial or three-dimensional location of points 
and the distances and angles between them , generally adopted by 
licensed surveyors , and members of various building professions . 
Excavation Methods-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
148 Material
	 •	Archaeological survey is a special type of land survey carried out to 
report the finds made in an archaeological site or to demonstrate the 
association of the archaeological site to the landscape . 
	 •	The result of an archaeological land survey is a high-resolution image 
of the landscape . This display can take several forms depending on the 
proposed purpose of the survey . 
	 •	The outcomes of an archaeological land survey become a record of the 
layout that can be compared to later surveys to ascertain the stability 
of the archaeological site and record any damage after excavation . 
	 •	Topographical surveying is primarily concerned with noting the natural 
and artificial features on the land itself . These may comprise hills , 
streams , ravines , trees , fences , buildings , and other improvements over 
the natural state of the land . 
	 •	Topographical survey enables archaeologists to measure and map the 
ground surface , precisely locating archaeological features , structures , 
finds or excavation areas . 
	 •	It is based on the idea that the earth ’ s surface is divided into a regular 
system of measurement , so that each place has a unique position . 
	 •	Topographical surveys can be conducted by using different instruments 
like the GIS , Theodolite , GPS , LIDAR , Photogrammetry etc . 
	 •	Stratigraphy is an important concept to modern archaeological theory 
and practice . The artefacts that are found in successive undisturbed 
cultural layers can be dated relatively on the basis of stratigraphic 
principles . 
	 •	Stratigraphy method is borrowed from geology . Sir Charles Lyell 
shaped the concept of stratigraphy in geology and published it in his 
outstanding book Principles of Geology in 1830 . 
	 •	There are certain fundamental laws and notions adopted in identifying 
and studying stratigraphy . These are : Laws of Superposition , Laws 
of Original Horizontality , Laws of Original Continuity , Laws of 
Stratigraphical Succession and Laws of Faunal Succession . 
	 •	Stratigraphy was later on developed to suit the needs of archaeology by 
Edward C . Harris in 1970s . In his book “ Principles of Archaeological 
Stratigraphy ”  ( 1979 )  . Harris questioned the application of geological 
laws directly in archaeology . 
	 •	He worked out a new method in the interpretation of archaeological 
stratification which is popularly called as Harris matrix . 
	 •	It works on a simple fundamental principle that if one cultural layer 
lies upon another , then the lower layer must have been deposited before 
the upper layer . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 149
Excavation Methods-II 	 •	Stratigraphy is an important relative dating technique i . e . it does not give 
you an absolute date , but indicates something is older or younger than 
things found above or below it . It gives the proper cultural sequence 
and aids in understanding of different cultures . However , it has its own 
limitations . 
11 . 7 KEY WORDS
	 •	CAD : CAD or Computer-aided design is the application of computer 
systems ( or workstations ) to aid in the creation , modification , analysis , 
or optimization of a design . 
	 •	Geology : It refers to the science which deals with the physical structure 
and substance of the earth , their history , and the processes which act 
on them . 
	 •	Ravine : It refers to a deep , narrow gorge with steep sides . 
	 •	Trigonometry : It is a branch of mathematics that studies relationships 
involving lengths and angles of triangles . 
11 . 8 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Define stratigraphy . 
2 . Write a short note on the contribution of Edward C . Harris in 
stratigraphy . 
3 . Describe land survey in archaeology . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . What is topographical survey in archaeology ? Discuss its significance . 
2 . Elaborate different methods of topographical survey . 
3 . Explain the various laws of stratigraphy . 
4 . Analyze the importance of stratigraphy in archaeology . 
11 . 9 FURTHER READINGS
E . B Banning , 2002 . Archaeological Survey . New York : Kluwer Academic 
Press . 
Edward C . Harris . 1997 . Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy . London : 
Second Edition , Academic Press Limited . 
Excavation Methods-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
150 Material
Jim Grant , Sam Gorin and Neil Fleming . 2002 . The Archaeology Coursebook : 
An Introduction to Study Skills , Topics and Methods . London : 
Routledge . 
Lewis R . Binford . 1972 . An Archaeological Perspective . New York : Seminar 
Press . 
P . A Parkes . 1986 . Current Scientific Techniques in Archaeology . London : 
Croomhelm . 
R . E Taylor and C . W . Meighan , eds . 1978 . Chronologies in New World 
Archaeology . Orlando : Fla . Academic Press . 
Richard Tabor . 2004 . Regional Perspectives in Archaeology : From Strategy to 
Narrative . Oxford : British Archaeological Reports International Series . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 151
Excavation Methods-III
UNIT 12 EXCAVATION METHODS-III
Structure 
12 . 0 Introduction
12 . 1 Objectives
12 . 2 Three Dimensional Recording
12 . 3 Drawing
12 . 4 Aerial Photography
12 . 5 Cataloguing
12 . 6 Conservation Methods
12 . 7 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
12 . 8 Summary
12 . 9 Key Words
12 . 10 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
12 . 11 Further Readings
12 . 0 INTRODUCTION
Archaeological excavation is the process by which archaeologists define , 
retrieve and record cultural and biological remains buried in the ground . The 
past activities leave traces in the form of house , graves , artefacts , bones , seeds , 
and other traces which signify human experience . Before any excavation , the 
site must be located . Aerial photography is one of the techniques employed for 
this work . The technique of three dimensional recording of objects evolved 
with time . Conservation of an artefact is of prime importance in archaeology . 
After an artefact is conserved , its drawing provides the most relevant and 
detailed information . The reporting of artefacts from an excavation involves 
many stages , and cataloguing is one such step . It involves the description of 
the characteristics of individual artefacts . 
12 . 1 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
	 •	Understand three-dimensional recording
	 •	Explain archaeological drawing
	 •	Discuss the technique of aerial photography
	 •	Describe cataloguing
	 •	Understand various conservation methods in archaeology
Excavation Methods-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
152 Material
12 . 2 THREE DIMENSIONAL RECORDING
For a long time the capturing of the third dimension , the depth or height was 
challenging . Traditionally , excavation plans and sections were documented 
in two dimensions . Objects were also recorded in two dimensions , often 
from different angles . Remote sensing images like aerial photographs 
were represented as flat surfaces . Although depth could be visualized with 
techniques such as stereoscopes , analysis of relief was troublesome . Threedimensional recording is the recording of artefacts and structures in time and 
space . The provenience of archaeological finds is recorded with reference 
to the site grid . 
The need for recording archaeological finds by three-dimensional 
method has been emphasized by Sir Mortimer Wheeler in his renowned 
work , Archaeology from the Earth . Several methods for three-dimensional 
recording have been prescribed . For example , by intersecting measurements 
from two reference points and levelling with a bubble level attached to a 
surveying pole or similar straight edge . Wheeler advanced an Orthogonal 
System of measurement . It consisted of a line of datum pegs connected by 
string and not more than one meter distant from each other and of a strong 
wooden square long enough to cover the width of a normal excavation trench . 
Thus the string marks a reference line and measurements are taken at right 
angles to it , the square being held level . 1
Another method described later on is based on another principle in 
general usage in modern surveying . From a base point or station we measure 
a direction , the distance between base point and the feature to be recorded 
and finally the difference in level . To get the direction more conveniently the 
angle between true north and the line pointing to the feature ( azimuth ) should 
be determined as in surveying practice . Since the distances involved are very 
limited for the present purpose , any complicated and expensive instrument is 
not required . A simple angular division fixed upon the wooden peg marking 
the base point is needed . Other things required comprise a tape , a small spirit 
level , a plumb bob and a prismatic compass . This method is very economical 
and yields very reliable results . When the excavation work is conducted in a 
simple , straightforward way , Wheeler ’ s Orthogonal System may be superior . 
All this changed at the end of the last century with the introduction 
of computer based digitization technologies , 3D software , and digital nearsurface sampling devices . 3D recording is conducted preferably with an 
electronic recording device , the total station or base point ; or if no total 
station is available , with tapes , plumb bobs , and surveyor ’ s levels . The new 
technology which usually involves off-site computer manipulation of the 
data , adds further accuracy to three-dimensional recording . 
1 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 153
The spatial properties of the multi-scale archaeological dataset can Excavation Methods-III
now be accurately recorded , analysed and presented . Relationships between 
artefacts can be elucidated by visualizing the records in a three dimensional 
space , computer-based simulations can be made to test hypotheses on the past 
use of space , remote sensing techniques help in detecting previously hidden 
features of landscapes , thus shedding light on bygone land uses . 2
12 . 3 DRAWING
After the conservation of an artefact , a drawing provides more relevant , 
detailed , easily edited , and potentially comparable information than is 
possible in a photograph . One of the most common jobs of an archaeological 
illustrator is drawing the finds and features from excavations and museums . 
The archaeological drawings are not just making a pretty picture of the item . 
The purpose is to provide most of the information in a form that the viewers 
can read . A good archaeological illustrator is well aware of the conventions 
governing how artefacts should be drawn . The knowledge of techniques 
of recording and drawing artefacts makes the work accurate and clear . The 
definition of a quality artefact drawing is ‘ …one which incorporates an 
understanding of the component parts of an artefact with an ability to make 
an accurate and aesthetic rendering of its character . 
Drawing artefacts reinforce an archaeologist ’ s observational powers , 
and highlights features relevant to identification and interpretation . Drawings 
can depict both easily visible and fainter surface areas . All illustration 
should have a metric scale . What gives drawing its strength is the amount of 
information that can be expressed in a single image . By excluding the detail 
that renders a drawing realistic and applying a variety of conventions for 
various materials , archaeological drawings become interpretive diagrams 
rather than artistic or realistic portrayals of the artefact . The illustrator 
can furnish the drawing to his or her intended audience whether it is for 
publication , where a more technical drawing is common , or for museum 
display , where a more artistic portrayal is appropriate . This is also depends 
upon the available technology , and while 3D imaging is becoming increasingly 
possible , most illustrators continue to use the more cost-effective pen and 
ink method . When illustrating for publication , drawings make it convenient 
for researchers to examine and interpret the artefact to better understand its 
use in both a historical and archaeological context . 3
Techniques of Drawings
There are many different techniques that are used for artefact drawings 
nowadays . Also , different projects , laboratories , and illustrators use different 
2 dimensions-of-archaeology
3 
Excavation Methods-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
154 Material
 ‘ in-house ’ techniques that are specific to that specific person or place . In spite 
of this , there are many universal goals within artefact drawing , and a limited 
way of achieving them . These common principles are described below : 
Orientation 
It refers to the minimum to be included in a plan view of both sides and 
profile view , as required . If an object is bent it should be drawn as such , but 
the original shape can also be included . Conventions for orientation are based 
on types of artefact . For instance , pointed objects such as swords or pins are 
drawn with the tip facing down ; however projectile points are aligned with 
the point upwards . The illustrator should provide as many views as necessary 
to convey the most amount of information . 
Scale 
It is important have the knowledge of the scale before drawing and how 
much the reduction or enlargement will affect the details of the artefact . A 
linear scale should also be included indicating which scale is being used on 
the actual drawing for future reference . A majority of the small finds can be 
drawn at a 1 : 1 scale , meaning 1cm in reality = 1cm on paper . Tiny artefacts , 
such as beads could also be enlarged to show more detail . For larger objects 
it may be necessary to scale down as necessary , which can include a scale of 
1 : 2 or 1 : 4 , etc . generally objects are drawn at a larger size , considering the 
reduction that will take place during the publication process . 
Outline 
There are different methods of outlining the object according to the available 
material . It can be traced directly , measured with an object such as a setsquare , drawn using a grid system , scanned , projected , or traced from a scaled 
photograph provided that the image in the photo was not distorted or taken 
from an undesirable angle , etc . 
Views 
When including multiple views of an object , it is vital for the illustrator to 
show the relationships between those views . Link lines are used to indicate 
this relationship , and are typically short dashes to clarify to the reader what 
he or she is looking at . When suitable , it is also sensible to include a crosssection of the object . This is performed by variety of methods , but in the final 
drawing the cross-section is either blacked in or for some materials diagonal 
lines or stippling is used . 
Shading 
Shading is always done with the light source at an angle of 45˚ from the top 
left corner of the drawing . For different materials either stippling or lines are 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 155
used to fill in the shaded areas . Shading is basically used to depict the relief Excavation Methods-III
of the object and should be kept to a minimum if possible . 
Check Your Progress
1 . Where has the need for recording archaeological finds by threedimensional methods been emphasized ? 
2 . What is one common job of the archaeological illustrator ? 
3 . From where is shading always done ? 
12 . 4 AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHY
After the invention of camera , people were ascending the skies in balloons 
to capture the unique outlook that only the birds see . Aerial photography is 
one of the best methods of understanding archaeological landscapes , because 
it reveals and make sense of features which are too faint , large and irregular 
to be better appreciated from the ground level . In cases like the Nazca lines 
( in southern Peru )  , the features are meaningless from the ground but easily 
visible from the air . 
In 1906 , the stone circle at Stonehenge ( a prehistoric monument in 
Wiltshire , England ) was one of the first archaeology sites to be photographed 
from the air . Although aerial photography was used during the First World 
War , it was not until after aerial developments during the Second World War 
that its use in archaeology became more popular . 
Aerial photographic research consists of three main elementsreconnaissance ( actually flying and taking pictures )  , archive search 
( investigating pictures of the site or area taken earlier ) and mapping ( where 
the information in aerial photography is interpreted and correctly placed )  . 
Two kinds of aerial photographs are taken—vertical and oblique . 
Vertical photographs are mostly captured at high-level , i . e .  , more than 
1000 feet height , continuously with machine cameras mounted at the base 
of aero-planes flying in straight regular traverses . In the 1940s many such 
photographs were taken for military purposes . Oblique photographs are 
generally taken with a handy zoom camera from closer to the ground , at an 
angle to the site in view . These photographs are captured actively when the 
photographer has positively identified a subject . Vertical photographs are 
usually passive in the sense that they only provide blanket coverage with 
no particular archaeological bias . With the purpose of providing a threedimensional effect , an overlapping pair of vertical photographs , taken from 
slightly offset positions , can be viewed stereoscopically . 
Excavation Methods-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
156 Material
Aerial photography revolutionized the landscape archaeology in the 
20th century . Early investigators attempted to gain birds-eye views of sites 
using hot air balloons , scaffolds or cameras attached to kites . It started with 
balloon flights in the first decade of the 20th century and expanded using 
open-seated biplanes in the second and third decades and later on covered 
almost the entire England . Methodical archaeological aerial photography 
has been conducted by organizations like the Royal Commissions on 
Historical Monuments ( RCHMs )  , Cambridge University Committee for 
Aerial Photography ( CUCAP ) and several other organizations . Sometimes 
helicopters are used as an alternative to fixed wing aero-planes , having the 
advantage of the ability to hover in mid-air over a site . 
There are multiple advantages of aerial photographs for the 
archaeologists . For the first time large sites could be viewed accurately , in their 
entirety and within their landscape . This aided the creation of drawn plans 
and also inspired archaeologists to look beyond the distinct monument and 
to appreciate a site ’ s role within its setting . Photographs are taken vertically 
for the purposes of planning and spatial analysis and obliquely to highlight 
certain features or give perspective . Vertical photos can be converted into 
scaled plans by the process of photogrammetry . 
Obviously , archaeological features are more visible from the air than 
on the ground . In temperate Europe , aerial reconnaissance is one of the 
principal methods by which new archaeological sites are discovered . Minor 
variations in ground conditions caused by buried features can be highlighted 
by numerous factors and then viewed from the air . 
Slight variations in ground levels will cast shadows when the sun is low 
and these can best be viewed from an aero-plane . These are called shadow 
marks . Buried ditches will hold more water and buried walls will hold less 
water than undisturbed ground , this phenomenon causes crops to grow better 
or worse , taller or shorter , over each kind of ground and hence define buried 
features which are evident as tonal or colour differences . Such effects are 
referred to as crop-marks . 
During winters frost can also appear on ploughed fields where water 
has naturally accumulated along the lines of buried features . These are known 
as frost-marks . Minor differences in soil colour between natural deposits and 
archaeological ones can also often show in ploughed fields as soil-marks . 
Differences in levels and buried features will also affect the behaviour of 
surface water across a site and can produce a remarkable effect after heavy 
rain . 
Roger Agache ( France )  , Antoine Poidebard ( Syria )  , L . W . B Rees 
( Jordan ) O . G . S . Crawford ( England )  , Sir Henry Wellcome ( Sudan ) and 
Giacomo Boni ( Italy ) are considered to be pioneers of aerial archaeology . 
Kite aerial photography is now being used on archaeological sites outside 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 157
Excavation Methods-III the visible spectrum , from the near ultra-violet through to the near and 
thermal infra-red . Aerial archaeology is used in the course of research and 
investigation in aviation archaeology . 
12 . 5 CATALOGUING
Cataloguing refers to the accounting used in the laboratory after the artefacts 
and eco-facts are processed initially and giving the numbers with which they 
are marked for storage . Its records describe and record what was found during 
an archaeological exploration and it is the primary record for all materials 
after excavation . The catalogue number is a unique number given to each 
individual item , or group of items , in an archaeological collection . Most 
archaeologists are fanatical about cataloguing their finds because it is easy 
for one distracted lab worker to mess up an artefact ’ s record of provenience . 4
Cataloguing is the assembly of all basic information about each 
item in the collection . This process is essentially a descriptive one , in 
which a series of observed variables are noted , identified and recorded . 
The most important aspect of cataloguing for an archaeological collection 
is permanently associating a specimen with its archaeological context . It 
involves keying a number that is associated with the specimen to a written 
record of its provenience . 
The cataloguing process starts at the excavation and continues in the 
lab after the field season is over . Each and every object must be accounted for 
and its provenience maintained through a catalogue . The beginner ’ s first job 
in a lab is almost always cataloguing . This can consume a lot of time . As per 
the thumb rule in archaeology , for every week spent excavating , archaeologist 
spend three to five weeks or more cleaning , conserving , and cataloguing the 
finds . Sometimes it appears tedious , but meticulous cataloguing is essential 
because without recording its precise provenience , an artefact ’ s value to 
future researches is greatly reduced . 
The chief objective of cataloguing is to identify and document an object 
or a group of objects with the purpose of collecting valuable information . 
Such information may comprise object ’ s identification number or code and 
its provenience . Even though the purpose of cataloguing is not to record 
characteristics or collect data for research purpose , catalogue information is 
important and useful for research . It allows the researcher to know about the 
objects in collection and the identifications made for cataloguing sometimes 
can be used for very general analysis . Without cataloguing , an item cannot 
be properly indexed and will not be easily accessible to the museum staff or 
the public . Sometimes a repository may also catalogue the records concerned 
4 Robert L . Kelly , David Hurst Thomas , 2013 ,  “ Archaeology : Down to Earth ”  , Cengage 
Learning
Excavation Methods-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
158 Material
with an archaeological collection . Generally the accession number is linked 
to both the specimens and the records . 
Catalogue or identity numbers give a code for uniquely identifying 
objects and for linking archaeological objects to their provenience . The 
cataloguing can be done on paper and later entered into an electronic database , 
or it may be recorded electronically first . It is not possible to visualize 
all the variables that another archaeologist might desire to analyse , but a 
good catalogue provides ample information to enable others to know what 
artefact is being described without even looking at the artefact . All artefact 
cataloguing depends on the ability to recognize and interpret artefacts and 
their characteristics , and this comes only through training and experience . 5
An artefact catalogue is a record of the characteristics of an artefact 
pertinent to the dimensions of space , form and time . For archaeologists , 
space-or which site , and where on the site , the artefact come from is the most 
important variable . It should be recorded both in the catalogue and on the 
label associated with the artefact . Form means the shape , size , colour , weight , 
material , pattern and the manufacturing technique . Information regarding 
these attributes can be acquired by observation and measurement of the 
artefact . Time or the age of the artefact can be ascertained with reference 
to the variable of form , because mostly one or more the characteristics will 
vary with time as the fashion and technology changes . Lastly , the quantity 
of artefact remains should be recorded . 
Apart from these characteristics , the artefacts are often classified as 
per the functional characteristics on the basis of assumptions made about their 
usage . Accordingly artefacts can be grouped into categories such as domestic , 
architectural and personal . Domestic comprise the items used at home , 
for example , ceramic tableware , bone and metal cutlery , glass bottles etc . 
Architectural items includes those which were used in constructing buildings 
such as ceramic bricks , plaster , wallpaper , iron nails etc . The majority of 
functional classification systems are based on the work of Stanley South , who 
was the proponent of the use of functional classification with the purpose of 
facilitating pattern recognition on sites . This comprised the identification of 
site-specific activities and activity areas within sites , and the comparison of 
different sites . However , functional analysis has its limitations . 6
12 . 6 CONSERVATION METHODS
Conservation is an action in order to prevent , stop or retard the process of 
deterioration of the artefacts . It is sometimes supplemented by the restoration 
work , which means the treatment of objects with necessary corrections and 
5 Jane Balme , Alistair Paterson , 2009 ,  “ Archaeology in Practice : A Student Guide to 
Archaeological Analyses ”  , John Wiley & Sons , p . 364
6 Ibid .  , p . 365
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 159
alterations . The idea of conservation is an eventual reality , which comprise Excavation Methods-III
both preservation and restoration . 
Any buried artefact would have reached a chemical and physical 
equilibrium with its environment . It remains quite stable in that 
environment . After burial in the earth , they have to acclimatize with the 
new environment through certain modifications to establish equilibrium 
with its microenvironment . The artefacts will again need to adjust with the 
new environment when it is excavated . Consequently , this process leads to 
breakdown of the object either physically or chemically or biologically or 
combination of all these factors . 
The recovered materials are needed to be conserved . Earlier the 
artefacts were washed with water ( except things that water could harm )  . 
But nowadays , many archaeologists hesitate to wash some artefacts as this 
might lead to damage and destruction of some information . For example , 
stone and ceramic artefacts can contain pollen or blood residues , plants , or 
other materials that can be identified and used to reconstruct tool use and 
diet—but not if an overenthusiastic lab worker has thoroughly polished the 
piece . Though , in general , a simple cleaning is in order . 
Some artefacts may require more attention , particularly organic or metal 
artefacts recovered from wet deposits . It may also be necessary to reconstruct 
broken pieces . This is frequently done with pottery since ceramics are mostly 
found in broken state , and reconstruction apparently tells us about the shape , 
size and decoration of the vessel . 
Archaeologists need to employ certain methods for the care of 
archaeological materials . There are three methods--cleaning , repair and 
stabilization . Cleaning implies the careful removal of dirt to facilitate 
examination , recording and conservation of the artefacts . Repair means 
securing the original position of the objects . Stabilization refers to 
strengthening of the specimens in all means to reduce or arrest its further 
deterioration . Different methods are applied for the conservation of organic 
and inorganic materials . Organic materials like bone , wood , leather , 
ivory are best kept under the conditions in which they are found . If their 
microenvironment is dry , wet , or humid , the object must be placed in the 
same microenvironment . Various chemical applications are practiced for the 
preservation of inorganic materials like potteries , stone , metals etc . 
Archaeological Museums
An archaeological museum is an institution that preserves a collection 
of artefacts and other objects of artistic , cultural , historical , or scientific 
importance . The purpose of museum is to serve the material remains not only 
to the researchers but also make it available to public to get an idea about 
their cultural heritage . 
Excavation Methods-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
160 Material
The earliest necessity to house objects of antiquarian remains in India 
dates back to late 1796 AD when the Asiatic Society of Bengal felt the need 
to house the vast collection of archaeological , ethnological , geological , 
zoological pursuits . However , they started the first museum in 1814 . 
Apart from this due to different explorations conducted by 
Archaeological Survey of India during the tenure of its first Director General , 
Alexander Cunningham vast quantities of antiquarian remains were collected . 
The establishment of site museums had to wait until the arrival of Sir John 
Marshall , who initiated the founding of the local museums like Sarnath 
( 1904 )  , Agra ( 1906 )  , Ajmer ( 1908 )  , Delhi Fort ( 1909 )  , Bijapur ( 1912 )  , 
Nalanda ( 1917 ) and Sanchi ( 1919 )  . National Museum Delhi , Salar Jung 
Museum Hyderabad , Madras Museum , Trissur Sakthan Museum , Pazhassi 
Raja museum Kozhikkode , Ambalavayal museum Waynad , and so on , have 
a good collection of archaeological materials . Tamil Nadu has Government 
Archaeological Museums at Chennai , Erode and Karur . 
Check Your Progress
4 . Why is aerial photography one of the best methods of understanding 
archaeological landscapes ? 
5 . What is cataloguing ? 
6 . What are the three methods employed for the care of archaeological 
materials ? 
12 . 7 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . The need for recording archaeological finds by three-dimensional 
method has been emphasized by Sir Mortimer Wheeler in his renowned 
work , Archaeology from the Earth . 
2 . One of the most common jobs of an archaeological illustrator is drawing 
the finds and features from excavations and museums . 
3 . Shading is always done with the light source at an angle of 45˚ from 
the top left corner of the drawing . 
4 . Aerial photography is one of the best methods of understanding 
archaeological landscapes , because it reveals and make sense of 
features which are too faint , large and irregular to be better appreciated 
from the ground level . 
5 . Cataloguing refers to the accounting used in the laboratory after the 
artefacts and eco-facts are processed initially and giving the numbers 
with which they are marked for storage . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 161
6 . Archaeologists need to employ certain methods for the care of Excavation Methods-III
archaeological materials . There are three methods--cleaning , repair 
and stabilization . 
12 . 8 SUMMARY
	 •	Archaeological procedure involves identifying a potential area , 
systematic collection of data , its organization , situating it in a particular 
cultural period , conserving and preserving them and also interpreting 
them . 
	 •	Traditionally , excavation plans and sections were documented in two 
dimensions . Sir Mortimer Wheeler emphasized the need for three 
dimensional recording . It is the recording of artefacts and structures 
in time and space . 
	 •	After the conservation of an artefact , a drawing provides more relevant , 
detailed , easily edited , and potentially comparable information than is 
possible in a photograph . 
	 •	The archaeological drawings are not just making a pretty picture of 
the item . The purpose is to provide most of the information in a form 
that the viewers can read . 
	 •	Aerial photography is one of the best methods of understanding 
archaeological landscapes , because it reveals and make sense of features 
which are too faint , large and irregular to be better appreciated from 
the ground level . 
	 •	Cataloguing refers to the accounting used in the laboratory after the 
artefacts and eco-facts are processed initially and giving the numbers 
with which they are marked for storage . 
	 •	Its records describe and record what was found during an archaeological 
exploration and it is the primary record for all materials after excavation . 
The catalogue number is a unique number given to each individual item , 
or group of items , in an archaeological collection . 
	 •	Conservation is an action in order to prevent , stop or retard the process 
of deterioration of the artefacts . It is sometimes supplemented by the 
restoration work , which means the treatment of objects with necessary 
corrections and alterations . 
	 •	An archaeological museum is an institution that preserves a collection 
of artefacts and other objects of artistic , cultural , historical , or scientific 
importance . 
Excavation Methods-III
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
162 Material
12 . 9 KEY WORDS
	 •	Azimuth : It is magnetic bearing sighted from your position to a known 
landmark . Used in navigation and in determining site locations . 
	 •	Catalogue : It is the systematic list recording artefacts and other finds , 
retrieved by archaeological research , including their description and 
provenience . 
	 •	Conservation : It is a branch of archaeology concerned with the 
stabilization , preservation , repair , reconstruction , and general 
management of material culture and natural resources . 
	 •	Nazca Lines : They are a group of very large trenches in the Nazca 
Desert , in southern Peru . They were created between 500 BC and 500 
AD . 
	 •	Photogrammetry : It is the science of making measurements from 
photographs . The input to photogrammetry is photographs , and the 
output is typically a map , a drawing , a measurement , or a 3D model 
of some real-world object or scene . 
	 •	Provenience : It means the source , origin , or location of an artefact or 
feature and the recording of same . It is the position of an archaeological 
find in time and space , recorded three-dimensionally . 
	 •	Reconnaissance : It is a technique of gathering data , often associated 
with surface surveys , in which archaeological remains are systematically 
identified and plotted on a map . 
12 . 10 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Write an explanatory note on three-dimensional recording . 
2 . What is archaeological drawing ? 
3 . Define cataloguing in archaeology . 
4 . Write a short note on archaeological museums . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . Discuss various techniques employed in this process . Also explain the 
significance of drawing . 
2 . Explain the origins , development and types of aerial photography . Also 
write a note on its significance . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 163
3 . How is cataloguing done and what is its significance ? Excavation Methods-III
4 . Describe the methods and significance of conservation of artefacts in 
archaeology . 
12 . 11 FURTHER READINGS
D . Browne . 1975 . Principles and Practice in Modern Archaeology . London : 
Teach Yourself Books . 
K . Rajan . 2016 . Understanding Archaeology . Field Methods , Theories and 
Practices . Thanjavur : Manoo Pathippakam . 
L . Adkins and R . Adkins . 1989 . Archaeological Illustration . Cambridge , Great 
Britain : Cambridge University Press . 
William Matthew Flinders Petrie . 2013 . Methods and Aims in Archaeology . 
Cambridge , Great Britain : Cambridge University Press . 
Lewis R . Binford . 1972 . An Archaeological Perspective . New York : Seminar 
Press . 
P . A Parkes . 1986 . Current Scientific Techniques in Archaeology . London : 
Croomhelm . 
R . E Taylor and C . W . Meighan , eds . 1978 . Chronologies in New World 
Archaeology . Orlando : Fla . Academic Press . 
Richard Tabor . 2004 . Regional Perspectives in Archaeology : From Strategy to 
Narrative . Oxford : British Archaeological Reports International Series . 
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
164 Material
UNIT 13 DATING METHODS IN 
ARCHAEOLOGY-I
Structure 
13 . 0 Introduction
13 . 1 Objectives
13 . 2 Relative Dating
13 . 2 . 1 Typology 
13 . 2 . 2 Stratigraphy
13 . 2 . 3 Seriation
13 . 2 . 4 Geo-Archaeological Dating 
13 . 2 . 5 Obsidian Hydration Dating ( OHD ) 
13 . 2 . 6 Chemical Dating of Bones 
13 . 3 Absolute Dating
13 . 3 . 1 Radio Carbon Dating ( C-14 ) 
13 . 3 . 2 Dendrochronology
13 . 3 . 3 Thermoluminescence
13 . 4 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
13 . 5 Summary
13 . 6 Key Words
13 . 7 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
13 . 8 Further Readings
13 . 0 INTRODUCTION
Archaeology is a multidisciplinary social science that routinely follows 
analytical techniques from various spheres of inquiry to answer questions 
about human behaviour and material in different phases of history . 
Archaeological investigations have no meaning unless the chronological 
sequences of events are reconstructed faithfully . Dating of remains is vital 
in archaeology , in order to place finds in correct relation to one another and 
to find what was present in the experience of any human being at a given 
time and place . 1 
Dating is the process of assigning to an object or an event a 
date in the past , allowing such object or event to be located in a previously 
established chronology . This generally requires a ‘ dating method ’  . A number 
of dating methods are used by the archaeologists to determine the antiquity 
of archaeological materials , organic remains like plants and animals , and 
of archaeological sites . These dating techniques can be broadly subdivided 
into two groups : Relative Dating and Absolute Dating . Relative dating 
identify the order in which the sites or artefacts were used in a sequence from 
earliest to latest . Absolute dating techniques attempts to establish an exact 
or approximate calendar date for a site or artefact . 
1 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 165
Dating Methods in 
13 . 1 OBJECTIVES Archaeology-I
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
• Understand the concept of relative dating and its various methods used 
in archaeology
• Examine absolute dating methods in archaeology
13 . 2 RELATIVE DATING
Relative dating is basic to chronology . It is the ordering of events in the absence 
of any written record or evidence . Under relative dating method a tentative 
date is achieved based on archaeological stratigraphy , palaeography seriation , 
linguistic style , context , art and architectural features . Archaeologists use 
relative dating techniques when the absolute dates are not possible or feasible . 
Before the advent of the scientific techniques , most of the archaeological 
and historical objects were dated based on relative dating methods . Relative 
dating techniques identify the order in which sites or artefacts were used in 
a sequence from earliest to latest . 
13 . 2 . 1 Typology 
Typology involves putting a number of finds into chronological order . It is a 
method of comparing reference objects with the purpose of classifying them 
according to their similarity or dissimilarity and associating them to a specific 
context or period . This technique is often used when it is not possible to make 
use of absolute dating methods . It generally allows the archaeologists to 
identify the period to which a cultural site or object belongs , without stating 
the date of occupation . This method is mainly applied to projectile points 
and ceramic vessels . These present many characteristics that are used for 
comparing them , such as morphology and raw materials in the case of stone 
tools , and decorative techniques and motifs in the case of ceramics . 
13 . 2 . 2 Stratigraphy
Stratigraphy can be described as a ‘ layer cake ’ type arrangement of deposits 
called strata , with the older layer beneath the latest . It is also known as the 
 ‘ Law of Superposition ’  . It is the branch of the geology that deals with the 
study and interpretation of the sedimentary stratified rocks , as well as of the 
identification , description , sequence , both vertical and horizontal , cartography 
and correlation of the units stratified of rocks . The artefacts that are discovered in 
successive undisturbed cultural layers can be dated relatively on the basis of the 
principles of stratigraphy . The principle of cultural / archaeological stratification 
is fundamental and it plays a dominant role in archaeological investigations . 
Modern excavation techniques are based on stratigraphic principles . 
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
166 Material
The concept of stratigraphy in geology was shaped by Sir Charles 
Lyell . There are certain fundamental laws and notions that are followed in 
identifying and studying stratigraphy . These are Laws of Superposition , Laws 
of Original Horizontality , Laws of Original Continuity and Laws of Faunal 
Succession . This concept was introduced in archaeology by the scholars like 
C . J . Thomsen , Kathleen M . Ken yon , J . J . Worsaae , and Mortimer Wheeler . 
Subsequently , it was developed to suit the needs of archaeology by 
Edward C . Harris in the 1970s . In his book Principles of Archaeological 
Stratigraphy published in 1979 , Edward Harris questioned the direct 
application of geological laws in archaeology . He worked out a new method 
of interpretation of archaeological stratification which is popularly known 
as the Harris matrix . It works on a simple fundamental principle that if 
one cultural layer lies upon another , then the lower layer must have been 
deposited before the upper layer . The time gap between the depositions of 
two cultural layers may be a century or a millennium and it depends upon the 
nature of cultural deposit . According to this concept , the contextual layer on 
the top is considered younger than the layer that is found below . Therefore , 
a succession of layers would provide a relative chronological sequence from 
earliest to latest . Any cultural material found in a particular contextual layer 
can be dated relatively younger and older depending upon from which layer 
the particular artefact is picked up . The artefacts recovered from orderly 
placed stratified layers would help to categorize them in certain chronological 
order . For example , the collection of Stone Age tools such as Palaeolithic 
tools , Microlithic tools and Neolithic tools in different cultural layers helps 
to establish the approximate date of a particular cultural layer . 2
13 . 2 . 3 Seriation
Seriation is a relative dating method in which artefacts from several sites , 
in the same culture , are placed in chronological order . It is a method of 
ascertaining the age of the artefacts on the basis of style , type , and technique . 
It is broadly classified into two categories namely stylistic seriation and 
frequency seriation . Stylistic seriation is a method in which artefacts and 
attributes are positioned on the basis of resemblance in style . For instance , 
dish-on-stand , S-shaped jar and perforated jar are some of the diagnostic styles 
available in Harappan sites . The carinated vessel is the diagnostic pots of 
Jorwe ware . The availability of such diagnostic wares would help to determine 
the cultural phase . The frequency seriation is more strictly inclined towards 
sequential ordering of the artefacts and assessing the origin , popularity and 
disuse of the artefacts . The length of time and degree of popularity ( frequency ) 
would be assessed in the given archaeological context . The frequency with 
which each form of artefact appears can be plotted as bars on a timeline . 
2 
M020081 / ET / 1493287698P07-M17-RelativeDatingMethods-ET . pdf
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 167
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I Generally it produces a shape known as a ‘ battleship curve ’ because it 
resembles the aerial view of a battleship . The changing popularity of each 
form will appear as a sequence of battleship curves . Other sites can be dated 
relative to the first site by comparing their seriation . For example , Painted 
Grey ware , Northern Black Polished ware and rouletted ware were observed 
in a particular time range only . Based on the quantity and frequency of the 
diagnostic ware , the date of the particular cultural phase is established . The 
Harappan ceramics were also examined on the basis of structure and shape . 
13 . 2 . 4 Geo-Archaeological Dating 
For the early prehistoric period archaeologists have borrowed techniques 
from geography , geology and the other earth sciences to reconstruct the 
environments of early people and also to establish a relative chronology 
based on environmental changes . With the change of climate , the types and 
relative numbers of different flora and fauna also changed . Where organic 
preservation is good , changes can be traced by analyzing pollen ( palynology ) 
found in sediments and animal bones . To provide pollen sequence a core 
through a deposit such as peat is taken and for each layer the proportions of 
different types of pollen are recognized . Sites within these deposits can then 
be cross-dated to particular phases of climate history in local sequences . This 
analysis is based on many factors which include the different amounts of 
pollen produced by each plant and the different distances the pollen travels . 
Likewise , sites can be relatively dated from the type of animal bones present . 
This method is particularly useful where the sequence of the appearance or 
extinction of species ( for example mammoths ) is known . Absolute techniques 
are needed to date these sequences . 3
13 . 2 . 5 Obsidian Hydration Dating ( OHD ) 
Obsidian is a hard , dark , glass-like volcanic rock formed by the rapid 
solidification of lava without crystallization . In 1960 , two geologists , Irving 
Friedman and Robert Smith introduced Obsidian Hydration Method ( OHD ) 
to the archaeological community . It is a geochemical method of determining 
the age of an artefact made of obsidian either in absolute or in relative terms . 
Obsidian contains about 0 . 2 percent water . As soon as a piece of obsidian is 
fractured it begins to absorb water from the atmosphere and begins to diffuse 
into the glass at a known rate . By measuring how far water has penetrated into 
the obsidian ( hydration ) on one site a relative date can be estimated to other 
sites . In some cases , obsidian can be regulated to provide absolute dates but 
that requires substantial additional data since the speed of hydration varies 
with local temperatures and the chemical composition of the obsidian . This 
is one of the cheaper laboratory dating techniques . 
3 Jim Grant , Sam Gorin , Neil Fleming , 2008 ,  “ The Archaeology Coursebook : An Introduction 
to Themes , Sites , Methods and Skills ”  , Routledge , London & New York , p . 82
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
168 Material
However , there are certain shortcomings in this method . The rate 
of hydration is not uniform throughout the world . The temperature varies 
over time from site to site . It is especially difficult to evaluate effects of 
temperature . Variation also exists in sample chemical composition . Reuse 
of artefact may lead to an erroneous date . 
13 . 2 . 6 Chemical Dating of Bones 
Bones are one of the important organic samples recovered in excavations . 
These bones help to reconstruct various aspects human life such as the dietary 
pattern , palaeo-climate , trade network and rituals performed in ancient times . 
Therefore , the control over the date would help to identify the changing 
pattern of diet , climate , ritual and trade . Buried bones absorb fluorine and 
uranium from water in the ground at the same time as their nitrogen content 
reduces as collagen in the bones decays . These processes take place at a 
uniform rate so it is possible to establish the relative age of different bones 
by measuring the proportions of these chemicals . 
Check Your Progress
1 . What is relative dating ? 
2 . Who shaped the concept of stratigraphy in geology ? 
3 . What is obsidian ? 
13 . 3 ABSOLUTE DATING
Absolute dating is a method in which involves precise dating of artefacts 
using various scientific techniques and in a few cases it is dated based on the 
hidden historical data available with historical documents such as inscriptions , 
copper plates , seals , coins , inscribed portrait sculptures and monuments . 
13 . 3 . 1 Radio Carbon Dating ( C-14 ) 
Radiocarbon dating ( also known as carbon dating or C-14 dating ) is a method 
for determining the age of an object containing organic material by using the 
properties of radiocarbon , a radioactive isotope of carbon . The radiocarbon 
dating is the oldest and perhaps the most widely used in archaeology . This 
method was developed in 1948 by Willard F . Libby as spin-off from atomic 
research during the Second World War . He received the Nobel Prize in 
Chemistry for this work in 1960 . 
It is based on the principle that radiocarbon C-14 is constantly been 
formed in the atmosphere by the interaction of cosmic rays with the nitrogen 
present in the atmosphere . The resulting C-14 combines with atmospheric 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 169
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I oxygen to form radioactive carbon dioxide which is absorbed by the plants 
by means of photosynthesis and by animals through eating . When the plant 
or animal ceases to be living it stops receiving fresh supply of C-14 . The 
existing C-14 now undergoes a process of decay which is called radioactivity . 
C-14 is a radioactive isotope or element of C-12 , and both are present in equal 
amounts . We may measure the decaying C-14 with reference to C-12 , and 
find out the number of years that have elapsed since the decay began . The 
object which contains less C-14 proves to be older in age , and that which 
contains more C-14 turns out to be younger . This measurement is based on 
the fact that the half-life of C-14 is 5568 years . The half-life of a radioactive 
material is defined as the period during which one-half of the amount of 
the material decays out . Since most organic materials perish in due course , 
charcoal because of its high content of carbon is the commonest material 
utilized for radiocarbon dating . 
The development of radiocarbon dating has had a profound impact on 
archaeology . Apart from allowing more accurate dating within archaeological 
sites than previous methods , it allows comparison of dates of events across 
great distances . Histories of archaeology often refer to its impact as the 
 ‘ radiocarbon revolution ’  . Radiocarbon dating has allowed key transitions in 
prehistory to be dated , such as the end of the last ice age , and the beginning 
of the Neolithic and Bronze Age in different regions . 
It was believed that the dates produced by radiocarbon dating were 
precise until it was discovered that amounts of carbon in the atmosphere 
have varied over time . This had led to underestimating the age of prehistoric 
sites by up to 800 years . To overcome this problem , radiocarbon dates are 
calibrated . Radiocarbon dates are never exact . Even after calibration there 
is a scope of error that is calculated statistically . This generally means that 
there is a 68 per cent chance or ‘ level of confidence ’  ( LOC ) that the real 
date is within the range indicated and a 95 per cent LOC that it is within 
twice the range . C-14 is mostly used to date organic materials including 
bone , shell and plant remains . It does not work on cremated bone although 
it will work for charred bone . It is more precise with wood samples from 
twigs and nuts than from trees that may have lived for hundreds of years . 
Radiocarbon ’ s practical use is for periods from 200 to about 10 , 000 years 
with less reliability to around 40 , 000 years . Until recently at least 10 grams 
of charcoal or 200 grams of bone were needed for results . However , the 
development of a process known as Accelerator Mass Spectrometry 
( AMS ) has facilitated much smaller samples of material to be dated , down 
to the one grain of cereal . It is a technique that measures the amount of 
Carbon-14 in an organic object and provides a rough indication of its age . 
Samples need to be handled carefully to avoid contamination . 4
4 Jim Grant , Sam Gorin , Neil Fleming , p . 86
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
170 Material
13 . 3 . 2 Dendrochronology
Dating of wooden objects on the basis of tree rings or growth rings of a 
tree is called dendrochronology . It is derived from the Greek word Dendron 
meaning ‘ tree limb ’ chronos mean ‘ time ’ and logy meaning ‘ study ’  . It is a 
dating method that uses the number , thickness and density of annual growth 
rings of ancient trees . This method was first developed by the American 
scientist A . E . Douglas at the beginning of the twentieth century . 
This is the most accurate chronometric dating method . It is based on the 
principle that every year many species of trees produce growth rings of new 
wood under their bark during annual growing seasons . The width of the ring 
( i . e .  , the amount of growth ) for each year is determined by various internal 
and external factors , but it tends to vary mainly in proportion to either the 
amount of available precipitation or the prevailing temperatures . The rings are 
wider in good conditions than in poor ones . Samples are obtained by using 
an increment borer , a simple metal tube of small diameter that can be driven 
into a tree to get a core extending from bark to centre . This core is split in the 
laboratory , the rings are counted and measured , and the sequence of rings is 
correlated with sequences from other cores . 5 
Trees located in the same area 
will have similar ring pattern which means wood from different periods can 
be matched in overlapping sequences . These are tied to historical dates by 
modern trees anchors the tree-ring chronology in time . 
Dendrochronology mostly uses softwood species that are sensitive to 
changes in growth conditions , while hardwoods exhibit rather little variation 
in ring width . This method provides precise dating , sometimes to the nearest 
year . It is especially used to develop calibration curves used to correct data 
obtained from radiocarbon dating , a technique that remains imprecise due to 
fluctuations in the concentration of C-14 in the atmosphere over the centuries . 
The bristlecone pines of California , which live for 4 , 000 years , were 
used to construct sequences over 7 , 000 years in the USA . However , this 
method has limitations . Not all areas have sufficiently varied seasons or 
sufficient surviving timber to make it possible to construct sequences . To 
effectively date wood around fifty years of tree rings are needed . Since this 
represents quite a thick piece of wood , the technique is better for dating 
building timbers than artefacts . Its direct use is from the Neolithic onwards 
when buildings were used and it has been widely used on medieval ships 
and buildings . 
Dendrochronology actually dates when the tree dies or is felled . 
Where wood has been reused , as often occurred with structural timbers 
in the past , this method can overestimate the age of a structure . However , 
dendrochronology is also the key method for calibrating radiocarbon dates 
5 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 171
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I and therefore is indirectly used in dating a wide range of organic materials 
for up to 11 , 500 years . 
13 . 3 . 3 Thermoluminescence
Thermoluminescence ( TL ) dating is a method that is based on the analysis of 
light release when heating crystalline material . It is used in mineralogy and 
geology , but is also increasingly being applied for dating of anthropological 
and archaeological samples . Thermoluminescence uses the phenomenon of 
ionizing radiations that exist naturally in the atmosphere . This dating method 
is mainly applicable for material with mineral or crystalline structure or with 
spurious crystalline contents . It is only functional for insulating material not 
for metallic artefacts . This technique is based on a unique physicochemical 
property of certain minerals ( especially quartz and feldspar ) that have an 
imperfect structure and therefore retain radioactive elements in the natural 
environment . Radioactive decay in the quartz crystals found in clay leads to 
a build-up of electric charge at a known rate . The electrical charge is released 
as light when the crystals are heated . When pottery is heated the energy in 
the flash of light is measured and used to calculate the time since it was fired . 
Thermoluminescence is a technique which involves complex 
manipulation . To obtain a date for a single pottery sample , it is necessary to 
perform a laboratory fractionation of the clay mineral used in the manufacture 
of the pottery and prepare around 75 sub-samples ; some of these are heated to 
release the level of thermoluminescence , while others receive a radiation dose 
to measure their sensitivity to radiation . Thermoluminescence can replace 
radiocarbon dating to date events that occurred more than 50 , 000 years ago ; 
it is used mainly for dating stone fireplaces , ceramics and fire remains . 6
Thermoluminescence dating is used for material where radiocarbon 
dating is not available , like sediments . Its use is now common in the 
authentication of old ceramic wares , for which it gives the fairly accurate date 
of the last firing . This technique has been used with reasonable success to date 
heat altered stone tools , burned hearths , and pottery . It is not as accurate as 
C-14 dating and can give incorrect readings due to radiation from the soil or 
if the initial heating was at low temperature . However , it is useful for older 
periods and cases where there are no organic remains such as dating Upper 
Palaeolithic figurines . 
Check Your Progress
4 . What development has facilitated the dating of extremely small 
samples of materials ? 
5 . What is the most accurate chronometric dating method ? 
6 . When is thermoluminescence dating used ? 
6 
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
172 Material
13 . 4 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Relative dating is basic to chronology . It refers to the ordering of events 
in the absence of any written record or evidence . 
2 . The concept of stratigraphy in geology was shaped by Sir Charles 
Lyell . 
3 . Obsidian is a hard , dark , glass-like volcanic rock formed by the rapid 
solidification of lava without crystallization . 
4 . The development of a process known as Accelerator Mass Spectrometry 
( AMS ) has facilitated much smaller samples of material to be dated , 
down to the one grain of cereal . 
5 . Dendrochronology is the most accurate chronometric dating method . 
6 . Thermoluminescence dating is used for material where radiocarbon 
dating is not available , like sediments . 
13 . 5 SUMMARY
• The chronology of events is a major element of reflection for researchers 
working in the field of human history . 
• Archaeologists have access to various techniques for dating 
archaeological sites or the objects found on those sites . 
• In archaeology , usually two types of dating are recognized- relative 
and absolute . 
• Relative dating comprises methods that are based on the analysis of 
comparative data or the context ( eg , geological , regional , cultural ) in 
which the object one wishes to date is found . 
• This approach helps to order events chronologically but it does not 
provide the absolute age of an object . 
• Relative dating uses methods like Typology , Stratigraphy , Seriation , 
Geo-archaeological dating , Obsidian Hydration Dating and Chemical 
dating of bones . 
• Absolute dating includes all methods that give figures about the real 
estimated age of archaeological objects . 
• These methods generally analyze physicochemical transformation 
phenomena whose rate are known or can be estimated relatively well . 
• Absolute dating is the only method that can help to clarify the actual 
age of an object . Absolute dating methods mainly include radiocarbon 
dating , dendrochronology and thermoluminescence . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 173
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I • Any one or combination of these dating methods is of great help in 
extending the time dimension to the objects of study . 
• In chronological studies the precession of the dating adds value to the 
object or event in the spatio-temporal scale . 
13 . 6 KEY WORDS
• Attribute : It is a characteristic or property of an object , such as weight , 
size , or colour . 
• Ceramic : It refers to objects , often pottery , made of fired or baked 
clay . 
• Finds : The term ‘ finds ’ is taken to include all artefacts , building 
materials , industrial residues , environmental material , biological 
remains and decay products . 
• Law of Superposition : It is a law that states that deeper layers of 
sediment or archaeological strata will naturally be older than the layers 
above them ( in the absence of unusual , disruptive , activity , such as 
earthquakes )  . 
• Matrix : It refers to the physical material ( often dirt )  , in which the 
archaeological objects are located . 
• Palynology : It refers to the recovery and study of ancient pollen grains 
for the purposes of analyzing ancient climate , vegetation , and diet . 
• Prehistoric : It refers to a time period of history for which no written 
records are available ; the absolute date for the prehistoric period varies 
from place to place . 
• Projectile Point : It is a general term for stone points that were hafted 
to darts , spears or arrows ; often erroneously called ‘ arrowheads ’  . 
13 . 7 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Write short notes on the following :  
( a ) Stratigraphy 
( b ) Seriation 
( c ) Geo-archaeology 
( d ) Chemical Dating of Bones 
( e ) OHD 
( f ) Thermoluminiscence
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-I
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
174 Material
2 . What is the difference between relative and absolute dating methods ? 
3 . Discuss the radio-active methods used in dating archaeological 
materials . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . What is relative dating ? Elaborate the relative dating methods applied 
in archaeology . 
2 . Describe the absolute dating methods in archaeology , highlighting the 
importance of each method . 
3 . What is dendrochronology ? Discuss its importance as a dating method . 
13 . 8 FURTHER READINGS
Greene Kevin . 1983 . Archaeology : An Introduction , 3rd Edition . Philadelphia : 
University of Pennsylvania Press . 
Taylor R . E . and Ofer Bar-Yosef . 2016 . Radiocarbon Dating : An 
Archaeological Perspective . London : Routledge . 
T . Douglas Price and Kelly Knudson . 2018 . Principles of Archaeology . 
London : Thames & Hudson . 
Aitken M . J . 1990 . Science-Based Dating in Archaeology . London : Longman . 
Libby Willard F . 1965 . Radiocarbon Dating . Chicago : Phoenix . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 175
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-II UNIT 14 DATING METHODS IN 
ARCHAEOLOGY-II
Structure 
14 . 0 Introduction
14 . 1 Objectives
14 . 2 Other Relative Dating Methods
14 . 2 . 1 Fluorine Test
14 . 2 . 2 Nitrogen Test
14 . 2 . 3 Pollen Test
14 . 3 Other Absolute Dating Methods
14 . 3 . 1 Archaeomagnetism
14 . 3 . 2 Potassium-Argon ( K-Ar ) Dating
14 . 4 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions
14 . 5 Summary
14 . 6 Key Words
14 . 7 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises
14 . 8 Further Readings
14 . 0 INTRODUCTION
As you learnt in the previous unit , archaeologists use many different 
techniques to work out the age of artefacts and sites for which they have 
no historical dates and the order in which they were used . These dating 
techniques can broadly be subdivided into two groups : Relative dating and 
absolute dating . Different methods used by archaeologists for relative and 
absolute dating have been discussed in the previous unit . This unit will deal 
with some more relative and absolute methods . 
14 . 1 OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit , you will be able to : 
• Discuss the different types of methods of relative dating used in 
archaeology such as fluorine test , nitrogen test and the pollen test
• Describe the absolute dating methods in archaeology such as 
archaeomagnetism
14 . 2 OTHER RELATIVE DATING METHODS
Relative dating is fundamental to chronology . As you learnt in the previous 
unit , it refers to the categorizing of events in the absence of any written record 
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
176 Material
or evidence . Relative chronology is important in reconstructing prehistoric 
archaeology . In relative dating the duration of the event is not known , so also 
the elapsed time between events is very difficult to determine . 
14 . 2 . 1 Fluorine Test
Fluorine test dating is another method of relative dating . It is based on the 
fact that amount of fluorine deposited in bones is proportional to their age . 
Most of the ground waters contain small amount of fluorine . The fluorine 
ions combine with hydroxyapatite crystals of the bone to form fluropatite . 
A bone buried for a longer time will absorb more fluropatite and vice-versa . 
The date of the bone is determined on the basis of the amount of fluropatite 
present in the bone . This test is useful in dating bones that cannot be attributed 
with certainty to any particular stratum and cannot be dated according to 
the stratigraphic method . A limitation of this method is the fact that the rate 
of fluorine formation is not constant , but varies from region to region . The 
quantity of fluorine can be determined either through chemical analysis or 
with the X- ray crystallographic method . In 1953 , this test was used to easily 
identify that the ‘ Piltdown Man ’ was forged , almost fifty years after it was 
originally ‘ unearthed ’  . Like fluorine , uranium or nitrogen content of the 
bones also can be measured . 
14 . 2 . 2 Nitrogen Test
Nitrogen provides another measurement of relative age . Nitrogen dating is 
a form of relative dating which relies on the reliable breakdown and release 
of amino acids from bone samples to estimate the age of the object . Bones 
are composed of calcium phosphate , fat and bone protein or collagen . In 
contrast to fluorine , nitrogen in the bone decreases with the length of time it 
has been buried . On death , the collagen decays at a uniform rate and turns 
into nitrogen . Like fluorine method , the amount of presence of nitrogen is 
measured and dated accordingly . The rate of decay depends on physical and 
chemical composition of the soil . Therefore , it is not universal . However , 
one can differentiate the date of the bones collected from a single deposit or 
from a single burial . In some situations , like thin porous bones might more 
rapidly change the dating created by multiple methods . 
14 . 2 . 3 Pollen Test
Relative dating can also be done on the evidence of floral remains . A common 
method of dating through floral remains is known as palynology . All flowering 
plants produce the almost non-destructible grains called pollen . The outer 
skin ( exine ) of these grains is resistant to decay and is hence preserved in 
lake sediments that have allowed the pollen experts to reconstruct detailed 
sequences of past vegetation and climate . The botanical samples are collected 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 177
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-II by means of a technique called flotation technique . Several screening methods 
are being used in the recovery of micro or macro botanical remains . The 
Flotation technique developed by Anthony J . Legge remains the best method 
and is being adopted throughout the world as it yields the best recovery 
rates . The pollen is extracted and then concentrated and stained before being 
examined under a microscope . Pollen grains can be recognized by their shape , 
and the percentages of different species present in each sample are recorded 
on a pollen diagram . A comparison of the pollen diagrams for different levels 
within a deposit allows the identification of changes in the percentages of a 
species and thus changes in the environment . 
The most well-known chronologically placed pollen sequences are 
those developed for the Holocene times of northern Europe . By examining the 
pollen samples from a particular site , one can safely place them in particular 
time-ranged pollen zones . The type of pollen found in any geological stratum 
depends on the kind of vegetation that existed at the time such stratum was 
deposited . A site or locality can therefore be dated by determining what kind 
of pollen was found associated with it . 
14 . 3 OTHER ABSOLUTE DATING METHODS
As you learnt , absolute dating is the method of determining an age on a 
particular chronology in archaeology and geology . Some scientists prefer the 
terms chronometric or calendar dating , as use of the word ‘ absolute ’ implies 
an unnecessary certainty of accuracy . 
14 . 3 . 1 Archaeomagnetism
Archaeomagnetic dating is the study and interpretation of the signatures of 
the Earth ’ s magnetic field in the past recorded in archaeological materials . 
Archaeomagnetic dating is based on the established fact that the direction 
and intensity of the earth ’ s magnetic field fluctuate over the years . Clay 
soils contain magnetic minerals and when the clay is heated to a certain 
temperature , these minerals will assume the direction and a proportional 
intensity of the magnetic field , which surrounds them . They will maintain this 
direction and intensity after they are cooled . By measuring these qualities , the 
age of the sample can be ascertained if the changes in the earth ’ s magnetic 
field at that location are known . 
The magnetic field of the earth at any given point is defined by three 
measurements , the angle of declination , the angle of dip , and the magnetic 
intensity . When a needle is suspended at its centre of gravity so that it can 
swing freely in all directions , and is then magnetized , it will get inclined to 
the horizontal direction . The angle of magnetic dip depends strongly on the 
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
178 Material
latitude . In addition to inclination , the needle will exhibit definite directions in 
a figurative horizontal plane . The directions defined by the needle are called 
magnetic north and magnetic south . The angle between magnetic north and 
geographic north is called the angle of declination . 
Robert Dubois , an expert in archaeomagnetic dating , uses the parastatic 
magnetometer in his dating laboratory . This magnetometer embodies the 
principle of the compass needle . It consists of three bar magnets , spaced on 
a slender rod suspended from a very fine wire of phosphor bronze or quartz . 
The entire assembly is enclosed within a plastic tube that protects it from 
air currents . A thin beam of light shines on a mirror attached to the rod , then 
reflects , like a pointer , to a numbered scale . The horizontal component of the 
earth ’ s magnetic field is annulled by passing an electric current through large 
coils of wire that surround the magnetometer by means of wooden scaffolding . 
Locally produced magnetic fields with a vertical gradient are annulled by 
the use of the three bar magnets . The upper and lower magnets are equal in 
strength and anti-parallel to the middle magnet , which has double strength . 
With this arrangement there is zero torque from any vertical magnetic field . 
The three magnets work like a double set of diametrically opposing 
magnets of equal strength . Since the pull on the two parts of each magnet 
system is equal and opposite , the effect of the earth ’ s field is cancelled and the 
beam of light points to zero . When a sample is placed on a platform directly 
under the suspended magnets , the entire assembly above it rotates slightly . 
This rotation is caused by the lower magnet , which is affected more strongly 
than the other magnets , and swings towards the direction of the sample , 
rotating the entire assembly as it moves . The reflected beam of light moves 
across the scale , exactly like a compass needle , indicating just how far the 
clay sample has caused the magnets to turn . By setting the sample on its top 
and bottom , its angle of declination is measured directly ; the angle of dip is 
calculated from readings taken when the sample is positioned on each of its 
four sides . These values then are used to calculate where the geomagnetic pole 
was located when the clay was fired . Measurements on a number of samples 
facilitate the investigator to compute a mean vector . This is the common and 
suggested procedure for archaeomagnetic dating . 
14 . 3 . 2 Potassium-Argon ( K-Ar ) Dating
Potassium-Argon dating is also a radioactive method . Potassium ( K ) is 
one of the elements that occur in great abundance in the earth ’ s crust . It 
is present in almost every mineral , either as a principal constituent or as a 
trace element . In its natural form , potassium contains 93 . 2% K-39 , 6 . 8% 
K-41 and 0 . 00118% radioactive K-40 . For each 100 K-40 atoms that decay , 
89% become Calcium-40 and 11% become Argon-40 , one of the rare gases . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 179
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-II As potassium in rock crystals decays it produces argon gas at a known rate . 
Argon-40 is an inert or inactive gas , which by means of diffusion can easily 
escape from its parent material under certain conditions . 
During rock formation virtually all Ar-40 that had accumulated in the 
parent material escapes . As the rock or mineral crystallizes the concentration 
of Ar-40 drops off to practically zero . The process of radioactive decay of 
K-40 continues , but the concentration of Ar-40 that develops over time will 
now , when dated , denote the moment of rock formation . By measuring the 
amounts and ratios in a laboratory a date at which the crystal was formed 
can be obtained . This technique has been used in volcanic regions to date 
layers of rock which sandwich human remains . For instance , at Koobi Fora 
in East Africa early hominid remains were dated to 1 . 89 million years BP 
±0 . 01 million years . 
The potassium-argon dating method can only be used in situations 
where new rock has been formed . The lavas , tuffs and pumice found as 
overlying strata at localities that contained culture-bearing deposits in such 
diverse areas as Italy , East Africa and Java are useful for this dating . 
The preparation of sample involves first , crushing of the rock samples , 
second concentrating it to high purity , third washing it on sample screens to 
remove fines , and fourth , treating it with hydrofluoric acid . The major problem 
of the technique is the removal of atmospheric argon from the sample . By 
removing the outer layer of the sample , most of the atmospheric argon will be 
removed . However , treatment of samples with hydrofluoric acid has proved 
to be very effective in reducing the atmospheric argon in the sample . Soon 
after sample preparation and drying it should be put into the extraction line 
and placed under vacuum . 
Potassium-argon dates are calculated from measurements of the sample 
content of Argon-40 . The amount of potassium in a sample fraction can 
be determined by a flame photometer , although for small concentrations , 
isotopic dilution analysis and even neutron activation analysis can be used . 
The determination of the concentration of argon is determined by mass 
spectrometric analysis . 
Check Your Progress
1 . What is fluorine testing based on ? 
2 . Why do some scientists prefer the term calendar dating to absolute 
dating ? 
3 . Where can the potassium-argon dating method be used ? 
4 . What is the magnetic field of the earth at any given point defined by ? 
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-II
NOTES
Self-Instructional 
180 Material
14 . 4 ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS 
QUESTIONS
1 . Fluorine testing is based on the fact that amount of fluorine deposited 
in bones is proportional to their age . 
2 . Some scientists prefer the terms chronometric or calendar dating over 
absolute dating , as use of the word ‘ absolute ’ implies an unnecessary 
certainty of accuracy . 
3 . The potassium-argon dating method can only be used in situations 
where new rock has been formed . The lavas , tuffs and pumice found 
as overlying strata at localities that contained culture-bearing deposits 
in such diverse areas as Italy , East Africa and Java are useful for this 
dating . 
4 . The magnetic field of the earth at any given point is defined by three 
measurements , the angle of declination , the angle of dip , and the 
magnetic intensity . 
14 . 5 SUMMARY
• Archaeologists increasingly rely on various scientific techniques in 
order to obtain precise information about the lives of past communities . 
These are especially useful in dating the archaeological material . 
• There are two ways of determining the age of an object , would it be a 
fossil , an object or an event of culture . They are relative and absolute 
dating methods . 
• The relative dating is useful in putting the objects on relative timeframe 
in a bracket of millennia or million , while absolute dating method 
pinpoints the age in numerical years ( very close to decades or centuries )  . 
• Several kinds of dating methods are presented in this unit--Chemical 
analysis based ( Fluorine and Nitrogen Test )  , Fossil studies ( Pollen 
Test )  , Earth science related ( Archaeomagnetism ) and Radioactive 
isotopic analysis dependent ( Potassium-Argon Method )  . 
• Archaeologists resort to the use of relative dating techniques when the 
absolute dates are not possible or feasible . 
• Determination of the age was simply a guess work in the initial stages 
of archaeological investigations particularly in the 18th-19th centuries . 
NOTES
Self-Instructional
Material 181
Dating Methods in 
Archaeology-II • As the research progressed , different techniques were applied to 
estimate the age . The vast accumulation of data and the significant 
data analysis provided sufficient scope for relative dating techniques . 
14 . 6 KEY WORDS
• Palynology : It refers to the recovery and study of ancient pollen grains 
for the purposes of analyzing ancient climate , vegetation , and diet . 
• Piltdown Man : Piltdown Man was a paleo-anthropological hoax in 
which bone fragments were presented as the fossilized remains of a 
previously unknown early human . 
• X-ray Crystallography : It is a method used for determining the 
atomic and molecular structure of a crystal , in which the crystalline 
structure causes a beam of incident X-rays to diffract into many specific 
directions . 
14 . 7 SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS AND 
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
1 . Write a short note on the fluorine test . 
2 . Discuss the nitrogen test and pollen test method of relative dating in 
archaeology . 
Long Answer Questions
1 . Explain the archaeomagnetism dating method . 
2 . Describe the potassium-argon dating ( K-Ar ) technique . 