Background 
My first encounter with fulachta fiadh was in 2005 when I, as a Swedish archaeologist, attended my first 
excavation in Ireland at Raheenagurren West, outside of Gorey in County Wexford. Very quickly I 
realised that fulachta fiadh and other similar features are among the most unappealing feature types to 
many Irish archaeologists who consider them too common, too boring and usually too waterlogged and 
messy to warrant any special interest. 
 Since 2005 I have participated in the excavation of more than a dozen burnt mounds in counties 
Wexford, Galway and Meath and contrary to the majority of my colleagues I find this feature type to be
one of the most fascinating phenomena that Irish archaeology has to offer. What appeals me about 
these features is not their complexity but rather their simple, and at the same time, enigmatic nature. 
 Despite burnt mounds being one of the most numerous archaeological features in Ireland very little is 
actually known about them. The hypotheses concerning the function of these features vary significantly
but few of these are actually supported by empirical evidence (see chapter 1). Limited in chronology to 
the Irish Bronze Age (Brindley & Lanting 1990; O’Drisceoil 1991; O’Sullivan & Downey 2004) one can 
only presume that whatever functions were performed at these numerous sites they must have been of 
significance to the Bronze Age inhabitants who built them. 
 Once I began to plan this thesis in Environmental Archaeology during the spring of 2007 it was thus
a natural step for me to select the burnt mound phenomena as the subject for my study. 
 This thesis is largely based on a sampling project performed with the assistance of Archaeological 
Consultancy Services Ltd. It was my good fortune to have the support of ACS during the course of this 
project as the company has provided me with access to the sites as well as any documentation, 
excavation data or logistical support I required for a successful analysis. 
 Five burnt mound sites in County Cavan were selected after consultation with ACS to provide the 
empirical material for this study. All five sites are located outside the town of Belturbet, 13 km north 
north-east of Cavan Town. All sites were detected, recorded and excavated in connection with the 
archaeological excavations conducted as part of the N3 Butler’s Bridge to Belturbet realignment 
scheme. The testing phase of this scheme was performed under excavation license E3427 while the 
final excavations were performed under the following excavation licenses: 
Bun 4 E3816 Director: Derek Gallagher 
Putiaghan Upper 1 E3821 Director: Gearoid Kelleher 
Putiaghan Upper 2 E3822 Director: Gearoid Kelleher 
 
Putiaghan Upper 3 E3823 Director: Gearoid Kelleher 
Straheglin E3825 Director: Gearoid Kelleher 
9
Purpose 
The primary questions I wish to answer in this thesis are focused around the functional aspects of Irish 
burnt mounds and the applicability of soil chemistry, geophysics and archaeobotany on this type of 
archaeological material. 
 The investigated sites were sampled for the purpose of performing phosphate, magnetic 
susceptibility, and archaeobotanical analyses. By evaluating the results from these analyses I hope to
answer the following questions: 
1. Can a combination of phosphate, magnetic susceptibility and archaeobotanical analyses provide 
valid data about the nature of burnt mounds? 
2. Can the data extracted from such analyses be used to isolate a specific function or at least 
eliminate some of the functional models previously proposed for burnt mounds? 
3. Can this study provide valuable insights to how the methods and research strategies applied 
here may be further refined and modified to become more suitable for burnt mound research? 
10
Comments on the layout of the study 
This thesis has been divided into several specific sections. It begins with a general overview of previous 
research on Irish burnt mounds and also presents most of the hypotheses proposed to date that deal 
with the issues of burnt mound function. 
 In the second section I present the theory behind my research along with theoretical aspects behind
the methods that I have applied on the five investigated sites. At the end of the second chapter I also 
review several cases of environmental archaeology being applied on archaeological phenomena relevant 
to this study. 
 In the third main section of this thesis the investigated sites are presented to the reader while the 
fourth section outlines the analytical procedure that was used during the various analyses. 
 The fifth part presents the results of the analyses for each individual area, site and feature while the 
final section of the thesis is dedicated to the interpretation and discussion of the results, answering the 
three questions presented above. 
 Before continuing further with the text I want to clarify two decisions that may be considered 
unnecessary or confusing to a reader of this text. 
 Firstly, an Irish reader may find him/herself wondering about whether the elaborations concerning 
most aspects of the fulachta fiadh phenomenon truly are necessary in a thesis of this kind. The decision 
to include a rather comprehensive background to fulachta fiadh is however conscious. The thesis is 
written at a Swedish university and it is in essence a study of methods that may have some significance 
for future investigations of similar phenomena in parts of the world other than Ireland. I found it 
therefore necessary to elaborate upon even the most commonly known aspects of Irish burnt mounds. 
 The second decision, which some readers may consider more troublesome, is my decision to treat the 
terms fulacht fiadh and burnt mound as synonyms. 
 From experience I know that some archaeologists in Ireland try to separate various types of “burnt 
mound like” features into either fulachta fiadh or burnt mounds. During my three year stay in Ireland I 
have heard and seen in writing attempts to separate these two designations either on grounds of 
geography (fulachta fiadh being Irish, burnt mounds being British) or based on morphology (fulachta fiadh
being a classical horse shoe shaped mound while everything else being designated vaguely as a burnt 
mound). On occasion I have also come into contact with divisions between burnt mounds and fulachta fiadh
based on the presence or absence of a trough (fulachta fiadh being a feature with a defined trough). 
 In my opinion such divisions are absolute nonsense considering the current state of burnt mound 
research. At the birth of the Irish burnt mound research in the 1950s there may have been grounds for 
creating strict criteria for how a burnt mound should look like as the number of excavated sites was 
small and their internal variation was insignificant (eg. O’Kelly 1954). Since then however burnt 
mounds, with or without troughs, crescent shaped, oval, round and irregular, mounds of every size and 
shape imaginable have been encountered on practically every major archaeological project in every 
corner of Ireland1
. 
 Burnt mounds are obviously a phenomenon with significant internal variations, the exceptions from 
the crescent shaped traditional fulacht fiadh becoming more numerous than the features on which the 
standard was created. Thus, in my opinion, creating individual categories of burnt mounds is a waste of 
any archaeologist’s time as few individuals possess the full breadth of information gathered during 
recent excavations. Without such information any categorization of the phenomenon is bound to be 
based on individual assumptions rather than true empirical data. 
 Undoubtedly, in a near future, someone will compile a catalogue of the hundreds of burnt mounds 
excavated to date in Ireland, allowing for a true categorization and classification of these features. Until 
then however I have decided to study the phenomenon as a whole. Therefore the terms fulacht fiadh and 
burnt mound in this thesis are used as synonyms, without any terminologically shrouded implications of 
their nature. 
11
1. Burnt mounds and hot stone technology in Ireland
Early burnt mound research 
Scientific research on the feature type known as fulachta fiadh or burnt mounds can be said to have been 
started in 1954 when Michael J. O’Kelly published his results from investigations of five well preserved 
fulachta fiadh in County Cork (O’Kelly 1954). The phenomenon of fulachta fiadh was however far from 
unknown even prior to O’Kellys excavations in the early 1950’s. 
 The term fulacht fiadh can itself be traced to the early Irish literature. The word fulacht probably means 
“recess” or “cavity” and the word fiadh means “of the deer” or “of the wild”. A more contemporary 
translation would thus be “cooking/roosting pit for deer or wild animals”. An alternative spelling of 
fulacht fiadh is fulacht fian where fian translates into “of the warriors” or “of the hunters” thus translating 
in full to “cooking/roosting pit of the warriors/hunters” (O’Drisceoil 1988:673, 1990:158). This 
terminology appears repeatedly in early Irish written sources from as early as the 9th century AD. Most 
of the descriptions are vague, often implying cooking or food preparation of some sort at fulachta fiadh, 
with the exact nature of the process rarely described in detail. In some instances the process described 
in the early historical sources is one of food preparation by roosting or cooking in a metal cauldron or 
on a griddle although the terminology used to describe the process is still related to that of the word 
fulacht. This fact has led Diarmuid O’Drisceoil to consider the possibility that the word fulacht, originally 
meaning recess or cavity, may over time have come to describe the general act of cooking or even the 
cooked food itself (O’Drisceoil 1990: 157f). 
 To the modern archaeologist the use of vague references in early written sources may seem as a risky 
way of interpreting an archaeological phenomenon. When Professor O’Kelly conducted his 
investigations however, written sources did inspire his interpretation of the excavated fulachta fiadh. 
(O’Kelly 1954:138f). The tradition of using historical sources for the interpretation of burnt mounds 
can however be traced to as early as the 17th century. In Foras Feasa ar Éirinn (Foundation on knowledge 
of Ireland) Seathrún Céitinn (Geoffrey Keating) made reference to the mounds of charcoal enriched 
soil and attributed them to the fianna, the small, semi-independent bands of warriors and hunters often 
mentioned in the mythology and early historical texts of Ireland. Céitinn’s interpretation was that 
fulachta fiadh were camps or stations were the fianna prepared the food that they had acquired by hunting 
(Ó Cróinín 1995:88; O’Driceoil 1991:3f; O’Kelly 1954:147f).
 As archaeology was developing into a modern science in the 19th century archaeologists working in 
Ireland noted the existence of burnt mounds in various parts of Ireland and frequently attributed their 
existence to hunting or warrior groups, presumably operating in the countries distant past, often 
referring to the early historical sources as well as Céitinn for support of their interpretations 
(O’Drisceoil 1991:4). 
 O’Kellys interpretations were undoubtedly inspired by this early research into fulachta fiadh, 
formulated by pre-war archaeologists and historians. In fact the period during which his pioneering 
work was conducted is often seen as a transitional period for the science of archaeology (Trigger 
1997:289ff) and O’Kellys work clearly manifests the spirit of his time. The 1950s was a period when 
traditional culture-historical methods were often supplemented by newly developed scientific methods 
and newly formulated research procedures. O’Kellys work adhered to the spirit of this transitional 
period as it used older research as an inspiration but also incorporated both planned experiments and 
newly developed scientific methods, such as 14C-dating (O’kelly 1954). 
 Experimental archaeology and an emphasis on the natural sciences were in the decade that followed 
to become important parts of the processual or “new” archaeology developed by Binford, Willey and 
Philips at the end of the 1950s and the 1960s (Bäck & Olsson 1994; Coles 1979; Trigger 1997:359ff). 
Through the work of O’Kelly the fulachta fiadh were introduced as an archaeological phenomenon in
late 20th century archaeology. 
12
Developments since 1954 
O’Kellys work was not only significant from a purely academic point of view. Ireland’s entry into what
today is known as the European Union signified a significant increase in infrastructure, land 
improvement and land reclamation schemes across the country (O’Drisceoil 1991:4). By extension this 
development has led to an increase in the amount of sites being excavated across the country. Through 
the work of O’Kelly the fulachta fiadh were identified as valid archaeological features and the amount of 
excavated sites now numbers in hundreds1
. Academic interest has, in comparison to other aspects of 
archaeology, been relatively limited but several important studies have since 1954 greatly improved the
knowledge of certain aspects of the fulachta fiadh phenomenon. 
 Regional studies have enhanced our knowledge of the distribution of fulachta fiadh in parts of Ireland 
(Condit 1990; Feehan 1991; Power 1990), experiments on reconstructed sites have provided data 
useable for the establishment of plausible explanations concerning their function (Buckley 1990; 
Lawless 1990; O’Kelly 1954; Quinn & Moore 2007) and 14C as well as dendrochronological dating 
techniques have allowed archaeologists to place the fulachta fiadh in their chronological context (Brindley 
& Lanting 1990). 
Morphology and layout of burnt mound sites 
As mentioned above the amounts of fulachta fiadh excavated to date number in the hundreds1
. Out of 
the vast amounts of data generated by these excavations it has been possible to identify general 
characteristics that often occur on fulachta fiadh sites. 
 The principle features of a fulacht fiadh is a trough or pit surrounded by a mound of heat shattered 
stones and charcoal enriched soil (O’Sullivan & Downey 2004). Because of their nature fulachta fiadh
tend to be easily recognisable in the landscapes where agricultural disturbance has been limited. They
can however also be observed in areas of intensive agricultural activity where they often appear as dark 
patches on newly ploughed fields. Fulachta fiadh are also one of the most easily recognisable feature 
types during archaeological investigations, such as test trenching or probing with an auger. 
 The troughs of fulachta fiadh vary in size and appearance. There are indications that early fulachta fiadh
tend to have unlined, circular troughs while rectangular troughs tend to date from 2000 BC and 
onwards (O’Neill 2000). The large amount of newly excavated fulachta fiadh does however make 
generalisations of the nature of the troughs difficult. 
 Rectangular troughs are often lined with wood, flat stones, clay or wicker (O’Neill 2000). Some 
troughs also appear to have been dug out from single pieces of large tree trunks before being placed in 
a pit dug to accommodate the container (O’Sullivan & Downey 2004). On occasion natural fissures or 
cavities in rock outcrops may have provided a natural container negating the need for a manmade 
trough. Some sites lack troughs altogether, indicating perhaps the use of portable containers (Coffey 
1984). 
 The area around the trough is almost always surrounded by a mound or spread of shattered stones 
mixed with soil and charcoal. This material often overlays the trough itself, likely as a result of human 
activities or erosion postdating the abandonment of the fulacht fiadh. The material is sometimes 
deposited around the trough in a crescent or U-shaped pattern suggesting that it was originally scooped 
out of the trough and deposited around it leaving one quadrant free from debris to accommodate 
access to and from the site. A summary of fulacht fiadh shapes in Co. Cork (Power 1990:13) shows that 
almost half of the recorded mounds display the typical crescent shape. The remaining mounds were Dshaped, oval, circular and irregular. The size of the mounds across Ireland varies from small and 
shallow spreads, only a few metres in diameter to mounds reaching over two metres in height and 30 
metres in diameter (Coffey 1984; O’Sullivan & Dawney 2004). 
 It is generally assumed that the troughs of fulachta fiadh were used to heat water by immersion of hot 
stones. This assumption is strengthened by the fact that many troughs seem to be constructed in a way 
13
that allows them to naturally fill with water, either by placement of the trough beneath the water table 
or by proximity to water sources such as streams, rivers and lakes (O’Kelly 1954:106; O’Neill 2000; 
O’Sullivan & Dawney 2004; Power 1990:14). The process of heating water in this particular manner is 
believed to have generated the residue of shattered stones and charcoal that makes up the mound of a 
fulacht fiadh. 
 The majority of fulachta fiadh also contain a range of other features in addition to the trough and the 
mound. Hearths are commonly found on many sites and their existence must be seen as an obvious 
result of the stone heating process (O’Kelly 1954; O’Sullivan & Downey 2004). The reson for many 
fulacht fiadh sites lacking hearths is likely due to the fact that this type of feature is easily disturbed or 
destroyed by post-depositional processes, especially in areas of subsequent agricultural activity. 
 Other features found in association with fulachta fiadh are pits of various sizes and shapes (likely 
reflecting an equally various range of functions), gullies and channels (possibly used for water 
management on the sites) and postholes. The postholes are sometimes interpreted as remains of simple 
structures (possibly used for storage), as windbreaks around the hearths or as racks for hanging or 
drying produce that may have been processed on the sites (O’Kelly 1954; O’Sullivan & Dawney 2004). 
 The above description of the morphology of fulachta fiadh sites is however a generalisation. The vast 
amounts of excavated fulachta fiadh reveal that there is a considerable variation in the structural 
appearance of fulachta fiadh sites, even when found in geographically coherent areas. An example of this 
is the cluster of three fulachta fiadh excavated by O’Kelly at Killeens in County Cork (O’Kelly 1954) 
where one of the sites displayed a well constructed, wood lined trough but no evidence of a hearth. The 
second site gave evidence of two troughs being constructed on site, one in the shape of a pit dug in 
close proximity to a stream and one wood lined, similar to that on the first site. The second site also 
displayed two hearths. The third site was considerably smaller and the cooking appears to have been 
done in a simple dug out pit. 
 The variations in size, layout and use of various techniques on sites that appear in close proximity to 
each other may partly be explained by post-depositional disturbance and alteration of the sites. At the 
same time archaeologist must at all times be aware that the variations may be a manifestation of an 
adaptation of the fulachta fiadh to changing functional demands, seasonal adaptations, local traditions or 
even idiosyncratic tendencies of their users. 
IMAGE 2. 
A ploughed out burnt mound at Putiaghan Upper 1 in County Cavan. Burnt mounds are easily identifiable in test 
trenches due to the distinct nature of the burnt mound material. Photographs: ACS Ltd.
14
Ballyvorney I, County Cork and Drumcalpin, County Cavan: two variations of the 
same theme
Fulachta fiadh as a generalized group of archaeological features display a significant variation in size, 
shape, morphology and the degree of preservation in which the features are encountered by excavators 
in the field. 
 The two examples below are presented in order to give a reader who is not familiar with this type of 
features a hint of the variety which exists among these features. 
IMAGE 3.
Plan and section drawing from M. J. O’Kellys 
excavations depicting the fulacht fiadh at 
Ballyvourney I in County Cork (O’Kelly 1954:110f; 
Waddell 2000:176). 
Ballyvourney I, excavated by Michael J. 
O’Kelly in 1952 is an excellent example of a well 
preserved fulacht fiadh displaying several 
structural features beyond those of the trough 
and mound (O’Kelly 1954). 
The well preserved state of the site may 
partially be attributed to its location in bog land, 
an area where agricultural activity, and thus postdepositional disturbance has been limited. 
 Most of the features found on the site were 
completely or partially covered by the mound of 
heat shattered stones and charcoal which 
surrounded the well preserved, wood-lined 
trough. 
The mound itself was roughly circular with a 
diameter of 12-13 metres and a maximum height 
of approximately 0,6 metres. Two hearths were 
detected just south-east and north-west of the 
trough respectively. A stone-paved pit, 
interpreted by O’Kelly as a roasting pit, was also 
found north of the trough. 
The most interesting feature found at 
Ballyvourney I was however a cluster of 
postholes, some of which still displayed wooden 
posts preserved in situ. The postholes were 
interpreted by O’Kelly to be part of a small hut 
with two simple internal features. The hut would 
have been, according to O’Kelly, roughly oval, 
supported by one central and ten external posts 
(see Image 3). Six other postholes found inside 
the presumed hut were interpreted as not 
belonging to the structure of the hut on basis of 
their vertical angles of entry into the underlying 
peat (all wall posts were driven at an angle 
pointing towards the cental post). These 
structures were instead labelled as “the butcher’s 
block or bed” and “the drying rack”. 
The likely existence of a hut at a fulacht fiadh 
site is unique as only a small percentage of 
fulachta fiadh sites display any kind of 
upstanding structures2
. As we shall see later in 
the text the existence of such structures is vital 
for some hypotheses that have been presented 
on the subject of the function of fulachta fiadh 
(Barfield & Hodder 1987). 
 Overall Ballyvourney I can be seen as an 
example of a fairly complex fulacht fiadh as few 
sites of this type display morphologies of a more 
complex nature. 
15
IMAGE 4. 
Plan (left) and section drawing (below) of 
the fulacht fiadh excavated at Drumcalpin in 
County Cavan (Murphy 1998). 
Drumcalpin is a fulacht fiadh site that was excavated by Deirdre Murphy in 1998 in connection with the 
construction of the Cavan Town Bypass (Murphy 1998). Contrary to sites such as Ballyvourney I the fulacht 
fiadh at Drumcalpin displayed significant evidence of disturbance post-dating the original feature. This 
disturbance may partially account for the comparatively low amount of structural features found at Drumcalpin 
as no prehistoric features were detected on the site other then the mound itself and its associated trough. 
 The mound was irregular, a shape that may possibly represent the result of centuries of post-depositional 
disturbance. It measured roughly 11 x 12 metres in plan and had a maximum depth of 0,5 metres. 
The mound was severely truncated by several modern cuttings. A field boundary had disturbed a large 
portion of the southern half, aligned along a south-east- north-west axis. A few metres north of the field 
boundary a modern pipe had been dug into the ground along a parallel axis, barely missing the trough. A 19th
century field drain was also found dug into the mound at its western end. Finally a rectangular test-trench was 
excavated into the eastern end of the fulacht fiadh by road engineers prior to the excavation of the site. 
The trough of the fulacht fiadh was, despite the extensive truncation of the mound, relatively well preserved. 
It was rectangular in shape with a posthole located at each corner. The combination of the trough being placed 
below the water table of the site as well as the impermeable nature of the heavy clay surrounding the postholes 
created conditions favourable for preservation of organic material and two of the posts were found partially 
preserved in situ. 
The sides of the trough were lined with a thin 
deposit of heavy clay. Deirdre Murphy 
interpreted this deposit as purposefully applied 
to the sides of the trough, possibly to ease the 
process of lining the trough with timber 
(Murphy 1998:10ff). 
14C dating of the Drumcalpin site produced a 
calibrated date of 1154-932 BC (Late Irish 
Bronze Age), placing it at the end of the period 
during which fulachta fiadh were intensively 
used across Ireland. 
As mentioned above Ballyvourney I in 
County Cork can be seen to represent the 
more complex and well preserved fulachta 
fiadh sites. Drumcalpin can on the other hand 
be seen as an example of the other end of the 
spectrum, representing the vast amount of 
fulachta fiadh sites discovered in heavily 
developed and/or heavily cultivated areas. 
Unfortunately sites such as Drumcalpin 
often tend to be omitted in the archaeological 
discourse and tend to be considered as 
uninteresting or unimportant in comparison 
with more well preserved and prestigious sites 
(O’Neill 2000). 
16
Dating 
Most fulachta fiadh have been dated to the Bronze Age. Within that period the dates seem to cluster 
around 1800-800 BC, placing the fulachta fiadh predominantly in the Irish Middle Bronze Age (Brindley 
& Lanting 1990; O’Drisceoil 1991; O’Sullivan & Downey 2004). 
 The preffered way of dating fulachta fiadh has to date been through the use of the 14C-method (Baillie 
1990; Brindley & Lanting 1990). Dendrochronology has proven to be a problematic for dating most 
fulachta fiadh sites as the surviving pieces of timber tend to contain rather short tree ring sequences, 
making comparison with regional master sequences problematic (Baillie 1990). Despite these problems 
some sites have successfully been dated through the use of dendrochronology3
. 
 Relative (typological) dating has proven unsuccessful on fulachta fiadh due to the lack of dateable 
artefacts (Baillie 1990). Thermoluminescence dating has been applied on similar features in Scotland 
with promising results but has, as far as I have been able to ascertain, not been applied on fulachta fiadh 
in Ireland (Anthony et al 2001). 
IMAGE 5. 
Distribution of known sites where fulachta fiadh and burnt mounds have been recorded by the Archaeological 
Survey of Ireland4
. County Cavan, the general area of interest for this thesis has been outlined in red.
17
Distribution
Fulacht fiadh is without a doubt the most numerous feature type with origins in the Irish Bronze Age 
(Feehan 1991; O’Drisceoil 1991). The exact distribution of fulachta fiadh is however not yet fully known. 
 Since fulachta fiadh were originally only marked on Ordnance Survey maps for Counties Cork, 
Kilkenny and Wexford (Stout & Stout 1997:40) it is not surprising that they were long believed to be a
predominantly southern occurrence (O’Kelly 1954:144; O’Sullivan & Downey 2004). 
 These counties do indeed display larger numbers of fulachta fiadh than average but developments in 
archaeology over the last 20 years have firmly established the fulachta fiadh as a nation-wide 
phenomenon as they have now been recorded in significant numbers in every county of Ireland (see 
map above) (Feehan 1991:202; O’Drisceoil 1991:4; O’Sullivan & Downey 2004; Stout & Stout 
1997:40). 
 An example of the major increase in recorded sites is the fact that not a single fulacht fiadh was known 
to exist in County Dublin as late as 1988 (O’Drisceoil 1988:673). By 2004 38 sites containing fulachta 
fiadh had been excavated in the same county1
. This fact strongly suggests that the majority of sites are 
still unknown to archaeologists as rescue excavations, even in a highly developed county like Dublin, 
only represent a minor percentage of the total. 
 Another hypothesis developed during the early years of fulacht fiadh research was that their 
distribution may be limited by geological factors. Areas with limestone bedrock were considered 
unsuitable locations for fulachta fiadh as limestone tends to turn into lime when exposed to heat which 
reacts into calcium hydroxide when submerged in water, thus making the water in the trough unsuitable 
for a range of activities (Buckley 1990:170; O’Kelly 1954:144). This hypothesis has since then been 
discredited as significant numbers of fulachta fiadh have been found in the lime stone rich counties of
Galway and Clare (Buckley 1990:170; Coffey 1984). 
 Archaeologists have noted however that local geology may to some extent affect the distribution and 
nature of fulachta fiadh. Victor Buckley has suggested that the use of igneous rocks, commonly found in 
northern Ireland, may explain the lack of large, upstanding mounds in that part of the country (Buckley 
1990). Buckley’s experiments have showed that igneous rocks are significantly more resistant to rapid 
changes in temperature than sedimentary and some metamorphosed types of rocks. Similar tendencies 
have also been noted by burnt mound researchers in Scandinavia (Buckley 1990; Larsson 1986, 1990). 
Assuming that the stones were used until fracturing rendered them unusable the resistant nature of the
northern rocks may account for the lack of large burnt mounds in that area. 
 Locally fulachta fiadh are generally found in close proximity to water sources (Feehan1991; 
O’Drisceoil 1991). A survey of nearly two thousand fulachta fiadh in County Cork revealed that only 8 
percent of the recorded sites were situated in areas without direct access to a water source (Power 
1990:14). The remaining sites were situated near streams (48%), marshes (21%), springs (10%), 
lakes/rivers (4%) and wells (9%). 
18
Burnt mounds in County Cavan 
County Cavan is one of the counties with the smallest amount of recorded fulachta fiadh (see Image 6). 
The archaeological survey of Ireland contains a total of 23 entries of fulachta fiadh and burnt mounds in 
the county1
. Five additional sites are also documented to have been excavated prior to 20041
 (Murphy 
1998). The archaeological testing performed in connection with the Butlers Bridge to Belturbet road 
improvement scheme has recently generated additional eight sites that likely represent fulachta fiadh
activity (Gallagher et al 2007) thus bringing the total number of known fulachta fiadh in County Cavan
to 36. The majority of these sites are concentrated to three areas. 
 The largest concentration is located between the towns of Cavan and Belturbet in central County 
Cavan. More than 60 percent of the fulachta fiadh in the county are situated in this area with a significant 
cluster occurring in an area approximately 5 x 4 km in size located less than 2 km south-east of 
Belturbet on the eastern side of the River Erne (see Image 7). 
 The second concentration of fulachta fiadh in Cavan is located at the border between counties Cavan 
and Meath just east of Virginia while a third group consisting of only two sites is situated at the border 
to County Monaghan near the town of Cootehill. 
 It should be noted however that these three concentrations do not necessarily reflect the prehistoric, 
distribution of fulachta fiadh. On the contrary the distribution pattern seems to be highly artificial in 
nature as it more or less corresponds with areas of intensive infrastructural development such as the N3 
and the Cavan Town Bypass. Of the 22 fulachta fiadh clustered between Cavan Town and Belturbet only 
6 mounds are not directly linked to the route of a road and these six mounds were all found in close 
proximity of each other by the same archaeologist on a single occasion, by extension meaning that only
one fulacht fiadh site has been detected in central County Cavan independently of development projects. 
 Considering the fact that most areas designated for archaeological investigations in connection with 
infrastructural development tend to be only a few hundred metres wide (or less) the count of 16 fulachta 
fiadh type features found on a stretch of road totaling less than 20 km is actually quite impressive. The 
data is certainly not sufficient for a secure estimate of the potential amount of burnt mounds in County 
Cavan but even a conservative guess would be that there are hundreds of potential burnt mound sites 
located throughout the county. 
19
IMAGE 6. 
Fulachta fiadh and burnt mounds in County Cavan. Features less than 300 m apart are presented together1; 4 (Gallagher et al 2007).
20
Burnt mounds between Cavan Town and Belturbet 
Very little has been published concerning fulachta fiadh in County Cavan and several recent excavations 
are still at a stage where the final excavation reports are being compiled. Below is a concise presentation 
of the fulachta fiadh recorded in central County Cavan before 2004. It should be noted that recent 
publications may already have made this list incomplete. 
 Out of a total of 23 sites with burnt mounds situated between Belturbet and Cavan Town nine have 
so far been excavated and published in the Excavations Bulletin (prior to 2004), these sites are 
summarized below. 
IMAGE 7. 
Map showing the distribution of fulachta fiadh sites between the towns of Cavan and Belturbet. Note the 
correspondence between the location of known sites and the routes of recently constructed or improved roads1; 4
(Galagher et al 2007). 
1. Straheglin, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 2008 
2. Putiaghan Upper and Bun, 5 fulachta fiadh, excavated in 2008 
3. Rosskeeragh, 6 fulachta fiadh, reported to DoE by archaeologist Mick Drumm in 2003 
4. Kilduff, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 2008 
5. Drumalure Beg, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 2008 
6. Drummany, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 1998 
7. Derrygarra Upper, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 1998 
8. Drumcalpin, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 1998 
9. Drumbo 1 & 2, 2 fulachta fiadh, excavated in 1998 
10. Tullymongan Lower, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 2003 
11. Pollamore Near, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 2004 
12. Tirquin, fulacht fiadh like features, excavated in 2004 
13 Cornaghleragh, 1 fulacht fiadh, excavated in 2004 
21
Derrygarra upper 
This site, excavated in 1998 in connection with the Cavan-by-pass road scheme consisted of an 
irregular spread of burnt mound material covering an area of 79m² with a maximum depth of 0,4m. No 
trough was detected during the excavation. A 14C date was obtained from this site dating it to cal. 2134-
1972 BC5
 (Murphy 1998). 
Drumbo 1 
This site consisted of a small mound of heat shattered stones set in a matrix of charcoal enriched soil. 
The site was heavily disturbed but was interpreted by Deirdre Murphy to represent the remains of a 
former fulacht fiadh. The preserved burnt mound material covered an area of less than 1m² and had a 
maximum depth of 0,28m. No trough was detected on this site. A 14C date places the site at cal. 906-
814 BC6
 (Murphy 1998). 
Drumbo 2 
Drumbo 2 consisted of a semi-oval mound of burnt mound material covering an area of roughly 76m² 
with a maximum depth of 0,17m. A wood lined trough was detected on site as were the remains of a 
hearth or pyre that was likely used to heat the stones used in the trough. The trough had a capacity of 
approximately 438l. A dendrochronological date was obtained from one of the timbers lining the 
trough dating the site to 959+9 BC3
 (Murphy 1998). 
Drumcalpin 
Drumcalpin consisted of an irregular mound of charcoal and heat shattered stones covering an area of 
approximately 125m² with a maximum depth of 0,5m. The mound was heavily truncated by modern 
activity which luckily did not destroy the trough that was detected under the main deposit of the 
mound. The trough was lined with clay and may originally also have been lined with timber, although 
none was preserved. The capacity of the trough was approximately 861m². A 14C date was obtained 
from this site dating it to cal. 1154-932 BC7
 (Murphy 1998). 
Drummany
The fulacht fiadh at Drummany consisted of two distinct deposits of heat shattered stones and charcoal 
enriched soil. The deposits were irregular and covered an area of approximately 61m². The depth of the
deposits ranged from 0,15 to 0,3 m. A trough was detected on site with a capacity of more than 1300l. 
The trough was simple in design and no traces of any lining were found. Deirdre Murphy states 
however that the nature of the underlying subsoil, a hard and compact boulder clay, would have been 
sufficient for keeping water in the trough without the need for additional lining8
 (Murphy 1998). 
Tullymongan lower 
 Was a fulacht fiadh which consisted of a mound 128m² in plan and 0,5m in depth. The mound was 
situated in close proximity to various prehistoric settlement remains but the these have yet not been 
confirmed as being contemporary with the fulacht fiadh. No trough was detected on site and no 14C dates 
have yet been published8
. 
22
Cornaghleragh 
The fulacht fiadh in Cornaghleragh is to date the largest excavated in County Cavan with a mound that 
covered 216m² in plan and had a depth of 0,8m. 
 Several features were detected underlying the main mound deposit. A large pit has been interpreted 
as a simple well as it was excavated in proximity to a spring that kept it continuously filled with water. A 
slot trench was also detected underneath the main mound and has provisionally been interpreted as a 
wind break. The trough, also situated under the burnt mound is the largest recorded fulacht fiadh trough 
in the county with a capacity of 1440 litres. No dates have yet been published from this site9
. 
Pollamore Near 
This site consisted of a mound of heat shattered stones and charcoal, approximately 33m² in plan and 
0,85m in depth. The deposit also contained large amounts of hazelnut shells. 
 The mound was situated at the edge of a semi-circular indentation dug into the subsoil. The 
indentation measured approximately 5,8 x 3,4m and had a maximum depth of 0,63m. Several unworked 
pieces of tree branches and trunks were found lying around the edges of this feature. 
 Another interesting find from Pollamore Near consisted of the partial remains of a horse found 
inside a pit found underneath a spread of burnt mound material. The cranium of the horse was also 
found in an adjacent bog10
. 
Tirquin
The site at Tirquin differs from the ones presented above in the respect that it does not consist of a 
single large burnt mound/burnt spread but rather of a number of pits and deposits of burnt mound 
material. At least one of the pits was probably used as a trough and the feature displayed an adjacent
gully with two postholes cut into it, the feature has been suggested by the excavators to have 
functioned as some sort of flow control mechanism. 
 Finds of pottery were made on this site and it has preliminarily been dated to the Bronze Age11
. 
 
23
Finds 
Fulachta fiadh sites generally tend to be poor in artefacts (O’Sullivan & Downey 2004). A compilation of 
finds from fulachta fiadh sites published in 1990 (Cherry 1990) showed that the majority of the artefacts 
recovered consisted of stone or metal axe heads, stone scrapers, flint arrowheads, quern stones, 
whetstones, spindle whorls and shards of pottery. Thus the material appears to be predominantly 
functional rather than ritual or ornamental in nature. The occasional finds of non functional nature, 
recorded prior to 1990, consisted of a shale bracelet from a site in County Down, a gold dress fastener
from County Mayo and fragments of an amber bead found in County Carlow (Cherry 1990). A small, 
gold plated, metal ring was uncovered at Killeens by O’Kelly during his pioneering excavations in 
County Cork (O’Kelly 1954:131). 
 The large amount of newly excavated fulachta fiadh sites all across Ireland renders the catalouge of 
artefacts from these type of features (Cherry 1990) slightly obsolete and makes the compilation of an 
updated publication highly desirable. 
 It is clear however that most excavation reports from fulachta fiadh sites published in the last few 
years indicate a trend towards predominantly functional artefacts. The vast majority of reported 
artefacts consist of flakes, blades and scrapers made out of flint or chert as well as occasional finds of 
pottery, usually dating to the Bronze Age12
. 
Burnt mounds and environmental archaeology 
Very little environmental archaeology has to date been performed on burnt mounds and even less has 
been published into the public archaeological domain. 
 The most common type of investigation performed on burnt mound sites is analysis of floral 
remains. The results of these investigations have so far generated little in the way of new knowledge. 
The Irish Archaeobotany Discussion Group reports for example that preserved floral remains have only been 
detected on less than 8% of the investigated sites and then only in small quantities (McClethie et. al. 
2007, Monk, pers. correspondence). 
 Other types of analyses such as identification of insect remains, wood species analyses from burnt 
mound charcoal deposits and palynological work has also been performed on some material from burnt 
mound sites. In common to all this work is that it is currently being processed and most of it is not 
ready for publication (Davis, pers. correspondence; Timpany, pers, correspondence). 
 Clearly, environmental archaeology is a discipline that could provide more in the way of scientific
data than it currently does in the attempts to solve the questions surrounding the burnt mounds of 
Ireland. 
 
24
Function 
Fulachta fiadh have been researched, with varying amount of intensity, over the last 55 years. Despite the 
research performed to date the function of this feature type remains something of a mystery. 
 This situation is hardly a result of a lack of attempts to define plausible interpretations concerning 
the function of fulachta fiadh but rather from an inability by archaeologists to identify the empirical data 
to support their hypotheses. Archaeologists are faced with a situation where the morphology, 
distribution and chronology of fulachta fiadh are relatively well researched but where our knowledge of 
the function, and by extension also the importance and purpose of the fulachta fiadh in Irelands 
prehistoric economy and society, is restricted to the extremely basic fact that they were used to bring 
water to boiling temperature. As the boiling of water must be seen as one of the most basic technical 
innovations ever created, commonly used for a range of different activities, an interpretation of the 
fulachta fiadh phenomenon can never be truly complete unless its function is better understood. 
The cooking hypothesis 
And it was their custom [the fianna] to send their attendants about noon with whatever they had killed in the 
morning’s hunt to an appointed hill, having wood and moorland in the neighbourhood, and to kindle raging fires 
thereon, and put into them a large number of emery stones; and to dig two pits in the yellow clay of the moorland, 
and put some of the meat on spits to roast before the fire; and to bind another portion of it with suagans in dry 
bundles and set it to boil in the larger of the two pits and keep plying them with stones that were in the fire, making 
them seethe often until they were cooked. And these fires were so large that their sites are to-day in Ireland burnt to 
blackness and these are now called Fulacht Fian by the peasantry (Céitinn: Foras Feasa ar Éirinn II in 
O’Kelly 1954:148). 
 The passage above is from Foras Feasa ar Éirinn by Seathrún Céitinn (Geoffrey Keating), written in
the 17th century. Combined with other historical references to ancient cooking places in Irelands past 
as well as studies of ethnographic parallels from different parts of the world this description of food 
preparation has laid the foundation for the oldest and perhaps most widely accepted interpretation 
of fulachta fiadh as places of food preparation (Barfield & Hodder 1987; O’Driceoil 1988, 1990, 
1991). Among the archaeologists who support this hypothesis are several groups who interpret the 
cooking function of fulachta fiadh slightly differently. 
 One of these groups is best represented by Michael O’Kelly who, as already mentioned, 
performed the first truly scientific investigations of fulachta fiadh. O’Kellys interpretations of the 
investigated sites were heavily influenced by the early written sources. Therefore the experiments 
that were performed in connection with the excavation and reconstruction of Ballyvourney I in 
County Cork were designed to test whether the cooking-techniques described in the written sources 
could be replicated. (O’Kelly 1954). 
 O’Kellys experiments showed that the water in the reconstructed trough (with a capacity of 454 
litres) could be brought to boiling temperature in about 30 minutes and subsequently be kept boiling 
by occasionally adding further hot stones. A leg of lamb, wrapped in straw, submerged in the water 
and kept boiling for almost four hours was tried for consumption. The result was a piece of meat 
that, according to O’Kelly, was “cooked to the bone and free from all contamination” (O’Kelly 
1954:122). Christy Lawless conducted a similar experiment in 1988 and confirmed that meat cooked 
in this manner “had good colour, good odour, [...] was very moist, succulent and very tasty” 
(Lawless 1990:8). 
 The success of O’Kellys experiments combined with the morphological similarity between his 
sites and the features described in historical sources led O’Kelly to interpret the fulachta fiadh as 
cooking places. 
25
 O’Kelly did however make it clear that the 14C dates from the sites investigated in County Cork 
(
14C dated to the Bronze Age*
) as well as other sites known at the time in other parts of the county 
did not support a connection between the fulachta fiadh and the mythological fianna (O’Kelly 
1954:138ff). The concept of the fian, (landless and usually young aristocrats, not yet in possession of 
an inheritance) appears in early medieval Irish law tracts and the fian should thus be considered as an 
occurrence dating to the late Iron Age and the early medieval period (Ó Cróinín 1995:88). 
 An alternative to the hypothesis that fulachta fiadh were the temporary “hunting stations” of 
roaming hunters and warriors has been proposed by John Feehan (1991). Based on finds of querns 
and flint tools, objects which he associates with domestic activities, Feehan postulated the 
hypothesis that the fulachta fiadh can be interpreted as sites of winter dwelling for a population 
supported by a pastoral economy (Feehan 1991:205). The lowland areas, bordering onto lakes and 
bogs, where fulachta fiadh are generally found may have been used as areas of early grazing by the 
Bronze Age herdsmen who during this time of the year substituted their diet of meat with one 
mainly based on cereal based foods such as porridge and pottage. 
 According to Feehan fulachta fiadh would have played a significant role in the day to day activities 
of winter settlements as the boiling of water would not only be suitable for the preparation of cereal
based food but also for personal hygiene and washing. Hot stones could also have been used for 
baking and household heating (Feehan 1991:205). 
Fat extraction 
A rather recent addition to the fulacht fiadh debate is an article by environmental archaeologist Mick 
Monk (Monk 2007) who has suggested that fulachta fiadh may have functioned as sites of fat production. 
The hypothesis has some validity as animal fat, especially the blubber of marine mammals, is known to 
have played a significant role in prehistoric economies throughout Europe (Gustavsson 1986; Lindqvist 
& Storå 1997). 
 Even though it is unlikely that marine mammals such as seals or whales were boiled in fulacht fiadh
troughs throughout Ireland it is nonetheless possible that extraction of fat from animal parts by 
immersing them in boiling water took place at burnt mound sites. 
 Animal fat rises to the surface of water when heated and it would have been easily separated from the 
water with a simple scoop if allowed to cool before collection. The final product would have had many 
possible uses, possibly even preservation of the very meat from which it derived, similar to the French 
course of confit*
(Monk 2007; Monk pers. correspondence). 
 The major problem with this hypothesis is that it may prove to be close to impossible to confirm in 
by empirical data. Lipid studies have been suggested as a possible means of addressing the issue as 
similar studies of lipids in pottery vessels have had some success. This suggestion may however turn 
out to be a long shot as fulachta fiadh troughs may not have permitted fats to be sufficiently preserved 
for identification (Monk 2007; Monk, pers correspondence). 
 Lipid studies of archaeological contexts also require rather comprehensive understanding of the 
diagenesis of the materials intended for study, one way of obtaining such data being the establishment
of modern references (Isaksson 2000). If lipid studies are to be useful in providing additional data 
concerning fulachta fiadh such a knowledge base of reference studies and materials would first have to be 
established (Monk, pers correnspondence). 
 
*
 It should be noted that O’Kellys 14C dates were performed while the method was still in its infancy and the results were 
general at best. The date from Killeens for example displays a span of 1500 years when calibrated (2900-1400 BC, 95,4% 
confidence) with a significant portion of that span covering what generally is considered to be the late Neolithic. O’Kellys 
samples were redated during the 1980s and published in a compilation of dates from 25 other sites (Brindley & Lanting 
1990). All of O’Kellys sites were, after the re-dating, placed firmly in the early and middle phases of the Bronze Age. 
26
Bathing and saunas 
In the discussion concerning the functional aspects of fulachta fiadh a hypothesis that they were 
saunas or bathing facilities tends to be one that is often found quoted in articles and excavation 
reports13 (Murphy 1998). 
 The sauna hypothesis was initially proposed by Lawrence Barfield and Mike Hodder (1987) who 
used an extensively investigated burnt mound in south Birmingham in England as their main object 
of study. During the excavation of the feature a significant portion of the main mound deposit was 
sieved indicating a total absence of bone fragments. After verifying that soil acidity could not have 
accounted for the lack of bones Barfield and Hodder began to search for an explanation to the 
function of the mound other than preparation of meat (Barfield & Hodder 1987:371f). 
 Drawing heavily on historical and ethnographic parallels the authors suggested that their burnt 
mound could have been used as a sweat house or sauna. The lack of bones was seen as only one of 
several indicators, others being a total absence of finds relating to food preparation and the close 
proximity to water (which is typical for saunas in many parts of the world) (Barfield & Hodder 
1987:371). 
 Barfield and Hodder also saw the large amount of burnt stones and charcoal as an indication that 
the feature had been used over a longer period of time rather than during short hunting expeditions 
as proposed by O’Kelly and others (Barfield & Hodder 1987:371). In this respect their view differs 
significantly from that of O’Kelly and other archaeologists who have experimented with fulachta 
fiadh. O’Kelly for example showed that the operation of a trough usually results in approximately 
two thirds of the trough being filled with stones after each use (O’Kelly 1954:122). Considering that 
most burnt mound troughs have a capacity of hundreds of litres an impressive mound can 
potentially be accumulated in a relatively short period of time. 
 The initial publication by Barfield and Hodder (1987) was written for the purpose of challenging 
the common interpretation of burnt mound as cooking sites. Giving rise to the most significant 
debate in burnt mound research the sauna hypothesis has in turn been subject to criticism on several 
accounts. The perhaps most significant of these is the fact that personal cleansing in a dry or steam 
sauna requires the presence of an enclosed structure and such features are exceptionally rare on 
fulachta fiadh sites (O’Drisceoil 1988:677). Other criticism of the sauna hypothesis has addressed the 
facts that in saunas steam is usually created by pouring water on hot stones rather than the other way
around (thus negating the need for a trough) and the fact that the few structures found on fulachta 
fiadh sites do not actually enclose the area around the trough indicating that the trough was not used 
for the creation of steam (O’Drisceoil 1988:677f). Diarmuid O’Drisceoil has also pointed out the 
idea of close proximity to water as being indicative of a sauna as irrelevant because any activity 
involving hundreds of litres of water would logically have favored such placement (O’Drisceoil 
1988:679). 
 Personal hygiene has however historically not been limited solely to the use of sweathouses and 
saunas. A. T. Lucas published an article as early as 1965 where he compiled references to bathing 
and washing in early Irish literature (Lucas 1965). In his article Lucas presents several instances 
where the use of hot stones for the purpose of heating bathwater is described. He also proposes that 
the large troughs of fulachta fiadh may have functioned as bath tubs during a time when metal or 
wooden tubs were not readily available (Lucas 1965:78f). This hypothesis is however far from 
accepted as most people would consider bathing in troughs filled with sharp, scorching hot stones to 
be uncomfortable at best (O’Drisceoil 1988:679). 
 
27
Textile processing 
The hypothesis that fulachta fiadh may have functioned as sites of textile production and/or processing 
is often neglected in the archaeological debate. This proposed function is however just as valid as those 
mentioned above, and in many ways just as experimented upon. 
 There are three processes connected with textile production that have been suggested to have taken 
place at fulachta fiadh sites: washing, dying and fulling of wool2
 (Jeffrey 1991). 
 Washing is a process not only necessary for cleaning dirty clothes but also as a first step in processing 
newly sheared wool which tends to be quite filthy and greasy2
. 
 Fulling is a quite simple process where a woven piece of cloth is submerged in hot water together 
with a detergent and thereafter agitated intensively for a short time. The process produces the dual 
result of cleaning and de-greasing the cloth as well as making it stronger, warmer and partially water
proof. This is achieved by heating the wool until the microscopic scales of the individual hairs open up 
and interlock with each other2
 (Nockert 1991:150). 
 Dyeing is a process which in its simplest forms is arguably even more straightforward than fulling 
(Denvir). A piece of cloth or wool can be submerged in warm water together with a dye that releases 
pigmentation in water to achieve simple colouring. Dying is known to have been performed throughout 
Europe from prehistoric times onward and the craft developed over time into a complex process where 
various types of substances were used, often in complex combinations of dyes and mordants2
 (Nockert 
1991:72f). 
 Since all three processes presented above require the presence of warm or hot water, a large 
container, and preferably the presence of a source of fresh water in which to rinse the textiles, fulachta 
fiadh seem just as likely to have been constructed for textile processing as for any of the other functions
presented in this chapter. That at least is the view of Anne-Marie Denvir, an archaeologist that in her 
undergraduate thesis proposes that fulachta fiadh would have made “excellent centres for textile 
production”2
. Denvir was not the first archaeologist to suggest such a function as an article by S. Jeffrey 
(1991) proposed fulling as a possible function for burnt mounds in the early 1990s and A. T. Lucas 
(1965) mentioned historical references to hot stones being used for washing as early as 1965. What is 
special about Denvir’s work is the fact that she performed a set of experiments, very much in the spirit 
of O’Kelly, in order to strengthen her hypotheses. Denvir used a trough specifically built for the 
experiments to prove that fulling, dying and washing can relatively simply be achieved by the means of
hot stone technology2
. 
 Using the simple dye of ivy berries (Hedera helix) a piece of wool was successfully dyed dark green and 
fulling and washing was achieved using little more than hot water and a detergent (stale urine)2
. The 
experiments must thus be considered to be equally convincing as those involving meat preparation. 
Brewing 
One of the most recent additions to the debate concerning functional aspects of burnt mounds is a 
hypothesis proposed by Billy Quinn and Declan Moore (2007) who have suggested that a primary 
function of fulachta fiadh sites was brewing. 
 Looking to the long history of fermented beverages in many parts of the world, as well as numerous 
ethnographic parallels of beer brewing with the help of hot stone technology, Quinn and Moore set up 
an experiment to determine whether a trough heated with stones could be used to convert water and 
malted grain into wort, one of the final processes involved in brewing (Quinn & Moore 2007). 
 The experiment turned out to be successful and the results were presented in an article in the popular 
Irish magazine Archaeology Ireland (Quinn & Moore 2007) where the two authors documented how they 
managed to turn 300 litres of water and 50 litres of malted grain into 110 litres of wort, perfectly usable 
for fermentation into ale. The success of the experiment combined with the suggestion that cereal 
produce may have been processed at fulachta fiadh sites exemplified by the occasional presence of 
querns, has prompted the authors to conclude that “a primary use seems clear- these sites [burnt 
mounds] were Bronze Age micro breweries (Quinn & Moore 2007)”. 
28
 Successful as the experiment may have been the conclusions of Quinn and Moore have not remained 
unchallenged in the archaeological debate. The main issue working against the hypothesis is the fact 
that it is based on a shaky empirical foundation. In reply to the initial article by Quinn and Moore 
members of the Irish Archaeobotany Discussion Group (McCletchie et. al. 2007) pointed out the fact that
beer brewing is an activity that includes large quantities of cereal produce. Since fulachta fiadh are sites 
where frequent firings take place as well as localities that are frequently waterlogged one would expect 
traces of brewing activities to be detectable in the archaeobotanical record. Despite the excellent 
preservation conditions present on many burnt mound sites the group stated that their own 
investigations have shown that less than 8% of investigated sites contained cereal remains and then 
only in small quantities (McCletchie et. al. 2007).
 The discussion is still very much ongoing as a reply by Quinn and Moore (2008) has recently been 
published where the questions raised by the Irish Archaeobotany Discussion Group are addressed. The 
question of that of the clear lack of cereal remains on fulachta fiadh sites is discussed by the authors who 
propose that the used grain was a valuable resource for its Bronze Age producers as it could be used 
for bread baking or as animal fodder. Quinn and Moore also propose that the used malt, unless 
preserved by charring or water logging, has such a poor rate of preservation that the 8% frequency of 
sites containing cereal remains is actually a reasonable result (Quinn & Moore 2008). 
 
Alternative functions 
A number of alternative functions to the ones presented above have over the years been proposed for 
fulachta fiadh. These include boat building, butter production, metallurgy and leather tanning (Barfield & 
Hodder 1987:371). 
 Some of the proposed functions seem, considering the knowledge we possess about burnt mounds 
today, as rather far fetched. Metallurgy is likely a candidate that should be removed from the 
archaeological discussion as metallurgical processes tend to leave rather clear traces in the 
archaeological record (Hambro Mikkelsen & Nørbach 2003). Boat building as a primary function is also 
an unlikely candidate considering the sheer amount of fulachta fiadh located in areas hardly suitable for 
waterway navigation (such as the Burren limestone plateau in County Clare). 
 A few of the hypotheses have been experimented upon, such as the tanning and hardening of leather 
in hot water (Coles 1979:198) but generally the abovementioned functions have one thing in common: 
they are poorly researched and are rarely supported by any firm empirical evidence. 
29
2. Environmental archaeology in theory and practice
Theoretical and methodological considerations 
Archaeology is a multidisciplinary science, a borrower where methods and theories from various 
sciences are used to access various types of information stored in the archaeological record. This study 
is an example of how methods originating from the natural sciences of botany, chemistry and physics 
can be applied to serve archaeology. 
 Working within the framework of the greater discipline of Environmental Archaeology my main 
theoretical inspiration has been the work of Dena Dincauze, an environmental archaeologist who has 
helped to define and clarify many concepts of the discipline, concepts that vary in scope from 
integration of archaeology into a more holistic ecological thinking (dealing with the interactions 
between various organisms and their environments) to concepts defining the applicability of various 
scientific methods on local archaeological phenomena (Dincauze 2000). 
 Due to the local scale of this thesis the latter theoretical considerations have been of particular
interest to me, especially concepts of taphonomy*
, the understanding of how various human and natural 
processes modify the archaeological material, processes that have to be understood and backtracked in 
order to understand the message that is stored within the archaeological matrix. 
 Similar ideas, dissecting the concepts of modification of archaeological materials, have been around 
for at least half a century. Schiffer’s (1976) identification of N- and C-transforms (natural and cultural) as 
some of the primary factors governing the composition of the final archaeological record as well as 
Binford’s (1968; 1989) focus on studies of anthropogenic processes are theoretical models that have 
been an influence to me despite the fact that their use in the greater archaeological science has been
gradually phased out over the last 25 years. 
 Post-processual archaeology has also been an influence, particularly in highlighting the effects of
culture on seemingly natural phenomena. Considering Ian Hodder’s (Hodder 1982) belief that all 
archaeological material, no matter how basic, reflects cultural behaviour, an environmental 
archaeologist is faced with the task of studying an immensely complex web of natural and cultural 
interactions. These interactions can be studied at local, regional or global scales. 
 This thesis is a local study of a regional phenomenon. To offset the effects of errors based on 
preconceptions I have chosen to study each of my sites as a separate entity, representativity being the 
primary consideration in the design of my sampling and interpretation strategy. 
 In order to answer the questions defined for this study I have studied the application of soil 
chemistry, geophysical properties and archaeobotany on various archaeological materials that in some 
way may act as references to the results provided by my analyses. Working in such a way I have omitted
studies of various aspects of human behaviour that may have affected the nature of the sites under 
study such as the effects of ritual, tradition and idiosyncrasy. The choice to leave such studies outside 
the framework of this study is not based on a belief that these factors are irrelevant to the 
understanding of the studied sites, but because of my belief that they are unidentifiable by means of the 
methods applied in this thesis. 
 No archaeological site is an island; all archaeological phenomena are interconnected in a complex 
pattern. Similarly no archaeologist should be an island. Despite this thesis being a rather straightforward 
attempt to apply deductive reasoning on an archaeological material it should not prohibit the use of the 
results of this study in a wider analysis of the burnt mound phenomenon, even if such a study is based
on differing theoretical reasoning. 
 
*
 Taphonomy was originally a term used only to describe the decomposition processes of living organisms. It has since then 
been borrowed by archaeologists to describe the decomposition and modification processes of both organic and inorganic 
materials after their primary deposition (Darvill 2002:419). 
30
Archaeobotany 
Archaeobotany, palaeobotany, palaeoetnobotany. “A loved child has many names” goes a Swedish saying and 
when dealing with the study of prehistoric flora and fauna and their mutual interactions that certainly 
seems more than true. The modern term archaeobotany will be used throughout this text to describe the 
method of analyzing plant remains extracted from archaeological contexts. The individual plant remains
will be referred to as plant remains or macrofossils (the latter also encompassing remains of non-plant 
origin). 
 The realization that plant and animal remains may be preserved for many millennia or longer is not a 
recent one. As early as 1848 Danish archaeologists, among them the rather well known Jens Worsaae, 
started investigations of middens composed of shellfish waste found along the shores of southern 
Scandinavia (Trigger 1997:81ff). A decade or so later, the now famous Swiss lake dwellings, with their 
impressive array of preserved organic artifacts and waste were discovered (Trigger 1997:83f). Together
those two events led to the first investigations of human interaction with the environment based on 
archaeobotanical and archaeozoological materials. 
 With time the study of plant and animal remains came to encompass several sub-disciplines such as 
palynology, the study of pollen grains in prehistoric deposits, developed by Lennart von Post in the 
early 1900s and also analyses of insect remains from prehistoric settlements (Trigger 1997: 247). 
 The study of zoological and floral remains from soil samples as well as studies of pollen from suitable 
localities has over the years developed into an integral part of archaeology (Nesbitt 2006:20) and when 
used in combination with traditional archaeology it has the potential to answer many questions 
concerning human impact on its local environment as well as local agricultural practices and sometimes 
even specific prehistoric processes involving organic resources (O’Connor & Evans 2005:Chap. 11). 
 In this study archaeobotanical investigations are mainly limited to the analysis of preserved plant
material visible to the human eye by means of a stereo microscope. There are several ways in which 
macrofossil plant remains may be preserved in archaeological contexts. The five most common ways of 
preservation are carbonization, preservation in arid conditions, preservation within coprolites, water
logging and imprinting (Viklund 1998:22). 
 Carbonization occurs when plant remains are subjected to heat of around 150-300ºC in an oxygen 
poor environment. Plants subjected to higher temperatures or to an oxygen rich environment at the 
time of heating tend to combust and evaporate (Viklund 1998:31f). Carbonization and water logging 
are without doubt the two most common means of preservation encountered on archaeological sites in 
northern Europe. 
 Preservation by imprinting on pottery and other types of clay are considerably rarer and so is 
preservation in coprolites although both types of archaeobotanical record may occasionally occur on 
Irish sites. Preservation due to arid conditions is on the other hand practically impossible in Ireland due 
to the prevailing climatic conditions. 
 The actual procedure of retrieving material for archaeobotanical analysis is rather straightforward and 
does not require advanced laboratory equipment (Branch et. al. 2005:93ff). Many of the steps can 
actually be performed on site with rather primitive equipment. The primary goal of the pre-analysis 
handling of archaeobotanical samples is to separate as much of the bulk soil of the sample as possible
from the information carrying remains. For this two methods may be utilized (frequently used in 
combination): floatation and sieving. By pouring a dry soil sample into water the majority of organic 
matter tends to float to the surface where it can be channeled into a separate container or a sieve (Brach 
et. al. 2005:125). The problem with this method is that not all material of interest has a density lower 
than water, allowing it to float. Bones, inorganic residue (perhaps from metallurgical processes) or 
organic mater weighed down by mineralization may often sink straight to the bottom of floatation 
tanks. Moist samples are also unsuitable for floatation, especially if derived from clayey deposits. An 
experiment conducted during the course of this thesis shows that up to 75% of all analyzable material 
would have been lost if the samples had been floatated prior to drying (see appendix 5). Water sieving
is exactly what the name implies. The sample is sieved through a set of sieves with varying mesh size,
separating the smallest fractions of the soil from the material to be analyzed. The mesh size can often 
be varied depending on what type of analysis is being performed and what types of questions one is 
31
trying to solve (Branch et. al. 2005:125). Once the material to be analyzed has been separated from the 
bulk of the soil it is usually dried and inspected visually. 
 This final step of the method is also where the method enters its complicated phase. The material 
needs to be detected and separated. Preserved fragments of plants are usually also separated from 
bones, slag fragment, small fragments of pottery and pieces of wood or charcoal. The identification of
these classes of macro remains is important as they may be sent on to various specialists for further 
analysis. 
 Once the preserved plant remains (usually, but not exclusively seeds) have been detected and 
separated they need to be identified and counted. This may sometimes be very difficult and time 
consuming as many remains tend to be fragmented or badly damaged by the passage of time or the 
preservation process that conserved them in the first place. 
 The complexity of the method does not stop once the remains have been identified down to their 
respective genus or species. In fact the interpretative phase of an archaeobotanical investigation is also 
the most crucial one. 
 As mentioned previosly, enrionmental archaeologist Dena Dincauze stresses over and over again the 
importance of taphonomy in her major work on theory and practice in Environmental Archaeology 
(Dincauze 2000). In archaeobotany taphonomical considerations are focused very much on establishing 
the origin and representativity of the plant remains extracted from archaeological contexts. 
Transportation of material, unrepresentative preservation conditions, selective deposition of plants, 
patterns of production and consumption, natural variations is plant population, etc. are factors that 
must be considered when interpreting archaeobotanical results (Dincauze 2000:332ff; Viklund 1998). 
 
32
Phosphate analysis 
Phosphate analysis is a method developed for identification of the phosphate content in soils. P is a 
substance that naturally circulates between various parts of the biosphere and the underlying soil. 
As living organisms or their waste products decompose the phosphates tend to become fixed within 
the organic or inorganic parts of the soil. Often the new compounds are insoluble and stable and can 
remain stable in the soil for considerable periods of time unless physically removed (Crowther 
1997:93ff; Heron 2005:565ff). 
 Phosphate analysis was originally developed for prospecting the agricultural areas of southern Sweden 
for suitable sugar beet areas. It did not take long however before the inventor of the method, Olof 
Arrhenius, could link anomalous concentrations of phosphates in some fields to historic and 
prehistoric settlement (Arrhenius 1934). In fact, the largest Iron Age settlement site known in Scania 
(the southernmost county of Sweden), Uppåkra, was detected by Arrhenius during his original surveys 
(see Image 8). Since then phosphate analysis has become a common analytical tool, frequently utilised 
during archaeological investigations. 
IMAGE 8. 
Map from the original phosphate survey of Olof Arrhenius. Note the significant concentration of phosphates at 
Uppåkra, today known to be one of the largest and archaeologically richest Iron Age sites in southern Sweden 
(Arrhenius 1934). 
33
Within the framework of this thesis both organically and inorganically bound phosphates have been 
analyzed, the implications of these two analyses being elaborated in greater detail later in this chapter. 
 Important to know however is that the method allows for both large scale surveying of large areas as 
well as highly localized analyses of specific features or stratigraphies (Branch et. al. 2005:51). 
 When used for prospecting samples are usually extracted with a gouge auger, basically a hollow tube
open on one side which allows for the retrieval of a column of soil. When investigating stratigraphies or 
specific features samples are usually taken systematically from archaeological contexts in separate 
containers. For stratigraphies Kubiena boxes have proven to be particularly practical as they allow for 
the transportation of intact stratigraphies to the laboratory. 
 When interpreting the results from any geochemical or geophysical analysis the importance of 
taphonomy is just as important as when interpreting archaeobotanical remains even if the taphonomical 
considerations are of slightly different nature (Dincauze 2000). Human actions within a given system 
are of great influence to the deposition patterns of phosphate rich materials but equally important are 
the chemical properties of the system in which the deposition is made as well as post depositional 
changes to the system, the latter two often being governed by the complex rules of geological 
formation processes and their interaction with the overlying biosphere (Dincauze 2000; Linderholm 
2007). 
Magnetic susceptibility 
Magnetic susceptibility is a method of measuring the soils susceptibility to be magnetized. This property 
changes with cultural disturbance of soils, water logging, burning or deposition of iron rich material in 
the soil. Some biological organisms also have the capacity to affect this property (Linderholm 2007). 
 Magnetic susceptibility can be measured either directly in the field with a portable device called a 
magnetometer or by bringing the soil to a laboratory based equivalent (Branch et al 2005:51; 
Linderholm 2007; O‘Connor & Evans 2005:141). In this thesis the latter type of analysis has been 
performed. 
 By extracting the soil with an auger and bringing it to the laboratory the archaeologist can choose to 
analyze specific parts of the stratigraphic sequence. Portable magnetometers do not have that option. 
In addition the soil can also be analyzed before and after ignition. The resulting quota is extremely 
useful for interpretation of MS results as a high MS-quota (MS rising considerably after ignition) usually 
indicates that the soil has not been subject to high temperatures before. If the quota is low it may 
indicate prior firings of the soil (Linderholm 2007). 
 Two very important aspects worth considering when analyzing MS is that many natural processes can 
alter the magnetic properties of the soil and that MS is not cumulative. Dumping ten times the amount 
of organic matter in one location and not in another will create a corresponding increase of phosphates. 
Lighting a fire ten times in one place and one time in another will not do the same to the results of MS 
analysis. The nature of heating, its temperature and access to oxygen, as well as the iron content of the 
soil are the main factors to consider, not the amount of firings (Linderholm 2007). 
Loss on Ignition 
Loss on Ignition is a very simple way of calculating the organic fraction of a soil sample. The soil is 
weighed, heated to a temperature of around 500-600ºC, allowed to cool and then weighted again. Since 
most of the organic matter will have burned and evaporated during the ignition calculation of the 
percentage of organic matter is fairly simple (Crowther 1997:94ff). 
 Temperatures higher than 600ºC are unsuitable for calculating the amount of organic matter in soils
as some minerals will begin to alter their properties at those temperatures. In addition some soils, 
especially ones with high clay and silt contents may contain water bound to the minerals in the soil, 
water which may be released during ignition (Linderholm pers. comment). 
34
Environmental archaeology in practice: the search for functional 
aspects of prehistoric phenomena 
Processing of animal based produce 
Basically all these heaps were constructed according to a common scheme. The stone packing [heat shattered 
stones], often in the shape of a horse shoe, was placed on a gently sloping outcrop, surrounding a natural 
depression in the rock. In the small space between the stone packing and the depression, there are always larger, 
unburned, stones forming a kind of stone frame (Gustavsson 1997:13). 
The description above describes a feature that could very easily be mistaken for a fulacht fiadh, the only 
difference being a placement around a natural depression on rocky ground rather than around a dug 
out trough. The feature however is neither Irish nor is it dated to the Bronze Age. These heaps, 
described by Gustavsson, have been detected on Kökar, a small island in the Baltic in the Åland 
Archipelago roughly midway between Sweden and Finland (Gustavsson 1997). 
 The function of these features, dated to the Iron Age, has been interpreted as the processing of seal 
blubber (a thick layer of vascularised fat under the skin of many marine mammals) into usable oil 
(Gustavsson 1986). 
 As fat has been proposed as a possible function for fulachta fiadh the description of a site similar in 
function and applied technology may be a good way to begin a survey of how environmental 
archaeology may be used to identify prehistoric activities. 
 Fat production is a possible use for burnt mounds but it may also be very difficult to prove 
empirically as fat may have a poor chance of preservation (Monk 2007; Monk, pers. correspondance). 
Gustavsson, faced with a similar problem, sought to confirm the proposed function by drawing upon 
ethnographic parallels from seal blubber processing still practiced at the time in Canada and the Soviet 
Union (Gustavsson 1986). 
 The ethnographic data showed that hot stones are very useful indeed for the extraction of fat from 
the blubber of seals as overheating and burning of the blubber would render it unusable. Instead of 
heating the blubber over a fire Gustavsson suggested that it may have been placed in the stone troughs
together with hot stones and left to slowly “sweat” out the fat which thereafter, thanks to the slope of 
the feature, was channeled into a separate depression in the rock (Gustavsson 1986). 
 In order to support this assumption phosphate analysis was performed on the features showing 
heightened but not excessively high concentrations (Gustavsson 1986). 
 The most phosphate rich parts of an animal are the bones (Bethell & Smith 1989; Ezzo 1994), 
suggesting that the interpretation of these features as oil production facilities rather than cooking or 
roasting pits, may be a reasonable one. 
 An interpretation of these features as roasting pits or some other type of food preparation facility, 
may have been expected, as many features of this type in Scandinavia have traditionally, just like the
Irish fulachta fiadh, been interpreted in this way (Norberg 1996; Wrede 1995). 
 The Swedish examples of features utilizing hot stone technology have traditionally been divided into 
three categories. The feature category skärvstenshögar, occuring throughout of central Sweden have 
sometimes been used as a parallell to the Irish and British burnt mounds (eg. Larsson 1990). This 
analogy is however only based on the superficial morphology of the features and the skärvstenshögar are 
actueally very poor comparisons to the Irish burnt mound as they refuse sites, places of discarded stone 
and other waste contra to the Irish mounds which are the actual activity sites where the burnt stone was 
created in the first place. 
 The other two feature types are known as kokgropar (cooking troughs/roasting pits) and 
skärvstensvallar (heat shattered stone enclosures) (Löthman 1986).
35
 The former are morphologically similar to fulachta fiadh and usually comprise a pit dug into the ground 
with heat shattered stones present either in the pit or deposited around it. The main suggested function 
has traditionally been food preparation by either direct firing inside the pit or by placing of hot stones 
inside the pits which have been suggested as being either dry or water filled (Norberg 1996). 
 Unfortunately, despite their common occurrence throughout parts of northern Sweden these features 
are poorly understood and their interpretation rests on rather dubious empirical evidence. In many 
cases their function as either food preparation sites or “something else” is based solely on the presence 
or absence of bones (Wrede 1995). As such the Swedish roasting pits are equally enigmatic as their 
counterparts on the British Isles and are not the best candidate for the exploration of avenues of 
methodological applications useful as a reference in this study. 
 The third main category of features displaying an adaptation of hot stone technology, the 
Skärvstensvallar, is a phenomenon that has been known since the 1920s but only in the last three decades 
has been subject to serious archaeological research (Spång 1986). Consisting of an enclosure of heat 
shattered stones (believed to be a by-product of day-to-day activities) mixed with soil, surrounding a
sunken-floor construction these sites were initially interpreted as habitable houses where the sunken 
construction and the enclosure acted as insulation against the cold climate (Spång 1986).Although this
interpretation may very well apply to many of these features their function as pure habitation sites has 
lately been debated. The discovery of three such constructions at the Neolithic site of Bastuloken in 
Ångermanland, northern Sweden has produced evidence of extensive processing of animal produce 
(Ekholm 2006; Engelmark & Harju 2007; Hellkvist 2007). The evidence, in the form of large amounts 
of animal bones of primarily elk, has been interpreted by some archaeologists as indications that 
specialized activities (such as leather processing butchering) may have been performed on the site 
(Engelmark pers. communication). 
 Regardless of whether the site was a habitable house or a semi-industrial site for the processing of elk 
based products the large amount of bones is reflected by the input of phosphates in the surrounding 
area (Hellqvist 2007). 
 The fact that phosphorous at different stages of its cycle of intake by organisms and deposition in soil 
tends to bind to different fractions of the soil has been mentioned previously. In the case of sites like 
Bastuloken where the primary source of phosphates were bones, the majority of P tends to bind to the 
inorganic fractions, suggesting that similar activities at fulachta fiadh in Ireland should result in 
comparable accumulation of phosphates. 
 At Bastuloken the input of P into the existing system was significant enough to be visible in 
stratigraphies from cores taken in a small nearby lake (Hellqvist 2007). The increase of P during specific 
times as seen in the cores suggests that there were several phases of activity at this site. By combining 
the results of the phosphate analyses with studies of the micro and macrofossil remains from the same 
layers suggestions have been made that the site was subject to at least three separate phases of use 
(Hellqvist 2007). 
 The Bastuloken site was dedicated to the processing of animal produce obtained by hunting in a 
Neolithic hunter-gatherer context. The same processes of phosphate deposition in the form of bone 
waste would however also exist on a site dedicated to animal-based production in an agricultural 
society. 
 The Bronze Age in Ireland was probably a period when agriculture was the backbone of the local 
economies (Waddell 2000:205ff). Livestock herding would have necessitated dedicated sites for the 
processing of the produce and if the burnt mounds were a part in this process then phosphate analysis 
may be a useable avenue for further studies of the phenomena. 
 
 
36
Prehistoric farming 
Prehistoric arable fields 
The introduction of crop based economies has traditionally, together with the introduction of animal 
husbandry, been one of the areas of archaeological research where the uses of the methods of 
environmental archaeology have played their most prominent role (eg. Brown 2007; Hillman 1981; 
Reynolds 1981; van der Veen 1992; Williams 1989). 
 The exact circumstances surrounding the introduction of such an economy are still subject to 
significant debate (Brown 2007; Wadell 2000:25ff; Williams 1989) and while some data points towards 
early experimentation with agriculture in the fifth millennium BC (Brown 2007; Wadell 2000:25ff) most 
recent research seems to indicate that agricultural experimentation occurred on the British Isles 
sometime around 4000-3800BC with an establishment phase occurring from 3800-3000BC (Brown 
2007). 
 Regardless of its exact date of introduction agriculture in the form of animal husbandry and crop 
cultivation was long since established during the Bronze Age when most Irish burnt mounds were in 
use (Waddell 2000:205ff). 
 Some possibilities of environmental archaeology to analyze places of animal based processes have 
already been presented. Cereal based processes have however also been proposed as a possible function 
for the Irish burnt mounds (Feehan 1991; Quinn & Moore 2007) and if such processes occurred on 
these sites they should, like most human activities, have left detectable traces in the archaeological
record. In order to interpret such data one must first establish a framework of what types of 
information are accessible by the methods applied on a specific material. 
 Most studies of prehistoric farming practices and the use of cereal produce have been based on 
analysis of pollen stratigraphies and studies of carbonized plant remains (Branch et al 2005:67ff; 
O’Connor & Evans 2005:160ff; Welinder 2004:70ff). These methods are highly useful in many 
circumstances but there are also limitations, one of which is that neither can be used for efficient 
localization of prehistoric arable fields (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996). 
 Prehistoric fields have traditionally been localized by archaeologists by surveying areas for physical 
changes in the landscape or by identification of features associated with crop cultivation such as field 
boundaries or stone clearance features (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996; Pedersen & Widgren 
2004:270ff). Such physical manifestations of former arable landscapes are however not always present. 
 Phosphate analysis has, as mentioned previously, been used for the identification of prehistoric 
settlement sites (Arrhenius 1934; Engelmark & Linderholm 1996; Heron 2005). The method can 
however also be used in order to detect prehistoric arable fields. 
 As mentioned above animal matter, particularly bone, contains significant amounts of phosphates 
that tend to become fixed in the inorganic fractions of the soil in which the material is deposited. 
Phosphate is however also a very important nutrient for plants. Any farmer must address this fact as 
long term agriculture is impossible unless the nutrients which are transported away with each crop are
replaced (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996). 
 At the beginnings of agricultural subsistence this problem was solved in different ways. One was by
abandoning depleted fields and clearing new ones every few years. This process was however not only 
time consuming and comparatively cumbersome but must also have become increasingly more of a 
problem as the Neolithic revolution triggered a population increase (Welinder 2004). 
 As agricultural technology developed many farmers began fertilizing their fields by spreading 
farmyard manure on the fields, increasing the yield of the crops. By the end of the Bronze Age this 
technology was in use in most parts of Europe. (Welinder 2004; Engelmark 1993). As many other 
processes the manuring and extensive use of arable fields created long term changes in the soil. 
 Two primary changes due to manuring are the increased concentrations of P bound to the organic 
parts of the soil and an increase in the amount of organic matter in the soil. A secondary effect of crop 
fertilizing is an increase in nitrogen which stimulates the growth of N accumulating plants such as 
goosefoot (Chenopodium spp.) (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996). 
37
 In the example of Bastuloken the high concentrations of phosphates were bound primarily to the 
inorganic parts of the soil resulting in a low quota between organic and inorganic phosphates. Such a 
result is typical for settlement sites and places of animal processing. An area with a high P quota is on 
the other hand indicative of deposition of highly organic matter such as manure. Thus a surveyed area 
which displays high concentrations of organic P, high levels of organic matter and a high P quota is a
likely candidate for a former field. By retrieving humic material from secure contexts in such a field the 
cultivation phase can also be dated, a necessity when trying to tie the identified fields to other 
archaeological phenomena (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996; Engelmark & Olofsson 1999). 
 Since many complex processes other than human interference affect the chemical composition of 
soils it is very important however that these type of surveys are not limited to the suspected fields 
themselves but also encompass surrounding areas that may act as reference points for the interpretation 
of data. Evaluation of data in light of previously conducted surveys and studies of documented farming
practices is often also preferable for a reasonable interpretation (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996). 
 At Vassmolösa in Kalmar County in south-eastern Sweden postholes believed to belong to several 
house structures were excavated in the late 1990s (Engelmark & Olofsson 1999). 
 A soil survey of the surroundings of the houses revealed two coherent areas that clearly stood out 
from the background readings. Just west of the houses, which were located at the edge of this western 
anomaly was an area with enhanced Magnetic Susceptibility, relatively high levels of phosphates and a 
generally low P quota indicating typical “settlement type” refuse deposition. Beyond this area the levels 
of organic P and P quota rose significantly while the MS of the soil dropped, indicating agriculture 
around the settlement, particularly to the east of the settlement (Engelmark & Olofsson 1999). 
 Investigations of habitational sites which are well documented in historical sources have confirmed
the applicability of this method for the purpose of localizing abandoned arable fields. A soil survey 
performed at Odlarlön, Västerbotten County, Sweden, showed that the results of the soil chemical 
analyses for a yard, pasture and arable field corresponded well to similar interpretations of prehistoric 
sites. The availability of historical sources for this particular site did however allow for a confirmation 
of the soil chemical interpretation (Hardy 2001; Viklund 2007). 
 As Quinn and Moore (2007) among other have stated, cereal based processes at fulachta fiadh sites may 
not necessarily have left a clear record in the form of preserved cereal remains. If the burnt mounds of 
Ireland were used as a part of such processes they should however be situated in correlation to 
prehistoric cultivation sites. The large amount of fulachta fiadh across the country indicates that whatever 
process was being performed at these sites it must have been extensive and logistical considerations 
would likely have created detectable correlations between prehistoric cereal producing areas and the 
fulachta fiadh (as proposed production sites). To discern such a correlation between production and 
processing sites would however likely require sampling on an ambitious scale utilizing not only 
phosphate surveys but also other methods such as palynology, preferably in an area where the 
distribution of fulachta fiadh is rather well known. 
Crops 
 The houses from the Vassmolösa mentioned above were also analyzed in detail for macrofossil 
remains. As the houses had not burned at any stage of their lifespan the archaeobotanical material was
rather sparse but did indicate the cultivation of at least two crops, barley (Hordeum vulgare) and flax 
(Linum usitattisimum), providing qualitative data about the prehistoric agriculture of the site (Engelmark 
& Olofsson 1999). 
 When the conditions for the preservation of macrofossil remains are right in-depth analyses of this
type can provide relatively high resolution data on certain activities performed on archaeological sites, 
adding to the wider scale data provided by methods like palynology and large area phosphate analysis 
(Hillman 1981; Viklund 1998). 
 By analyzing the remains of Scandinavian long houses (primarily postholes) Karin Viklund has 
illustrated how such analyses may be performed. One of the houses presented in her thesis is House 1 
from a site at Gene in Ångermanland County in northern Sweden. This was the first long house in 
Scandinavia analyzed using both archaeobotany and geochemistry (Ramqvist 1983; Viklund 1998). 
38
Using the archaeobotanical data coupled with phosphate analysis as well as studies of artefacts and 
house morphology the excavator, Per Ramqvist, was able to present an interpretation of the internal 
division of the house (Ramqvist 1983:158). 
IMAGE 9. 
Graphic representation of the results of the archaeobotanical and phosphate analyses as well as the final 
interpretation of the internal organization of House 1 at Gene in Ångermanland, Sweden (Ramqvist 1983). 
 
Viklund who has performed and examined data from several analyses of this type concluded in her 
thesis that functional analysis of long houses from Scandinavia has a good chance of identifying in 
particular grain storage areas, stables and to a lesser extent threshing barns, the latter two being more 
difficult to detect due to the fact that some parts of the plant assembly are more fragile. In threshing 
barns for example the primary material likely to be deposited would have consisted of chaffs and straw, 
easily destroyed by most heating regimes (Viklund 1998). 
 Viklund also acknowledged the vital importance of a deeper understanding of the processes under 
study. A problem in European archaeobotany, however, is the lack of well documented agricultural 
practices at their most basic level. The problem stems from the fact that European agriculture is long
since modernized and does not provide a suitable reference to prehistoric habits (Hillman 1981). 
 Gordon Hillman, working mainly with British archaeobotanical material, has proposed that studies 
into the practices of less modernized agricultural societies may provide reasonable parallels to 
European prehistory (Hillman 1981). 
 Using a Near Eastern comparison he proposes that archaeobotanists may, at the very least, be able to 
discern certain stages of crop processing as well as be able to separate sites dedicated to pastoral and 
crop based production (Hillman 1981). 
39
IMAGE 10. 
Example the various stages of cereal processing as presented by Viklund (1998, after Hillman 1981). 
Another aspect of archaeobotanical studies proposed by Hillman as particularly usable is the study of 
plant physiology, growth and distribution patterns (Hillman 1981). 
 A rather simple study based on plant physiology is for example measurement of the length of 
identified weeds. As various harvesting techniques have been practiced over the course of prehistory 
different types of weeds have been accidently harvested with the crops. A major change, sometimes 
visible on multiperiod sites, is the introduction of straw harvested as fodder for animals. Prior to the 
introduction of this practice only the ears of a cereal were harvested, either by hand or with a simple 
sickle or knife. During such harvesting very few low growing weeds tended to accumulate in crop 
storage areas. As straw became a resource the cereals were instead cut at the base with a sickle or a 
scythe resulting in accidental harvest of even low growing species (Engelmark 1993). 
 Another example for how studies of plant physiology can be used to interpret archaeobotanical 
remains is examining the original weight and size of the weed seeds. As removing weeds and other 
plant residue from the grain is vital prior to the production of flour (some weed seeds are poisonous,
others unpalatable or difficult to digest) (Korsmo 1981; Viklund 1998) several techniques have been 
practiced to make this process as efficient as possible. Sieving was one of them, another was 
winnowing, a practice where the seed is thrown into the air allowing for separation of the light residue 
from the heavier grain. As the size and weight of weed seeds determines the stage at which these 
remains are potentially separated from the grain the study of these properties can be sometimes be used 
to determine the stage at which a cereal material was preserved (Viklund 1998). 
 Hillman has proposed that spring contra autumn sowing may also be discerned by studies of the 
growth patterns of weeds (Hillman 1981). Using cleavers (Galium aparine) as an example he proposes 
that the occurrence of these weeds in archaeobotanical assemblages from British sites dating to the 
Iron Age and Romano-British periods is a clear indication of autumn sowing. To support spring sowing 
Hillman proposes that a lack of autumn germinating weeds such as cleavers could be used as evidence 
if the material at the same time contains spring germinating species of similar weight and size (thus 
eliminating the possibility that the archaeobotanical material was preserved at a stage when the weeds
had already been cleaned) (Hillman 1981). 
 Studies such as Hillman’s and Viklund’s are necessary because they add qualitative properties to the 
interpretation of the plant assemblages found in archaeological contexts. This is a vital part in 
identifying the taphonomy of the material, an understanding without which a true understanding of the 
material is impossible. 
40
Beer and brewing 
 Brewing is a function that has been proposed for fulachta fiadh. In fact Quinn and Moore (2007) see it 
as a likely primary function of burnt mounds in Ireland. 
 Beer and other fermented beverages can be assumed to have played a significant role in Europe’s 
prehistory as a comparatively easily produced mind altering substance. It is not surprising then that 
traces of various production processes related to the creation of fermented beverages containing 
alcohol are occasionally encountered in the archaeobotanical record. 
 Beer appears to have originated in Mesopotamia at least 9000 years ago, even if its spread from that 
area is not entirely documented in the archaeological record (Behre 1999:35f). We know however that 
beer was known and common throughout the antique world as references to this drink occur in 
Egyptian, Greek and Roman written sources (Behre 1999:35; Olsson 1992:3f). During the medieval 
period descriptions of beer production became common and it is these sources that have provided 
modern researchers with the most valuable insights into historic and prehistoric brewing (Behre 
1999:35ff). 
 Beer brewing is a moderately complex process which requires the grain to be processed in several 
steps (Behre 1999; Olsson 1992; Unger 2001:387). 
 The first step to a successful brewing in pre-industrial societies is to submerge the grain in water for 
several days, regularly rinsing the grain and changing the water. The purpose of this procedure is dual as 
it cleans the grain from impurities and at the same time stimulates the grain to start germinating. Once 
the grain has been stimulated into early germination they are allowed to grow sprouts of about 5-10 
mm. During the sprouting process some of the starch in the grain is transformed into sugar allowing 
for fermentation. When the germination has gone on for a sufficiently long time the process is aborted, 
usually by abruptly drying the grain. 
 A next step called roasting can be used. This is a process where the grain is warmed to about 60-70ºC 
before being ground into malt, a roughly ground mash of grain. The malt is thereafter mixed with water
and heated in a container resulting in wort. Before allowing the wort to ferment however the beer was 
usually spiced. The additives not only give the final brew a nicer taste but most of them also contain
substances that significantly extend the lifespan of the brew. 
 The fermentation of beer was in prehistoric times achieved by exposing the wort to airborne yeast. 
The importance of yeast in brewing seems not to have been understood until the 16th century when it is 
first discussed in German written sources (Behre 1999:35). 
 Prior to the 18th century all beer brews were top fermented, usually resulting in thick foam forming at 
the surface of the brew which had to be regularly removed (Behre 1999; Olsson 1992:7). 
IMAGE 11. 
Germinated barley. Modern reference and carbonised specimen from a Swedish Viking Age site (see page 44). 
41
The most commonly used beer additive today is hops (Humulus lupulus). This species was however, 
prior to the 9th and 10th centuries almost unknown as a beer additive outside the confines of western 
and central European monasteries (Olsson 1992:7). In most areas of Europe sweet gale (Myrica gale) was 
instead the dominating beer spice. Sweet gale was indeed of some importance for several local 
economies in northern Europe until the 18th century when unfounded rumors about its ill effects of 
human health and sanity led several countries to outlaw its use (Behre 1992:42f). 
 In addition to sweet gale and hops many other species of plants have been used as beer additives, 
either functioning as substitutes for the species mentioned above or complementing them in order to 
create unique tastes (Behre 1999:43). 
Anchusa officinalis Lavandula angustifolia Rubus idaeus *** 
Artemisia absinthium Majorana hortensis Salvia officinalis 
Artemisia vulgaris *** Melissa officinalis Sambucus nigra *** 
Asarum europaeum Mentha pulegium *** Sanicula europaea *** 
Calluna vulgaris *** Mentha spicata *** Stachys officinalis *** 
Citrus limon Origanum vulgare Szygium aromaticum 
Cnicus benedictus Phyllitis scolopendrium *** Teucrium scordium 
Euphrasia rostkoviana *** Picea abies Thymus serphyllum 
Feoniculum vulgare Pimpinella anisum Veronica officinalis *** 
Fragaria vesca *** Potentilla anserina *** Vinca minor 
Geum urbanum *** Prunus avium *** Zingiber officinale 
Hysopus officinalis Prunus spinosa *** 
Inula helenium Quercus sp. *** 
Juniperus communis *** Rosmarinus officinalis Humulus lupulus 
Laurus nobilis Rubus fruticosus *** Myrica gale *** 
TABLE 1. 
Plant species documented in historical sources to have been used as beer additives (compiled by Behre 1999). 
Species marked with *** would probably have been known and available in Ireland during the bronze age14; 15
(Godwin 1975; Rose & O’Reilly 2006). 
 
The table above shows a compilation of species known to have been used as beer additives because 
they have been mentioned in medieval or later sources (Behre 1999). Some of the species are 
commonly available throughout Ireland while others were not imported to northern Europe until the 
spread of Christianity and the monastic gardening traditions (Godwin 1975; Olsson 1992). It is, of 
course impossible to say that no other species were used as beer additives throughout prehistory as 
many more species of plants display the similar aromatic properties to those listed above 
 Many of the plants listed in the table above are very common species, especially the ones marked as
likely to have grown in Ireland during the Bronze Age (Godwin 1975; Rose & O’Reilly 2006). This 
means that they do often occur in the archaeological record. 
 Behre (1999) notes that species from his list occur on many of the sites that he himself has 
investigated. Obviously not all these sites can be breweries. 
 Sometimes however, the suitable conditions and perhaps a measure of pure luck do preserve 
materials that probably derive from brewing. 
 One such material was investigated by Karin Viklund from the Envrionmental Archaeology 
Laboratory in Umeå (Viklund 2004). The material derived from RAÄ128, a site in Vinberg parish in 
Halland, Southern Sweden. The site dated to around 1000-1100 AD. The site consisted of four pits 
(alternatively small structures with a sunken floor) located in close proximity to settlement remains 
“typical” for the period (long houses). 
 Each of the houses contained five or six distinct layers. Since both the lower as well as the higher
deposits displayed similar characteristics (inclusions of charcoal and heat shattered stones) Viklund 
concluded that they had all been created due to the same process and that they all indicate primary use, 
repeated several times, rather than a single use and secondary infilling. 
42
 During the archaeobotanical analysis of the material from these pits two factors stood out as 
indicators for brewing. 
 Firstly the assemblage of plant remains was rather unique. Cereals, a type of plant remains that 
normally dominates many samples from this period were very sparse. The single most numerous 
species turned instead out to be sweet gale (Myrica gale). 
 Sweet gale is a very common plant in Scandinavia where it grows in many bogs and other moist 
environments. The sheer amount of sweet gale seeds (more than 700) combined with the fact that the 
seeds reappeared in most contexts indicated that they had been purposefully brought to the site 
(Viklund 2004). The seed coats of the specimens were in many cases fractured and there were no traces 
of the tiny drops of resin that always cover the sticky sweet gale seeds. Both aspects can be explained
by immersion in hot water and were thus seen as another indication of Brewing. 
 Perhaps even more unique than the presence of large assemblages of sweet gale seeds was the 
presence of a powdery substance in three of the pits. The substance was found in the upper part of the
stratigraphy and Viklund speculates whether it may be residue of beer foam from the top fermenting 
process known to have been used during the relevant period. At Viklund’s suggestion the foam was 
analyzed soil chemically and showed rather high levels of phosphates (Viklund 2004). Similar levels of
phosphates have since then also been recorded on modern beer foam from experimental brewing 
(Linderholm pers. comment). Since the top fermenting technique, which produces vast amounts of 
foam residue, would have been in use throughout Europe’s prehistoric period (Unger 2001) soil 
chemistry of suscpected brewing facilities may be one way of confirming or dismissing their presence 
on fulachta fiadh sites (Viklund pers. comment). 
 The site from Halland seems as a very likely candidate for a prehistoric brewery. The presence of 
significant amounts of heat shattered stones further supports this hypothesis as hot stones (and later
metal objects, including cannonballs) are known to have been used in this way in many parts of Europe 
(Viklund 2004). 
 The relative absence of cereal remains on the site does not necessarily work against this hypothesis as 
none of the structures seems to have burned, eliminating the possibility for carbonization due to an 
accident. Contrary to the malt, which is perfectly edible, the beer additives were of little use once they 
had been sieved out of the wort (Viklund 2004). Human selection may in this case have had a 
significant impact on the nature of the archaeobotanical record. 
43
IMAGE 12. 
Sweet gale. Uncarbonized, modern specimens. Note the small drops of resin present on the uppermost 
picture.
The material from Vinberg presented above can be said to represent the waste products from the 
brewing process. The sweet gale seeds and the possible beer foam can be seen as traces from the final 
stages of brewing. The site was ordered, other types of residue lacking and in the end the site must have 
been purposefully abandoned. There are however sites that provide archaeologists with entirely 
different insights into the brewing process. 
 Between 1978 and 1984 the Department of Archaeology at the University of Uppsala (south-central 
Sweden) conducted research excavations of a late Vendel Period/early Viking Age†
 site in Hässelby, 
Uppland (north-east of Stockholm) (Olsson 1992:9). 
 One of the several features discovered on the site was the remnants of a long house witch had been 
abandoned after a catastrophic fire. Disastrous as the fire must have been for its inhabitants the house 
did provide today’s archaeologists with the preserved remains of what probably is a very limited span of 
time, an archaeological snapshot. 
 
†
 The Swedish Vendel Period, named after the Vendel burial site is usually considered to date between 550 and 800 AD. 
 The Viking Age usually defines the period between 800 and 1066 AD. 
44
IMAGE 13. 
Plan of House 1 at Hässelby in Uppland, Sweden. Showing the location of the considerable concentration of 
germinated barley (Olsson 1992). 
 
During the excavation one feature stood out as unique. It was made up of a layer of carbonized cereal 
grains which were sampled and sent to the Environmental Archaeology Laboratory in Umeå where it 
became clear that most of the grains were not only germinated but also retained most of the sprouts 
still intact (Olsson 1992). Measurements of 100 randomly selected sprouts showed that their length 
varied between 4,8 and 9,0 mm with an average of 6,9 mm, i.e. the length at which germination is 
usually aborted through drying. 
 Evidence that drying had actually been attempted came from the location of the deposition inside the 
house. The seeds were found laying unceremoniously in a pile on the floor just a few steps from the 
main hearth of the structure. As this appears to be a very poor location for storage of grain it prompted 
the excavators to suggest that the seeds had originally been stored in a container, perhaps a wicker 
basket, suspended from the ceiling of the house. The location of this hypothetical basket, not directly 
above the hearth but sufficiently close to it for warmth, may have provided the optimal drying 
conditions inside this building (Olsson 1992). 
 A different type of site, at Eberdingen-Hochdorf in southwest Germany, has also produced some 
evidence of drying and roasting of germinated barley (Hordeum vulgare). Depositions of charred, 
germinated barley were made inside a U-shaped trench. The find was relatively clean from 
contamination and unlike the find from Hässelby the sprouts were not present with the grain (Stika 
1996). This latest factor is important as the trench in which the grain was found could have been 
interpreted as a storage area. If such a storage area was damp enough germination of the grain could 
have began prematurely, ruining the crop. Since sprouts are normally separated from the grain before 
the malt is prepared the feature has instead been interpreted to have a function in the brewing process 
(Stika 1996:86ff). 
45
 Hans-Peter Stika, an archaeobotanist who has performed several germination experiments has 
proposed a hypothesis that the U-shaped trench may have functioned as a kiln where the germinated 
grain was roasted before grinding (Stika 1996:86f).
 Identifying brewing in the archaeological record is a task very well suited to archaeobotany. In fact, it 
is hard to imagine how such sites could be confirmed using any other method. 
 Brewing is a process where specialized techniques are used on some of the most common crops 
commonly found in the archaeobotanical record making identification of brewing processes in 
prehistory possible only when conditions have allowed for preservation of brewing materials in a state 
where it is identifiable as such. 
 It is very likely that brewing was an extremely common occurrence in prehistory and undoubtedly 
many of the cereal finds identified on archaeological sites were probably intended for beer production. 
No amount of cereal find can however prove that brewing has taken place on a specific site. 
 Experiments, like those of Quinn and Moore (Quinn & Moore 2007) have shown that brewing can 
be successfully performed in fulachta fiadh. It may however turn out to be difficult to prove that 
hypothesis unless favorable circumstances at some burnt mound site has allowed evidence to be 
preserved and we, as archaeologist, are lucky enough to find it. 
IMAGE 14. 
Section through trench feature interpreted as a drying/roasting facility for germinated barley at EberdingenHochdorf in southwest Germany (Stika 1996). 
Plant based dyeing and tanning 
Historical and archaeobotanical evidence from the Mediterranean clearly indicates that plant based dyes 
were of economic importance in the area throughout antiquity. Roman, Greek and Hebrew sources 
mention species such as weld (Reseda luteola), madder (Rubia tinctorum) and woad (Isatis tinctoria) as 
important plants that were purposely cultivated on a significant scale. Finds from Egyptian tombs and 
mummies confirm the use of these plants in Mediterranean antiquity (Zohary & Hopf: 191ff). 
 Medieval sources from areas in northern Europe also confirm the importance of plant based dying. 
Woad (Isatis tinctoria), bearberry (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi), northern bedstraw (Galium boreale) and Keck 
(Anthriscus sylvestris) are examples of species that have been recorded as dyestuff in medieval sources 
(Harrisson 2002: 32ff; Tunón 2005). 
 Post-medieval written sources as well as ethnographic observations from various locations around the 
world have further provided large amounts of knowledge concerning the use of plants for dying in preindustrial societies (Jönsson 1910 ; Tunón 2005). 
 In short there is little shortage of knowledge concerning the use of plant based materials in various 
colouring processes, technologies that more than likely have their origins in prehistory. 
 Despite prehistoric dying being primarily a plant based activity, identification of sites dedicated to that 
type of production, using of archaeobotany and other environmental methods may be virtually 
impossible due to two primary reasons, preservation ratio and identifiability. 
46
 Production and processing of grain-based products or beer, as described above, often involves 
processes where plant material is exposed to environments with a better chance of accidental 
preservation. Roasting of malt and drying of grain are examples of activities that run a strong chance of 
accidental charring. Dying is a primarily water based process where chances of accidental preservation
are limited. 
 Brewing, spicing, flour production, malting, threshing and winnowing are all processes that involve 
specific parts of a plant, parts that in many instances are both more easily preserved and easily 
identifiable when preservation has taken place. Dying on the other hand is a process where the 
desirable parts often were roots, stalks and leaves (Jönsson 1910), parts of plants that are generally
more difficult to distinguish from “normal” charcoal and ash and usually very difficult to identify in
detail. 
 A second difficulty in identifying dying processes is the fact that most dyeing plants recorded in 
historical sources which are native to northern Europe are also some of our most common weeds, 
examples being various species in the cleavers genus (Galium) and the daisy (Asteraceae) family. 
 The problems of identifying dying apply even more to leather tanning processes which are also based
on plants based products. 
 Various types of tanning have the dual function of providing leather with a desired colouration as 
well as providing it with other properties, such as stiffness and durability for boot production, or 
flexibility and softness for various types of clothing (Jönsson 1910: 517ff). 
 Most plants can theoretically be used for tanning but traditionally species with a high content of 
tannins (naturally occuring polyphenols that among other things give red wine and tea their distinctive 
colouration) have been preferred. 
 Historically documented species preferred for tanning are oak (Quercus), willow (Salix), alder (Alnus), 
larch (Larix), pine (Pinus) and spruce (Picea) (Jönsson 1910; Tunón 2005). 
 As the tanning process is at its most effective if plant parts rich in tannin (>40%) are used the most 
commonly applied part of the above mentioned species was the bark. 
 Similarly to dying preservation of bark is a water based process is difficult to imagine and even if it 
did occur the chances of distinguishing such remains from common “fire wood” charcoal is virtually 
impossible. 
 
 
Summary 
As seen from the examples above archaeobotany and soil chemistry can be used as tools to illuminate 
various archaeological issues. An important aspect of any scientific study is however also recognizing 
the limitations of the applied method. 
 The examples above illustrate how animal based production can leave traces in form of increased 
phosphate levels in the soil of archaeological context and their surrounding areas. Phosphate analysis
can also be used to detect agricultural activities, detection of activities that traditionally has been the 
arena of botanically based disciplines such as archaeobotany and palynology. 
 Archaeobotany is also a method that can be used to identify specific aspects of agricultural practices 
and various elements of plant based processes. 
 Some activities may however be difficult, or even impossible to detect and analyze with the methods
used in this thesis. Some functions suggested for fulachta fiadh, such as personal hygiene or fulling, have 
not been discussed in detail and no reference studies have been presented in the above chapter. 
 This has to do with the limitations of the methods as activities of this type rarely leave discernable 
traces accessible through environmental archaeology. Although some processes that do not leave a 
distinct imprint in the archaeological matrix may be partially proven by negative evidence and a process 
of elimination of other contradicting explanations, it is my belief that these explanation models are best 
investigated by applying interdisciplinary overlapping. In essence: if my method can not access certain 
data then perhaps a different one can. By overlapping methods and creating interdisciplinary synthesis a 
more complete picture of prehistoric processes may be an attainable goal. 
47
 Such an interdisciplinary approach is not possible, nor is it attempted in this thesis. The limited
empirical background available for this thesis only allows a specialized study of a phenomenon. It is 
however written and intended as a small contribution to an overall picture of the fulacht fiadh
phenomenon. 
IMAGE 15. 
 A visual representation of the theory behind this thesis. Investigation of various phenomena is possible with the 
methods applied in the thesis but one must also be acutely aware of their limitations. No study should be seen as 
an isolated effort, only by interdisciplinary overlapping is true archaeological knowledge attained. 
48
3. The empirical material and its geographic context 
The area of investigation: a general overview 
The main goal of this thesis is to determine whether a combination of geochemical, geophysical and 
archaeobotanical analyses can be used to investigate functional aspects of burnt mounds. 
 For this purpose five sites were selected for sampling: Bun 4, Putiaghan Upper 1, 2 and 3 and 
Straheglin 1 (see map below). 
 The three Putiaghan Upper sites were located in a cluster of four burnt mounds of which one, 
Putiaghan Upper 4, was determined to be unsuitable for this investigation because of very limited 
access to the surrounding area. Putiaghan 2 and 3 are in very close proximity to each other and were 
processed as one site. Straheglin 1 was located approximately 1,2 km to the north-west towards the 
town of Belturbet. 
 The sampling was performed in two separate stages. Samples for the geochemical and geophysical 
analyses were taken prior to the final excavation of the sites, the sample grid and location based on the 
results of the archaeological testing performed during the summer of 2007 (Gallagher et al 2007). 
 Stage two, involving the collection of archaeobotanical samples was performed by ACS staff (directed 
by site director Gearoid Kelleher) during the course of the excavations in spring of 2008. As significant 
amounts of samples were collected during the excavations a representative amount was selected from 
each site. 
 During the processing of samples from phase two samples were also collected from Bun 4 at the 
request of site director Derek Gallagher. This site contained numerous features, among others a 
possible house structure, a likely ring barrow and a possible burnt mound. The site was situated 
approximately 240 m east of Putiaghan Upper 1. 
IMAGE 16. 
Proposed route of the realigned N3 through the area investigated in this thesis. The burnt mound sites are 
marked in red.
49
The area of the proposed realignement of the N3 between Cavan Town and Belturbet is located within 
the north Irish drumlin belt. As such the local topography is dominated by alternating small lakes and
hills created by glacial action at the end of the last glacial (Aalen 1997). Besides the lakes and the hills 
the only major geographic feature in the area is the River Erne. None of the sites was however directly 
adjacent to the river, the closest sites being Putiaghan Upper 1, Bun 4 and Strahelgin 1, located 300-400 
m away from the river. The topographic location of these sites on hill tops and slopes makes alluvial 
deposition from the river unlikely. No alluvial deposits were detected anywhere near the sites during 
the centreline testing except for some minor deposits of alluvial character on the shore of Putiaghan 
Lough (Gallagher et al 2007). 
 All sites investigated in the course of this thesis were located in pastures (Gallagher et al 2007)
without any indications of crop cultivation in the near past. The local vegetation, except that of various 
grasses and herbs present in the pastures, consisted mostly of shrubs and low trees that were grown 
along the field boundaries. In Putiaghan Upper 2, 3 and 4 wetland species such as Carex (sedge) and 
Juncus (rushes) were also present, reflecting the close proximity to Putiaghan Lough. Juncus species were 
also noted in Putiaghan Upper 1, reflecting the documented high water table (see description of 
Putiaghan Upper 1 below). 
 The topsoil in the area (Ap-horizon) generally reflected the general nature of the underlying subsoil 
(C-horizon) which was composed of silts and clays. Local variations in the composition of the subsoil
seemed to be consistent with changes in local topography and proximity to lakes, streams and water 
filled drainage ditches. Some areas also consisted of drained bogs that had been made into pastures 
(Gallagher et al 2007). 
 The Geological Survey of Ireland has documented the bedrock in the area as mostly comprising 
limestone along with sandstone, shale and various metasediments16. No bedrock outcrops were 
detected during the centreline testing so presumably postglacial geological processes have buried the 
bedrock beneath the depth of standard archaeological testing. 
IMAGE 17. 
Photograph of Putiaghan Upper 1 on the day of the pre-excavation soil survey. Facing east-southeast. 
Photograph: Radoslaw Grabowski 
50
The area of investigation: archaeological monuments
A limited amount of recorded archaeological monuments were 
known in the area prior to the N3 realignment scheme. 
 The six fulachta fiadh in the town land of Rosskeeragh, 
close to Putiaghan Upper have already been presented. 
 A ringfort is located north-east of Putiaghan Lough, also in 
the townland of Rosskeeragh. The site also contains the 
remains of a possible hut, although the two features may be 
unrelated. 
 The two small lakes in the area, Putiaghan Lough and Bun 
Lough both contain remains of crannogs or suspected
crannogs while a possible enclosure has been recorded south 
of Bun Lough. 
 Aside from the six fulachta fiadh there are no features or 
monuments in the area that can be securely tied to the Bronze 
Age4
. 
IMAGE 18. 
Monuments and archaeological sites in the investigated area 
known prior to the archaeological investigations in connection with 
the N3 realignment scheme 1; 4
. 
51
Putiaghan Upper 1 
License No: E3821 
General overview 
Putiaghan Upper 1 was located on one of the higher points of a hill between Putiaghan Lough and 
River Erne. The site was located on a field bordered on two sides by a road and rural habitation, the 
remaining sides bordering onto other fields separated by hedge rows and field boundary ditches 
(Gallagher et al 2007). 
 During centre-line testing one burnt mound composed of at least two separate deposits was detected 
in the north-western part of the field. This feature appeared prior to the excavations as the largest and 
most distinctly defined of the four selected burnt mounds (Gallagher et al 2007). 
 The location of this burnt mound was slightly unusual as it was several hundred meters away from a 
water source. During the first phase of the sampling several areas of high water table were however 
noted in close proximity to the burnt mound. The high water table also explained the occurrence of 
various Juncus species on the field as these are typical wetland species. 
Soil sampling 
To accommodate a comprehensive sampling of what appeared to be the most extensive of the burnt 
mounds detected during testing a 4 x 4 m sample grid was laid out across a 30 x 30 m area around the 
feature (see Image 19). Outside the 30 x 30 m grid samples were taken at 10 m intervals resulting in a
total investigation area of approximately 65 x 55m (0,36 ha). Some sample points had to be adjusted 
away from the main sample grid due to the presence of stones and testing trenches. 
 Only two samples were extracted from within former test trenches. These two samples were 
extracted from the main burnt mound material below the depth of test trenching (secure context). 
Otherwise the samples were extracted from the lower part of the topsoil (Ap-horizon) or, when 
encountered, from anthropogenic deposits (possible features). On occasion reference samples from the 
underlying subsoil (C-horizon) were also extracted. 
 The samples were taken from a total of 72 sample points. Numerous points resulted in several 
individual samples, taken at different depths in the stratigraphy. 
Archaeobotanical sampling 
During the excavation of Putiaghan Upper 1 most contexts discovered on the site were sampled. A 
total of 32 3 litre samples were selected for archaeobotanical analysis. These 32 samples represent 13
individual contexts consisting of the burnt mound itself and several adjacent or underlying pit/troughlike features. All features are described in detail in the results chapter. 
52
IMAGE 19. 
Location of test trenches and soil survey sample points at Putiaghan Upper 1. 
53
Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3 
License No: E3822 (PU2) and E3823 (PU3) 
General overview 
Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3 were two sites that were located on a hill slope close to the shore of 
Putiaghan Lough, north-west of Putiaghan Upper 1.The slope towards Putiaghan Lough was broken by 
a small plateau roughly halfway between the two sites. 
 The vegetation in this area was of typical wetland character with inclusions of Carex (sedge) and Juncus 
(rushes) species. The vegetation as well as the presence of alluvial deposits close to the shore of 
Putiaghan Lough indicates that the lake is prone to flooding. The area has probably also been subject to 
considerable movement of water down the slope towards the lake, accentuating its wetland character. 
 During centre-line testing two burnt mound like features were detected in this area along with several 
smaller pit/spread like features (Gallagher et al 2007). 
Soil sampling 
Due to the proximity of the features in Putiaghan 2 and 3 (less than 40m) the site was treated as one 
unit. The entire area, including the plateau (which was not recommended for excavation) was sampled 
using a 5 x 5 m grid set out in a rectangular pattern. Due to the large amount of test trenches the 
rectangular sample pattern had to be adjusted on several occasions (clearly visible in Image 20 below).
The only samples extracted from within the backfilled test trenches were taken from the burnt mound 
features below the depth of the test trenching (secure contexts). In total samples were taken from 107 
sample points across an area 95 x 45 m in size (0,43 ha). Several sample points resulted in more than 
one individual samples, taken at different depths in the stratigraphy. 
 Most samples were extracted from the lower part of the topsoil (Ap-horizon) or, when encountered, 
from anthropogenic deposits (possible features). On occasion reference samples from the underlying 
subsoil (C-horizon) were also extracted. 
Archaeobotanical sampling 
During the excavation of these two sites samples were collected from almost every context. A total of 
five 3 litre samples, representing two contexts (burnt mound spreads), were selected for 
archaeobotanical sampling from Putiaghan Upper 2. 
 From Putiaghan Upper 3 a total of seven samples (five in 3 litre and two in 10 litre bags) were 
selected from three contexts representing the main burnt mound material and a pit found partially 
overlaid by the main mound material. All features are described in greater detail in the results chapter. 
54
IMAGE 20. 
Location of test trenches and sample points at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3. 
55
Straheglin 1
License No: E3825 
General overview 
Straheglin 1 was located in a rather large pasture field. The investigation area was situated on a hill
slope. At the base of the hill was a bog that most likely had been drained and transformed into a 
pasture in modern times. 
 One burnt spread and several suspicious charcoal-rich features were detected during centre-line 
testing just above the former bog (Galagher et al 2007). 
IMAGE 21. 
Straheglin 1 during centre-line testing in 2007. Note how the clayey soil underlying the Ap-horizon on the hill is 
replaced by peat at the base of the slope, indicating the former location of a bog. Facing southeast. 
Photograph: ACS Ltd. 
56
Soil sampling 
The samples were taken at 5 m intervals around the main burnt mound feature and at 10 m intervals 
further out covering an area approximately 65 x 45 m in size (0,3 ha). The grid was set out to cover 
most of the slope on which the features were located, the flat area at the top of the hill as well as a 
portion of the former bog. Samples from a total of 41 points were extracted at Straheglin 1 (some 
points resulted in several individual samples taken at different depths in the stratigraphy). 
 Most samples were extracted from the lower part of the topsoil (Ap-horizon) or, when encountered 
from anthropogenic deposits (possible features). On occasion reference samples from the underlying 
subsoil (C-horizon) were also extracted. 
Archaeobotanical sampling 
A total of four 3 litre samples from Straheglin 1 were selected for archaeobotanical analysis. These 
represent three contexts consisting of the fill from one trough and two charcoal rich deposits. All three 
features are elaborated upon in the results chapter of this thesis. 
IMAGE 22. 
Location of test trenches and soil survey sample points at Straheglin. 
57
Bun 4 
License No: E3816 
General overview 
The site of Bun 4 was situated in a pasture where, during centre-line testing, severeal archaeological
features were detected. These features consisted of a possible ring-barrow, a slot trench of a possible 
structure and the possible remains of a hearth. No burnt mounds were detected during the testing 
(Gallagher et al 2007). 
 A burnt mound was however found during the final excavation of the site at the periphery of the 
field. Because of the proximity to Putiaghan Upper 1 a limited amount of samples were also taken from 
this site as a complement to the overall study. 
 
Archaeobotanical sampling
A total of eight 3 litre samples were collected from Bun 4 for archaeobotanical analysis. These samples 
represent six contexts consisting of one burnt mound three small pits/possible postholes and two fills
of a large pit that has preliminarily been interpreted as a well (Gallagher pers. comment). 
58
4. Analytical procedure 
Geophysics and geochemistry 
All samples collected during the first phase of this project have been subject to the analyses described 
below. During the second phase of the sampling sub-samples of 200 ml were taken from every bag 
selected for archaeobotanical analysis. These were analyzed with the same methods as the soil survey 
samples. 
Analytical methods 
Inorganic phosphate analysis (CitP ppm) 
The phosphates were extracted with the citric acid method developed by Arrhenius (1934) and refined 
by Environmental Archaeology Laboratory in Umeå (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996). Inorganic 
phosphates were determined by citric acid (2%) extraction. The concentration of P2O5
 is presented as 
parts per million (ppm). 
 A problem with weak acid extraction is that it may sometimes be rendered ineffective by high pH in 
soil. Since large areas of Ireland are situated on top of calcareous limestone bedrock this was a potential 
problem. 
 To confirm that high pH was not offsetting the effect of the citric acid a total of 240 samples were 
also extracted with an addition of hydrochloric acid (HCl). As the results turned out largely unaffected 
HCl extraction was discontinued in the remaining samples. 
Total phosphate analysis (CitPOI) 
The total phosphate content, allowing for calculation of organically bound phosphates by subtraction 
of CitP from CitPOI, was arrived at with the same method as for CitP. Prior to analysis of the total 
phosphate content the samples were ingnited at 550ºC in order to decompose the organic matter, 
release organically bound elements and break the silica lattice (Engelmark & Linderholm 1996). 
 The concentration of P2O5 after ignition is presented as parts per million (ppm). 
Loss on Ingition (LOI%) 
Weighing a dry sample prior to and after oxidative combustion allows for calculation of the percentage 
of organic matter in the soil. The amount of organic matter is presented as % of the initial mass. 
((Soildry-Soil550)*100)/100=LOI% 
pH analysis (pH) 
In order to control that high pH was not affecting the results of the phosphate analysis several site 
transects and selected points from the soil survey were analysed. pH was also measured in one sample 
from each context selected for archaeobotanical analysis. Measurements of pH in the archaeobotanical 
samples had the dual purpose of controlling that calcareous conditions were not affecting the 
phosphate analysis as well as providing information on the potential preservation conditions for 
unburned bone. 
 The pH measurement was done in a 6 to 1 solution of soil and 0,1M KCl with a Mettler Toledo MP 
225 pH meter. 
59
Magnetic Susceptibility (MS) 
The magnetic susceptibility was measured with a Bartington MS2 magnetometer equipped with a MS2B 
sensor. The susceptibility is presented per 10g of dry soil. 
 Prior to analysis the soil was dried, homogenised and sieved through a sieve with 1,25 mm mesh size. 
Magnetic Susceptibility after oxidative ignition (MS 550) 
The magnetic susceptibility was measured after oxidative ignition at 550ºC. The magnetic susceptibility 
was measured with a Bartington MS2 magnetometer equipped with a MS2B sensor. The susceptibility is 
presented per 10g of dry soil. 
 Prior to analysis the soil was dried, homogenized and sieved through a sieve with 1,25 mm mesh size. 
Statistical processing 
P Quota 
The P quota is a simple way of showing the relationship between the amounts of organically and 
inorganically bound phosphate in the soil. A higher quota represents higher amount of organically 
bound phosphate in the soil. 
CitPOI/CitP=PQuota 
MS Quota 
The MS quota is a simple way of showing the relationship between magnetic susceptibility prior to and 
after oxidative ignition. A low MS quota may indicate prior heating of the soil. 
MS550/MS=MSQuota 
Interpolation 
In the results chapter much of the data is presented as an interpolated visual representation. All 
geochemical and geophysical data was processed using ArcView 3.2 GIS software. The interpolation is 
made according to the Inverse Distance Weighted method and the data is classified at equal intervals. 
IMAGE 23. 
Homogenised phosphate samples prior to treatment with citric acid. Photograph: Radoslaw Grabowski. 
60
Archaeobotany
Analytical procedure 
All archaeobotanical samples were dried prior to final processing. The dry samples were floatated and 
water sieved through a set of sieves, the smallest with a mesh size of 0,5mm. 
Once the floatated and water sieved samples were dry they were visually inspected through a stereo 
microscope. Any material of interest, in this case carbonized seeds, bone and some stone objects, were
separated and identified using the reference collection of the Environmental Archaeology Laboratory 
and a selection of relevant literature14; 15 (Beijerinck 1976; Bolin 1926; Grigas 1986; Korsmo et al 1981; 
Renfrew 1973; Rose & O’Reilley 2006; Schoch et al 1988; Zohary & Hopf 1993). 
Statistical processing 
Archaeobotanical results can be presented in various forms. If extensive archaeobotanical remains are 
present within a defined area the results of the analysis are usually best interpreted after an analysis of 
the significance of the finds from individual contexts. The quantity of an archaeobotanical material can 
for example be correlated to the size of the sample, the volume of the original context or the 
production quantities of seeds and other plant parts for each identified species (Branch et al 2005:98f). 
 As will become apparent from the results in the chapter below the material from these sites is not 
suitable for comparison between sites as only one feature produced an archaeobotanical material of 
significant quantity. 
 The results of the archaeobotanical analysis are therefore presented as raw counts in the results 
chapter and the appendices. 
Floatation experiment 
The archaeobotanical samples analysed in the course of this thesis were all collected on site during the 
spring of 2008. Prior to the samples being shipped to Sweden for analysis they had to be reduced in 
size (otherwise their weight would have been counted in hundreds of kilograms). 
 A decision was made that the samples would be processed by floatation and water sieving in Ireland 
and dried prior to shipping. As the samples were transported to ACS’s Drogheda office just days prior 
to my arrival they were still moist, wet or even waterlogged. 
 From personal experience I know that floatation alone is sometimes used for archaeobotanical 
analysis with the presumption that any material that does not float to the surface is of little interest. 
From personal experience I also know that the floatation is sometimes performed on wet samples 
without prior attempts to dry the material, usually to accommodate speedy processing of samples 
directly on site or during the post-excavation phase of archaeological projects. 
 Since the material extracted by floatation and the water sieved residue was to be separated anyway I 
decided to perform a simple experiment in order to determine the percentage of plant material that 
would have been lost if floatation alone had been used on the wet samples. 
 All material that was extracted by floatation in Drogheda was assigned a respective sample nr 
followed by category designation “C”. All residue extracted in Drogheda by water sieving was dried and
the now totally dry samples were floatated once more in Umeå. All floating material was this time 
designated as category “A” and the remaining residue as category “B”. Not directly connected to the 
main questions of this thesis the results of the experiment are presented in Appendix 5. 
61
5. Results 
Putiaghan Upper 1 
Pre-excavation survey 
The phosphate analysis of the area around the fulacht fiadh in Putiaghan Upper 1 displayed generally low 
levels of inorganic as well as organic phosphates. Three concentrations of phosphate content were 
however identified in the area. 
 The most distinct of these was the burnt mound itself which displayed higher than average levels of
inorganic phosphates (CitP) and relatively low levels of organic phosphates (CitPOI) as well as organic 
matter (LOI%). This result may be indicative of processing of animal produce on the site. 
 The second anomalous reading of phosphates was detected just south of the fulacht fiadh and is likely a 
result of agricultural activity, possibly modern one. The increased levels of inorganic phosphates were 
reflected by a corresponding increase in organic matter and organic phosphates, possibly indicating the 
deposition of manure. 
 The third anomaly was an area approximately 10- 20 metres east of the fulacht fiadh. The increase in 
phosphates was rather limited and vaguely defined making it problematic to interpret. It may be the 
result of natural variations in the soil. 
 The result of the MS analysis showed a very clear increase in susceptibility limited to the northeastern quadrant of the burnt mound, a likely indication of in situ burning. Interestingly the 
susceptibility in the rest of the mound was the same as in the surrounding area. This may indicate 
limited disturbance of the material after its initial deposition as activities such as heavy ploughing would 
most likely have displaced the burnt soil over a wider area. 
 Another interesting indication from the MS analysis was seen in the results of MS550. The results 
from this analysis showed that the potential susceptibility was distinctly lower in the topsoil overlaying 
the burnt mound than the surrounding area. This may indicate that the site was subject to some form 
of soil clearance prior to the construction of the fulacht fiadh. If the feature had been built on top of 
undisturbed soil the potential susceptibility in that area should have remained the same as the average 
for the entire field. However, if the site was cleared prior to the establishment of the fulacht fiadh the 
process may have resulted in the removal of iron rich strata of the soil, lowering its potential 
susceptibility. 
 The analysis of the acidity of the soil from Putiaghan Upper 1 showed a pH of 4,6 – 6,3. Thus pH is 
likely not a factor affecting the phosphate analysis. The acidic conditions are also indicative of 
conditions unfavourable for the preservation of unburned bones. 
62
IMAGE 24. Inorganic phosphate concentration at Putiaghan Upper 1. IMAGE 25. Total phosphate concentration at Putiaghan Upper 1. 
63
IMAGE 26. PQuota at Putiaghan Upper 1. IMAGE 27. Organic content of the soil at Putiaghan Upper 1. 
64
IMAGE 28. Magnetic susceptibility at Putiaghan Upper 1. IMAGE 29. MS after oxidative combustion at Putiaghan Upper 1. 
65
IMAGE 30. Pre-excavation plan of Putiaghan Upper 1.
66
IMAGE 31. Post-excavation plan of Putiaghan Upper 1. 
67
Feature analysis 
After sectioning and removal of the main burnt mound material several pit/trough like features were 
found in Putiaghan Upper 1. Of the 32 archaeobotanical samples collected on site 13 have so far been 
analysed for macrofossil remains, one from each sampled context. 
F10- burnt mound deposit 
Sample 316, deposit F10
The sample was comparatively rich in charcoal with inclusions of heat shattered stones as well as burnt 
“gravelly” particles likely representing fractured stones. The sample had a distinctly “ashy” character 
which is consistent with its proposed origins. 
 The preserved plant material was very sparse and consisted of only one seed, that of sun spurge 
(Euphorbia helioscopia). 
 As seen from the pre-ex and post-ex plans above the deposit overlaid several pits. The uppermost fill 
in pits F47, F45, F38 and F52 were assigned the same number (F10) as the main mound material. As 
the uppermost fill in these pits likely represents secondary infill action postdating the abandonment of 
the site they should be considered as belonging to the mound rather than the pits in terms of the 
validity of the macro fossil remains. 
Samples 319, 320, 327, 342, deposit F10
These samples were virtually identical to the sample classified in the field as belonging to the main 
mound material. The only discernable difference was a lower frequency of charcoal inclusions. It is 
possible that the process of redeposition from the main mound into the pits (likely water induced 
erosion) may to some extent have sorted the material. 
No plant remains of any kind were found in these samples but one possibly struck piece of slate was 
detected in sample MAL_0003_327 (F10) from F38. The stone was not retouched and, in the event of 
being worked, it is likely a piece of debitage. 
IMAGE 32. 
A possibly struck piece of slate like stone from fill F10 of cut F38. 
Photograph: Radoslaw Grabowski 
68
Cut F74, pit with fills F72 and F75 
Pit F74 has been interpreted as a possible trough (Kelleher in print). It contained two fills and displayed 
evidence of being partially recut by a later pit (F77). Both fills were sampled during the excavation and 
analyzed for macro fossil remains. 
Sample 334, primary fill F75 
Other then inclusions of charcoal this sample contained no material of interest. The sample did not 
contain any traces of heat shattered stones. 
Sample 324, secondary fill F72 
Similarly to the primary fill this deposit did not contain any macro fossil material of notice. Some 
fragments of heat shattered stones were however present indicating a secondary nature of the 
deposition process as the heat shattered stones may indicate erosion of the main burnt mound material 
into the pit. 
IMAGE 33. 
Cut F61, pit with fills F44, F62 and F63
This feature was very adjacent to the abovementioned pit F74. It contained a total of three fills of 
which only the primary F63 was sampled during the excavations. F61 has been interpreted as a possible 
trough (Kelleher in print). 
Sample 329, primary fill F62 
Other than heat shattered stones and charcoal inclusions this pit contained no macro fossil remains of
interest. 
IMAGE 34. 
69
Cut F38, pit with fills F10, F48, F49, F50, and F51 
This pit was located centrally underneath the main fulacht fiadh mound. It has preliminarily been 
interpreted as a trough of the fulacht fiadh. A large stone at the base of the pit may represent the remains 
of stone lining (Kelleher in print). Two of the fills were sampled, F48 and F51. 
Samples 328 and 335, fills F48 and F51 
These samples provided no macro fossil material of interest besides charcoal and heat shattered stones. 
IMAGE 35.
Cuts F54, F68, F55 and F81, several recut pits 
The largest set of features excavated at Putiaghan Upper 1 consisted of four intercutting pits. The 
earliest of these is believed to be F54 which was filled with primary fill F58. F58 was also present in cut 
F68 which may be contemporary to F54. F68 was cut by a separate pit (F55) which contained primary 
fill F57 and secondary fill F56. All the above features were in turn truncated by a pit with cut F81. 
Sample 339, primary fill F58 of cuts F54 and F58
Only minor inclusions of charcoal and heat shattered stones were noted in the sample from this 
context. 
Sample 330, primary fill F57 of cut F55
This sample contained charcoal and fragments of heat shattered stones. A total of three seeds were 
recovered and identified as blackberry (Rubus fruticosus coll.) and raspberry (Rubus idaeus). Both seeds 
were however uncarbonised which casts some doubts on their validity as they may represent recent 
contamination. However, there were no Rubus shrubs noted in the immediate vicinity of the feature and 
the high water table on this site combined with the compact, clayey nature of the fill (Kelleher in print) 
does not exclude the possibility that these seeds were preserved due to wet and anaerobic conditions. 
70
Cut F3, a pit with fills F4 and F24 
This was a pit, containing two fills, excavated just north of the fulacht fiadh. The primary fill, F24, was 
sampled and analysed. 
Sample 343, primary fill F24
Only charcoal and heat shattered stones were noted in this deposit. 
IMAGE 36. 
Geochemistry and geophysics 
Similarly to the pre-excavation soil survey the levels of phosphates in the investigated features were
comparatively low. Some trends were however detectable in the data from the phosphate analysis. 
 Comparison of the primary layers from each of the analysed pits/troughs showed that three features 
in particular (F54, F74 and F3) contained higher concentrations of inorganic phosphates and lower 
PQuotas than the other features. 
 The Magnetic Susceptibility of the individual features was generally low, indicating that none of the 
features was used for in situ burning. Thus none of the features can be directly tied to the increase in 
MS detected in the pre-excavation survey (ie. the hearth was located close to the features but has since 
been destroyed). 
 A hearth or pyre would most likely have been used on the site to heat the large amount of hot stones. 
Such a feature might possibly have been destroyed by post-depositional activity or simply remained 
undetected in the mass of charcoal and burnt residue on site. 
71
IMAGE 37. 
Graph showing the inorganic phosphate content and the PQuota for the pits/troughs of Putiaghan Upper1.
Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3 
Pre-excavation survey 
The phosphate levels on this site were generally low. Two areas of interest were however clearly 
detectable. The first of these was an increase in phosphates in the alluvial sediment from the sample 
point closest to Putiaghan Lough. This is likely an increase created by the downward movement of 
phosphorous material from the surrounding fields (the lake is at the lowest point of the surrounding 
landscape). As such the anomaly is not directly representative of on-site activities. 
 The second anomaly was limited to the small plateau between Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3. This 
anomaly may be linked to activities performed on the plateau, the only flat part of the field. This 
assessment is supported by the fact that the PQuota for the samples from the plateau was generally 
low. 
 An increase in organic phosphates as well as organic matter was also detected at the eastern end of
the plateau and it may indicate deposition of organically rich refuse at the periphery of the plateau. 
 The MS analysis for this site proved very interesting as a general increase in susceptibility was 
recorded around the plateau, the most significant anomalies corresponding very well with the locations
of several smaller features in Putiaghan Upper 2. Raised susceptibility was also recorded at the western 
end of the plateau. 
 The calculated MSQuota for the area showed a low quota (indication of prior disturbance and firing)
across the plateau and around the recorded features with increasing quotas for samples taken at the 
periphery of the site, perhaps indicating the general extent of the site. 
 The pH of the soil was generally low across the site indicating that calcareous conditions have not
affected the results of the phosphate analysis and that the conditions on site are not favourable for 
preservation of unburned bones. 
CitP
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
F57, primary of
cut F55
F58, primary of
cut F54
F63, primary of
cut F61
F75, primary of
cut F74
F51, primary of
cut F38
F24, primary of
cut F3
F10, burnt
mound material
average from
Ap-horizon
Pquota
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
F57, primary of
cut F55
F58, primary of
cut F54
F63, primary of
cut F61
F75, primary of
cut F74
F51, primary of
cut F38
F24, primary of
cut F3
F10, burnt
mound material
average from
Ap-horizon
CitP PQuota
72
 IMAGE 38. Inorganic phosphate concentration at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3. IMAGE 39. Pquota at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3.
73
 IMAGE 40. Total phosphate concentration at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3. IMAGE 41. Organic content of the soil at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3.
74
 IMAGE 42. Magnetic susceptibility at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3. IMAGE 43. MSQuota at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3.
75
 IMAGE 44. Plans of Putiaghan Upper 2 (top) and Putiaghan Upper 3 (bottom).
76
Feature analysis
All of the archaeobotanical samples from Putiaghan Upper 2 have been analysed in the course of this 
thesis. Due to the extremely rich nature of the samples from Putiaghan Upper 3 a representative 
amount was selected for analysis. In total four samples from Putiaghan Upper 3 were analysed, one 
from each of the fills in pit F14 [PU3] and two from the main burnt mound material. The selection 
was made to be approximately representative of the total volumes present in each context. 
 Due to the fact that the sites were excavated under different licenses and were documented separately 
each context number quoted in this section will have the site abbreviation presented in square brackets 
after the context number (eg. F14 [PU3]). 
F3 [PU2] and F4 [PU2], two deposits of burnt mound material 
These two deposits were composed of typical burnt mound material. The larger one, F4 [PU2], was 
composed of two separate halves (see plan above), adjacent to each other and identical in composition. 
Sample 300, burnt mound material deposit F3 [PU2] 
This deposit produced very little material of interest. Inclusions of charcoal were present, although in 
comparatively small quantities as were inclusions of heat shattered stones. 
 Only one carbonised seed was retrieved from this context, that of goosefoot (Chenopodium sp.). 
Samples 301-304, burnt mound material deposit F4 [PU2] 
The samples from the larger of the two burnt spreads were very similar to those from F3 [PU2]. No 
seeds were recorded in this deposit and the only other identifiable macrofossil was the thorax (?) of an 
insect. 
F14 [PU3], a pit with fills F12 [PU3] and F11 [PU3], overlain by deposit F8 [PU3]
Cut F14 [PU3], was a pit with two fills (context F12 [PU3] and F11 [PU3]) and one area of 
oxidisation (F13 [PU3]) that was found at the base of the pit. The oxidisation has been interpreted as a 
single event of in situ burning (Kelleher in print). The feature has been interpreted as a possible 
furnace. 
 Burned bones were noted during the excavation in both the primary and secondary fills as well as the 
overlaying spread of charcoal enriched material (Kelleher in print). Ritual deposition of cremated bone 
or the use of bones as fuel has been suggested as possible explanations for the presence of the bones 
(Kelleher in print). 
IMAGE 45. 
77
Sample 305, primary fill F12 [PU3] 
This sample contained comparatively large amounts of charcoal but no discernable traces of heat 
shattered stones. Occasional occurrences of burned bones were also noted in the sample. The truly 
interesting macrofossils from this context were however the carbonised plant remains. Because of the 
richness of the sample only a fraction of the available material has been processed so far. The material 
has so far provided a total of 2156 carbonised seeds of cereals and various weeds. 
 The cereals consisted of 544 specimens of oat (Avena sp.), 471 examples of hulled barley (Hordeum 
vulgare), 120 bread/club wheat (Triticum aestivum ssp. vulgare/ssp. compactum) and 785 cereal remains that 
were too fragmented for identification. 
 Concerning the finds of oats (Avena sp.) it is often difficult to distinguish the wild growing wild oats 
(Avena fatua) from the cultivated Avena sativa. The identification is only possible if the lemma bases of 
the seeds have been preserved (Renfrew 1973:94). Three lemma bases of wild oat (Avena fatua) were 
detected in the material. However, since oats (Avena sp.) make up the numerically largest group of 
cereals from this context it seems unlikely that all Avena remains in the pit belong to wild oats. 
 Another interesting aspect of the cereal material is that at least two types of wheat were being 
cultivated; bread wheat (Triticum aestivum ssp. vulgare) and club wheat (Triticum aestivum ssp. compactum). 
 Distinguishing club wheat and bread wheat is slightly problematic as the carbonised remains tend to
be very similar. Therefore the two species are presented together in this thesis. Most of the material
appears to belong to bread wheat but the finds of 21 rachis segments of club wheat confirm that at 
least a percentage of the wheat belongs to T. compactum. 
 The third cereal recorded in the pit was hulled barley (Hordeum vulgare). There were no indications on 
the barley (or any of the other cereals) that would support germination prior to carbonization. 
 The weed remains were composed of 13 specimens of mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris), 4 goosefoot 
(Chenopodium sp.), 62 black-bindweed (Fallopia convolvulus), 10 hemp-nettle (Galeopsis sp.), 109 small 
waterpepper (Persicaria minor), 1 water pepper (Persicaria hydropiper), 6 knotgrass (Polygonum aviculare) and 1 
common sorrel (Rumex acetosa). The sample also contained one unidentified seed of grass (Poaceae) and 4 
fragments of hazelnut shell (Corylus avellana). 
 
IMAGE 46. 
Left: Modern reference of club wheat rachis 
segments as well as carbonised specimens 
from Putiaghan Upper 3. 
Below: Carbonised seeds of club wheat 
(Triticum aestivum ssp. compactum) from 
Putiaghan Upper 3. 
Photographs: Radoslaw Grabowski.
78
 
Sample 311, secondary fill F11 [PU3]
The secondary fill of pit F14 [PU3], contained slightly less charcoal and significantly less preserved 
plant remains than the underlying primary fill. In total 139 carbonised plant remains were found in this 
fill. Despite the difference in numbers the overall composition of these remains roughly mirrored those 
of fill F12 [PU3]. The carbonised cereal remains consisted of 23 specimen of oat (Avena sp.), 40 hulled 
barley (Hordeum vulgare), two possible grains of wheat (Triticum aestivum ssp. vulgare/ssp. compactum) and 69 
grains of cereal that were too fragmented for identification. The weed flora was represented by 4 seeds 
of small water-pepper (Persicaria minor) and one seed of knotgrass (Polygonum aviculare). 
 The remaining macrofossil material consisted of occasional burned bones and one find of a snail 
shell. 
IMAGE 47.
A selection of weeds from pit F14 in Putiaghan 
Upper 3. Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris), 
knotgrass (Polygonum aviculare) and black 
bindweed (Fallopia convolvulus). 
Note the similarities but also the differences 
between P. aviculare and F. convolvulus, the 
former usually being more asymmetric than the 
latter and lacking the “shiny” and “sharp” 
edges of F. convolvulus. Drawings from Bolin 
(1926) and Lindman (1917). 
Photographs: Radoslaw Grabowski 
79
Samples 307-308, burnt deposit F8 [PU3] overlaying pit F14 [PU3] 
The two analysed samples from the burnt mound produced results similar 
to those of the two fills in pit F14 [PU3]. A total of 122 cereal and weed 
remains were found in the samples. These were composed of 22 grains of 
oat (Avena sp.), 28 hulled barley (Hordeum vulgare), 7 bread/club wheat 
(Triticum aestivum ssp. vulgare/ssp. compactum) and 53 unidentified cereal 
fragments. Two seeds of mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris), 1 hemp nettle 
(Galeopsis sp.), 2 knotgrass (Polygonum aviculare) and 5 fragments of hazelnut 
shell (Corylus avellana) were also found in the samples. 
 Similarly to the two fills the main burnt deposit contained occasional 
burned bones and significant amounts of charcoal. 
Geochemistry and geophysics 
The analysis of the sub- samples from the respective features in Putiaghan 
Upper 2 and 3 shows that the phosphate levels of most features correspond 
approximately to the average “natural” background of this site, the only 
exception being the two fills of pit F14 [PU3]. 
 The primary fill of the pit displayed phosphate levels significantly higher 
than the site average. The phosphate concentration in the secondary fill was 
approximately half of that in the primary fill but still significantly higher 
than the surrounding area. 
 The PQuota in both fills was low. Normally this indicates deposition of 
material which is rich in inorganic phosphates. The burnt bones from both 
deposits may account for some of the inorganic phosphates but the most 
likely scenario is that the bones and the carbonised seeds in combination 
with each other have resulted in the increased concentration of phosphates. 
Uncarbonised grain would have resulted in an increase of organically bound 
phosphate but since the seeds were burned the organic phosphate 
compounds were probably already broken by the time this pit was 
abandoned (Linderholm pers. comment). 
 The magnetic susceptibility in pit F14 [PU3] was also higher than average, 
confirming the in situ burning indicated by the layer of oxidised soil at the 
base of the feature F13 [PU3]. 
Image 48.
Barley (Hordeum vulgare) from 
Putiaghan Upper 3. 
Photographs: Radoslaw Grabowski 
80
Straheglin 1 
Pre-excavation survey 
As previously mentioned the site of Straheglin 1 was situated on a slope of a hill with a bog situated at 
its base. 
 The soil survey performed prior to the excavation shows clear indications of how this topography has 
affected the results of the analyses. The entire area of the slope seems to have been subject to 
downward movement of soil from the slope towards the base of the hill. The results of inorganic 
phosphate analysis shows clearly how the soil has moved down the hill and been deposited in the bog. 
The MS analysis shows a similar trend. 
 Both analysis also show that the lower susceptibility and lower phosphate concentration is limited to 
the slope only. The flat top of the hill has thus likely not been affected to the same degree by erosion as 
the slope. The LOI analysis shows, unsurprisingly, that the amount of organic matter is very high in the 
area of the former bog. 
IMAGE 49. Phosphate concentration at Straheglin 1.
81
 IMAGE 50. Magnetic susceptibility at Straheglin 1. IMAGE 51. Organic content in the soil at Straheglin. 
82
IMAGE 52. Post-excavation plan of Straheglin 1. 
Feature analysis 
Four contexts from Straheglin 1 were analysed for macro fossils. These consisted of one small burnt 
spread (F25) which was cut by pit F36, the remains of a possible pyre (F51) and the fill of a pit, 
possibly a trough (F19). Finds of hazelnut shells as well as bovine and red deer bones were noted 
during the excavation in pit F22 (Kelleher in print). This pit was however not investigated within the 
framework of this project. 
F25- a small burnt spread 
Sample 314 
This was the spread of charcoal and burned stones that was detected during testing and preliminarily 
interpreted as the remains of a fulacht fiadh-like activity. A large portion of this deposit was missing due 
to the cutting of a later pit. 
 The archaeobotanical sample from this spread contained sparse amounts of carbonised plant remains 
consisting of four seeds of wheat (Triticum sp.) and one seed of cleavers (Galium sp.). One fragment of 
hazelnut shell (Corylus avellana) was also present in the sample.Significant amounts of small fragments of 
heat shattered stone and charcoal were also noted in this deposit. 
83
Cut F21, a pit (possible trough) with fill F19
Samples 312, 315
The archaeobotanical sample from this pit contained sparse amounts of carbonised plant remains 
consisting of one barley (Hordeum vulgare), one seed of hemp nettle (Galeopsis sp.), one specimen of 
cleavers (Galium cf. aparine) and one small seed that was too badly fragmented for identification. The 
only other macrofossil remain was a section of an insect exoskeleton. The sample also contained 
considerable amounts of heat shattered stones and moderate inclusions of charcoal. 
F51, the remains of a possible pyre 
Sample 313 
This sample contained rather sparse archaeobotanical material consisting of four carbonised wheat 
grains (Triticum sp.), one carbonised cleavers seed (Galium sp.) and 2 fragments of hazelnut shell 
(Corylus avellana). The sample contained comparatively large amounts of charcoal as well as 
inclusions of fragmented heat shattered stones. The soil also had a distinctly “ashy” character. 
Geochemistry and geophysics 
The soil analysis results of the subsamples from the three features show that phosphate 
concentration and the magnetic susceptibility follow the general trend of the site. The only 
anomalous readings on this site were the rather high amounts of organic matter in deposits F51
and F25, possibly indicating deposition of organically rich, but not necessarily phosphate rich, 
material. 
IMAGE 53. Cleavers. Drawing from Lindman (1917). Photographs: Radoslaw Grabowski.
84
Bun 4 
All samples taken from Bun 4 were analysed in the course of this study. Three of the features consisted 
of small pits that have preliminarily been interpreted as postholes. These were partially overlain by a 
burnt mound deposit which was also sampled. The final sampled feature was a large pit which has been 
interpreted as a possible well. 
 The perhaps most interesting aspect of the burnt mound and the underlying pits/postholes is that 
they were found in close proximity to features of a clearly ritual nature such as the ring barrow and the 
associated burials of cremated human bones (Gallagher in print). 
Feature analysis 
Cut F242, a possible well with fills F254, F149 and F141 
Samples from two contexts were analyzed from the large pit in Bun 4 representing the two uppermost 
fills of the feature. 
Samples 351, 352. Secondary fills F149 and F141 
The archaeobotanical material from these two fills was very sparse consisting of only one carbonised 
hulled barley (Hordeum vulgare) grain from fill F149. F141 displayed occasional inclusions of unburned 
bones and both fills produced only occasional inclusions of charcoal. 
Cuts F12, F14 and F15, possible postholes with primary fills F20, F64 and F61 
These three features were all located adjacent to each other and have preliminarily been interpreted as 
postholes (Gallagher in print). The possible posthole F15, possibly belongs to a simple rectangular 
structure which was initially overlain by F11, the main burnt mound material. 
Sample 350, F61 primary fill of F15 
The primary fill from the posthole believed to belong to a small structure produced no valid 
macrofossil material other than occasional inclusions of charcoal. 
Samples 353-355, primary fills F20 and F64 of F12 and F14 
These two fills, belonging to possible postholes just outside the presumed rectangular structure 
mentioned above both contained moderate inclusions of charcoal as well as occasional finds of burned 
bone. 
 Possible posthole F14 also contained fragments of heat shattered stones and three carbonised plant 
remains. The plant remains were composed of two grains of hulled barley (Hordeum vulgare) and one 
cereal grain that was too fragmented to be identified. 
F11, burnt mound 
Samples 348, 349 
The burnt mound of Bun 4 contained sparse amounts of carbonised plant material in the form of a 
single seed of goosefoot (Chenopodium sp.). A single seed of common fumitory (Fumaria officinalis) was 
also found in an uncarbonised state in this deposit. Due to the shallow and surface-adjacent nature of 
this deposit this seed most likely represents modern contamination. The only other macro remains 
noted in this context were occasional inclusions of burned bone. 
85
Geochemistry and geophysics 
The soil analyses for the subsamples taken from the macrofossil samples presented above is slightly 
difficult to interpret as there was no site-wide survey done of Bun 4. There is however a trend towards
higher phosphate levels in both fills of the large pit (F141 and F149) which would support the 
interpretation of the feature as a well as wells often display depositions of material rich in phosphates 
(bones and other types of rubbish) (Engelmark 1995; Linderholm pers. comment). The occurrence of 
unburned bones in one of the fills (F141) would support the assumption that the increased levels of 
phosphates originate from waste being deposited in a well. Wet and anaerobic conditions may have 
allowed these bones to be preserved. 
 
86
6. Interpretation 
Interpretation: Putiaghan Upper 1 
The site of Putiaghan Upper 1 is possibly the closest thing to a “traditional” fulacht fiadh sampled within 
the framework of this thesis. 
 The phosphate analysis showed very limited input of phosphorous material on this site and this input 
was spatially limited to an area directly underneath the fulacht fiadh and a few individual underlying 
features. The results of the MS analysis similarly showed that the fires that must have been present on 
the site were limited to an area directly adjacent to the identified troughs. 
 Translating these, rather vague, soil chemical and geophysical indications into a reasonable 
interpretation the site’s function is difficult but the increased phosphate content in three of the features 
coupled with the low PQuotas in the same features may indicate the processing of animal based 
produce on the site. 
 The absence of preserved plant material on this site may be seen as either evidence that plant based
activities were not performed at Putiaghan Upper 1 or that preservation conditions or preservation 
prerequisites did not exist on this site. In light of the finds of limited amounts of uncarbonised Rubus
seeds, preserved in the wet conditions of one of the pits, the former explanation seems as the most 
likely one. 
 The disturbance on this site, as seen primarily in the MS and MS550 analyses, is spatially limited. The 
investigated areas south and east of the feature show little or no traces of significant disturbance. This 
site may thus have functioned in isolation or it may have been situated at the periphery of a larger 
activity area that has subsequently been destroyed by road construction and housing development to 
the north and west. It is also possible that the limited nature of the disturbance may indicate a short or 
low-intensive use of this site. 
 
Interpretation: Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3 
The geochemical and geophysical soil analysis of this site indicates a clear spatial division of the site 
into areas used for different types of activities. 
 The central plateau, which is the only truly level part of the field where this site is located, displays 
increased levels of inorganic phosphates and a comparatively low PQuota, indicating activities where 
animal based produce was processed. The increased levels of organic phosphate at the periphery of the 
plateau may also indicate deposition of organically rich waste at the edges of this area, possibly 
suggesting a link between the cereal processing area (represented by pit F14 [PU3]) and the plateau 
(such a link could for example be that F14 [PU3] was a drying/roasting area while the plateau was used 
for one of the processing steps usually preceeding drying/roasting such as winnowing or threshing). 
 The hearths or pyres that must have been in use during the application of hot stone technology on 
this site were most likely distributed around this central area of activity. This assumption is supported 
by the correspondence between areas of significantly increased magnetic susceptibility and the 
deposition of the majority of burnt stones and charcoal enriched soil at Putiaghan Upper 2. 
 One feature, pit F14 [PU3], which contained a large find of carbonised plant material makes the 
overall interpretation of this site difficult as the nature of the archaeobotanical assembly contradicts the 
preliminary dating of the site as belonging to the Bronze Age (see separate interpretation of the pit 
below). 
 In the event of all features present at Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3 being contemporary the data would 
indicate a true multipurpose activity site with a primary function being the processing of cereal produce. 
The cereal remains do however suggest a much later (early mediaval or later) date for pit F14 [PU3] 
and if that date is indeed correct one must consider whether this applies to the entire site or just the pit. 
 The overall area investigated during this thesis has turned out features of predominantly Bronze Age 
character such as the “classical” fulacht fiadh at Putiaghan Upper 1 and the ring barrow at Bun 4. The 
87
burnt mound/burnt spread deposits in Putiaghan Upper 2 display many similarities to the burnt mound 
in Putiaghan Upper 1 with regards to the lack of plant material, limited albeit detectable increases of 
inorganic phosphates and similar soil morphology consisting of redeposited A and C horizon material 
mixed with significant amounts of heat fractured stones. 
 Pit F14 [PU3] on the other hand displays higher phosphate concentrations, considerable input of 
plant material and little or no evidence for heat shattered stone material. Thus the data seems to 
indicate a separate date for the two parts of the site with Putiaghan Upper 2 possibly dating to the 
Bronze Age and Putiaghan Upper 3 probably dating to the early medieval or later. If 14C dates become 
available this interpretation may have to be re-evaluated. 
IMAGE 54. 
Proposed model for the spatial organization of Putiaghan Upper 2 and 3. 
88
Interpretation: pit F14 [PU3]: 
Formation 
Pit F14 [PU3] and its associated spread of charcoal 
enriched soil was the only significant find of carbonised 
plants detected within the framework of this thesis. In 
total less than 2 percent (14 litres) of the total volume 
(aprox. 900 litres) of the feature’s three contexts was 
investigated resulting in more than 2000 individual seeds. 
 All three contexts appear to be the result of a single 
event of carbonisation. This hypothesis is primarily 
supported by the sheer amount of carbonised seeds. Since 
less than 2% of the entire volume of the feature has so far 
been analysed the potential amount of carbonised seeds in 
the pit may be in excess of 100,000 individual grains. 
 Although reoccurring processing of cereals in 
connection to this feature may have resulted in the
accidental carbonisation of a limited amount of grains it is 
my belief that this material must be the result of an entire 
batch of cereal produce being lost due to accidental 
ignition during a single event. 
 The ratio between the identified species in the individual 
contexts seems to support this hypothesis showing a
strong correspondence in all three contexts (see graph, 
Image 55). The taphonomy affecting the final ratios of 
each identified species in this pit would likely have 
involved many complex parameters such as the original 
growing conditions, the nature of the harvesting 
techniques as well as the rinsing and storage regimes. It is 
unlikely that the relationship between the different species 
would have remained this similar in all three contexts 
unless they originated from the same event. 
Plant based indicators of local agriculture 
The macrofossil remains of weeds from this pit show a predominance of weeds that thrive in heavy, 
clayey and nutritionally rich soils, possibly indicating a conscious utilisation of such environments in the 
local agriculture. The significant presence of water peppers (Persicaria hydropiper and Persicaria minor) may 
also indicate that the fields were insufficiently drained as these species only occur in moist conditions. 
 The weed assembly consists (almost exclusively) of tall or twining species (Korsmo et al 1981). Thus 
the lack of low-growing weeds may indicate agriculture where the straw of the cereal was not harvested
as animal fodder. Another indication seen in the weed flora is that most seeds belong to species that 
establish themselves during the spring (Korsmo et al 1981). This fact is a very clear indication that the 
cereals grown in this area were spring sown. 
 The cereals consist of three species that historically became the dominating crops of agricultural 
Europe. The presence of barley is unsurprising on a site which has preliminarily been dated to the 
IMAGE 55.
Graph showing the internal relationships 
between the various groups of identified 
floral remains in primary fill F12, secondary 
fill F11, and the overlaying spread of 
charcoal rich soil F8. 
89
Bronze Age as this species was already well-established on the British Isles during the Bronze Age and
continued to play a significant role in the agriculture of the area long after the last fulachta fiadh were 
constructed (Godwin 1975:410; Hubbard 1976; Rowley-Conwy 2000). 
 The presence of free-threshing wheat and oat is however more problematic in light of the preliminary 
dating. Oat is known to appear occasionally on Irish sites during prehistory but only in very small 
quantities. In the absence of lemma bases the occurrence of this species can not be securely determined 
as either belonging to conscious cultivation of oat (Avena sativa) or to (Avena fatua) the wild growing 
predecessor to cultivated oat. Secure evidence of cultivation of Avena sativa across the British Isles has 
been limited to sites dating to the Early Medieval period or later. The same applies to cultivation of
free-threshing wheat (Fyfe et al 2004; Monk pers. corresponance). 
 The establishment of a secure chronology for this feature is thus important in order to determine 
weather the feature is related to the other Bronze Age features in the surrounding area (and thus 
indicating very early cultivation of oat and free-threshing wheat) or weather the feature represents a
separate phase of activity. 
Function 
 Returning to the functional and formational aspects of this feature the evidence seems to indicate a 
drying or roasting function. The feature may perhaps be a roasting pit of a type similar to the 
Eberdingen-Hochdorf trenches presented in Chapter 2 (Stika 1996) where the grain was dried/roasted 
by channeling hot air from an adjacent heat source into an enclosed space. Alternatively the pit may 
also be a storage facility for cereals that was somehow subject to accidental ignition. 
 If the feature is some form of drying/roasting pit the general absence of carbonized straw, lemma 
bases and other parts of the cereal which are usually removed prior to consumption would indicate that 
the cereals were in the later stages of processing (see Image 10 on page 39) when they were accidentally 
ignited. 
 One function that this feature does not support is brewing. The archaeobotanical evidence displays 
no evidence of typical pre-brewing processing regimes such as germination or malting. One of the 
weed species encountered in the pit (Mugwort, Artemisia vulgaris) has been documented in historical 
sources as a useful beer additive (Behre 1999) but this species is represented by only 15 individual 
seeds. As mugwort is one of the most common weeds in northern Europe, each plant producing 
between 50 000 and 700 000 individual seeds (Korsmo et al 1981:34f), the presence of 15 seeds in the 
investigated portion of the pit must be seen to represent unconcious contamination rather than 
purposeful utilisation of the plant in question. 
Interpretation: Straheglin 1 
The site of Straheglin 1 is a very good example of how natural, post-depositional, processes can alter 
the potential use of a scientific method for the interpretation of a site. The applied geochemical and
geophysical methods have on this site been rendered unusable for the interpretation of the functional 
aspects of the burnt mound because of soil displacement due to colluvial action. 
 Despite this fact the results show that the method does indeed perform the task for which it was 
developed. It gives the archaeologist a tool to study properties of the soil that are not easily accessible 
by traditional excavation methods. Since the soil displacement seen at Straheglin 1 has more than likely 
also affected the anthropogenic deposits on this site the data is valuable in its own right as a historical 
record of the soil formation processes in the area.
 The archaeobotanical material from this site was sparse but generally in line with that detected at
Putiaghan Upper 3. The presence of not only barley but also free-threshing wheat on this site does 
however cast the same doubts on the preliminary dating of this site as it did on Putiaghan Upper 3. 
Clearly additional dates are necessary for a comprehensive interpretation of the material. 
90
 The presence of cereals, hazel nut shells and bones (detected during the excavation, not the analysis) 
does however indicate a site belonging to an agrarian economy with evidence for both cereal based 
agriculture as well as pastoral and hunting activities as indicated by bones presumably belonging to both 
bovines and red deer. 
Interpretation: Bun 4 
This site was only partially investigated, the analysis being limited to a selection of features adjacent to a 
burnt mound. 
 The archaeobotanical material was rather sparse. The retrieved cereals originated from contexts 
belonging to a possible well feature and the postholes of a small structure. Unfortunately neither of 
these features can be securely linked to the burnt mound or the rest of the site. The samples from the
postholes were also taken from the primary fills of the features which puts in doubt the reliability of the 
data in interpreting even the structure to which they belong. This stems from the fact that, when 
sampling the remains of structures, the secondary fill of postholes should be targeted as the material
from the secondary layers is most likely to represent activities performed prior to the abandonment of
the structure. The plant material in primary fills of postholes on the other hand tends to represent 
activities performed prior to the establishment of the structure. Since the activities represented by the 
primary fill of postholes and the establishment phase of a structure may chronologically separate the 
archaeobotanical material in the primary fills of the postholes must be interpreted with a great degree of 
scepticism unless good chronological control has been established for the investigated contexts 
(Engelmark 1985; Engelmark et al 1998). 
 The increased phosphate content in the large pit investigated on Bun 4 seems to confirm the 
interpretation of the feature as a well as wells often display increased phosphate concentrations due to 
the accumulation of waste inside them (Linderholm pers. comment). The presence of unburned bone 
fragments inside the feature also seems to support this assumption as the deposits must have been 
continuously waterlogged for such a material to be preserved in the overall acidic environment. 
Site comparison 
With exception for Putiaghan Upper 3 the investigated sites display many similarities. The 
archaeobotanical material was limited and when it was obtained it did not generally occur in deposits 
that can be clearly linked to burnt mound activity. There were occasional finds of weed and other plant 
seeds present in fulacht fiadh related deposits such as the Rubus seeds in pit F55 at Putiaghan Upper 1 
but the occurrences were very occasional and indicative of limited contamination rather than human 
utilisation of the plants. The cereal finds in the burnt mound type features at Straheglin 1 (wheat, 
cleavers and hazelnuts) and Putiaghan Upper 3 are exceptions where the plant assembly does indeed 
indicate an anthropogenic means of deposition. 
 The charcoal rich spread and pit at Putiaghan Upper 3 is an obvious example of an anomaly being 
detected among a generally homogenous material. This pit, based on the evidence from the 
archaeobotanical analysis, is not a fulacht fiadh type burnt mound, i.e. it was not used for heating of 
water by means of hot stone technology but rather for either storage or drying/roasting of cereal 
produce. The feature also appears to be of a much younger date. 
 The nature of the soil of the investigated burnt mound in Straheglin 1 on the other hand conforms 
well to the other investigated burnt mound features thus indicating a possible cereal based function for 
the features. This indication is however supported by the presence of only four cereal grains. Coupled
with the fact that these grains (similarly to Putiaghan Upper 3) indicate a later (early medieval and 
onward) date the evidence seems to contradict what is generally known about the chronology of these 
features. 
 The phosphate analyses of the investigated features show similar trends across all sites. The limited 
phosphate input indicates low-intensive use, possibly involving the processing of animal produce. A 
91
comparison of the phosphate input in the investigated features and the overall background levels shows 
only marginally elevated levels of phosphorous material (see Image 56) on all sites except Putiaghan 
Upper 3 and Bun 4. 
 The anomalous nature of the feature in Putiaghan Upper 3 once again makes this site an unlikely 
candidate for an interpretation of the general nature of the burnt mounds of this area. The raised levels 
at Bun 4 are however interesting as this site not only contained a burnt mound but also a large amount
of other features of primarily ritual character. The raised phosphate levels at Bun 4 thus seem to mirror 
the superficial complexity of the site, indicating more intensive and/or prolonged human activity on the 
site. 
 Since all of the sites containing “proper” burnt mounds appear to have been used on a limited scale
they may possibly have been utilised by the local inhabitants as agriculturally-industrial activity areas. 
Taking into consideration the fact that the hinterland around the investigated features displays both 
additional burnt mounds and a ritual site of likely Bronze Age date (the ring-barrow at Bun 4) it is not 
far-fetched to speculate whether the stretch of land between River Erne and the adjacent lakes to the 
north may have supported one or more fully established Bronze Age communities, communities where 
the burnt mounds functioned as processing areas for the local subsistence economy. No habitation 
sites have so far been found in this area but since the corridor of the N3 realignment rarely exceeds 100 
m in width it is possible that the habitation sites may be located somewhere outside the investigated 
area. 
IMAGE 56. 
Box and whisker plot showing the phosphate input at the various sites compared to the average background levels 
of the Ap horizon. 
92
7. Conclusions 
The applicability of the method 
At the beginning of this text three questions were formulated for this thesis. The first was weather a
combination of archaeobotany, geochemistry and geophysics could provide valuable data for the 
overall interpretation of fulacht fiadh type burnt mounds. 
 The results presented above clearly show that a range of usable information can be obtained from the
application of these methods. The analyses presented in this thesis have detected indications of various 
factors such as the intensity of use of the burnt mounds, the extent of disturbance around the 
individual sites as well as the spatial organisation of the spaces surrounding these features. The analyses 
have also identified one feature, the pit in Putiaghan Upper 3, as not belonging to the category fulacht 
fiadh/burnt mound at all. 
 The analyses have also been useful in determining some limitations of the applied methods as seen in 
the soil analyses of Straheglin 1 which turned out to be more useful for a study of the geological 
processes on that site rather than functional aspects of the burnt mounds themselves. This is somewhat
unfortunate as trying to provide data for an interpretation of the functional aspects of the burnt 
mounds was the second question formulated for this thesis. 
Functional aspects indicated by the method 
Excluding the cereal rich pit found at Putiaghan Upper 3 all of the investigated sites have shown 
indications of various activities involving both processing of animal produce as well as occasional 
evidence of cereal-based agriculture. Thus the evidence seems to point towards an interpretation of the
burnt mounds (in this specific area) as activity sites for the local subsistence economy, probably 
engaged in the processing of animal produce. Possible functions could be fat extraction or meat 
preparation. Other processes involving animal produce may also have been performed on the sites but 
the relatively low enhancement of phosphate input on the sites seems to indicate a very limited 
deposition of bones, thus pointing towards the processing of pre-treated animal produce. If the burnt 
mound sites were used in activities such as the slaughter and butchering of animals the phosphate levels 
would in all likelihood have been much higher due to a larger amount of bones being deposited in situ.
 Some hypotheses suggested for fulachta fiadh in the past are rather clearly contradicted by the results of 
the analyses. One of these is the suggestion that fulachta fiadh may have functioned as bathing/sauna 
installations. Such sites would in all likelihood have been considerably “cleaner” then the surrounding 
area with regards to phosphate input and the presence of bones. 
 The hypothesis that the burnt mounds were used for the preparation of cereal based food such as 
porridge also seems unlikely. I base this assumption on two facts: the lack of secure cereal occurrences 
in the actual troughs (which often display excellent preservation conditions) and the size of the troughs 
which usually ranges in hundreads of litres, indicating a more ambitious type of activity. While meat,
cooked, dried or smoked can be stored for lengths of time by applying various preservation techniques 
porridge can only be consumed shortly after preparation, thus negating the need for vast quantities of
water. 
 Feehan’s suggestion that the fulachta fiadh were winter dwellings for a pastorally oriented population 
also seems unlikely. The sites investigated here show no signs of permanent or seasonal habitation, in
fact most activities seem to be limited to an area directly around the burnt mounds (with exception for 
the ritual activity around the Bun 4 fulacht fiadh). If fulachta fiadh were, as Feehan proposes, used for 
preparation of cereal foodstuffs and basic household activities then the housholds themselves would 
most likely have left some trace in the archaeological record record. 
 Evidence of brewing is also sorely lacking in the material. The cereals in the anomalous pit at 
Putiaghan Upper 3 may have been intended for brewing but if that was the case none of the typical 
93
signs are visible in the material. Since the pit is also, most likely, an occurrence separate from the burnt 
mound phenomenon the cereals do not bear any significance for the burnt mound debate even though 
they are highly interesting in their own right as a material representing local agricultural practices during 
historical or prehistoric times. 
Possibilities for the future 
The analyses performed during this thesis should be seen as a taste of what type of information may be
obtained by conscious and planned application of environmental methods on this specific type of 
material. There are many ways in which such a study could be extended and elaborated upon. 
 It is clear that the fulachta fidh did not exist in isolation. Despite the evidence indicating a low-intensive 
use of these sites, the surrounding area must contain further evidence of the community by which they 
were operated. Performing more extensive excavations of such areas as well as procuring more 14C 
dates for areas with burnt mounds and other, various archaeological remains is one way of addressing 
the wider nature of these features by placing them in a proper chronological and geographical context. 
 In such studies the methods of environmental archaeology can be of great use. An extension of the 
geophysical and geochemical analyses would probably run a high chance of identifying additional 
activity areas, arable fields and habitation sites. Analyses of this kind can also very effectively be
performed in a non-destructive way, eliminating the necessity to fully excavate the entire area. Another 
method that could provide additional data on the development of human settlement in the area is 
palynology. By performing pollen analyses on sediments from one of the many bogs or lakes in the area 
chronological control and additional data concerning the establishment of arable agriculture could be 
obtained. 
 Complementing the spatially extensive soil surveys and palynological methods, qualitative data 
concerning specific features could be obtained by the application of the full arsenal of methods 
developed within environmental archaeology on any macrofossil samples extracted in the future. The 
archaeobotanical analyses could very effectively be combined with osteological analyses of extracted 
bone material and analyses of insect remains from waterlogged deposits could provide information that 
complements the data carried by floral remains. 
 Most importantly however, for the success of a study aimed at answering the many questions 
surrounding fulachta fiadh, will always be intent and planning. Only by planning an investigation in a way 
that corresponds to the questions at hand can relevant data be collected. As mentioned before, the 
number of excavated fulachta fiadh numbers in the hundreds. The grim fact is that Irish archaeologists 
can probably excavate another thousand without ever gaining more information than what is already 
available as long as the traditional method of simply removing archaeological contexts and recording 
their superficial morphology remains unassisted by the methods of more specialised disciplines. 
Returning to the main theoretical consideration of this thesis it seems clear to me that only an 
interdisciplinary approach to a complex archaeological problem can attain any form of reliable results. 
This thesis, it seems to me, has shown that environmental archaeology can play a vital role in such an
interdisciplinary approach to the burnt mound issue. 