Rare gold coin found in Hungary shows assassinated Roman emperor
By Laura Geggel published 12 days ago

The emperor died at age 22 . 
Excavators in Hungary have discovered a " very rare " gold Roman coin that features the face of a murdered Roman emperor . 

The third-century coin depicts Emperor Volusianus , who co-ruled the Roman Empire for about two years with his father , until the emperor was assassinated at age 22 by his own soldiers . Because of Volusianus ' short reign , coins bearing his face are rare . What ' s more , the coin ' s denomination is rare , as is finding gold coins from the Roman period in Hungary , said Máté Varga , an archaeologist at the University of Szeged in Hungary and head of the excavation . 

Despite their luck in finding this rare treasure , however , the excavators have no idea who owned the currency . But because it was the only gold coin unearthed at the site ,  " it is likely a stray that someone lost ,  " Varga told Live Science in an email .  " It must have been a great loss for the former owner to lose this valuable coin .  " 
The coin was unearthed by a museologist of the Rippl-Rónai Museum in Kaposvár , along with museum volunteers in early 2022 . The group was excavating a Roman settlement in Somogy County in southwestern Hungary , but Varga declined to elaborate on the site ' s whereabouts .  
 
 " The exact location of the site is being kept secret for the time being , as the archaeological site is being investigated ,  " he said .  " Illegal metal detectors are a big problem in Hungary , so we cannot reveal the location for the time being .  " 

A glass fibula , or brooch , found at the same site as the Roman coin . 

A glass fibula , or brooch , found at the same site as the Roman coin .  ( Image credit : Máté Varga ) 
The excavators found the 0 . 2-ounce ( 5 . 6 grams ) gold coin — known as an aureus — during a metal detector survey of the site , Varga noted . The coin was minted during the rule of Volusianus , or between A . D . 251 and 253 . 

One side of the coin features a portrait of the bearded emperor with a crown of rays on his head , while the other side depicts Libertas , the personification of freedom , Varga said . 

This coin wasn ' t " small change ,  " either .  " The denomination of the coin is not an ordinary aureus , but a rare binio , i . e . a double aureus ,  " Marjanko Pilekić , a numismatist and research assistant at the Coin Cabinet of the Schloss Friedenstein Gotha Foundation in Germany who wasn ' t involved with the new coin ' s discovery , told Live Science in an email . Binio coins were first minted in the Roman Empire in the first century B . C .  " This nominal appeared only at the beginning of the third century A . D . … then quickly disappeared again ,  " Pilekić said . 

The discovery of the coin is " wonderful and exciting ,  " Pilekić said .  " Judging by the photo , the condition of the coin is terrific .  " 
Archaeological work at the Roman site is ongoing . Based on recovered artifacts , including this coin , it appears that the settlement existed in the third and fourth centuries , when this region was a part of the Roman province of Pannonia Superior , Varga said . Other uncovered artifacts include Roman silver and bronze coins ( including one of the third-century emperor Probus )  , a bronze key , a silver ring with inscriptions and a glass brooch . 

The coin is now a part of the Numismatic Collection at the Rippl-Rónai Museum , which previously had only one Roman gold coin , Levente Ábrahám , director of the museum , said in a statement . 

Originally published on Live Science . 