For centuries , Stonehenge and the monuments that 
surround it have been central to the understanding and 
interpretation of Britain ’ s ancient past . Ever since Geoffrey 
of Monmouth wrote his History of the kings of Britain in AD 
1139 , Stonehenge has been a chronological anchor-point for 
histories and prehistories alike . For while the exact date of 
the monument has been much discussed over the years , the 
idea of an ‘ Age of Stonehenge ’ is deeply embedded in both 
popular and academic literature . Each new generation has 
interpreted what it sees in a different way as a result of 
different social conditions , a tradition of change 
perceptively encapsulated and mirrored back on the 
archaeological world and its followers by Jacquetta Hawkes 
in her oft-cited remark set out above . 
Research has been at the heart of these changing 
approaches . The first excavations were carried out at 
Stonehenge on behalf of the Duke of Buckingham in AD 1620 , 
with many more investigations in the area over the following 
centuries . Throughout , Stonehenge has remained an enigma , 
regarded as self-evidently important and yet never fully 
understood . As a result it has become the most written-about 
and most photographed prehistoric monument in Europe 
( Illustration 1 )  , an icon of the idea of prehistory and the 
challenge of archaeological inquiry . The results of 
archaeological investigations in the region , and considerations 
of the finds from them , have provided the basis for numerous 
analyses , studies , classifications , and interpretative models 
that run right to the heart of our understanding of prehistoric 
communities of northwest Europe . The Bush Barrow dagger 
series , the Wessex Culture , and the wide-ranging debates 
about possible connections between Bronze Age Wessex and 
Mycenaean Greece are amongst the most memorable of the 
many matters debated over the years . Less widely recognized , 
but significant on an international scale , is the much more 
recent role of Salisbury Plain in the early development of 
aviation and the training of the armed forces . Moreover , the 
place of Stonehenge as a symbol of the ancient past in 
contemporary culture has provided a rich field for the 
investigation of modern social relations and the value of our 
heritage to a range of communities . 
Illustration 1 
Aerial view of Stonehenge 
and the Avenue looking 
northeast . The site is under 
a light snow cover which 
enhances the circular 
earthwork enclosure 
and the ditches of the 
Avenue .  [ Photograph : 
©Skyscan Balloon 
Photography . English 
Heritage Photo Library .  ] 
Research also lies at the heart of managing Stonehenge 
and its environs . The importance , significance , quality , 
authenticity , and legal protection of the physical remains at 
and around Stonehenge led , in 1986 , to its inscription on 
UNESCO ’ s World Heritage List , as half of the site formally 
known as the Stonehenge , Avebury and Associated Sites 
2 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 14 PM Page 3 

World Heritage Site ( WHS number C373 )  . Such designation 
is intended not to fossilize the areas to which it applies , but 
rather to provide for effective , robust , and sustainable 
management . Conserving the outstanding universal value 
of a World Heritage Site takes place within the context of 
maintaining visitor access and experience , retaining a 
sustainable working agricultural economy , and supporting 
the long-term social , economic , and amenity needs of the 
local community . Archaeological research linked to 
conservation and management policies is explicitly referred 
to in the World Heritage Convention ( UNESCO 1972 , art . 5 ) 
and is implicit to the key task of presenting the heritage to 
the public . The management guidelines published by 
ICOMOS for world cultural heritage sites note that ‘ every 
World Heritage Site contains a wide range of elements 
deserving of research , much of which is purely academic ’  
( Feilden and Jokilehto 1993 , 28 )  . It goes on to urge that 
research should be planned and programmed . 
Locally to the Stonehenge sector of World Heritage Site 
C373 , all these matters are extensively dealt with in the 
Stonehenge management plan ( English Heritage 2000 )  . 
A complementary management plan also exists for the 
Avebury sector ( English Heritage 1998 )  . Both recognize that 
archaeological research is an important strand of the 
management regime of any World Heritage Site . For 
Stonehenge the management plan notes that ‘ the current 
state of our knowledge about the cultural landscape of 
Stonehenge as a whole is still incomplete ’  ( English Heritage 
2000 , 4 . 7 . 1 )  , a theme that is developed in Objective 26 of 
the plan which states that : 
Research should be encouraged and promoted to 
improve understanding of the archaeological , historical 
and environmental value of the WHS necessary for its 
appropriate management . 
It then proposes the development of a research agenda 
for the Stonehenge World Heritage Site , which , in due 
course , will form an appendix to the Management Plan 
itself . This document is the first published iteration of such 
an agenda , prepared in line with the definition and structure 
recommended in Frameworks for our past ( Olivier 1996 ) and 
accordingly hereafter referred to as a research framework . 
A research agenda for the Avebury area has already been 
published ( AAHRG 2001 )  , the first such document for a 
World Heritage Site in the UK . 
The overall importance of developing , discussing , and 
agreeing an archaeological research programme for 
Stonehenge , as anywhere else , is emphasized in the review 
document Power of place which notes that ( English Heritage 
2001 , para . 12 )  : 
Before we do anything , we need knowledge … We need 
targeted , integrated research and regular ‘ State of the 
historic environment ’ reports to identify priorities and 
provide the basis for informed decisions . 
These sentiments find further expression in the 
Government ’ s response to the Power of place review 
which looks to a future in which , amongst other things 
( DCMS 2002 , 9 )  : 
The full potential of the historic environment as a 
learning resource is realized … the historic environment ’ s 
importance as an economic asset is skilfully harnessed . 
The overarching aim of the Stonehenge Archaeological 
Research Framework is therefore to recognize the importance 
of research in the World Heritage Site and actively to 
encourage , within a conservation ethic , well-planned , clearly 
focused , and closely targeted research . Such work will lead to 
increases in knowledge , enhance understanding of the past , 
and both respond to and inform management efforts . It is not 
intended to be over-regulatory or highly prescriptive , and it 
seeks both to recognize and to embrace a wide range of 
approaches to research and the theoretical and philosophical 
positions that lie behind them . Through the summary 
accounts , position statements , illustrations , and maps it is 
hoped that new and innovative research questions will be 
identified and acted upon ; in this sense the research 
framework may act as a practical stimulus to new ways of 
looking at and thinking about the data . 
Because of the nature and sensitivity of the World Heritage 
Site it is proper that all research carried out there should be 
compatible with World Heritage Site values . In practical terms 
the archaeological research framework is intended to : 
• underpin curatorial work in relation to the management 
of the archaeological resource in the area , allowing 
decisions to be firmly based and fairly judged ; 
• maximize the return in terms of archaeological 
knowledge and insight that arises from routine land 
management works , property development , and landuse change ; 
• stimulate dynamic and innovative approaches to the study 
of archaeological deposits and materials in the area 
through problem-orientated and curiosity-driven research 
initiatives in order to expand the knowledge-base and 
increase public understanding and awareness of the past ; 
• inform the presentation and interpretation of the World 
Heritage Site to the public . 
Crucial to the attainment of these is the creation of a 
long-term sustainable approach to research , meeting 
today ’ s need for improved knowledge and understanding 
within the World Heritage Site and its hinterland without 
jeopardizing the ability of future generations to continue the 
tradition of research and investigation . 
TOWARDS AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
Attempts to define research questions and align efforts to 
solve recognized problems have been a feature of the 
archaeological landscape since the mid-twentieth century , 
many of which were published as ‘ strategy ’ or ‘ policy ’ 
documents of various kinds ( see Darvill and Fulton 1998 , 
292–6 for a summary list )  . Together , these documents provide 
a secure basis for the rational and communally endorsed 
selection of sites and themes to investigate . They also allow 
relatively scarce resources to be deployed effectively . 
Wiltshire has been the subject of a number of reviews 
leading to the definition of problem-orientated research 
strategies since the late 1960s , the most comprehensive 
early examples being the series of papers by Derek Roe on 
the Palaeolithic ( Roe 1969 )  , Jeffrey Radley on the Mesolithic 
( Radley 1969 )  , and Stuart Piggott on the Neolithic and 
Bronze Age ( Piggott 1971 )  . Roughly a decade later the 
Wessex Archaeological Committee published A policy for 
3 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 14 PM Page 4 

archaeological investigation in Wessex ( WAC 1981 ) which 
took a thematic approach , well grounded in the prevailing 
processualist thinking , to the structuring of future 
investigations and included proposals for work around 
Stonehenge under the theme of ‘ Subsistence , population , 
and social organization ’  ( WAC 1981 , 14 )  . This work 
subsequently took place and represents a major 
contribution to present understandings of the distribution , 
nature , and relative intensity of activity in the landscape 
around Stonehenge ( Richards 1990 )  . 
In 1997 , CBA Wessex and the Forum for Archaeology in 
Wessex convened two seminars to discuss research 
strategies for archaeology in the twenty-first century AD ; 
contributions to the seminar dealing with prehistory were 
later published ( Woodward and Gardiner 1998 )  . More 
recently still , the Archaeological research agenda for the 
Avebury World Heritage Site ( AAHRG 2001 ) provides a wellinformed synthesis of current knowledge and an agenda for 
future research within the Avebury sector of the 
Stonehenge , Avebury and Associated Sites World Heritage 
Site . Many of the issues and research questions posed for 
the Avebury area are also relevant to the Stonehenge 
Landscape , and in due course it might be appropriate to 
produce a single research framework covering both sectors 
of the World Heritage Site . 
Several period-specific and thematic research agendas 
have been published which are relevant to the Stonehenge 
Landscape and which have been taken into account in later 
discussions ( e . g . Gamble 1999 ; Haselgrove et al . 2001 ; James 
and Millett 2001 )  . Stonehenge and its surrounding landscape 
have also been the subject of a number of forward-looking 
discussions that helped structure and scope future work . 
Suggestions about further work were made by the surveyors 
of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments following 
their study of Stonehenge and its environs ( RCHM 1979 , xv ) 
and more recently in the detailed publication of the 
twentieth-century excavations at Stonehenge ( Wainwright et 
al . 1995 )  , and as a contribution ( Wainwright 1997 ) to the 
conference entitled Science and Stonehenge held under the 
auspices of the British Academy and the Royal Society in 
March 1996 . Some of the themes identified in these papers 
were incorporated into the Stonehenge management plan as 
potential areas for research , especially : environment 
reconstruction ; understanding ritual , ceremony , and sacred 
use ; documenting settlement patterns , land-use , and land 
division ; and enhancing details of the chronology of 
particular monuments ( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 7 . 6 )  . 
The last 50 years have also seen substantive changes in 
the way that research policy documents and strategies are 
formulated and framed . A strategic review of the subject by 
Adrian Olivier for English Heritage ( Olivier 1996 ) found that : 
There is fundamental agreement that in order to make 
longer term objectives sustainable , regional frameworks 
are needed in which all those active in archaeological 
work can participate , and on which curatorial decisions 
can be firmly based and fairly judged . 
Whereas earlier documents emphasized the inter-linked 
ideas of ‘ policy ’ and ‘ priorities ’  , since Olivier ’ s work a more 
staged or nested approach has developed in which the 
overarching structure is that of a ‘ research framework ’ in 
which different interests can be advanced and evaluated in 
a systematic and structured way . The main users of such 
frameworks are archaeological curators , planners , and 
decision-makers , and those involved in the development 
and execution of structured research programmes . 
WHAT IS A RESEARCH 
FRAMEWORK ? 
In an archaeological context , a research framework is 
essentially a tool for promoting and facilitating a wide range of 
research in such a way as to make the best of opportunities to 
extend knowledge and understandings of the archaeology of 
an area . It comprises three main components : 
Resource Assessment : A statement of the current state of 
knowledge and a description of the archaeological resource . 
Effectively , a critical review of existing achievements linked 
to a series of maps and listings of key investigations 
and publications . 
Research Agenda : A list of perceived gaps in current 
knowledge , work which could usefully be done , linked to 
explicit potential for the resource to answer the questions 
posed . Essentially , a statement of the main identifiable 
issues and priorities for systematic incremental 
investigation over the next decade or so . 
Research Strategy : A statement setting out priorities , 
methods , and a selection of initiatives that can be pursued 
to address the agenda . Essentially , proposals for progressing 
all archaeological research by matching needs to anticipated 
operations and providing a structure to link recognized 
objectives with unanticipated opportunities in the future . 
These components fit together in a tightly structured 
way ( Illustration 2 ) so that the resource assessment relates 
to what has happened ( i . e . past research )  . Defining the 
research issues or setting the agenda is very much a 
contemporary exercise ( i . e . present research )  , while taking 
these issues forward involves the formulation of new 
programmes and initiatives ( i . e . future research )  . 
Illustration 2 
Schematic representation 
of the main components of 
an archaeological research 
framework showing the 
relationships with other 
kinds of framework .  [ Based 
on Olivier 1996 , figure 1 .  ] 
Sections 2 , 3 , and 4 of this document relate to the 
principal elements of a research framework and follow 
through the logical sequence already outlined . The 
remainder of this introductory section sets the parameters 
on the study and describes the practical and theoretical 
context for existing and anticipated work in the area . 
Throughout , it is recognized that research happens in a 
variety of ways , two of which dominate . Problem-orientated 
4 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 14 PM Page 5 

research is the main focus of this document as it relates to 
matters , generally formulated as questions , that can be 
recognized and defined as worthwhile endeavours likely to 
lead to new knowledge . Stress is placed not only on the way 
questions are framed , but also on the source of the 
questions , the specification of appropriate methods , and the 
standardization of practices ( Binford 1964 ; Daniels 1972 )  . 
One of the major ongoing debates about the way problemorientated research is carried out revolves around the 
relationship between identifiable ‘ problems ’ or ‘ questions ’ 
and the data-sets or materials used to answer them ( Binford 
2001 ; Odell 2001 )  . Scientific approaches tend to focus on 
data generated from the study of the subject matter itself to 
answer the question in the form of an ‘ explanation ’ of some 
kind . In contrast , humanities-based approaches typically 
impose a problem onto a body of data in order to generate 
an ‘ understanding ’ of the matter under scrutiny . 
A second kind of research is what in Britain is commonly 
called curiosity-driven research , and this also needs to be 
taken into account and encouraged because it is often 
extremely productive and can yield major advances . In this 
the questions are not pre-formed but rather emerge out of 
an ongoing relationship between researchers and the 
material that is the subject of study . Such work is 
essentially opportunistic , and is typically linked to the 
recognition of significance in newly revealed evidence or 
fresh observation of existing evidence . This makes it 
difficult to plan and programme . However , there are two 
main stimuli to such research . First is the purely 
serendipitous conjunction of unforeseen discoveries , ideas , 
or approaches that provide new insights or make sense of 
previously intractable patterns . Second is the exploitation of 
opportunities provided by non-archaeological activities such 
as land-management , property development , or 
construction works of some kind . Both of these are relevant 
to future research within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
CONSTRUCTING THE 
STONEHENGE WORLD HERITAGE 
SITE ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
This document is the end product of a process of 
construction and consultation , and the starting point for an 
ongoing self-critical research programme ( see below )  . The 
work of assembling the document was commissioned by 
English Heritage from the Archaeology and Historic 
Environment Group in the School of Conservation Sciences 
at Bournemouth University in April 2001 following a series 
of earlier discussions and meetings . The research team was 
led by Professor Timothy Darvill , assisted by Vanessa 
Constant and Ehren Milner . This team was responsible for 
drafting , compiling , and editing the present document , 
drawing on original work and commissioned sections ( the 
authors of which are identified in the text )  , as well as on 
material , comment , and suggestions supplied by others . 
The approach used here , which differs slightly from that 
used in earlier published research frameworks , evolved 
during early meetings with officers of English Heritage and 
the working party of the Stonehenge Interpretation Panel 
who guided and steered the progress of this project . 
Central to the construction of this research framework 
has been the wide circulation and discussion of draft 
sections and earlier iterations of the whole document . In 
addition to input from the working party of the Stonehenge 
Interpretation Panel already mentioned , three publicly 
advertised open focus-group sessions were held , two in 
London and one in Salisbury . Hard copies of the document 
were circulated widely , and all the documentation was 
placed on a dedicated World Wide Web site to ensure the 
greatest possible opportunity for anyone interested in the 
subject to read and comment . Appendix IV provides a 
summary of the main elements of the consultation process . 
The overall aim was to promote discussion at local , 
national , and international levels . 
Because of the multiplicity of sources that have been 
drawn on during the construction of this framework it is 
hoped that it can be owned and pursued by the 
archaeological community and others as a whole . In 
presenting a series of identified issues and objectives in 
Sections 3 and 4 respectively , all the matters raised which fall 
within the scope of research defined in a fairly broad way 
have been included . In a few cases specific proposals have 
been amalgamated , but it is hoped that they have gained 
strength as a result . The only proposals specifically excluded 
were one or two relating explicitly to the display / presentation 
of Stonehenge itself which , it was felt , were essentially 
management matters rather than research questions . 
DEFINITIONS , SCOPE , AND 
GEOGRAPHICAL CONTEXT 
The Stonehenge World Heritage Site does not exist in 
isolation either physically or intellectually . Although 
geographically separate , the two landscapes centred on 
Stonehenge and Avebury respectively are included in the 
same World Heritage Site designation . Thus when reference 
is made to the Stonehenge World Heritage Site it should be 
read as meaning the southern part of the Stonehenge , 
Avebury and Associated Sites World Heritage Site . 
What is presented here is an explicitly archaeological 
research framework , recognizing that the area occupied by 
the World Heritage Site might also allow for the 
development of research interests in a wide range of other 
matters , for example the contemporary natural environment 
( fauna , flora etc .  )  . These , however , are matters that need to 
be considered and set out by other discipline-specific 
communities . The following definitions and parameters set 
the scope of this archaeological research framework . 
Philosophically , the construction of an archaeological 
research framework can only take place within the prevailing 
traditions of the discipline of archaeology even though much 
of the evidential basis of the subject that can be drawn upon 
at any one point in time will have been created within quite 
different interpretative schemes . Current approaches can 
perhaps most easily be summarized as being post-processual 
in the very general sense of being characterized by a wideranging mixture of different , and sometimes conflicting , 
approaches , many of which are grounded in critical theory . 
Such plurality of endeavour is something the archaeological 
research framework will seek to encourage , recognizing the 
interests and aspirations of a whole range of diverse research 
orientations and respecting the rights of each to have 
5 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 14 PM Page 6 

physical access to relevant research materials provided that 
this does not compromise the ability of other researchers to 
pursue their inquiries . Attention is given to the historical 
development of approaches to the recovery and processing of 
data and to the understanding and interpretation of 
Stonehenge and its associated structures in later sections . 
Chronologically , the Stonehenge World Heritage Site is best 
known for its archaeological remains dating to the Neolithic 
and Bronze Age , the ‘ Age of Stonehenge ’  , for it is these that 
form the basis of the designation . The environs of Stonehenge 
have , however , been exploited more or less continuously since 
the end of the last glaciation of Britain and both the 
emergence of the spectacular monuments and the subsequent 
use of the area after their abandonment are very much part of 
the overall history of the landscape . In more recent times the 
area has been especially significant in terms of its military 
history . Thus , although greatest emphasis will be placed on 
the periods best represented by the currently known 
archaeology , attention will be given to all periods from the late 
Pleistocene through to the late twentieth century AD ( cf . 
English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 7 . 5 ; AAHRG 2001 )  . 
Geographically and temporally , the boundary of the World 
Heritage Site , which covers about 2000ha , is an artefact of 
modern mapping , contemporary landscape features , and the 
differential survival of archaeological monuments in 
surrounding areas . As such it is an arbitrary slice of earlier 
patterns , however they may have been defined . Equally , it is 
accepted that the world that was known to those who lived 
in , worked , and used the landscape around Stonehenge was 
a continuous space that extended out in all directions to 
limits that today we can only surmise and which were never 
constant . While Stonehenge itself now provides the focus for 
a great deal of attention , it is fairly certain that for much of its 
existence Stonehenge as we know it today was not the 
centrepiece of the world in which it stood . 
Stonehenge lies on the chalk downs of central southern 
England , to the west of the River Avon and about 63km from 
the mouth of the Avon on the English Channel coast at 
Christchurch ( Illustration 3 )  . For the purposes of this study , 
and to provide a reasonable archaeological context for the 
material within the World Heritage Site , an arbitrarily 
defined rectangular study area of 135 square kilometres is 
used , the southwest corner being at SU 405000 138000 , the 
northeast corner being at SU 420000 147000 ( Map A )  . This 
study area is referred to as the ‘ Stonehenge Landscape ’  , a 
term that has some academic basis since it broadly reflects 
the visual envelope extending out from Stonehenge and its 
main associated monuments ( Batchelor 1997 , Plan 9 )  , 
although it must ultimately be seen as no more than a 
convenient and manageable study-space . 
Illustration 3 
Location map showing 
the position of the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
within northwest Europe 
and the topographical 
form of the Stonehenge 
Landscape . The highlighted 
circle centred on 
Stonehenge has a radius 
of 200km .  [ Reproduced 
courtesy of NASA – Visible 
Earth , and ESRI . ESRI® 
Data & Maps , 2004 .  ] 
The Research Framework will simultaneously look 
inwards from the boundary of the Stonehenge Landscape in 
a detailed way , and outwards into wider worlds in a general 
way . Summarized as a nested series of geographically 
scaled spaces , the following terminology has been adopted 
even though the reality of boundless spaces and seamless 
timescales is recognized : 
• Stonehenge World Heritage Site : The roughly square 
designated World Heritage Site centred on Stonehenge , 
currently covering about 2000ha . 
• Stonehenge Landscape : A rectangular territory of 135 

square kilometres centred on and fully containing the 

World Heritage Site ( Map A )  . 

• Stonehenge Region : A broadly defined area represented 
archaeologically as the main catchment from which 
materials , people , and ideas were drawn when building 
and using the sites and structures known . This region 
6 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 14 PM Page 7 

includes the northern part of Salisbury Plain and the 
Marlborough Downs in which Avebury lies , but includes 
more geographically remote areas too . 
• Stonehenge World : The wider context within northwest 
Europe ( Illustration 3 ) and beyond that provides the 
broader socio-cultural setting for what was happening 
within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
All these terms should be seen simply as a vocabulary with 
which to conceptualize and communicate ideas about space , 
time , and social relations : they are not intended as fixed geospatial classifications . Functionally , views of the Stonehenge 
World Heritage Site have tended to focus on what are widely 
regarded as ritual and ceremonial monuments such as 
Stonehenge itself and the barrow cemeteries round about . 
Investigations over the last 50 years have shown that there is 
much more than this in the area : Bronze Age settlements , 
fieldsystems , and multi-period flintscatters , for example , have 
all now been recognized . Moreover , archaeological theory has 
emphasized the absurdity of thinking in simplistic terms about 
ritual or domestic sites in a prehistoric context . All of what 
might be regarded as recognized strands of life should be 
seen as deeply , and in many senses inextricably , embedded in 
each other . 
Interest in Stonehenge itself and the monuments around 
it is wide and diverse , and extends well beyond the 
traditional boundaries of archaeology . Archaeoastronomy is 
one area with a substantial literature and considerable 
achievement that will be considered , as too the appreciation 
of the wide range of values that recognize a contemporary 
interest in the sacred nature of place . It is recognized that 
matters such as ley-lines , geomancy , earth-magic , and 
druidism , amongst many others , also interest sectors of the 
community who visit and respect the Stonehenge 
landscape , and who draw on its content for inspiration and 
insight . These are not explicitly considered here although it 
is recognized that each could be the subject of separate 
interest-group-prompted considerations in future . 
HISTORY OF RESEARCH 
Investigations have taken place within the Stonehenge 
Landscape for more than four centuries , and for a wide 
range of different reasons . In some respects this work 
represents a microcosm of archaeological endeavour in 
Britain across the centuries , but in other respects it is 
unique in terms of the opportunities taken and the way that 
the results influenced developments in method and 
interpretation elsewhere in northern Europe . Work at and 
around Stonehenge includes many ‘ firsts ’ in the application 
of new techniques and approaches : milestones in the 
history of archaeological field practice and analysis . 
Sometimes this results from a genuine desire to find out 
more about the monument and its setting , in other cases it 
can be suspected that such a world-famous site is used as a 
case study in the hope that something of its perceived 
importance will pervade the results of the new work . 
Four broad phases or eras can be identified in the 
history of research , the main elements of which are briefly 
summarized below . As a result of these studies it is possible 
to assess the contribution that has been , and continues to 
be , made by a series of key data sets and the techniques 
applicable to their recovery and analysis . These are 
considered in the following sub-section , headed ‘ Finding the 
archaeology of the Stonehenge Landscape ’  . The 
investigations and research implicit in the work described 
here provide the raw material for developing interpretations 
and understandings of Stonehenge and its landscape ; the 
changing nature of this knowledge is discussed further in a 
later section entitled ‘ Interpreting the archaeology of the 
Stonehenge Landscape ’  . 
The Antiquarian era ( before 1900 ) 
The idea of investigating archaeological sites by digging into 
them started early at Stonehenge when , in 1620 , George , 
Duke of Buckingham , had a hole dug in the middle to see 
what was there ( Chippindale 2004 , 47 )  . Later reports suggest 
that the ‘ heads and horns of stags and oxen , charcoal , 
arrowheads , rusty armour and rotten bones ’ were found 
( quoted in Long 1876 , 49 ) and there is more than a suspicion 
that the diggings were directly responsible for the fall of 
Stone 55 on the 3 January 1797 . The Duke also examined 
some of the round barrows on King Barrow Ridge , in one of 
which was found a ‘ bugle-horne tip ’ t with silver at both ends ’  
( Long 1876 , 39 )  . This work so intrigued the monarch of the 
time , James I , that he commissioned the well-known neoclassical architect Inigo Jones to make a survey and study of 
the site ( Illustration 4 )  . As it turned out , much of the fieldwork 
was done after the king ’ s death in 1625 , mostly during visits 
to Wiltshire between 1633 and Jones ’ own death in 1652 . The 
work of producing the publication was completed by John 
Webb , Jones ’ assistant ( Jones and Webb 1655 )  . 
Illustration 4 
Idealized plan and 
elevation of Stonehenge by 
Inigo Jones published in 
1655 . To make the site fit 
his model he has added an 
extra trilithon and arranged 
the two innermost settings 
as a regular hexagon .  [ From 
Jones and Webb 1655 .  ] 
Further surveys and descriptions followed during the later 
seventeenth century , notably by John Aubrey in the 1660s 
( Aubrey 1693a ; 1693b )  . However , it was William Stukeley ’ s 
five seasons of fieldwork in the early eighteenth century that 
represent the next major investigation . Starting in about 
1720 , the work included drawing and describing Stonehenge 
7 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 8 

and its landscape setting . In 1721 he found the Stonehenge 
Avenue , and on 6 August 1723 he discovered the long narrow 
embanked enclosure north of Stonehenge that he called the 
cursus ( Piggott 1985 , 93 )  . In 1722 and 1723 he investigated 13 
barrows ( 12 round and 1 oval )  , most of them in Amesbury and 
Wilsford parishes . His published account ( Stukeley 1740 , 
81–93 ) represents the first illustrated excavation report in 
British archaeology ( Atkinson 1984 )  . 
Relatively little work took place during the later 
eighteenth century , although two barrows within Vespasian ’ s 
Camp were excavated in 1770 , probably in the course of 
landscaping works ( RCHM 1979 , 22 )  . However , from about 
1800 onwards interest seems to have been rekindled , the 
early nineteenth-century investigations being dominated by 
the work of Sir Richard Colt Hoare and William Cunnington . 
These notable , eminent , and some would say destructive , 
antiquarians individually or together investigated more than 
200 barrows around Stonehenge using the shaft technique 
( Meyrick 1948 ; and see Cunnington 1975 , appendix IV for a 
list of sites investigated )  . This popular , and in retrospect 
rather economical , approach involved digging a pit in the 
centre of the mound , the investigations continuing 
downwards until a burial was found or the old ground surface 
under the mound was reached . Cunnington began work 
about 1802 , being sponsored by the Revd William Coxe and H 
P Wyndham , and employing Stephen Parker and his son John 
as labourers ( Illustration 5 )  . From March 1804 the costs of 
employing Cunnington and the Parkers were assumed by 
Richard Colt Hoare , who assisted with the work and took 
control of its overall direction . The results of this fieldwork 
were published in two volumes as The ancient history of 
Wiltshire ( Colt Hoare 1812 and 1821 )  . Stonehenge and its 
surroundings are included in the first volume ( Colt Hoare 
1812 , 113–78 )  , the account being accompanied by numerous 
high-quality illustrations , made by Philip Crocker , and the first 
detailed map of the archaeology of the Stonehenge environs 
( Colt Hoare 1812 , op . 170 )  . Both Cunnington and Colt Hoare 
deposited a coin or specially made token in their excavation 
trenches to alert future archaeologists to the fact that they 
had been forestalled , a tradition started by William Stukeley 
( Grinsell 1978 , 11 )  . 
Illustration 5 
Watercolour by Philip 
Crocker showing William 
Cunnington and Sir Richard 
Colt Hoare ( left ) 
supervising Stephen 
and John Parker opening 
a round barrow in the 
Normanton cemetery .  
[ Reproduced courtesy of 
the Wiltshire Archaeological 
and Natural History Society , 
copyright reserved .  ] 
The most spectacular discovery made by Cunnington 
was the richly furnished Wessex I burial at Bush Barrow 
( Wilsford 5 ) uncovered in September 1808 . It contained an 
inhumation with accompanying grave goods . These included 
a bronze axe , three daggers , one of which had a pommel 
decorated with gold , a stone sceptre , and two gold lozenges 
( Colt Hoare 1812 , 203–5 )  . But Colt Hoare and Cunnington 
did not confine their investigations to barrows . Cunnington 
excavated at Stonehenge at least three times before his 
death in 1810 . Work also took place at Rox Hill , and 
numerous other sites described in The ancient history of 
Wiltshire were tested by the spade in various ways . 
Cunnington and Colt Hoare ’ s work naturally inspired 
others to engage in excavation . Amongst them was the Revd 
Edward Duke ( 1779–1852 ) who inherited Lake House in 
1805 . In 1810 he excavated barrows within the Lake 
Cemetery , the Wilsford Down Cemetery , and the Lake Down 
Cemetery . Although these excavations were small scale 
Duke attempted grand interpretations on a wide canvas , 
elaborating the ideas of Stukeley in maintaining that the 
early inhabitants of Wiltshire had portrayed in their 
monument-building a vast planetarium or stationary orrery . 
He saw the earth being represented by Silbury Hill while the 
sun and the planets revolving around it were marked by a 
series of earth and stone ‘ temples ’ in which Stonehenge 
was supposed to represent Saturn ( Duke 1846 )  . 
Illustration 6 
Plan of Stonehenge by 
Flinders Petrie , completed 
in 1877 , with the stone 
numbers and provisional 
geological identifications 
noted .  [ From Petrie 
1880 , plate II .  ] 
After a lull of about 40 years , investigations of sites 
around Stonehenge continued in the later nineteenth 
century with the campaigns of John Thurnam , medical 
superintendent at the Devizes Asylum ( Piggott 1993 )  . He 
opened long barrows and round barrows in the Stonehenge 
8 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 9 

Landscape between 1850 and 1873 , mainly because of an 
interest in human remains and the anthropology of early 
populations . His results were published in site-specific 
reports , in two more general papers ( 1868 ; 1871 )  , and in the 
Crania Britannica ( Davies and Thurnam 1865 )  . 
In 1874 and 1877 , Professor Flinders Petrie surveyed 
Stonehenge in detail and published his enumerated plan in 
Stonehenge : plans , description , and theories ( 1880 )  . 
Characteristic of the positivist traditions behind his 
investigations is the fact that the sections of his book are 
divided into two blocks : facts and theories . His numbering 
system of the stones and the Aubrey holes within the 
monument remains in use today ( Illustration 6 )  . 
By the end of the nineteenth century a significant 
proportion of sites and upstanding monuments within the 
Stonehenge Landscape had been sampled using the 
techniques of the day . The volume of literature generated 
was considerable , so that by the beginning of the twentieth 
century W Jerome Harrison ( 1902 ) was able to list nearly 950 
items in his bibliography of Stonehenge and Avebury . 
The early professional era ( 1900–1945 ) 
Compared with the early nineteenth century , the first half of 
the twentieth century was a period of relative quietude for 
investigations around Stonehenge . The work that was 
carried out took place under the direction and leadership of 
a range of professional experts , often under the auspices of 
an established committee set up by a learned society or 
government department . 
The purchase of large tracts of land on Salisbury Plain by 
the army in 1897 fundamentally changed the character of 
the area , and access to it . There were also considerable 
advantages to having a military presence nearby , and in 
1906 Stonehenge became the first archaeological site in 
Britain to be photographed from the air ( Capper 1907 ; 
Wilson 1982 , 10–11 )  . 
In 1901 Professor William Gowland excavated around 
Stone 56 at Stonehenge ( Illustration 7 )  , prior to its restoration 
to the upright position ( Gowland 1902 )  . Following the 
presentation of Stonehenge itself to the State in 1918 a 
further campaign of works was initiated with the combined 
purpose of exploring the site and assisting in the periodic 
consolidation of the standing remains . This work was directed 
by William Hawley and took place between 1919 and 1926 , 
with further work by Robert Newall and George Englehart in 
1929 . In all , about a half of the ditch circuit and approximately 
40 per cent of the interior was examined . 
Illustration 7 
Professor William Gowland 
( second from the left ) 
supervising the excavation 
of Stone 56 in 1906 .  
[ Reproduced courtesy of 
the Wiltshire Archaeological 
and Natural History Society , 
copyright reserved .  ] 
Investigations in connection with management works 
around the monument also took place : a section of waterpipe trench along the A344 was watched by Newall in 1919 , 
an investigation of the Avenue close to the Stonehenge– 
Amesbury Road was carried out by R Clay in 1927 , and in 
1935 W E V Young excavated in advance of the construction 
of the first of a long series of car-parks on the north side of 
the A344 ( see Cleal et al . 1995 , table 2 , for a listing of 
recorded twentieth-century investigations at Stonehenge )  . 
In the surrounding landscape the emphasis shifted from a 
preoccupation with barrows to include an interest in other 
classes of site . Mr P Farrer observed sections cut by pipetrenches through the bank of Durrington Walls and the central 
part of the Stonehenge Cursus in 1917 . The discovery of 
Woodhenge through aerial photography in 1926 led to very 
extensive excavations by Mr and Mrs B H Cunnington ( last of 
three generations of archaeologically inclined Cunningtons ) 
between 1926 and 1928 ( Cunnington 1929 )  . In addition , they 
excavated four ring-ditches / barrows immediately south of 
Woodhenge and the middle Bronze Age enclosure known as 
the Egg ( Cunnington 1929 , 49 )  . At Upavon , the construction of 
military facilities revealed the remains of a Roman villa in 
1907 ( Anon 1930 )  . Barrow excavations were , of course , still 
carried out from time to time . The investigation of Amesbury 
101 in the 1920s by Passmore and Hawley , for example , 
revealed a collection of oddly shaped natural flints rather 
improbably interpreted as a witch-doctor ’ s outfit ( Passmore 
1940 )  . At Boscombe Down , the creation of an airfield led to 
the excavation in 1930 of Amesbury G85 , probably a twophase monument ( Newall 1931 )  . 
Dr J F S Stone , a chemist based at Porton Down with a 
great passion for archaeology , excavated at numerous sites 
along Countess Road and around Ratfyn that were brought 
to light in the 1920s and 30s through property development , 
road-widening , or the laying of pipelines . Many other sites 
no doubt went unrecorded to judge from the incidence of 
stray finds and poorly provenanced accounts . 
Research investigations of various kinds were 
undertaken during the early part of the twentieth century . 
Aerial photography , for example , played an increasingly 
important role in the documentation of sites in the 
Stonehenge Landscape as the twentieth century unfolded , 
Crawford and Keiller including images of Ogbury Camp , 
Bush Barrow , Amesbury Down , and Stonehenge in their now 
classic volume entitled Wessex from the air ( 1928 )  . Surface 
collections were also assuming a more prominent place in 
archaeological research , evident for example in the work of 
Laidler and Young ( 1939 ) on King Barrow Ridge . Excavations 
were carried out at , amongst other sites , Casterley Camp in 
1912 ( Cunnington and Cunnington 1913 ) and Winterbourne 
Stoke in 1925 ( Newall 1926 )  . In 1938 J F S Stone directed the 
excavation of a mini-henge monument in Fargo Plantation , a 
site revealed by potsherds collected by Boy Scouts from a 
rabbit scrape in November 1937 ( Stone 1938 )  . Research into 
the origins of the bluestones at Stonehenge and several 
nearby sites ( including the Fargo mini-henge ) expanded 
earlier theories , helping to fuel what has since become a 
long-running controversy on the relative merits of human 
agency as against glacial action as the means by which the 
stones were transported from southwest Wales to Salisbury 
Plain ( Thomas 1923 ; see Thorpe et al . 1991 , table 5 )  . 
9 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 10 

The rescue era ( 1945–1980 ) 
Although investigations prompted by property development , 
engineering works , and agricultural change had been a 
feature of investigations during the early twentieth century , 
the post-war period down to about 1980 saw a massive 
increase in this kind of activity . One of the first within the 
Stonehenge Landscape was the work at Boscombe Down 
West , directed by Mrs K Richardson and others in 1948–9 in 
advance of the construction of the Boscombe Down RAF 
station . Such was the scale of the work that a dragline 
excavator was used to remove ditch fills ( Illustration 8 )  : one 
of the earliest cases in Britain of major plant being used in 
an archaeological excavation ( Richardson 1951 , figure 5 )  . 
Illustration 8 
A dragline excavator and 
lorries being used in the 
excavation , directed by 
Miss K Richardson , of the 
inner ditch of the Iron Age 
enclosure at Boscombe 
Down West in 1949 .  
[ Photograph : RAF Station , 
Boscombe Down . Crown 
Copyright / MoD .  ] 
The range of sites recorded expanded , and the 
opportunities for small-scale investigations at known 
monuments increased greatly . Flint mines were discovered 
and recorded east of the Stonehenge Inn in 1952 ( Booth and 
Stone 1952 )  . A pipe-trench through Durrington Walls in 
1950–1 revealed deposits to the south of the enclosure that 
were explored in further detail in 1952 . It was charcoal from 
this excavation that provided material for radiocarbon 
dating , as it turned out the first two radiometric dates on 
archaeological material from the British Isles ( Piggott 1959 )  . 
At Stonehenge itself a new campaign of excavations , 
again linked to the needs of restoration , began in 1950 . Work 
was carried out in 1952–4 , 1956 , 1958–9 and 1964 , under the 
auspices of Richard Atkinson , Stuart Piggott , and J F S Stone , 
and in 1950 and 1952 by R Newall ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 11–12 )  . 
Although this was relatively modest compared with Hawley ’ s 
earlier work , a number of important relationships were 
explored and documented . Two further excavations were 
undertaken in 1978 , one involving Alexander Thom at one of 
the Station Stones , the other a cutting through the ditch by 
John Evans in order to recover environmental samples . By far 
the largest excavations in the immediate vicinity of 
Stonehenge were those connected with the construction of 
extensions to the car-park in 1966 and 1979 , the creation of 
an underpass and associated works in 1967 , and a whole 
range of pipe-trenches and cable-laying in 1968 and 1979–80 . 
Faith and Lance Vatcher undertook much of this work , with 
later seasons undertaken by Mike Pitts and the Central 
Excavation Unit of English Heritage ( formerly the Department 
of the Environment )  . In total , these investigations added 
considerably to what was known about the area immediately 
around Stonehenge , and included major discoveries that 
have fundamentally changed understandings of the 
monument : a partner for Stone 96 ( the Heel Stone )  ; the 
Mesolithic postholes and early tree pit in the western end of 
the car-park ; and the so-called Palisade Ditch north and west 
of Stonehenge ( see Section 2 )  . There were also opportunities 
to explore the eastern end of the Avenue near the Avon west 
of Amesbury in advance of house-construction ( Smith 1973 )  . 
Post-war decommissioning of military installations and 
increases in demand for cultivated land led to large tracts of 
landscape around Stonehenge being ploughed up between 
1945 and the early 1950s with the result that earthworks were 
levelled and important sites destroyed . The biggest casualties 
were amongst round barrows ( see for example Grinsell 1978 , 
5 ) and the Stonehenge Cursus . Campaigns of excavations 
were launched , in most cases after sites had already been 
heavily damaged . Amongst the barrows there were major 
investigations at G51–54 on Wilsford Down and Normanton 
Down in 1958 ( Smith 1991 )  ; eighteen barrows near Shrewton 
in 1958–60 ( Green and Rollo-Smith 1984 )  ; Wilsford G2–5 in 
1959 ( Grimes 1964 )  ; twelve barrows in Amesbury and 
Winterbourne Stoke between 1959 and 1961 ( Gingell 1988 )  ; 
Wilsford cum Lake 1 , 33 , and 33a in 1960 ( Field 1961 )  ; 
Amesbury 51 in 1960 ( Ashbee 1978a )  ; and Amesbury G70 and 
G71 in 1961 ( Christie 1964 ; 1970 )  . A few of the sites explored 
at this time remain unpublished , but the discoveries made 
during the early years of this flurry of barrow excavation 
within a limited geographical area contributed much to the 
shaping our understanding of Bronze Age round barrows in 
Britain as a whole ( see Ashbee 1960 )  . 
The excavation of the Wilsford Shaft between 1960 and 
1962 was an unexpected consequence of investigating pond 
barrow Wilsford G33a that was being eroded by ploughing 
at the time ( Ashbee et al . 1989 )  . Excavations around the 
west end of the Cursus , and at barrows Winterbourne Stoke 
G5 and G30 within the Cursus ( Christie 1963 )  , have since 
allowed the restoration of the Cursus ’ s western terminal and 
barrow G30 to their pre-1950 appearances . 
An early geophysical survey using a Megger Meter took 
place on the so-called long mortuary enclosure on 
Normanton Down in 1957–8 , no doubt encouraged by 
Richard Atkinson ’ s enthusiasm for remote sensing prior to 
excavation . The site was subsequently excavated and dated 
to the middle Neolithic , but remains difficult to interpret 
( Vatcher 1961 , 160 ; and cf . Clark 1990 , 12–13 )  . 
Alterations to the road network around Amesbury in the 
later 1960s provided numerous opportunities for 
archaeological investigation . Works included the construction 
of a dual carriageway along the A303 in the eastern part of 
the Stonehenge Landscape , the creation of a bypass around 
the north side of Amesbury ( also A303 )  , construction of a 
roundabout and modification to the road alignments at 
Winterbourne Stoke Crossroads , and the realignment of the 
A345 through Durrington Walls . All revealed important finds 
and structures . The single largest operation was at Durrington 
10 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 11 

Walls where extensive excavations took place between 1966 
and 1968 . As at Boscombe Down earlier , earthmoving 
machinery was extensively used by Geoffrey Wainwright to 
uncover a large area for excavation , here using highly 
manoeuvrable JCBs to remove topsoil and clear the site 
( Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 10 )  . It was an approach that 
caused much disquiet in the archaeological community at the 
time , but set a precedent much followed since ( Wainwright 
2000b , 913 )  . Amesbury barrow G39 excavated in 1960 , in 
advance of widening works on the A303 , was subsequently 
reconstructed with a revetment to support the underlying 
chalk ( Ashbee 1980 )  . The most unexpected finds associated 
with the A303 widening was probably the so-called plaque-pit 
west of King Barrow Ridge ( Harding 1988 )  : a small chalk-cut 
pit containing two rather unusual decorated chalk plaques 
datable to the later third millennium BC . 
An essentially research-driven excavation was carried out 
at Robin Hood ’ s Ball in August 1956 to assess the age and 
nature of the earthworks ( Thomas 1964 )  . Elsewhere , a wide 
range of construction works , pipe-trenches , and cable-laying 
led to numerous watching briefs and small-scale excavations , 
as for example at Amesbury 25 and 103 barrows in 1978–9 
( Pitts 1980 )  . Rather more substantial excavations took place in 
advance of tree-planting on the later prehistoric and Roman 
site southwest of Durrington Walls in 1970 ( Wainwright 1971 )  . 
The flow of stray finds reaching museums and local 
collections continued throughout the post-war period , many 
being reported in the annual register of archaeological finds 
published in the Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural 
History Society Magazine . 
The management and conservation era 
( since 1980 ) 
A switch from the re-active approaches of rescue archaeology 
to the pro-active approaches inherent to conservation 
archaeology around 1980 also saw changes in the nature of 
the investigations carried out in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
The need for investigations directly related to site 
management and conservation works can be seen in the 
excavation of new visitor routes within Stonehenge ( Bond 
1982 )  , the recording of barrows on King Barrow Ridge and in 
Luxenborough Plantation damaged by storms in 1987 and 
1990 ( Cleal and Allen 1994 )  , and extensive geophysical work 
at Durrington Walls and in the Stonehenge Triangle ( David 
and Payne 1997 , 73–113 )  . Strategic planning needs ( for both 
development control and site management ) and detailed 
contextual information to set alongside the work at individual 
monuments was provided by the extensive Stonehenge 
Environs Survey directed by Julian Richards between 1980 
and 1986 . This work included systematic fieldwalking over 
available cultivated land ( c . 750ha )  , sample excavations at 15 
sites ranging in date from the early Neolithic through to the 
later Bronze Age , and the sampling of dry valley fills ( Richards 
1990 )  . Alongside this work there were strenuous efforts in 
many quarters to publish the excavations carried out in 
previous decades , well exemplified in the publication dates of 
work from the rescue era . The single most substantial 
contribution in this area was the publication of the twentiethcentury investigations at Stonehenge itself , including work on 
the Avenue and other monuments in close proximity to the 
main site ( Cleal et al . 1995 )  . 
Survey work in the area north of that investigated by the 
Stonehenge Environs Project , within the Salisbury Plain 
Training Area , has been in progress since the mid 1980s , 
encouraged by Dai Morgan Evans , Roy Canham , and the late 
Bob Smith ( DLA 1993 )  . A detailed survey of the field 
archaeology of the training area was carried out by the 
RCHM during the 1990s ( McOmish et al . 2002 )  . Building on 
these baseline studies an Integrated Land Management 
Plan for the Salisbury Plain Training Area has been 
approved , and includes within its coverage much of the 
northern part of the Stonehenge Landscape . It sets out an 
approach to the management of the archaeological , 
ecological , and other environmental resources within the 
context of military training activities . 
Central Wessex is an area that has attracted a great deal 
of archaeological interest in recent decades . The northeast 
corner of the Stonehenge Landscape , for example , falls within 
the study area of an extensive survey of linear earthworks , 
the Wessex Linear Ditches Project , carried out between 1988 
and 1991 ( Bradley et al . 1994 )  . The southeastern corner of the 
Stonehenge Landscape overlaps slightly with the study area 
of the Danebury Environs Programme ( Palmer 1984 ; Cunliffe 
2000 )  . Much of the Stonehenge Landscape also lies within 
the study of the Salisbury Plain Project undertaken between 
1992 and 1994 to review the evidence for Romano-British 
settlement in the area ( Entwistle et al . in prep .  )  . 
The application of approaches to the assessment and 
evaluation of sites prior to the determination of planning 
permissions , as set out in PPG16 ( DoE 1990 )  , but widely used 
before this time , introduced new kinds of archaeological 
investigation to the roster . Field evaluations associated with 
private developments are summarized in the annual 
gazetteers of archaeological investigations published as 
supplemental volumes to the British and Irish Archaeological 
Bibliography , but two schemes deserve special mention 
because of the extent of the work involved : the Stonehenge 
Visitor Centre proposals ; and the A303 roadline 
improvements . In their current form ( summer 2004 )  , these 
two schemes form what is known as the ‘ Stonehenge Project ’  , 
details of which were outlined in a document published in 
April 1999 known as the Stonehenge master plan ( English 
Heritage and National Trust 1999 )  . Since July 1999 , progress 
with the project has regularly been reported in a newsletter 
initially entitled Stonehenge Master Plan Newsletter ( issues 
1–4 )  , renamed Stonehenge Vision in March 2002 ( issues 5–9 )  , 
and most recently relaunched as The Stonehenge Project 
Update ( Issue 1 , Autumn 2004 )  . However , both elements of 
the Stonehenge Project originated long before the emergence 
of the Stonehenge Master Plan and represent one of the 
longest-running sagas in conservation archaeology . 
Stonehenge visitor centre 
The idea of improving visitor access to , and facilities for , 
Stonehenge has been discussed for decades , as too the 
associated closure of the A344 that cuts through the north 
side of Stonehenge and the Avenue ( DoE 1979 ; Heritage 
Projects 1984 ; Chippindale 1985a ; 2004 , 259–77 ; LH 1997 )  . 
Map Q shows the position of the dozen or so possible sites 
considered for the relocation of the visitor centre and the 
extents of the various archaeological investigations carried 
out to inform the selection of sites and the development of 
proposals . Table 1 lists the main approaches applied to the 
assessment and evaluation of each . 
By 1990 extensive consultations and researches focused 
on a site adjacent to Durrington Down Farm at Larkhill for a 
new visitor centre . In addition to the block of land for the 
visitor centre itself and car-parks , the works required an 
access road from the west and minor works to Durrington 
11 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 12 

Down Farm itself . All these areas were subject to deskbased assessments and field evaluations ( Illustration 9 ) 
before the results were brought together as a full 
Environmental Statement ( Darvill 1991 )  . 
Table 1 
Summary of the main 
archaeological techniques 
used in the field evaluation 
of possible sites for a new 
Stonehenge Visitor Centre . 
Site name 
Desk-based
Assessment
Geophysics
Fieldwalking
Auger transects
Test-pitting
Linear trenching
Targeted trenching
EIA
Reports 
A Countess Farm Darvill 1993b , 55–72 
B Countess Road East / 
Countess Roundabout 
Darvill 1993b , 55–72 ; 
Bartlett 1994 ; WA 1995 ; 
WA 2003a ; 2004 ; Chris 
Blanford Associates 
2004 , vol . 2 , Appendices 
A5 . 3 , 5 . 5 , 5 . 6 , 5 . 7 , 5 . 9 , 
and 5 . 10 
Countess Road to 
Stonehenge area 
transportation links 
Darvill 1993b , 55–72 ; 
Bartlett 1994 ; Reilly et 
al . 1996 ; Chris Blanford 
Associates 2004 , vol . 2 , 
Appendices A5 . 4 and 5 . 8 
C Fargo North Bartlett 1993a ; WA 
1993c ; Darvill 1993b , 
19–54 ; Burton 1998 ; WA 
1998b 
D Fargo South Darvill and Timby 1993c 
E Larkhill Darvill 1991a ; WA 1992 
Western Access routes 
( Larkhill to A344 ) 
WA 1991 ; 1993c ; 
Bartlett 1993a ; 1993b ; 
Darvill 1993c ; 1994 
Durrington Down Farm 
infrastructure changes 
Darvill 1991b ; 1992a ; 
1992b 
F New King Barrows 
( north of A303 ) 
Darvill 1993b , 73–118 
G Old King Barrows Darvill 1993b , 119–50 
H Strangeways Darvill 1993b , 119–50 
I Stonehenge Bottom Darvill and Timby 1993a 
J Pedigree Stock Farm Darvill and Timby 1993b 
K New King Barrows 
( south of A303 ) 
Darvill and Timby 1993d ; 
WA 1993a ; Darvill 1995 
L Stonehenge car-park See Heritage Projects 
1984 ; Addyman 1989 
Following the withdrawal of this scheme in December 
1991 further possible sites were reviewed ( Darvill 1993a ) and 
two were subject to field evaluation : the A303 roadline site 
south of the New King Barrows ( WA 1993a ) and the Countess 
Road East site also known as the Countess Roundabout Site 
( Darvill 1995 ; WA 1995 )  . It is the last-mentioned of these that 
is now moving forward for development . A full listing of all 
the work undertaken in relation to the selection of sites to 
help guide the planning of visitor circulation and site 
management between 1990 and 1996 has been circulated 
( Darvill 1997b )  . More recently , a study of military 
archaeology in the area has been prepared ( WA 1998a )  , and 
further evaluations took place on the Countess Road East 
site in 2003–4 in order to inform the detailed design and layout of the facilities ( WA 2003a ; 2004 )  . 
The Countess Road East site was purchased by English 
Heritage in December 2000 . In April 2001 it was announced 
that Denton Corker Marshall , an international architectural 
practice based in Melbourne ( Australia ) and London , had 
been appointed to design the new visitor centre . A planning 
application and accompanying environmental statement 
( Chris Blandford Associates 2004 ) for the scheme was 
12 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 13 

Illustration 9 
Field evaluation using 
test-pits for the proposed 
Stonehenge Visitor Centre 
at Larkhill .  [ Photograph : 
Timothy Darvill . 
Copyright reserved .  ] 
submitted to the Local Planning Authority in August 2004 
and validated by them in September 2004 . Much debate still 
continues about whether Countess Road East is the best 
site for a visitor centre , how it will be used , and how exactly 
visitors will circulate within the landscape around 
Stonehenge ( Baxter and Chippindale 2002 ; Chippindale and 
Baxter 2003 ; Pitts and Richards 2003 )  . 
Improving the A303 
Plans for the up-grading and improving of the A303 from 
King Barrow Ridge through to Berwick Down have been 
debated almost as long as the visitor centre proposals . 
Although English Heritage has commissioned various 
studies to assist in discussions about alternative routes , the 
majority of the work has been co-ordinated by the Highways 
Agency . More than 50 possible routes and associated 
permutations involving cuttings and tunnels were examined 
between 1991 and 1999 . Desk-based studies were carried 
out for almost all proposals , and field evaluations have 
been carried out on some . A summary of activity up to 1996 
has been circulated ( Darvill 1997b , 30–9 )  . Further field 
evaluations for an on-line solution involving a combination 
of above-ground improvements and a tunnel were taking 
place at the time of preparing the first iteration of this 
Research Framework . Map R shows the main route-options 
investigated for the realignment of the A303 between 
Amesbury and Berwick Down , together with the position 
and extent of the main archaeological investigations carried 
out to help inform the selection of a preferred route and the 
design of the carriageways and related infrastructure . 
In June 1999 Transport Minister Lord Whitty announced 
the Government ’ s preferred route for the improvement of 
the A303 , a mainly on-line solution for the eastern section 
with a tunnel 2km long south of Stonehenge itself and a 
northern bypass for Winterbourne Stoke . Autumn 1999 
saw the appointment of Mott MacDonald as the lead 
consultants on the development of the improvement 
proposals . One of the main areas of contention to be 
addressed was the nature of the tunnel , with many 
fearing that a relatively cheap , short , cut-and-cover 
solution would be adopted . However , in December 2002 
the Government announced that a bored tunnel 2 . 1km 
long would be included in the scheme . On 5 June 2003 the 
Department of Transport published draft orders and an 
environmental statement relating to the proposed A303 
improvements around Stonehenge , initiating a period of 
public consultation . 
A Public Inquiry into the proposals opened in Salisbury on 
17 February 2004 and sat for 37 days until its close on 11 May 
2004 . The inspector ’ s report was expected in early September 
2004 with the Government ’ s announcement shortly 
afterwards . However , at the time of writing ( December 2004 )  , 
the report and recommendations resulting from the Public 
Inquiry had still not been published . Assuming that the 
proposals are approved in the spring of 2005 , construction 
work could commence early in 2006 and the road would be 
open for traffic by the autumn of 2009 . 
The conclusions to be drawn from the various field 
evaluation projects undertaken to date for both the road 
scheme and the visitor centre proposals include the fact 
that very few previously unrecognized major monuments 
have been discovered , although some small structures and 
features have been recognized . The general proposition that 
major areas of colluviation and valley fill are very rare has 
been confirmed on several occasions . The extensive and 
destructive nature of ploughing and agricultural 
improvement schemes in the 1950s , and engineering works 
in the 1960s , has been revealed in many of the areas that 
were subject to field evaluation . 
An exercise in site sampling rather similar to a field 
evaluation was carried out at the Netheravon Roman villa 
site in July and August 1996 , the first part in connection with 
the making of an episode of Time Team for Channel 4 
( Rawlings 2001 )  . 
Excavation and recording works specified in connection 
with development control have led to some important and 
extensive archaeological work in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Interestingly , much of it relates to remains that fall outside 
the Neolithic and Bronze Age periods for which the area is 
most famous . At Butterfield Down , Amesbury , excavations in 
advance of a housing development revealed a possible late 
Neolithic pit-ring , a ring-ditch , and an early Bronze Age 
burial , a pit containing Beaker pottery , a large boundary 
ditch of the late Bronze Age , and Roman occupation from the 
first to fifth centuries AD ( Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 )  . At 
Figheldean excavations and watching briefs for pipeline 
schemes allowed the excavation of later prehistoric and 
Romano-British enclosures and occupation sites ( Graham 
and Newman 1993 ; McKinley 1999 )  . Field evaluation followed 
by targeted excavation of selected areas revealed pits 
containing Beaker pottery at Crescent Copse , Shrewton 
( Heaton and Cleal 2000 )  . In the far northwest corner of the 
Stonehenge Landscape a pipeline scheme revealed , and 
then permitted the excavation of , an area of Romano-British 
settlement and part of a small cemetery of the same date 
( McKinley and Heaton 1996 )  . And most recently , rich Beakerperiod burials have been found at Amesbury in advance of 
constructing a new school ( Fitzpatrick 2002 ; 2003a ) and on 
Boscombe Down as a result of renewing a water-pipe 
( Fitzpatrick 2004a )  . Both discoveries have contributed to 
fundamental changes in thinking about the nature , wealth , 
and relationships of communities living in the Stonehenge 
area in the late third millennium BC . 
Purely research-orientated investigations have been 
relatively few in number since 1980 . Small-scale excavations 
were carried out at Vespasian ’ s Camp in 1987 ( Hunter-Mann 
1999 )  , and various pieces of survey work and excavation 
were in progress at the time of preparing this iteration of 
the Research Framework ( e . g . Parker Pearson et al . 2003 ; 
and see Section 4 )  . 
One important new area of research that has developed 
since the early 1990s is that of exploring the phenomenology 
of the landscape and the natural and humanly created 
elements of it in an attempt to understand how it was 
13 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 14 

experienced and how people engaged with it ( see Tilley 
1994 )  . Following these ideas a team based at Birmingham 
University has developed an interactive CD-ROM-based 
visualization of the landscape around Stonehenge allowing 
journeys through real and imagined worlds ( Exon et al . 2001 )  . 
FINDING THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF 
THE STONEHENGE LANDSCAPE 
The investigations and studies carried out to date allow a 
general overview of the achievement and potential of a 
range of archaeological techniques and major sources which 
can be expected to help find out about the archaeology of 
the Stonehenge Landscape in future . These are reviewed in 
the following sub-sections , starting with non-interventional 
approaches . Statistics about the number and extent of 
surveys and interventions are taken from the Stonehenge 
Landscape GIS ( see below )  . 
Ground-based geophysical surveys 
Contributed by Andrew David 
In recent years , geophysical survey has played a major role in 
mapping and unravelling the archaeology of the Stonehenge 
Landscape . The applications of geophysical survey in the WHS 
were reviewed in 1996 ( David and Payne 1997 ) and a number 
of specific recommendations and targets for future work were 
proposed ( David and Payne 1997 , 107–10 )  . That review , and its 
proposals , remain substantially unchanged at the present time 
of writing and should be a starting point for consideration of 
geophysical applications to archaeological research in the 
WHS . In the light of experience in the Stonehenge area , the 
opportunity is taken here to provide a brief critical overview 
together with a much-abbreviated assessment of the further 
contributions that these methods can add to a better 
understanding of this landscape and its monuments . 
At current reckoning , the total area surveyed using 
geophysical prospective methods up until 2001 within the 
Stonehenge Landscape amounts to 3 . 1602 square kilometres , 
about 2 per cent of the total area ( Map B )  . Of this , 0 . 6891 
square kilometres of surveyed ground lie outside the World 
Heritage Site , 2 . 4710 square kilometres inside . This is mostly 
magnetometer survey , a substantial proportion of which has 
been commissioned as part of the evaluation of the several 
options for visitor centres and road corridors . Magnetometer 
survey has been the technique of choice , not only because it is 
relatively rapid and hence cost-effective , but also because it is 
particularly responsive , with proven efficacy for the detection 
of features such as pits and ditches on chalkland geology 
( Illustration 10 )  . This reputation has been vindicated many 
times in the Stonehenge area where , for instance , the Greater 
and Lesser Cursus , Coneybury henge , and the interior of 
Durrington Walls have all produced distinct magnetic 
signatures . At Durrington Walls , no fewer than four new 
enclosures and an abundance of pits have been found within 
the earthwork enclosure . At Coneybury it was a magnetometer 
survey that located the remarkable early Neolithic pit , now 
familiarly known in the literature as ‘ The Anomaly ’  . 
Illustration 10 
Plot of the results from a 
geophysical survey of the 
Lesser Cursus in 1993 .  
[ Survey by Alastair Bartlett 
for English Heritage .  ] 
Earth resistance survey , which is a more time-consuming 
method and at the mercy of seasonal variation in soil 
moisture , has been applied very sparingly and only on 
specific monuments , such as Stonehenge itself , where its 
ability to locate pits , ditches , and remnant bank material 
was apparent . The method has an advantage over 
magnetometry on account of its superior ability to locate 
buried megaliths and megalith settings , which is best 
14 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 15 

demonstrated at Avebury and Beckhampton ( Ucko et al . 
1990 ; David 2001 )  . Such survey has nonetheless failed to 
determine conclusively whether or not part of the 
Stonehenge Avenue once included stone settings . 
Earth resistance and magnetometer survey probably 
remain the most appropriate geophysical methods for 
extended reconnaissance survey within the WHS . 
Magnetometry holds the greater appeal for wide coverage of 
the landscape and , with the use of multiple arrays of sensors , 
total coverage of all accessible land can be contemplated . 
Use of highly sensitive ( alkali vapour ) magnetometers and of 
reduced sampling intervals offers greater potential for the 
identification of weakly magnetized features and those buried 
below colluvium or alluvium . However , wooded areas will 
remain impractical to survey , and those areas where ferrous 
interference is severe ( e . g . former military installations ) 
present significant problems . Topsoil magnetic susceptibility 
survey could be extended widely across the landscape , 
helping to identify areas of former settlement or industrial 
activity . Earth resistance survey will also become increasingly 
mechanized , using wheeled electrodes or mobile electrostatic 
arrays , each capable of much greater rates of ground 
coverage than formerly , and with the ability to gather data 
from varying depths . Use of ‘ slingram ’ -type instruments offers 
the benefits of rapid measurement of both conductivity and 
magnetic susceptibility . 
Such extensive reconnaissance survey can thus be 
undertaken at a scale formerly only considered feasible for 
aerial survey and with the advantage that areas of pasture , 
not so amenable to the latter , may also be productive . Large 
tracts of landscape can be explored both for previously 
unrecognized features and to extend knowledge of those 
only partially known , such as the Palisade Ditch . Advantage 
will need to be taken of the complementary nature of the 
available methodologies , and survey strategies will of 
course integrate as many sources of evidence as possible , 
both from the ground surface itself , from excavations , 
coring , and remotely sensed data , and from documentary 
records . The use of GIS to store , integrate , and analyse such 
multiple data sets is already established . 
Aside from reconnaissance , geophysical techniques can 
also continue to be focused on particular features , sites , or 
monuments and have an obvious bearing both on academic 
research and on site management . Ironically this potential is 
perhaps least realizable at Stonehenge itself where the level 
of complexity and later disturbance is counterproductive . 
However , more highly detailed surveys of the unexcavated 
portions of the circle might clarify knowledge of sub-surface 
features ; and the use of resistivity and radar tomography 
might provide crude information on depth and morphology . 
Ground penetrating radar has been used at pond barrows in 
the Wilsford Group ( Cole 1997 )  , but with applications possible 
at ever-greater spatial scales , and assisted by sophisticated 
data visualization , it offers an increasing potential . This is 
probably greatest on monuments where structural 
information survives at some depth : barrows , earthworks , 
monumental ditches , and buried stone structures would be 
appropriate targets . The further examination of pond barrows 
to test for the presence of shafts provides an instance where 
further research could be pursued . 
Taking into account the results of the now numerous 
surveys within the World Heritage Site it is clear that 
geophysical survey methods , and magnetic techniques in 
particular , are amongst the most powerful tools available 
for furthering knowledge of Stonehenge Landscape . 
Everyone concerned with research and conservation at 
Stonehenge and its environs should pause to give 
them thought . 
Aerial photography 
Contributed by Simon Crutchley 
Aerial survey of the Stonehenge landscape can be divided 
into two separate elements , the actual taking of 
photographs for both archaeological and non-archaeological 
purposes and the mapping , recording , and interpretation of 
the sites visible . 
Although it is difficult to assess how many photographs 
cover the precise area of the World Heritage Site , the 
National Mapping Programme covering the nine OS quartersheets encompassing the WHS viewed some 3500 specialist 
photographs taken for archaeological purposes and a 
further 1900 vertical photographs taken mainly by the RAF 
in the 1940s , 50s , and 60s . The large number of nonspecialist photographs for such a small area is due to the 
presence of several airfields on Salisbury Plain just to the 
north that provided bases for reconnaissance training flights 
in the area . The actual site of Stonehenge has always been 
a magnet for aerial photographers and the kilometre square 
in which the stones themselves sit has some 400 specialist 
aerial photographs alone . 
As well as the large numbers of photographs ( which 
equate to about 24 photos per kilometre square ) there is 
also a great chronological depth to the material available . 
The earliest photograph held by the NMR in Swindon is of 
Stonehenge taken from a war-balloon by Lieut . P H Sharpe 
in July 1906 , arguably the first aerial photograph ever taken 
of an archaeological site ( Capper 1907 )  . There follow 
photographs of the stones from every decade until the 
present , and many notable views of related and nearby 
monuments and features . Among these are the two views of 
the Stonehenge Avenue included in Crawford and Keiller ’ s 
Wessex from the air ( 1928 , 222 )  . The surrounding area is not 
covered in as great detail as the immediate vicinity of the 
stones , but it still has specialist photographs dating to the 
1930s as well as the non-specialist cover . Although the 
benefit of photographs taken for non-archaeological reasons 
might not be immediately apparent , they are most helpful . 
Sometimes they happen to have been taken at the right 
time of year to reveal cropmarks , but their date range is 
useful also as they show changes in land-use and also some 
features which have since been destroyed . Amongst the 
earliest vertical photographs were some taken by the USAAF 
in December 1943 , when low winter sunlight helped to 
highlight slight earthwork features that have since been 
destroyed by ploughing . 
The second aspect of aerial survey relates to the 
mapping , recording , and interpretation of features visible on 
available photographs . Such work also has a long history in 
the area of Stonehenge . Some of the earliest landscape 
mapping in the country was carried out for parts of 
Salisbury Plain by O G S Crawford , at the time intending to 
produce a series of maps on the The Celtic fields of 
Salisbury Plain . Unfortunately , only one map , Old Sarum , 
was ever published ( Crawford 1934 )  , though that for 
Amesbury reached the proof stage . The rest never 
progressed beyond his original annotated OS maps as the 
outbreak of war in 1939 put a stop to his work . More 
recently aerial photographs were used as the basis for much 
of the work for the 1979 publication Stonehenge and its 
15 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 16 

environs and between 1991 and 1993 detailed survey was 
carried out by the Air Photography Unit of RCHME ( now the 
Aerial Survey section of English Heritage ) in advance of 
plans for the proposed visitor centre and with reference to 
changes to the route of the A303 . In 1994–5 these plots 
were superseded by the Salisbury Plain Training Area ( SPTA ) 
Mapping Project ( English Heritage 2000 )  , which was itself 
superseded by the Stonehenge World Heritage Site 
Mapping Project , the mapping and recording phase of which 
was completed in 2002 . Each of these new projects has 
recorded information that had not been found before and 
Map C shows the position and extent of the features 
recorded up until the end of 2003 ( Barber et al . 2003 )  . 
Conventional aerial reconnaissance in the area by English 
Heritage and others will no doubt continue and , in due 
course , allow further information to be added . 
Stonehenge and surrounding sites have also been a 
testing ground for new approaches to airborne remote 
sensing . Satellite images are one area that has seen rapid 
growth since military and civilian sources became more widely 
and more rapidly available from the late 1980s . Martin Fowler 
has charted the increased resolution and improved data 
processing over the years from the SPOT Panchromatic and 
LANDSAT images of the 1990s with typical ground-equivalent 
pixel sizes of 10m and 30m respectively ( Fowler 1995 ) to the 
Russian KVR-1000 data sets with a ground-equivalent pixel 
size of 1 . 4m ( Fowler and Curtis 1995 ; Fowler 2002 )  . More 
recently still , the QuickBird satellite launched in October 2001 
now circles the earth at an altitude of 450km and provides a 
ground resolution of 0 . 61m for panchromatic images ( Fowler 
2002 )  . Using such images it is possible not only to locate 
previous unrecorded sub-surface anomalies but also regularly 
to monitor land-use change and monument condition . 
LiDAR images derived from an airborne laser scanner that 
can pan across the ground and return high-resolution digital 
data relating to immensely detailed surface topography is 
amongst the latest battery of potentially useful techniques . 
Evaluation based on sections of the Stonehenge landscape 
recorded by the Environment Agency suggests that it will 
prove invaluable for mapping , recording , and monitoring 
earthwork and landform features , and has already shown 
that it can reveal low-relief earthworks that have previously 
escaped recognition from conventional aerial photography 
and visual observation ( Illustration 11 )  . 
Illustration 11 
LiDAR image of a 
section of the Stonehenge 
Landscape near Fargo 
Plantation .  [ English 
Heritage . Copyright 
reserved .  ] 
Field survey , surface collections , and 
stray finds 
An extremely wide range of field survey techniques and 
approaches has been deployed in the Stonehenge 
Landscape . Amongst the earliest is simple straightforward 
descriptive recording and drawn illustration . These have 
proved extremely important in documenting the former 
condition of monuments and in some cases the position of 
sites now lost to view or destroyed . There is also important 
information about the land-use patterns obtaining at 
monuments which helps in the understanding of monument 
decay processes ; a good example is Stukeley ’ s view of the 
central section of the Stonehenge Avenue with cultivation 
across the monument and more extensively to the south 
( Stukeley 1740 , Tab XXVII ; Illustration 12 )  . 
More recent work has used rather different techniques . 
The open and predominantly arable nature of the landscape 
south of the Packway has facilitated a great deal of 
fieldwalking and surface collection . Large collections 
resulting from such activity are preserved in Devizes and 
Salisbury museums , and there is no doubt more in private 
hands . Systematic fieldwalking really began with the 
Stonehenge Environs Survey ( Richards 1990 ) and is 
concentrated in the central and northern part of the World 
Heritage Site ( Map B )  . Additional fieldwalking to the same 
specification has been done as part of the field evaluation 
works for the Stonehenge Conservation and Management 
Programme during the early and mid 1990s ( Darvill 1997b )  . 
A total of 9 . 2851 square kilometres has been systematically 
walked within the World Heritage Site ( 35 per cent of the 
land area ) and a further 0 . 5308 square kilometres in the 
Stonehenge Landscape beyond , giving an overall survey 
sample of 7 per cent of the Stonehenge Landscape as a 
whole . Much arable land is rotational and becomes available 
for fieldwalking at intervals . A programme of fieldwalking 
prior to their conversion from arable to pasture has been 
16 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 17 

established as part of the Countryside Stewardship Scheme 
for the area . It must be recognized , however , that nearly 
35 square kilometres of the Stonehenge Landscape are 
currently uncultivated , essentially permanent grassland and 
this is not available for fieldwalking . 
Illustration 12 
Ploughing across the 
eastern section of the 
Stonehenge Avenue , east 
of King Barrow Ridge , in 
the 1720s . The barrows 
shown on the skyline are 
the New King Barrows ( left ) 
and the Old King Barrows 
( right )  .  [ From Stukeley 
1740 , Tab . XXVII .  ] 
Fieldwalking , whether opportunistic or systematic , 
does have an impact on preserved ploughzone 
assemblages if material is removed for further study . Over 
time , assemblages have no doubt been depleted as a 
result of repeated collection . The argument for restraint 
where assemblages are under no direct threat has been 
voiced on a number of occasions ( Richards 2002 )  . English 
Heritage has issued guidance on the management of lithic 
scatters for planning authorities and developers generally 
( Schofield 2000 )  , while a draft policy on fieldwalking 
methodologies for the Stonehenge and Avebury World 
Heritage Site was circulated for comment in Autumn 2003 
( Pomeroy-Kellinger 2003 )  . 
Topographic and earthwork surveys by measured 
drawings have long been an important part of the recording 
and analysis of monuments in the Stonehenge area . The 
RCHM survey carried out in the late 1970s provides 
characteristically detailed plots of many monuments ( RCHM 
1979 )  . Another type of field survey is the monument condition 
survey . Examples in the Stonehenge Landscape include the 
work by Julian Richards in connection with the Stonehenge 
Environs Survey ( 1986 )  , a study of monument condition by 
the National Trust in 1999 ( National Trust 2001 )  , and a more 
extensive condition survey by Wessex Archaeology on behalf 
of English Heritage in 2002–3 ( WA 2003b )  . 
Stray finds from casual collection and as a result of 
everyday activities provide an important strand of valuable 
evidence about the nature and extent of past land-use and 
can occasionally lead to the identification of major sites . As 
early as 1635 , a hoard of pewter was discovered in a field 
near Normanton to the south of Stonehenge and sold for 
five pounds ( Long 1876 , 39 )  , a very considerable sum of 
money at the time . Subsequently , many worked flints , stone 
axes , pieces of pottery , coins , and metal tools and 
ornaments have come to light and been variously lost , sold , 
or given to local museums . Many stray finds have been 
noted and published in the annual volumes of the Wiltshire 
Archaeological and Natural History Magazine , between 1971 
and 1983 as a formal ‘ Wiltshire Archaeological Register ’  . 
Metal detecting has contributed to the flow of finds coming 
from the area in recent years , many of which no doubt 
disappear without trace without coming to the notice of 
archaeologists . With the extension of the Portable 
Antiquities Scheme to all parts of England in 2003 , however , 
there are greater opportunities for reporting and logging 
stray finds from the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Field evaluation 
This is not so much a single technique but the application of a 
group of interventional techniques that almost always 
includes trenching of various kinds and test-pitting , but may 
also incorporate geophysical survey , fieldwalking , and 
auguring which are described elsewhere in this sub-section . 
The main purpose of field evaluation is to sample an area of 
land in order to locate and define the nature and extent of any 
archaeological remains and deposits that might be present . In 
a research context such an approach is sometimes known as 
 ‘ trial trenching ’  , but since the later 1980s field evaluation has 
become a well-developed process that provides good results 
for use in the decision-making processes associated with 
management initiatives and , within the planning system , 
development control ( Champion et al . 1995 )  . 
Most field evaluations undertaken within the 
Stonehenge Landscape have taken place since 1985 and 
have been carried out in connection with developing plans 
for a new visitor centre and the realignment / improvement 
of the A303 ( see Maps Q and R )  . A summary of the work 
carried out before 1996 , and references to the reports on 
each investigation , has been circulated ( Darvill 1997b )  . 
Information about work undertaken between 1996 and 2004 
is contained in the environmental impact statements for the 
A303 Stonehenge Improvement Scheme ( BBCHG 2003 ) and 
the Stonehenge Visitor Centre ( Chris Blandford Associates 
2004 )  . Details of the studies undertaken for each of the 12 
sites considered as possible locations for the new visitor 
centre are summarized on Table 1 ( and see Map Q )  . 
Test-pitting is a technique that has been increasingly 
widely used in the Stonehenge Landscape since the mid 
1980s , mainly as a robust way of systematically evaluating 
areas under differential land-use . The aim is to allow the 
quantification of artefact densities within the topsoil so that 
concentrations of material and spatial clusters of distinctive 
finds can be identified ( e . g . Richards 1990 , 66–72 )  . In this , 
the technique has proved remarkably successful . Up until 
17 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 18 

2001 , the area subject to test-pitting within the World 
Heritage Site totals 0 . 5205 square kilometres , with 0 . 4451 
square kilometres in the surrounding areas of the 
Stonehenge Landscape . The total area test-pitted amounts 
to just less than 1 per cent ( 0 . 9658 square kilometres ) of the 
total area available ( 135 square kilometres . As part of the 
Stonehenge Environs Survey test-pitting was used to help 
evaluate extensive surface scatters defined by fieldwalking 
( Richards 1990 )  . Attention focused on four sites : W83 at 
Robin Hood ’ s Ball ; W59 on King Barrow Ridge ; W32 at Fargo 
Wood I ; and W31 on Wilsford Down . Of these , two produced 
sub-surface features that could plausibly be linked to the 
presence of the ploughzone assemblages . 
Sample-trenching ( linear trenches arranged to provide a 
representative sample of an area ) has been extensively 
applied ( see Map B )  . Typically , 1–2 per cent of the land area 
has been examined during work around Stonehenge , 
although the extent to which this can be regarded as 
representative remains an open and important question . 
Targeted sample trenches are aimed at investigating 
possible and known features and anomalies revealed through 
some kind of remote sensing ( usually aerial photography or 
geophysical survey )  . In general they have been successful in 
locating sub-surface features , although their small size and 
limited objectives can make the results frustrating , 
tantalizing , but essentially inconclusive for much research . 
Overall , field evaluation has proved extremely useful in 
identifying and defining archaeologically sensitive areas 
within the Stonehenge Landscape , and in providing 
information about the nature of known and unknown sites 
and monuments . 
Excavation 
Archaeological excavation is the single most powerful way of 
exploring buried deposits and , while inherently destructive , 
is able to provide relatively high-quality and detailed 
information . Excavations have taken place within the 
Stonehenge Landscape for more than 400 years but the 
techniques and approaches used have been continually 
developing so that each generation tends to look back on 
the work of earlier excavators with a rather critical eye . How 
the work of the later twentieth century with its concern for 
standardized methods of investigation and recording will be 
regarded in future only time will tell . It is fair to say , however , 
that all the excavations undertaken to date have contributed 
something to current knowledge in one way or another . 
In general , the preservational quality of the deposits and 
remains uncovered has been good , at least within the range 
of materials that can be expected to survive within neutral 
and alkaline environments . The existence of localized 
microenvironments under mounds and within rock-cut 
features occasionally yields complementary materials . 
The Stonehenge Landscape GIS contains a total of 603 
separate recorded excavations – others may well have been 
carried out for which no records exist or no records have yet 
been found . Looked at geographically , this can be broken 
down into 397 ( 66% ) carried out within the World Heritage 
Site excluding the Stonehenge Triangle , 46 ( 8% ) excavations 
inside the Stonehenge Triangle , and 160 ( 27% ) excavations 
outside the World Heritage Site . 
About 7 ( 1% ) excavations were carried out within the 
study area during the seventeenth century , 18 ( 2% ) during the 
eighteenth century , 360 ( 60% ) during the nineteenth century , 
and the remaining 208 ( 34% ) during the twentieth century . 
The high level of activity in the nineteenth century is mainly 
attributable to William Cunnington and Sir Richard Colt Hoare 
who together or individually were responsible for the 
investigation of 218 sites within the study area , 169 ( 77% ) of 
which were round barrows . Although numerous , these early 
excavations were limited in their impact . The reinvestigation 
of sites previously examined by antiquaries has proved 
extremely useful where it has been done in recent years , 
often providing a more secure context for known groups of 
artefacts . A good example is Amesbury G39 opened by 
William Cunnington probably in the summer of 1808 and reexcavated by Paul Ashbee in 1960 ( Ashbee 1980 )  . 
The range of monument classes that have been subject to 
excavation in the Stonehenge Landscape is not great , and 
there are many classes that have never been examined or 
have hardly been considered at all . Prehistoric barrows , 
especially round barrows , represent the single most common 
target for excavation , perhaps because they are amongst the 
most conspicuous features of the landscape . Out of the 603 
recorded excavations , about 370 ( 61% ) related to the 
investigation of round barrows . Looked at another way , there 
are about 640 round barrows recorded within the Stonehenge 
Landscape , of which 257 ( 40% ) have been excavated at some 
time . Of these excavated sites , 184 ( 72% ) lie within the World 
Heritage Site excluding the Stonehenge Triangle , 9 ( 4% ) lie 
inside the Stonehenge Triangle , while 64 ( 25% ) lie outside the 
World Heritage Site . The total number of individual 
excavations at barrow sites is higher than the amount of 
excavated barrows as some barrows have been excavated on 
more than one occasion . Overall , of the 257 excavated 
barrows within the Stonehenge Landscape approximately 213 
( 83% ) were investigated during the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries , the remainder during the twentieth century . 
Excavations undertaken during the twentieth century 
can be classified according to the purpose for which they 
were undertaken : management , rescue , or research . 
Rescue work constitutes the biggest single group , 
accounting for nearly two-thirds ( 64% ) of the total . Much 
of this work concentrates around Boscombe , southeast of 
Amesbury , where targeted trenches together with SSR 
style excavation ( strip , sample , and record ) provides 
information about more than 10ha of former downland 
east of the River Avon ( Fitzpatrick 2004b )  . Managementprompted projects account for 23 per cent of excavations 
with only 13 per cent of twentieth-century excavations 
being connected to research-driven projects . This 
contrasts with the previous century when all excavations 
were essentially research-driven . 
Environmental archaeology 
A wide range of palaeoenvironmental evidence in many 
different forms is preserved in archaeological deposits and 
other accumulative sediments in the Stonehenge Landscape ; 
much of it was recovered during twentieth-century 
excavations . General reviews providing the regional context 
have been published for plant microfossil and macrofossil 
evidence ( Scaife 1987 ) and archaeozoological material ( Coy 
and Maltby 1987 )  . A catalogue of prehistoric plant remains 
from Wiltshire including charcoal identifications , seed 
impressions on pottery , species identified from preserved 
pollen , and carbonized plant remains has been published 
( Grose and Sandell 1964 )  . Allen ( 1997 ) provides a critical 
review of the environmental evidence for the earlier 
prehistoric phases , but there is little by way of review or 
18 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 19 

synthesis for the Iron Age and later evidence . That such 
material is relatively plentiful is demonstrated by the 
recovery of human remains , faunal remains , charred plant 
remains , and sediments containing environmental indicators 
at , amongst other sites , Figheldean ( McKinley 1999 , 24–30 ) 
and Butterfield Down ( Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 , 35–6 )  . 
Much of what is known of the Holocene environment 
derives from samples taken from archaeological contexts , 
details of which are usefully listed with references by Allen 
( 1997 , 116 , and Allen et al . in Richards 1990 , 253 )  . These 
include major contributions from the car-park postholes at 
Stonehenge ; the ditch of Stonehenge itself ; the ditch and 
 ‘ anomaly ’ at Coneybury ; Durrington Walls ; the Amesbury 42 
long barrow ; the Stonehenge Cursus ; the Lesser Cursus ; the 
Wilsford Shaft ; Woodhenge ; and the fills of ‘ Wessex Linear ’ 
ditches on Earl ’ s Down . From these , land-snails provide 
information about the overall vegetation structure while 
charred plant remains ( including seeds , fruit remains , charcoal 
etc .  ) and faunal assemblages give species-level information 
about the flora and fauna . The nature of the contexts from 
which these samples are derived inevitably means that they 
reflect either socially constructed assemblages or highly 
localized niches within the broader environment . 
Pollen sequences are extremely rare on the chalklands , but 
two have been found in the Stonehenge Landscape . One 
spans the Boreal and Sub-boreal and derives from a post-pit 
uncovered in the Stonehenge car-park ( Allen 1995 ; Scaife 
1995 )  . The second comes from the Avon floodplain and 
produced a long sequence starting around 7950–7030 BC 
( GU-3229 : 8460±200 BP )  . Ten boreholes were examined along 
a transect on the northern side of the river . A maximum depth 
of 1 . 68m of monocot peat and organic silt was recorded 
towards the centre of the transect , resting on late Devensian 
or early Flandrian sands and gravels ( Allen 1997 , 120 ; Scaife in 
Cleal et al . 2004 , 228–34 )  . The pollen sequence derived from 
samples taken from the boreholes suggests four main phases 
to the vegetational history of the valley , designated Durrington 
1–4 . Phase 1 , the basal zone , shows largely open herbaceous 
communities of grasses and sedges in the damper valley 
bottom around 8000 BC , followed by the appearance of birch 
and pine with an increasing importance to oak , elm , and hazel 
through the early Flandrian . Phase 2 begins with a period of 
erosion , perhaps connected with forest clearance , with 
markedly fewer trees and shrubs represented . Birch and pine 
are present still , and lime appears for the first time . Some 95 
per cent of the total pollen deriving from herbs suggests that 
the floodplain was again dominated by grasses , sedges , and 
other fen plants . Alder is also present . Cereal-type pollen is 
present as well as evidence for segetals and weeds typical of 
cleared land . This phase probably spans the period from about 
4000 BC down to perhaps 1500 BC , after which there seems to 
be a hiatus in the sequence . During Durrington 3 , the Roman 
and early post-Roman period , tree and shrub pollen becomes 
dominant in these fen carr peats . Tree species include alder 
and birch , elm , lime , and a little ash . Durrington 4 shows a 
return to an open floodplain environment with the demise of 
the alder carr , perhaps reflecting the intensification of landuse in medieval times . 
The poverty of colluvial deposits in the small valleys and 
dry valleys in the area has long been noted as puzzling within 
what appears to be a fairly densely occupied landscape ( Allen 
1997 , 120 )  . A sampling programme undertaken within the 
context of the Stonehenge Environs Project failed to identify 
significant deposits ( Richards 1990 , 210–11 )  . However , in 1993 
shallow deposits up to 0 . 75m thick were recognized on 
Coneybury Hill immediately south of New King Barrows ( WA 
1993a )  , perhaps suggesting that persistence in making 
further searches will be rewarded . A shallow colluvial profile 
was also identified at Folly Bottom northwest of Amesbury 
during pipeline observation in 1991 ( Cleal et al . 2004 )  . 
Buried soils sealed beneath later monuments provide one 
of the largest yet so far under-exploited sources of 
environmental evidence . Biases in the data available certainly 
exist ( Allen 1997 , 127 )  , but can increasingly be dealt with . 
The potential of alluvial deposits and floodplain 
archaeology along the Avon and the Till is very considerable 
and amply illustrated by investigations near Lake in the 
Woodford Valley in 1996 ( McKinley 2003 )  . Field evaluations , 
watching briefs , and excavations here revealed a rich alluvial 
sequence with prehistoric , Roman , and later artefacts 
stratified along the valley margins . The waterlogged 
conditions below the alluvium preserved a mid-firstmillennium AD burial complete with its wooden plank cover . 
As a result of the study of the various strands of evidence 
recovered to date a basic picture of the changing physical 
environment has emerged and has been fully discussed on 
several occasions by Michael Allen ( in Richards 1990 , 254–8 ; 
in Cleal et al . 1995 , 470–91 )  . Most recently , attempts have 
been made to map land-use and environment in relation to a 
series of distinct phases ( Allen 1997 )  . To set alongside these 
studies of the evolving natural vegetation , Mark Maltby ( in 
Richards 1990 , 247–9 ) has provided an extremely useful 
summary of the exploitation of animals in the Stonehenge 
environs during the Neolithic and Bronze Age based on 
samples from numerous archaeological contexts . 
Preservation of artefacts and ecofacts 
In very broad terms , three scales of preservational context can 
be identified with reference to artefactual and ecofactual 
materials . Each is briefly reviewed in the following paragraphs . 
Mega-scale : This relates to the largest-scale environmental 
indicators and preservational contexts known to exist , of 
which the most extensive are the alluvial and colluvial 
deposits of the Avon and Till valleys . These include sections 
of buried prehistoric landscape and old river channels . Field 
evaluations at the new visitor centre site in Countess Road 
revealed alluvium to a depth of about 2 . 5m over an old 
surface adjacent to the Avon ( Darvill 1995 , figure 3 . 4 )  . These 
and other comparable deposits will be critical for 
understanding the use and role of the River Avon in earlier 
times . Smaller areas of hill-wash and other superficial 
deposits exist in dry-valleys and along the smaller streams 
in the Stonehenge Landscape , but none of these has been 
fully mapped and only a few have been sampled ( but see 
Richards 1990 , 210–11 )  . 
Augering provides rapid insights into the buried soil profile 
and is especially useful to locate and plot areas of deeper 
soils , colluvium , and alluvium . Augering can also be used to 
take samples for geochemical studies and environmental 
analysis . The total area which has been augered amounts to 
0 . 0938 square kilometres , with 0 . 0016 square kilometres 
inside the World Heritage Site and 0 . 9224 square kilometres in 
the Stonehenge Landscape beyond ( Map B )  . 
Perhaps the biggest and most significant large-scale 
environmental resource in the Stonehenge Landscape is that 
represented by the buried soils preserved beneath 
archaeological monuments , especially barrows , banks , and 
lynchets . The wide distribution across the Stonehenge 
19 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 20 

Landscape of buried soils preserved in this way means that , at 
least for the Neolithic and the Bronze Age , it may be possible 
to map land-use zones and changing patterns of exploitation 
in the way initiated by Allen ( 1997 )  . Depending on the exact 
circumstances of burial , the nature of the buried soil itself , 
and the character of the underlying bedrock , such deposits 
may preserve pollen , charcoal , and molluscan remains , 
provide opportunities for micromorphological studies and 
geochemical analysis and , in some cases , incorporate direct 
evidence of land-use such as cultivation marks , manuring 
debris , or burnt material . The preservation of pottery , flint , 
stone , and bone is generally good within these contexts . 
Substantial peat deposits or sediment accumulations likely 
to preserve long-term pollen sequences are extremely rare on 
or around the chalklands of Wessex . Work in the Avon 
floodplain has , however , revealed a long pollen sequence , the 
base of which dates to about 8200–7000 BC ( GU-3239 : 
8460±200 BP )  ( Allen 1997 , 120 ; Cleal et al . 2004 )  . Waterlogged 
deposits that include preservation of ancient timber have been 
recorded in the Avon Valley near Lake ( McKinley 2003 )  . 
Macro-scale : At a medium scale the environmental record is 
dominated by the analysis of fill sequences in individual 
features on archaeological sites . These have proved 
remarkably revealing . In some , for example the postholes in 
the Stonehenge car-park , both pollen and molluscan remains 
survived and therefore provided insights into different sectors 
of the local environment ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 41–56 )  . Elsewhere 
only molluscan remains are represented , as , for example , in 
the fills of the ditch of the Amesbury 42 long barrow ( Richards 
1990 , 105–9 )  , the ditch of Coneybury henge ( Richards 1990 , 
154–8 )  , the ditch at Woodhenge ( Evans and Wainwright 1979 )  , 
the ditch around Stonehenge ( Evans 1984 )  , and the ditch of 
the Stonehenge Cursus ( Allen 1997 , 130 )  . Soil particle size 
studies , soil geochemistry , and soil micromorphology have all 
been tried on these deposits with varying degrees of success . 
Ecofacts represent a major category of material 
recovered from excavations of all periods , especially bone , 
which is generally well preserved except where localized soil 
conditions cause its accelerated decay . 
Human bone has been recovered from the inhumations 
and cremations variously found in most of the barrow 
excavations undertaken to date . Much of this has been 
subject to detailed osteoarchaeological and anthropological 
studies , but to date there has been relatively little forensic 
examination ( but see Brothwell et al . in Ashbee 1978a , 
43–55 ; Ashbee 1984a , 84–7 ; Pitts et al . 2002 )  . Chemical 
analysis of tooth enamel has enabled population 
movements to be tracked ( Pitts et al . 2002 , 137–9 ; 
Fitzpatrick et al . 2004 ) and there is clearly abundant scope 
for more work of this kind using extant human remains from 
burials in long , round , and oval barrows especially . To date 
no genetic fingerprinting or DNA studies have been 
reported . Before much further work can be done , however , 
there is an urgent need to compile a register of the human 
remains that are extant , their whereabouts , their condition , 
and the availability of documentation relating to their 
discovery and subsequent treatment . 
Faunal remains are also widely represented , although 
current evidence suggests that little has survived from pre1950s excavations . Again , the early prehistoric components of 
the data have been explored ( Maltby in Richards 1990 , 247–9 )  , 
and this now needs to be complemented by a review of 
evidence for the presence and exploitation of animals in later 
periods . The value of tight chronological control over the main 
components of placed faunal deposits is emphasized by the 
realization that some of the non-human skeletal components 
in the ditch at Stonehenge had been curated for perhaps 200 
years or more before being deposited ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 
529–30 )  . The potential for re-examining extant assemblages 
from previous excavations is well illustrated by the results of 
work by Albarella and Serjeantson ( 2002 ) on animal bone from 
the late 1960s excavations at Durrington Walls . Metrical data 
from this study is available on line through the Archaeology 
Data Service catalogue at 
catalogue / projArch / pigsdurham_2004 /  . 
Other macroscopic environmental remains from 
excavations within the Stonehenge Landscape include the 
rich assemblage from the Wilsford Shaft , the bottom 2 . 5m 
or so of which was waterlogged . As well as a selection of 
inorganic material , environmental remains included animal 
bone , pieces of worked and unworked wood , plant fibre 
cord , pollen , seeds and a range of plant macrofossils , 
mosses , charcoal , fungi , insect remains , land-snails , skin 
and hair fibres , and dung ( Ashbee et al . 1989 )  . Equally 
unusual is a calcium–phosphate-replaced coprolite 
recovered from a pit of later Romano-British date at 
Figheldean ( McKinley 1999 , 28 )  . The presence of shells , 
especially sea-shells , has sometimes been noted ( e . g . 
Ashbee 1984a , 81 ) but the incidence , context , and origins 
have not been explored . Pottery , flint , and stone are also 
well preserved in most excavated features . 
Micro-scale : At the very small scale the majority of evidence 
relates to conditions in a select area within part of a specific 
feature or deposit . This is perhaps most often seen within 
graves where the microenvironments caused by the decay 
of one kind of material allow the preservation of others . At 
Amesbury barrow G58 , a copper dagger in the central grave 
provided a highly localized context for the preservation of 
organic material . This included wooden ( yew ) rivets 
attaching two horn hilt-pieces to the metal blade , traces of 
a hide sheath , and evidence that the blade and hilt had 
been encased in sphagnum moss and wrapped in cloth 
( Ashbee 1984a , 67–73 )  . A dagger in a burial associated with 
Beaker pottery at Shrewton had also been encased in moss 
and wrapped in cloth , perhaps a bag ( Moore and Rowlands 
1972 , 42 )  . Traces of wood have been found on a bronze 
dagger from the Bush Barrow , while traces of cloth are 
visible on an axe-blade from the same barrow ( Annable and 
Simpson 1964 , items 170 and 178 )  . Other examples from the 
Stonehenge Landscape could be cited . 
Scientific dating 
The main scientific dating technique hitherto applied to sites 
and monuments in the Stonehenge Landscape is radiocarbon 
dating . Indeed the first radiocarbon determinations made on 
samples of archaeological material from the British Isles used 
charcoal from the old land surface under the rubble examined 
in 1952 on the south side of the bank of Durrington Walls 
( Stone et al . 1954 , figure 4 where the source of the samples is 
marked ‘ charcoal ’  )  . The two dates of 3650–3000 BC ( GRO901 : 4584±80 BP ) and 3510–3090 BC ( GRO-901a : 4575±50 
BP ) were famously declared ‘ archaeologically inacceptable ’  
( sic ) by Stuart Piggott ( 1959 , 289 )  . Since that time about 100 
further determinations have been made , the accumulating 
body of ages and their calibrated dates being deployed in 
various ways to shed light on the phases and sequences 
represented at individual monuments and the place of those 
20 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 21 

phases in wider British and European contexts . Richards 
( 1990 , 259–62 ) provides a valuable compendium of 
determinations and their calibrated dates available up until 
that time , while Allen and Bayliss ( in Cleal et al . 1995 , 511–35 ) 
list and discuss all the dates available for Stonehenge and its 
associated structures available up until 1995 . 
The most comprehensively dated monument is 
undoubtedly Stonehenge itself , not least because this site 
has benefited from the development of a bespoke dating 
programme using available samples as an integral part of 
the post-excavation programme relating to all the twentiethcentury excavations at the site ( Bayliss et al . 1997 )  . 
However , even with 52 acceptable and reliable dates 
available , there are still many outstanding issues relating to 
the sequence of events and associations between particular 
elements of the structure . Phases that include the main 
stone settings are the least well dated , the phasing of which 
has prompted fairly vigorous debate ( e . g . Case 1997 )  . 
A robust series of dates is available from samples taken 
from the Wilsford Shaft , some of which date actual artefacts 
( e . g . wooden buckets )  , while others relate to defined 
horizons within the fill . The stratigraphic position of the 
samples accord well with their date ( Ashbee et al . 1989 )  . 
Although 14 dates are available from Durrington Walls they 
relate to widely scattered contexts and provide only a 
general chronology for the site as a whole . Few duplicate 
samples from the same context were dated , and some 
determinations are known to have derived from bulked 
samples . The remaining dates are isolated determinations or 
small groups relating to a site or deposit . These are useful in 
providing a broad horizon within which to set the recorded 
evidence , but are of little help in resolving the detail of what 
happened when and where in the landscape . Some of the 
determinations are associated with important categories of 
artefacts and styles of monument construction , notably the 
few determinations from round barrows which have been 
discussed by Ashbee ( 1986 , 84–5 ) in relation to the 
publication of his excavations at Milton Lilbourne . 
Great caution must be exercised when using some of the 
early determinations , especially in the light of Ashmore ’ s 
findings that multi-year samples tend to give older than 
expected dates ( 1999 )  . The use of combining routines and 
averaging methods must also be treated with caution . Recent 
developments in the application of radiocarbon dating to 
cremated remains ( cf . Aerts et al . 2001 ) has great potential to 
shed light on the chronology of the putatively later Wessex 
Culture graves which often contain cremations ( see Grinsell 
1957 , 231–8 for a provisional list of possible samples )  . 
There are no documented cases of thermoluminescence 
( TL ) dating being used on ceramics or refractory materials 
from sites within the Stonehenge Landscape . Chlorine 36 
dating has been applied to igneous rock from Stonehenge 
and surface outcrops around Carn Menyn in the Preseli Hills 
( Bowen et al . 1994 ; Bowen 1994 ) to reveal that the surface 
of the rock examined had been exposed for 14 , 000±1900 
years and 5400±400 years respectively . The interpretation of 
these results as evidence for the human transportation of 
bluestone to Stonehenge has been challenged ( WilliamsThorpe et al . 1995 )  . 
Scientific analysis of objects and materials 
The importance of Stonehenge and its associated 
materials have attracted attention for use as case-studies 
for generations . H H Thomas ’ investigation into the 
petrology of the stones forming the main monument was 
not the earliest such study , but it is one of the best known 
and most widely cited works because it set new standards 
for the application of petrological techniques in 
archaeology ( Thomas 1923 )  . Subsequent studies of the 
stones and related stone artefacts have continued the use 
of petrological examination ( Ixer 1997a ) and also applied 
other physical and chemical methods of characterization 
and compositional analysis including laboratory-based xray fluorescence ( XRF )  , portable x-ray fluorescence 
( PXRF )  , and magnetic susceptibility ( MS )  ( Thorpe et al . 
1991 ; Williams-Thorpe et al . 2004 )  . It is now recognized 
that the so-called ‘ bluestones ’ at Stonehenge , and the 
artefacts and bluestone fragments from other nearby 
sites , comprise a variety of rock types . These include : 
spotted blue dolerite , unspotted blue dolerite , green 
dolerite , grey rhyolite , and rhyolitic ignimbrite ( Thorpe et 
al . 1991 , 139–42 )  . While it is generally agreed that all 
these rocks ultimately derive from outcrops in the Preseli 
Hills of Pembrokeshire , how exactly the expanded range 
of rock types maps onto the established petrological 
groups from the area ( Group VIII , a silicified tuff ; Group 
XIII , spotted dolerite ; Group XXIIIa , graphic pyroxene 
granodiorite ; and Group XXIIIb quartz dolerite ) is a matter 
that requires further investigation . 
Isotope analysis has been used to investigate the early 
residence areas of prehistoric and later burials from the area . 
The Anglo-Saxon adult male who had been decapitated and 
buried beside Y-Hole 9 at Stonehenge seems to have spent 
his childhood in the area northeast of his final resting place 
according to the analysis of oxygen , lead , and strontium in 
his tooth enamel ( Pitts et al . 2002 , 137–9 )  . Similar studies of 
the Amesbury Archer suggest that he spent a good deal of 
his life in continental Europe , perhaps in the Alps ( Fitzpatrick 
2003a )  , while the Boscombe Bowmen seem to have 
originated in southwest Wales ( Fitzpatrick 2004a ; Fitzpatrick 
et al . 2004 )  . Clearly there is great potential for further 
studies of suitable preserved burials from around the area as 
an aid to understanding the nature and extent of population 
movements at different times . The results of such work will 
also have implications for thinking about the likely sources 
of inspiration for some of the monuments and the possible 
meanings that attached to them . 
Grounded in the biological sciences , lichenology has 
been applied to Stonehenge in 1973 , 1994 , and , most 
recently , 2003 when Peter James , Vince Giavarini , and 
Oliver Gilbert undertook a detailed week-long survey . As a 
result of this new work 18 previously unrecorded species 
were added to the list of 66 already documented . These 
included maritime lichens which may have arrived because 
westerly gales blow salt and propagules inland ( Rose and 
James 1994 ; Giavarini and James 2003 )  . 
Laser scanning provides an economical means of creating 
high-resolution digital 3-dimensional images of the surfaces 
of objects or structures . These images can then be used as 
models for analysis under different lighting conditions , can be 
viewed from any angle , and can be used to create scaled 
replicas . An experimental programme of laser-scanning was 
undertaken at Stonehenge in 2002 , focusing on stones 3 , 4 , 
and 53 which were already known to carry engravings of axes 
and daggers , as well as relatively modern graffiti ( Goskar et 
al . 2003 )  . Two previously unidentified carvings of axes were 
found on the inner face of Stone 53 . Clearly the technique has 
much potential for the systematic study of stone surfaces at 
the monument ( Illustration 13 )  . 
21 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 22 

Illustration 13 
( left ) Laser scanner in 
action recording rock art 
on the surface of Stone 
53 at Stonehenge .  
( right ) Digital image of 
part of the surface of 
Stone 53 showing carvings 
of axes and a dagger as 
well as modern graffiti .  
[ Photograph and image 
reproduced courtesy of 
Wessex Archaeology 
and Archaeoptics . 
Copyright reserved .  ] 
Museum collections 
The two main museum collections containing artefacts , 
ecofacts , records , and relevant archival material from 
fieldwork and excavations in the Stonehenge Landscape are at 
Devizes and Salisbury . Together these account for more than 
80 per cent of holdings relevant to the Stonehenge Landscape . 
At Devizes the collections are maintained in the Wiltshire 
Heritage Museum ( formally known as Devizes Museum ) run 
by the Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society . 
There is a long tradition of producing published catalogues 
( Cunnington and Goddard 1896 ; 1911 ( revised edition 1934 )  ; 
Annable and Simpson 1964 ) that provide invaluable 
information about the context and origins of objects as well 
as descriptions of the objects themselves . 
At the heart of the museum is the Stourhead Collection 
amassed by Sir Richard Colt Hoare and William Cunnington 
and formally acquired by the museum through purchase in 
1883 . Some of the objects from this collection , including 
the goldwork from the Bush Barrow , were on loan to the 
British Museum between 1926 and 1988 . However , the 
vigorous cleaning of some pieces while on loan caused 
considerable controversy ( Corfield 1988 ; Kinnes et al . 1988 ; 
Shell and Robinson 1988 )  , and they have since been 
returned to Devizes . It is current policy that the Stourhead 
Collection remains in one location ( Devizes ) for the benefit 
of researchers . 
Devizes Museum holds many items found in the 
Stonehenge area either during archaeological excavations 
or deriving from surface collections since the 1880s . Since 
1971 annual lists of accessions have been published in the 
Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Magazine as 
part of the Wiltshire Archaeological Register . Amongst the 
excavated material in the collections are the finds and 
archives from Woodhenge . The collections include paintings 
and drawings , prints and photographs relating to 
Stonehenge . The associated library houses archaeological 
archives , including the archaeological papers of Sir Richard 
Colt Hoare and William Cunnington , amongst them those 
relating to their barrow excavations around Stonehenge . 
At Salisbury , the collections are maintained by the 
Salisbury and South Wiltshire Museum , established in 
1860 ( Willoughby 1960 ; see 309–10 on Stonehenge finds )  . 
Part of the very extensive collections relevant to the 
Stonehenge Landscape have been published in catalogue 
form ( Moore and Rowlands 1972 )  . The collections include 
most of the finds and archives from the twentieth-century 
excavations at Stonehenge itself ( for details see Cleal et 
al . 1995 , 17–20 )  , as well as the finds and archives from the 
excavations at Boscombe Down West , the Stonehenge 
Environs Survey , and the 1966–8 excavations at Durrington 
Walls . The collections also include pictures and other 
material relevant to Stonehenge , as well as finds and 
archives from other sites in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Since 1971 new accessions to the collection have been 
reported in the Wiltshire Archaeological Register published 
annually in the Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural 
History Magazine . A new Stonehenge gallery was opened 
in 2000 . 
Numerous other museums also have finds and archives 
relating to sites in the Stonehenge Landscape , including : 
Ashmolean Museum ( Oxford )  ; British Museum ( London )  ; 
University Museum , Manchester ; Lukis Museum ( Guernsey , 
Channel Islands )  ; and Hull Museum . The British Museum 
collections include 148 accessions from the parishes of 
Amesbury , Bulford , Durrington , Wilsford cum Lake , and 
Winterbourne Stoke ( see Kinnes and Longworth 1985 for 
listing of some material )  . To what extent other museums in 
southern England and beyond have small amounts of 
material from the area is not known , neither is the extent of 
private collections beyond what can be gauged from the 
annual Wiltshire Archaeological Register . The discovery in 
22 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 23 

2000 of human remains from Stonehenge itself , previously 
believed to be lost ( Pitts et al . 2002 )  , shows the potential 
for surveying collections and trying to track down items that 
have been recorded but since lost from view . 
Archive collections including publications , printed 
matter , drawings , paintings , maps , plans , and notebooks of 
various kinds are held by the National Monuments Record in 
Swindon and the Society of Antiquaries of London . Julian 
Richards has published a personal selection of old 
photographs of Stonehenge which vividly illustrates many 
aspects of the monument ’ s recent history ( Richards 2004 )  . 
The National Monuments Record also has an extensive and 
fairly complete collection of the ‘ grey ’ literature relating to 
the assessments , evaluations , and management plans 
prepared over the last 20 years of so . The guide catalogue 
to an exhibition entitled ‘ Visions of Stonehenge 1350–1987 ’ 
mounted in Southampton City Art Gallery in September 
1987 to coincide with the first meeting of the World 
Archaeological Congress provides a useful summary of the 
main pictures and illustrations of Stonehenge ( Chippindale 
1987 )  . Others are listed by Hatchwell ( 1969 )  . 
Historical and cartographic sources 
Contributed by John Chandler 
Local historical sources , including maps , are generally 
catalogued and retrievable according to the parish ( es ) to 
which they relate . The Stonehenge Landscape embraces , in 
whole or part , no fewer than 18 modern parishes formed 
from 23 ancient parishes . Although few have surviving 
Saxon boundary charters , most are named in Domesday 
Book ( 1086 )  , and some may be coterminous with Saxon or 
earlier land units . 
The Victoria History of Wiltshire has , between 1962 and 
1995 , published modern scholarly accounts , embracing , 
inter alia , the topographical , tenurial , and agricultural 
history of all these ancient parishes apart from four ( which 
all happen to be peripheral )  . These treatments , including 
their detailed annotation to primary sources , supply the 
researcher ’ s first resort . 
The Ordnance Survey mapped the area at small scale in 
1817 ( surveyed 1807–10 ) and at large scale c . 1887–9 
( surveyed c . 1877–86 )  , with subsequent revisions published 
irregularly to the present . Before 1800 , the most useful 
printed map is that of Andrews and Dury published in 1773 . 
Maps by Crocker for Colt Hoare ’ s The Ancient History of 
Wiltshire ( 1812 )  , and engraved views by Stukeley for his 
Stonehenge ( 1740 , but executed 1721–4 ) provide important 
landscape information ( Illustration 14 )  . 
Illustration 14 
Early map of the 
Stonehenge landscape 
from Sir Richard Colt 
Hoare ’ s The ancient 
history of Wiltshire .  
[ From Colt Hoare 
1812 , opp . 170 .  ] 
Manuscript estate maps , usually of the period 1700–1850 , 
depict portions of the study area , notably ( for part of 
Amesbury parish ) a fine atlas of 1726 . Two series of 
manuscript maps , accompanying parliamentary enclosure and 
tithe commutation , are of paramount importance . Twelve 
enclosure maps ( c . 1790–c . 1866 ) describe approximately half 
the area , while tithe maps ( all c . 1837–43 ) cover each ancient 
parish except one ( Netheravon )  . Using tithe maps and 
apportionments it is generally possible to discover ownership , 
occupancy , name , acreage , and use of each land parcel c . 1840 . 
Most relevant maps , as well as other archival sources ( of 
which estate , manorial , and taxation records , glebe terriers , 
farm accounts , and sale particulars provide the most useful 
landscape and toponymic information )  , are held in the 
Wiltshire and Swindon Record Offices . Certain key historical 
sources have been published in the Wiltshire Record Society 
series or elsewhere . 
Catalogues of historical sources , and in some cases 
complete texts , are becoming increasingly available on the 
internet , and this is a trend which will doubtless facilitate 
historical research in future . Likewise , the technique of 
linking detailed map regression to evidence from other 
archival sources has advanced since its pioneering use in 
23 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 24 

the RCHM study of Stonehenge and its environs ( 1979 )  , and 
offers further potential for understanding the evolution of 
the Stonehenge Landscape , especially over recent centuries . 
Personal and institutional archives and records 
The pre-eminence of Stonehenge in the ranks of 
archaeological sites means that many individuals and 
institutions hold collections of material relevant to 
understanding the site and its surroundings . These range 
from memorabilia collected from visits to the area , 
correspondence , objects , and personal photographs and 
drawings of Stonehenge , nearby sites , and the landscape 
generally . These can be very informative , especially any that 
show early investigations or now-lost features . In a few cases 
such personal collections may derive from investigations 
carried out prior to strict controls on the deposition of 
archives and records in public repositories . One such 
collection is that assembled by Denis Grant King in the 
course of his excavations at sites in Wiltshire as well as visits 
to the Avebury and Stonehenge area . Following his death in 
February 1994 this material , which included photographs and 
notebooks , was widely dispersed by a house clearance 
dealer and has since been found in car-boot sales and 
second-hand shops across central southern England . As 
mentioned above , human skeleton 4 . 10 . 4 from Stonehenge 
came to light nearly 60 years after it was throught to have 
been lost when the Royal College of Surgeons in London was 
bombed in 1941 ( Pitts et al . 2002 )  . Yet another example 
represented by the pieces of antler found at Stonehenge by 
William Hawley during his excavations in the 1920s came to 
light amongst the collections of the Society of Antiquaries of 
London in March 2002 ( The Guardian 5 : 3 : 2002 )  . There is 
much potential for the recovery and assembly of personal 
collections of this sort . 
Sites and Monuments Record and GIS 
Although the Stonehenge Landscape is well served by a 
series of consolidated records assembled from the early 
nineteenth century onwards , the first extensive county-based 
systematic retrievable record was the Wiltshire County Sites 
and Monuments Record ( SMR ) established in the early 1970s 
as part of the field archaeology service provided by the 
County Council ’ s Library and Museum Service . The early role 
of this facility has been described by Ford ( 1973 ) and sets 
the context for the creation of the record . Based initially on 
the Ordnance Survey ’ s archaeological record , the Wiltshire 
county SMR has since grown considerably in its breadth and 
depth of coverage so that by early 2002 it contained more 
than 20 , 500 individual record entries ( about 1700 relating to 
the Stonehenge Landscape ) for all periods down to the 
twentieth century AD . Although its primary purpose relates 
to the provision of planning advice , its also has a major role 
in underpinning management initiatives . 
In 1994 English Heritage established a dedicated GIS 
record for an area of 135 square kilometres centred on the 
Stonehenge World Heritage Site . The record is 
complementary to , and compatible with , the Wiltshire SMR . 
It is maintained at Fort Cumberland in Portsmouth and 
provides an aid to the management and interpretation of the 
World Heritage Site and its surroundings ( Batchelor 1997 )  . A 
similar record also exists for the Avebury area ( Burton 2001 )  . 
The English Heritage Stonehenge GIS record contains 
about 1700 database items , with graphical representation 
using points , lines , and areas as appropriate for different 
classes of monument and types of evidence . In addition , the 
GIS provides opportunities for analysis and research such 
as the mapping of archaeological sensitivity and 
importance , and inter-monument visibility analysis 
( Batchelor 1997 , 66–71 )  . 
The maps that accompany this Research Framework were 
produced from the English Heritage GIS record and reflect its 
content as at May 2002 , although some recently recognized 
sites have been added . As with all such records its origin , 
development , and content are subject to a series of 
parameters and limitations , and the maps have to be viewed 
in that context . One of the most fundamental in this regard is 
the fact that negative evidence has not been plotted . Thus the 
distribution of sites is a map of where particular things have 
been positively identified and recorded ; the relationship 
between the patterns represented and the original distribution 
of such things is a matter for further research . GIS-based 
analysis of the Stonehenge Landscape is not confined to the 
English Heritage system ; GIS-based research in archaeology is 
a rapidly expanding field and one for which the quality of data 
in the Stonehenge Landscape is highly attractive . Wheatley 
( 1996 ) has investigated the distribution of lithic scatters using 
GIS modelling to predict the density of finds in areas not 
covered by the Stonehenge Environs Project . The same author 
has used Cumulative Viewshed Analysis to examine the visual 
relationships of long barrows around Stonehenge and Avebury 
( Wheatley 1995 )  . More recently , a team based at Birmingham 
University has used GIS to develop virtual landscapes that can 
be explored from almost any computer ( Exon et al . 2001 )  . 
INTERPRETING THE 
ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE 
STONEHENGE LANDSCAPE 
Finding and investigating the archaeology of the Stonehenge 
Landscape is one thing , interpreting it , explaining it , and 
developing an understanding of it at a scale greater than that 
of the individual site is quite another . Just as the history of 
research in the Stonehenge Landscape represents in 
microcosm the history of archaeology generally , so too the 
interpretation of Stonehenge and its surrounding monuments 
reflects the changing philosophical traditions and theoretical 
positions characteristic of the discipline as a whole . Richard 
Atkinson explored such things in the last chapter of his classic 
work Stonehenge ( Atkinson 1979 , 182–202 )  , as did 
Christopher Chippindale in Stonehenge complete ( Chippindale 
2004 ; see also Chippindale 1989 )  . In a wider context , Andrew 
Sherratt has proposed a useful model through which to 
analyse changing attitudes to the interpretation of historic 
landscapes , what he called the European Cultural Dialectic 
( 1996a , 142 )  . This identifies two broadly parallel trajectories of 
thought , each drawing upon wider prevailing perspectives , but 
not necessarily wholly in kilter with the implementation of 
these perspectives in other disciplines such as philosophy , art 
history , and literature . Indeed , with reference to Stonehenge , 
the development of competing interpretations reveals an 
idiosyncratic pattern of thought that probably owes much to 
the maverick characters of those responsible for the various 
successive contributions ( Illustration 15 )  . 
The first trajectory in Sherratt ’ s model is predominantly 
 ‘ enlightenment ’ in its attitude , providing essentially 
24 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 25 

evolutionary narratives in which order , hierarchy , and 
progression are paramount , models of change are 
deterministic , and analysis is largely comparative . These 
attitudes can be traced from the classical revivals of the 
Renaissance in fourteenth-century Europe through the Age 
of Enlightenment in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries to Positivist science from the early nineteenth 
century , and , most recently , modernist and processualist 
views from the mid twentieth century onwards . 
Illustration 15 
Andrew Sherratt ’ s 
European dialectic model 
adapted to changing 
interpretative models 
of Stonehenge .  [ Based 
on Sherratt 1996 , figure 1 .  ] 
The second trajectory is predominantly ‘ romantic ’ in its 
attitudes , with genealogical narratives focused on meaning , 
action , growth , and descent . The whole approach is grounded 
in contextualist and relativist modes of thinking to produce 
interpretations and ‘ understandings ’ rather than explanations . 
This line of approach starts with the Reformation in Europe in 
the 1520s and its concern for the roots of northern peoples . It 
develops through Romanticism in the eighteenth century , 
Nationalism in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century , 
and , currently , post-modernism and its counterpart in postprocessual archaeology from the late 1980s onwards . 
While each of these trajectories unfolds in parallel , the 
dialectical element of Sherratt ’ s model emphasizes the 
periodic shifts in dominance between the two trajectories as 
phases of stability and contentment with one line of 
thinking eventually lead to revolt , disenchantment , and a 
consequent shift across to the other way of seeing the 
world . Thus although , at any one time , the dominant 
tradition is to be found on one trajectory , research within 
the traditions characteristic of the parallel trajectory take 
place albeit with a reduced significance and impact until the 
next shift in dominance . For Stonehenge , these changing 
approaches can be seen not only in the descriptive written 
discourses available , but also in the way the site and its 
surroundings are mapped and drawn . These themes are 
explored in the following sub-sections which are arranged to 
plot the course of the dominant attitudes to cultural history 
and intellectual position . 
The age of myth and legend 
Stonehenge is sometimes tentatively associated with the 
circular temple to Apollo in the land inhabited by the 
Hyperboreans that is referred to originally by Hecateus of 
Abders ( c . 300 BC ) in a lost work that was later quoted by 
the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus in his Bibliotheca 
historica ( Book V )  . However , Atkinson ( 1979 , 183 ) found 
insufficient justification for the link , and Burl ( 2000 , 205 ) 
plausibly suggests that Hecateus ’ temple was the great 
stone circles and avenues of Callanish on Lewis . 
The earliest explicit reference to Stonehenge is that by 
Henry of Huntingdon in his Historia Anglorum written about 
AD 1130 . In describing the wonders of Britain , he said 
( quoting Atkinson 1979 , 184 )  : 
The second is at Stonehenge , where stones of an 
amazing size are set up in a manner of doorways , so that 
one door seems to be set upon another . Nor can anyone 
guess by what means so many stones were raised so 
high , or why they were built there . 
About six years later , in AD 1136 , Geoffrey of Monmouth 
gave a more rounded account of Stonehenge in which he 
rehearsed a legend that became the principal account of the 
monument for centuries . This is the story of Aurelius 
Ambrosius , king of the Britons , who sought to 
commemorate his nobles slain in battle by Hengist the 
Saxon . Aurelius consults the wizard Merlin as to what a 
fitting memorial might be . Merlin advises acquiring a stone 
structure , known as the Giant ’ s Dance , from Ireland . Using 
his supernatural powers he then transports the structure 
across the water to Salisbury Plain . 
The tale of Aurelius and Merlin was widely repeated 
through the later twelfth and thirteenth centuries : in the 
Anglo-Norman translation of Geoffrey by Wace of about 1171 , 
in the Topographia Hibernica by Giraldus Cambrensis of about 
1187 , and in a work by Robert of Gloucester dating to about 
1278 ( see Barclay 1895 , 131–2 for a useful list of early sources , 
and Legg 1986 selected for transcriptions )  . Indeed , the story 
may embody a genuine folk-memory of the actual building of 
Stonehenge and the acquisition of stones from a distant 
source in the west of Britain ( now known from scientific 
evidence to be west Wales ) which survived as oral tradition 
down to the twelfth century AD ( Piggott 1941 ; Atkinson 1979 , 
185 )  . The picture is complicated by the fact that interest in the 
site during medieval times seems to have focused on the great 
size of the stones and this has led Burl ( 1985 ) to suggest that 
perhaps Geoffrey misunderstood contemporary stories about 
large standing stones in County Kildare in Ireland . 
Two illustrations of Stonehenge are known from 
fourteenth-century manuscripts . One shows Merlin building 
the monument much to the amazement of mere mortal 
onlookers ; the other depicts a rather squared-up 
perspective view of the monument ( Chippindale 1983a 
figures 14 and 15 )  . Here , as with the oral traditions , 
Stonehenge is the real-world incarnation of something 
created in a mythical world ; a place where worlds collide . 
Renaissance revisionism 
The move away from the medieval world towards the modern 
order represented by the revival of learning and fresh 
interests in classical antiquity that characterized the 
Renaissance from around AD 1400 led to the first challenge 
25 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 26 

to Geoffrey of Monmouth ’ s account . It is found in the 
anonymously authored Chronicle of England compiled in the 
mid fifteenth century and published by William Caxton at 
Westminster in 1480 ( Atkinson 1979 , 186 ; Chippindale 2004 , 
25 )  . Here the retold version of Monmouth ’ s tale is 
represented as just that , a story . The questioning , inquiring 
intellect inherent to Renaissance thinking can also be seen in 
the comments made by John Rastell ( 1530 ) to the effect that 
some of the stones at Stonehenge were of artificial cement . 
The Reformation and Stonehenge 
Religious revolution and the reconstruction of western 
Christendom in northern Europe from the early sixteenth 
century engendered an intellectual detachment from the 
classical world and a new focus on the origins and 
autonomy of northern peoples . John Leland was at the heart 
of the early development of such thinking with reference to 
the antiquities of England as the King ’ s Antiquary in the 
service of Henry VIII from 1533 onwards . Although the site 
of Stonehenge is not included in Leland ’ s Itinerary , 
elsewhere he repeats Geoffrey of Monmouth ’ s story with a 
variant in which Merlin obtains the stones not from Ireland , 
but from a place on Salisbury Plain ( Leland 1709 ) 
A young Protestant German scholar , Herman 
Folkerzheimer , came to England in 1562 , and in the company 
of Bishop Jewel of Salisbury visited Stonehenge . 
Interpretation was a challenge to both men , but the bishop 
ventured the opinion that the stones had been set up as 
trophies by the Romans because the actual positioning of 
the stones resembled a yoke ( Chippindale 2004 , 30 )  . This 
was the first recorded proposal that the Romans might be 
responsible for the structure . 
Other commentaries of the period include that by Luca 
de Heere , a Flemish Protestant who fled to England in 1567 . 
Between 1573 and 1575 he prepared a guide to Britain that 
includes a detailed account of Stonehenge and a picture 
( Chippindale 2004 , 33 and figure 21 ) which is the earliest 
known to have been drawn on the site itself , and 
interestingly includes two barrows as well as Stonehenge 
( see Bakker 1979 )  . Only slightly later in date are a 
watercolour by William Smith published in 1588 and a rather 
unreal stylized print by an unknown artist with the initials 
 ‘ RF ’ dated 1575 . The foreground of this print includes two 
men digging into a barrow from which they have already 
removed some giant bones . 
Within the same tradition was William Camden ’ s history 
and topography of Britain first published in Latin in 1586 as 
the Britannia , and subsequently enlarged and reprinted 
many times . The edition of 1600 included an illustration of 
Stonehenge ( an incompetent re-engraving of the RF print of 
1575 already referred to ) and a description . Camden refers 
to Stonehenge as ‘ a huge and monstrous piece of work ’ and 
in a comment redolent of the age he laments ‘ with much 
grief , that the Authors of so notable a Monument are thus 
buried in oblivion ’  ( see Legg 1986 , 60–1 )  . 
Enlightenment and the English Renaissance 
The Enlightenment of the seventeenth and early eighteenth 
centuries in Britain returned the focus of interpretation to 
the scientifically based trajectory . Two problems relating to 
Stonehenge began to command attention : where did the 
stones come from , and how did they get to Salisbury Plain ? 
William Lambarde ( 1580 ) addressed both by emphasizing 
what can be achieved by dedicated groups of people who in 
this case brought the stones from north Wiltshire 
( Chippindale 2004 , 36–7 for summary )  . Developing interest 
in detailed description may have resulted in the idea that 
the stones were difficult to count ; the removal of stones 
may also have been contributory to this idea . Speed ’ s map 
of Wiltshire published in 1625 shows the beginnings of a 
more geographically aware view of the land , and 
Chippindale ( 2004 , 46 and figure 30 ) has speculated that a 
picture dated 21 June 1716 which shows people exploring 
the monument may reflect an early interest in Stonehenge 
astronomy . The spirit of inquiry is reflected in the Duke of 
Buckingham ’ s diggings in the centre of the site in the 1620s , 
and King James ’ decision to commission an expert study of 
the site by Inigo Jones in the 1630s and 1640s ( Jones and 
Webb 1655 )  . In his interpretation of the site , and in the spirit 
of the Renaissance , Jones was adamant that the structure 
was built by Roman architects using Tuscan proportions . 
Contrary views circulated alongside those of Jones . In 
1661 Dr Walter Charleton , physician to Charles II , proposed 
that the builders of Stonehenge were the Danes of the ninth 
century AD , noting analogies with ancient megalithic 
structures in Denmark . Especially important in view of the 
prevailing political situation was the proposal that 
Stonehenge had been the coronation place of the Danish 
kings ( see Chippindale 2004 , 61 )  . Further evidence of 
Renaissance interest in the debate and resolution of 
intellectual questions in relation to Stonehenge comes from 
the work of John Aubrey ( 1626–97 )  . Commanded to 
investigate the site by Charles II , Aubrey worked at 
Stonehenge in 1666 , using fieldwork , surveys , planning , and 
observation to create a new plan of the site that challenged 
Jones ’ idealized classically inspired reconstructions . 
Aubrey ’ s Monumenta Britannica was incomplete and 
unpublished at the time of his death , but survived in 
manuscript form until its eventual publication in 1980 
( Aubrey 1693a ; 1693b )  . Aubrey ’ s contribution to an 
understanding of the stones was to invoke , in a rather 
confused way , the ancient Druids as mentioned by Caesar , 
Tacitus , and others , as the architects and users of 
Stonehenge and all the other stone circles in Britain . This 
conclusion , reached in old age after decades of discussion 
and speculation , perhaps reflected the shifting intellectual 
climate that by about 1700 was favouring a more romantic , 
interpretative , vision of the past ( see Piggott 1937 )  . 
Romantic visions 
In 1705 Samuel Gale was perpetuating the idea that 
Stonehenge was a rude and barbarous British monument 
( Nichols 1790 , 24 )  . Bridging the transition from the 
intellectual traditions of the Restoration to those of 
Romanticism was one of the great antiquaries of the 
eighteenth century , William Stukeley ( 1687–1765 )  . His 
upbringing meant that for the first half of his life he continued 
the style of fieldwork , travelling , measuring , and observing on 
the ground so central to the work of Aubrey . Stuart Piggott 
( 1981 , 24 ) has argued that Stukeley ’ s continuation of these 
traditions well into the 1730s was because he was provincial , 
old-fashioned , and out of date . In the second half of his life , 
from the late 1730s onwards he was drawn into the changed 
intellectual mood of the metropolis . In his book Stonehenge : 
a temple restor ’ d to the British druids published in 1740 he 
used the results of his fieldwork from the 1720s to look 
outwards from the monument into the surrounding 
26 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 27 

landscape , depicting barrows and other earthwork structures 
in relation to the central structure . It was Stukeley who first 
recognized the Avenue and the Cursus . Together with Lord 
Pembroke he dug into a range of barrows in the area 
( Atkinson 1984 )  , and suggested that the occupants of the 
barrows were the people who built and used Stonehenge . But 
in the text his newly found Romantic leanings reveal 
themselves . He dismissed the idea of Roman , Danish , Saxon , 
Phoenician , or any other overseas involvement , instead 
arguing with almost religious zeal for the primary contribution 
of native Britons and in particular the crucial role of the 
Druids . The sub-title of his study shows his desire to overturn 
existing , and by then intellectually inferior , explanations of 
the site and ‘ restore ’ it to its place in history . In discussing his 
discovery of the Avenue , Stukeley also noted its alignment on 
the rising sun on midsummer day ; here was a connection 
between the human world and the natural world that so 
interested the Romantic thinkers of the mid eighteenth 
century . As Piggott ( 1985 , 153 ) observed ,  ‘ Stukeley ’ s delight 
in the English countryside is an endearing feature … an 
almost sensuous pleasure in the mild English landscape of 
the Wiltshire Downs .  ’ 
Belief in Druidical origin for Stonehenge and connections 
with astronomy can be traced through the later eighteenth 
century , and indeed beyond . John Smith suggested that the 
site could be astronomically explained and that it was a 
temple for observing the motions of the heavenly bodies 
( 1771 )  . The internationally renowned English astronomer 
Edmund Halley visited the site in 1720 , probably in the 
company of Stukeley ( Lockyer 1909 , 54 )  . 
The Romantic visions of Stonehenge created by the mid 
eighteenth century come through most clearly in the 
depictions of it made in the later eighteenth and early 
nineteenth centuries ( Chippindale 1987 , 18–21 )  . The Sublime 
tradition is represented by an astonishing number of fine 
paintings of Stonehenge . The works of Thomas Hearne , 
Thomas Rowlandson , Thomas Girtin , William Turner of Oxford , 
James Bridges , and many others provide marvellously 
theatrical pieces that stand up well alongside the watercolour 
masterpieces by J M W Turner ( c . 1825–8 ) and John Constable 
( c . 1835 )  . Thomas Cole ’ s narration of landscape history 
published in 1836 shows Stonehenge in Arcadia replete with 
nymphs and shepherds ( Chippindale 2004 , figure 68 )  . 
Druidical images also come through with great force . In 1815 
a view by Samuel Rush Meyrick and Charles Hamilton Smith 
entitled The Costume of the original inhabitants of the British 
Isles shows a grand conventional festival with banners 
carrying snake designs draped over the trilithons , the ark of 
the covenant from Old Testament traditions , and the 
costumes themselves from medieval Europe ( Chippindale 
2004 , figure 61 )  . Other illustrations in similar vein abound , 
some focusing on what might be considered religious or 
ceremonial themes while others can be interpreted as more 
nationalistic in the messages they convey . 
Even as these images were being prepared , however , the 
pendulum of radical thinking was swinging back towards 
the more explanatory traditions that built on the discipline 
of Renaissance observation and by the later nineteenth 
century revealed itself in positivist science . 
Positivism and the emergent sciences 
The art of excavation was revived in the Stonehenge 
Landscape by William Cunnington ( 1754–1810 ) who in 1798 
dug under the stones of the trilithon that fell in 1797 ( stones 
57 , 58 , and 158 ) and found Roman pottery ( Cunnington 
1975 , 10–11 )  . This was reported by the young topographer 
John Britton in his Beauties of Wiltshire as proof of a Roman 
date for the monument , but others were more cautious . 
Cunnington himself started working for H P Wyndham , 
MP for Wiltshire , on the excavation of barrows ; by 1801 he 
had opened 24 examples around Stonehenge . In 1802 
Cunnington excavated at Stonehenge , and soon after came 
to be employed by Sir Richard Colt Hoare ( 1758–1838 )  , 
a well-connected wealthy landowner living at Stourhead 
( Sandell 1961 )  . Colt Hoare ’ s travels in Europe and extensive 
network of contacts brought him to want to write a new 
history of Wiltshire , which he did between 1808 and his 
death in 1838 . The spirit of the age is reflected in the motto 
he cited at the head of the introduction to the first volume :  
 ‘ we speak from facts , not theory ’  ( Colt Hoare 1812 , 7 )  , the 
facts in question for the prehistoric period at least being the 
results of Cunnington ’ s excavations . Colt Hoare ’ s volume is 
well illustrated with plans and maps , including the first 
detailed map of the archaeological monuments of 
 ‘ Stonehenge and its environs ’  ( Colt Hoare 1812 , op . 170 )  . 
Colt Hoare ’ s achievements were considerable , but it was 
not until the second half of the nineteenth century that their 
value could really be appreciated as the results of 
intellectual and theoretical scientific thinking in spheres 
such as stratigraphy , evolution , and artefact sequences 
came to the fore . John Lubbock ’ s book Prehistoric times was 
first published in 1865 and applied to Britain the so-called 
Three-Age sub-division of the prehistoric past that had been 
developed 50 years earlier in Denmark . Lubbock placed 
Stonehenge and most of the barrows around about into a 
period back beyond the Bronze Age , a more ancient period 
than even the most adventurous antiquaries had previously 
ventured to suggest ( Lubbock 1865 )  . Ironically , as 
prehistorians were attempting to fit Stonehenge into an 
essentially evolutionary model of the ancient past , Charles 
Darwin himself was at Stonehenge in June 1887 studying 
the way that fallen stones became buried and suggesting 
that earthworms played a major role ( Darwin 1888 , 154 )  . 
Scientific approaches were not confined to chronology , 
sequence , construction , and decay of monuments . In the mid 
nineteenth century , John Thurnam ’ s excavations were a search 
not for grave goods but for human remains ( Marsden 1974 , 
57–64 ; Piggott 1993 )  . Thurnam and others suggested that the 
skulls from barrows divided into two types : dolicocephalic 
from long barrows and bracycephalic from round barrows . 
These he associated with different and successive racial or 
ethnic groups . Meanwhile , in 1868 , Sir A C Ramsey was the 
first geologist to point out the similarity of some of the 
bluestones of Stonehenge to the igneous rocks of 
Pembrokeshire ( Ramsey et al . 1868 ; see also Maskelyne 1878 )  . 
Subsequent work by J W Judd ( 1902 ) suggested a glacial origin 
for the bluestones , while 20 years later H H Thomas ( 1923 ) 
confirmed the earlier identifications using optical petrology 
and attributed their movement to human agency . 
Astronomical lines of inquiry prompted earlier by 
Stukeley also submitted to science , with observational work 
by Lockyer in 1901 following nearly two decades of studies 
elsewhere in the world . His findings led him to make various 
connections between Stonehenge and the temples of 
ancient Egypt , and to endorse , in a scientific sort of way , 
earlier suggestions that Stonehenge had been a solar 
temple serviced by astronomer-priests ( Lockyer 1909 , 
chapter 44 )  . By contrast , E H Stone used astronomical data 
and the orientation of the axis of Stonehenge to propose 
27 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 28 

that the stone structures were built about 1840 BC ( Stone 
1923 , 131 )  , a good estimate at the time but a few centuries 
later than current thinking suggests . 
Surveys were also a feature of the prevailing currents of 
thought in the later nineteenth century , one of the most 
significant and accurate being that carried out by Flinders 
Petrie in June and September 1877 ( Petrie 1880 )  . Petrie 
suggested the need for detailed excavations at Stonehenge 
to find evidence that would date accurately the construction 
of the stone circles . He suggested excavating a stonehole 
while supporting the stone in a wooden cradle , an idea 
implemented in 1901 by Professor William Gowland 
( Gowland 1902 )  . Gowland ’ s work at Stone 56 was the first 
recorded scientific excavation at Stonehenge itself and 
allowed the suggestion that Stonehenge was constructed in 
the later part of the Neolithic or the period of transition from 
stone to bronze ( Gowland 1902 , 86 )  . He also proposed that 
the ‘ purpose for which Stonehenge was erected … [ was ] a 
place of sanctity dedicated to the observation or adoration 
of the sun ’  ( 1902 , 87 )  . In support of this Hawley includes an 
illustration of a Japanese print showing sun-worship in 
Japan ( 1902 , plate vi )  , an early example of using 
comparative ethnology to aid archaeological interpretation . 
Nationalism and cultural histories 
Romantic interpretations of Stonehenge and its surroundings 
did not die out during the nineteenth century , although they 
were fairly well eclipsed by the brash authoritative scientific 
inquiries of the age . In the early twentieth century there was 
renewed interest in interpretative studies partly in reaction 
to the scientific focus of the previous century and partly 
because of the political climate in Europe and beyond with 
its inherent concern for nationalism and identity . Attention 
shifted away from questions such as when Stonehenge was 
built , and for what purpose , towards an interest in who built 
it and what influenced them . Culture histories were favoured , 
recognizing the distinctiveness of communities in time and 
space and seeking interpretations based on migration , 
colonization , and invasion . 
Gordon Childe was the most notable exponent of the 
cultural historical approach to European prehistory . He 
suggested ( 1940 , 106 ) that 
like the fabric of an English cathedral , the stones of 
Stonehenge mirror the fortunes of a community . Neither 
the construction of the Aubrey Circle nor even the 
erection of Lintel Circle and Horseshoe … would be 
beyond the power of a prosperous pastoral tribe 
profiting from the grazing of Salisbury Plain and the 
products of its flint-mines . 
Who those communities were can be found in the work 
of another great scholar of the period , Stuart Piggott , who , 
in 1938 , defined the Wessex Culture in classic Childean 
terms ( Piggott 1938 ; Illustration 16 )  . Childe himself ( 1940 , 
135 ) described them as a ‘ small ruling class expending their 
accumulated surplus wealth on luxury trade with far-flung 
connections ’  , but disagreed with Piggott ’ s proposal that 
they were invaders from Brittany ( Childe 1940 , 141–3 )  . Illustration 16 
Stuart Piggott ’ s map of 
Wessex Culture graves in 
central southern England .  
[ From Piggott 1938 , figure 
24 , reproduced courtesy of 
the Prehistoric Society .  ] 
Investigations of the cultural associations of all the various 
elements of Stonehenge and its neighbouring monuments , the 
sequences of events represented there , and the local and 
long-distance associations demonstrated by finds and 
replicated ideas formed the main fields of inquiry between 
1910 and the mid 1960s . These approaches influenced the 
campaigns of early professional archaeologists in the area and 
underpinned the need to rescue as much material as possible 
from endangered sites in the 1950s ( see above )  . Atkinson 
( 1979 , 201 ) reflected on the achievement of these approaches , 
noting in the words of Sir Mortimer Wheeler that in the early 
twentieth century Stonehenge was dug up ‘ like potatoes ’ with 
rather little result , but that later work ( with which he was 
himself associated ) was planned to answer a limited number 
of quite definite questions . 
Until 1995 ( Cleal et al . 1995 )  , the results from the campaign 
of excavations at Stonehenge in the 1920s were only available 
in published form as interim accounts in the Antiquaries 
Journal ( Hawley 1921 ; 1922 ; 1923 ; 1924 ; 1925 ; 1926 ; 1928 )  . R S 
Newall , who worked at the site with Hawley , published an 
interpretative account of the work in 1929 , describing the 
stones and associated features , and suggesting parallels 
between the form of the stone structures and the arrangement 
of portals and chambers in a range of Neolithic tombs ( Newall 
1929a )  . It may be noted that it was during this period that 
seemingly authentic rock art was noted on a number of stones 
( Crawford 1954 ; see Thurnam 1866 for a discussion of the 
possibility that such art may be present )  . 
The 1950s and early 1960s in particular were a period 
characterized by works of synthesis and review , triggered by 
the new excavations of Atkinson , Piggott , and Stone which 
began in 1950 and continued fairly continuously for about a 
decade . Atkinson ’ s volume Stonehenge , first published in 
1956 , appeared before the excavation was finished , 
although it was later updated ( Atkinson 1979 )  . One of the 
most important , but generally rather ignored , studies was 
that by Stuart Piggott published in 1951 and thus pre-dating 
Atkinson ’ s well-known volume by five years . Taking Newall ’ s 
account and the interim reports from Hawley , Piggott 
examined the ‘ two-date theory ’ and broadly accepted it , 
developing a three-stage sequence for the construction of 
the monument as Stonehenge I , II , and III ( Piggott 1951 )  . It 
was this sequence which Atkinson used in modified form in 
1956 ( Atkinson 1956 , 58–77 ) and which was widely adopted 
until being superseded by the full publication of the 
twentieth-century excavations in 1995 . Following the 
publication of Atkinson ’ s Stonehenge , R S Newall provided a 
detailed and highly useful critical review ( Newall 1956 )  . 
By the mid 1960s the cultural-historical approaches to 
Stonehenge and its surrounding sites , fuelled by decades of 
28 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 29 

excavation and fieldwork , began to run out of steam . 
A resurgent interest in more scientific , explanatory 
approaches again surfaced and served to redirect attention . 
Modernism and processualism 
Two lines of inquiry about Stonehenge that had lain 
dormant for a period came back to life in the mid 1960s . In 
1966 Gerald Hawkins published a book entitled Stonehenge 
decoded in which he speculatively expanded the 
astronomical aspects of Stonehenge , suggesting that it was 
in effect a giant computer used for the prediction of eclipses 
and other astronomical events . Although it was a line of 
argument that built on similar statements 60 years 
previously , it hit the mood of the times and generated a lot 
of interest that continued for many years ( Hawkins 1966a ; 
1966b ; Newham 1966 ; 1972 ; Colton and Martin 1967 ; 1969 ; 
Thom 1974 ; 1975 ; Thatcher 1976 )  . It caused much debate at 
the time , both in relation to the astronomy itself and its use 
for interpreting archaeological features ( e . g . Atkinson 1966 ; 
1982 ; Hoyle 1966 ; 1973 ; Hawkins et al . 1967 ; Hawkins 1973 ; 
Moir 1979 )  , and in terms of the challenges it posed to the 
more traditional , essentially Romanticist , views of the past 
( e . g . Hawkes 1967 )  . A recent review by Ruggles ( 1997 ; and 
see below ) picks up the fall-out from these various debates . 
A second area of debate was rekindled by G A Kellaway 
who argued that the bluestones from southwest Wales 
arrived at Stonehenge by glacial action rather than human 
agency ( Kellaway 1971 )  . Again , this was a controversy that 
continued through the later 1970s and beyond ( e . g . Atkinson 
1974 ; 1979 , 105–16 ; Kellaway 1991 ; 2002 ; Thorpe et al . 1991 ; 
Darrah 1993 ; Ixer 1997a ; 1997b ; Burl 2000b ; Castleden 2001 )  . 
Although the dating of Stonehenge itself and the 
surrounding monuments , and the chronological relationships 
between them , had been at the focus of research efforts for 
centuries , it was not until the application of radiocarbon 
dating that absolute dates became available . By the late 1960s 
enough had been obtained to show that traditional models 
based on cross-dating and diffusion were fundamentally 
flawed . Renfrew ’ s paper entitled ‘ Wessex without Mycenae ’ 
published in 1968 started the demolition of many longcherished ideas , a process continued with increasingly 
devastating effect when the calibration of radiocarbon ages to 
calendar years allowed greater ease of comparison between 
radiometric determinations and historically documented 
events ( Renfrew 1968 ; 1973b )  . By the mid 1970s it was not 
only the chronologies that were being called into question but 
the whole purpose and nature of archaeological 
interpretation . Renfrew suggested that the future lay in the 
study of cultural process through the analysis of different 
fields of activity , different sub-systems of the cultural system 
to use a cybernetic analogy , which if properly understood 
should give the information needed to understand the 
workings of the culture as a whole ( Renfrew 1974 , 36 )  . 
Stonehenge and its associated monuments have been widely 
used in exploring such a processual approach to prehistory , 
amongst them Renfrew ’ s own study of social change in the 
area ( Renfrew 1973a )  . This was also the approach used by 
Ellison as a framework within which to structure research 
activity in Wessex in the later 1970s and 1980s ( WAC 1981 )  . 
As an essentially scientific school of thought , 
processualism promoted the scientific study of sites and 
materials and it is in such an environment that technical 
studies of ancient materials from around Stonehenge 
flourished : for example amber ( Shennan 1982 ; Beck and 
Shennan 1991 )  , shale ( Brussell et al . 1981 ; Pollard et al . 
1981 )  , metal ( Britton 1961 ; Ottaway 1974 )  , faience ( McKerrell 
1972 )  , and stone ( Howard in Pitts 1982 )  . Studies of the 
environment were also a key element of this scientific view 
of landscape and land-use ( Richards 1990 ; Allen 1997 )  . 
Another facet of modernism was the bringing into the 
present of things from the past . The use of Stonehenge as 
the setting for a story or as a powerful image has a long 
history , but from the 1960s its appearance in popular and 
historical fiction ( Grinsell 1986 )  , advertising , and ‘ pop ’ 
culture becomes more common ( see Chippindale 2004 ; 
Darvill 2004a )  . By the end of the 1990s the range of 
Stonehenge-inspired literature was very considerable , and 
included ‘ best-sellers ’ by Edward Rutherford ( 1987 ) and 
Bernard Cornwall ( 1999 ) among others . The emergence of 
parallel narratives , multivocality , and the study of agency 
are features of post-modernist or post-processualist views 
of the past , a return towards essentially interpretative 
approaches which represents the most recent swing in 
thinking about Stonehenge and its surroundings . 
Post-modernist approaches 
Contributed by Barbara Bender 
Although Chris Chippindale might be surprised to hear himself 
called a post-modernist , his book Stonehenge Complete , first 
published in 1983 ( Chippindale 1983a ; 2004 )  , and his edited 
volume Who owns Stonehenge ?  ( Chippindale et al . 1990 ) were 
among the first attempts to consider the changing and often 
contested meaning of the stones , though not the landscape . 
Somewhat later , Bender focused on questions of multivocality 
and contestation ( Bender 1992 ; 1993 )  ; Timothy Darvill pushed 
towards a symbolic landscape ( Darvill 1997a )  ; and Mike Parker 
Pearson and Ramilisonina ( 1998 ) used ethnographic analogies 
to great advantage . Whilst most English Heritage publications 
have remained resolutely descriptive , their Teacher ’ s 
handbook to Stonehenge ( Anderson et al . 1996 ) moved 
towards a contested present-past . Stonehenge : making space 
covers much post-modernist ground ( Bender 1998 )  . 
Post-modernist approaches begin with the problemization 
of the well-established demarcations within research agendas . 
Thus , for example they question the separation of prehistoric 
Stonehenge from contemporary Stonehenge since ‘ we ’  , in the 
present , create , naturalize , and valorize all the categories and 
divisions employed . The questions we ask , and the answers 
we give , are always created in the present out of our particular 
embodied historical and social placement . There is , therefore , 
only a present-past , and we cannot make definitive 
propositions – only ones that answer well ( enough ) to our 
( multiplex ) condition . Second , though there are questions 
specific to particular historic conjunctures , there are many 
more that are appropriate to any time or place . Interpretations 
of the past are enriched by asking the same questions about 
the present – and vice versa . 
These two general considerations lead to a number of 
other perspectives on what we do . We construct a very 
particular type of past based on the assumed neutrality of 
linear ( clock ) time . The past , therefore , appears to lie 
 ‘ behind us ’ and to be separate from the present . It might be 
more realistic to think of the past as in front of us , because 
we rework it as part of the present / future . Moreover , linear 
narratives are interjected with other sorts of time – emotive , 
conditional , seasonal , ceremonial , and memory time . 
We construct a very particular type of past – and present 
– based on assumed divisions between people and things 
29 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 30 

and people and places . We need to understand that things 
and places are not just created by people , but creative of 
people , and that time , space , things , people work off each 
other , and are always in process . 
We construct a very particular type of past – and present 
– based on other taken-for-granted divisions : nature :  : 
culture , mind :  : body , life :  : death , male :  : female . These 
need to be questioned . 
Space , like time , is polysemic and polyvalent . Depending 
on who you are , and when and where , your sense of place 
will vary . Some people ’ s sense of place will be valorized , 
others ’ marginalized . 
Places , like sites , are never autonomous . They work 
within larger landscapes . These landscapes – familiar , 
unfamiliar , landscapes of voyaging , of exile , of hearsay and 
myth – are interconnected and unstable . A familiar 
landscape may become unfamiliar . 
People ’ s engagement with the world around them is 
sensory as well as cerebral . People ’ s engagement with the 
material world is created through action , and creative of 
action . Using all their senses , people are socialized into 
and negotiate their place within the landscape , learning 
and questioning what is possible , where to go , what and 
how to see . Landscapes of movement , entrance , exit , 
procession , escape . 
Because people ’ s engagement with the world around 
them is variable and in process , and because knowledge of 
 ‘ how to go on ’ is differentially experienced and valued , the 
use of past or of place is always open to contestation . Past 
and place are political ( Illustration 17 )  . 
Illustration 17 
De-romancing 
Stonehenge : confronting 
the socio-political functions 
of the site in 
a post-modernist age .  
[ Illustration by David 
Bromley from The Guardian , 
15 June 1992 . Reproduced 
courtesy of Guardian 
Newspaper Group .  ] 
THREATS , PRESERVATION , 
AND SURVIVAL 
The decay of standing monuments in the Stonehenge 
Landscape has been a matter of comment and concern for 
several centuries . William Stukeley lamented the ploughingup of the downs and the decay of monuments in the 1720s 
when he was working in the area , and he shows ploughing 
on the Stonehenge Avenue in one of his illustrations 
( Stukeley 1720 , 1 and 52 )  . But even in Stukeley ’ s day the 
prehistoric monuments of the Stonehenge Landscape were 
far from pristine . Each successive generation has contributed 
to the diminution of what already existed . Indeed , it seems 
likely that some if not all of the later prehistoric and 
Romano-British fieldsystems in the area had a major impact 
on earlier funerary monuments . The most severe damage in 
more recent times came through the construction of military 
camps in the first half of the twentieth century and the 
dismantling of the camps , levelling of earthworks , and 
conversion of the land to arable in the mid twentieth century . 
Surveys of the preservation and survival of monuments 
mainly date to the later twentieth century . Land-use and 
ownership are major contributory factors for the long-term 
conservation and management of archaeological remains 
and they conspire to create two broad zones of preservation 
within the Stonehenge Landscape . North of the Packway the 
land is mainly in military ownership . Here earthwork survival 
is generally good , with much land in pasture ( McOmish et 
al . 2002 )  . South of the Packway earthwork survival is 
generally poor except where woodland or some other 
feature has limited the impact of destructive activities ; landuse here has been predominantly arable cultivation 
( Richards 1990 )  , although this is changing as the National 
Trust negotiates new leases and agreements . The RCHM 
survey of the Stonehenge Environs in the mid 1970s 
documented the decay of archaeological sites within their 
study area parish by parish and by reference to the main 
types of upstanding monuments ( RCHM 1979 , xiv–xix )  . It all 
makes dismal reading and emphasizes the dramatic losses 
over the last 300 years . 
During the final fieldwork season of the Stonehenge 
Environs Project ( 1983–4 ) a systematic check was carried 
out on all recorded monuments within the study area , but 
the results do not appear to have been analysed beyond 
their primary use in the development of site management 
30 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 31 

recommendations ( Richards 1984 ; 1986 )  . At the same time , 
a study of the archaeology of the Salisbury Plain Training 
Area was undertaken ( Canham 1983 ) which drew also on 
earlier work ( Smith 1981 )  . Here a sample of 27 round 
barrows in grid square SU15SE , for example , showed that 
about 15 per cent were undamaged , nearly a quarter could 
not be located because they had probably been destroyed , 
about one third showed evidence of old damage , while the 
rest ( about 35% ) showed evidence of recent damage 
( Canham 1983 , 42 )  . This is slightly better than the national 
average for Bronze Age monuments ; the Monuments at 
Risk Survey ( MARS ) revealed that in 1995 about 15 per cent 
of Bronze Age monuments were complete or almost 
complete , but that only about 12 per cent of known 
monuments of the period had been destroyed ( Darvill and 
Fulton 1998 , table 6 . 1 )  . 
A comparative study of the survival of Bronze Age round 
barrows in the Stonehenge area and in the upper Thames 
Valley of Oxfordshire showed that in both areas medieval 
and earlier farming had destroyed more barrows than 
nineteenth-century and later agriculture ( Peters 1999 )  . In 
October 1999 a study of recorded monuments within the 
National Trust ’ s Stonehenge Estate revealed that half of 
recorded earthworks had been levelled , and an estimated 
15 per cent of monuments were at that time regarded as 
highly vulnerable . It was found that 35 per cent of visible 
damage was caused by badgers and rabbits ( Illustration 18 )  , 
30 per cent by ploughing , footpaths , and building works 
( National Trust 2001 , 14–16 )  . A more broadly based 
condition survey of 661 recorded monuments within the 
World Heritage Site was carried out in 2002 , commissioned 
from Wessex Archaeology by English Heritage ( WA 2003b )  . 
This desk-based study and fieldsurvey revealed that about 
60 per cent of monuments had no surface expression . 
Of the monuments that were visible ( 40% overall ) some 28 
per cent were in ‘ good ’ condition , 34 per cent in ‘ moderate ’ 
condition , and 39 per cent in either ‘ poor ’ or ‘ very poor ’ 
condition . Overall , about two-thirds of monuments were 
found to be in a relatively stable condition , 12 per cent 
were subject to moderate deterioration , and just 1 . 5 per 
cent were subject to rapid deterioration . The main ongoing 
influences on the condition of monuments were , in order 
of magnitude : cultivation , burrowing animals , and tree and 
scrub cover . Lesser impacts from stock damage and wearand-tear from visitors were found to be limited in scope 
and effect . About 6 per cent of monuments were assessed 
as being highly vulnerable to the loss of their archaeological 
resource from ongoing impacts , while a further 57 per 
cent were assessed as having medium vulnerability . 
Illustration 18 
Rabbit damage to a round 
barrow in the Winterbourne 
Stoke barrow cemetery .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
These statistics are comparable with the national picture in 
1995 revealed by the Monuments at Risk Survey . Amongst 
earthwork monuments , for example , about 60 per cent 
were flat ( Darvill and Fulton 1998 , figure 5 . 23 )  , while 
approximately 2 per cent of monuments were classified 
as being at high risk ( Darvill and Fulton 1998 , 221 )  . 
Taking a long-term view , the main causes of damage 
noted for the Stonehenge Landscape have been : 
• Construction of military camps 
• Pasture or arable conversion 
• Road schemes 
• Property development 
• Ploughing 
• Rabbit infestation 
• Storms and natural hazards 
Many of these are ongoing as either continuous 
actions , sporadic but controllable events , or 
unpredictable natural happenings . It is the aim of the 
Management Plan to reduce , control , and where 
necessary mitigate these various hazards and threats as 
much as possible ( English Heritage 2000 )  . It may be 
noted , however , that while some offer opportunities for 
research work when they are approved ( e . g . road schemes 
and property development )  , others only serve to diminish 
the potential of deposits both now and on into the future 
( e . g . ploughing and rabbit infestation )  . 
DESIGNATIONS , MANAGEMENT 
CONTEXT , AND LAND-USE 
The Stonehenge Landscape and the sites and monuments 
within it are subject to a wide range of gradually changing 
designations and include a large number of protected 
areas and land over which specific policies or controls 
apply . These range in physical scale from a few square 
metres over individual barrows to the 2000ha of the 
World Heritage Site ( Map D )  . The implications for carrying 
out research are considerable , although also highly 
variable . A detailed consideration of these issues is 
set out in the Stonehenge Management Plan ( English 
Heritage 2000 )  , the relevant designations for 
archaeology and the historic environment being 
summarized as follows : 
International designations 
World Heritage Site . 2000ha of land forming part of the 
Stonehenge , Avebury and Associated Sites World Heritage 
Site ( Maps A and D ) inscribed on the World Heritage List in 
1986 ( C373 )  . The outstanding universal value of the World 
Heritage Site is described in the Nomination Documentation 
as follows : 
Stonehenge and Avebury are the two most important 
and characteristic prehistoric monuments in Britain . 
They represent the Henge monument par excellence , 
as the largest , most evolved and best preserved 
prehistoric temples of a type unique to Britain . Together 
with the associated sites and monuments they provide 
a landscape without parallel in Britain or elsewhere and 
provide unrivalled demonstration of human achievement 
in prehistoric times . 
31 
015-046 section 1 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 15 PM Page 32 

National designations 
Scheduled Monuments : Some 299 separate blocks of land 
within the Stonehenge Landscape , 179 within the World 
Heritage Site ( Map D )  , are included on the Schedule of 
Monuments as defined by the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act 1979 . Controls on works affecting 
such monuments are in place through the Scheduled 
Monument Consent procedures . 
Guardianship Monuments : Two monuments , Stonehenge 
and Woodhenge , together with adjacent land are in State 
Guardianship under the terms of the Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Areas Act 1979 . All responsibilities for 
the management of Guardianship sites rest with the State . 
Listed Buildings : These are buildings and structures of special 
architectural or historic interest that are ‘ listed ’ by the 
Secretary of State and therefore afforded various forms of 
protection according to their grade ( I , II *  , II )  . There are 
currently 293 Listed Buildings within the Stonehenge 
Landscape , 52 of them within the World Heritage Site ( Map D )  . 
Registered Parks and Gardens : A list of parks and gardens 
of special historic interest is compiled and maintained by 
English Heritage , although inclusion on the list does not 
carry any statutory protection . Two registered parks lie 
within the Stonehenge Landscape ( Map D )  : Amesbury 
Abbey ( Grade II ) and Lake House at Wilsford cum Lake 
( Grade II )  . 
Stonehenge Regulations : The Stonehenge Regulations 
1997 ( Statutory Instrument 1997 No . 2038 ) came into force 
on 8 September 1997 , revoking earlier regulation dating 
back to 1983 . The effect of the 1997 Regulation is to control 
public access to the ancient monument of Stonehenge . A 
series of prohibited acts are defined , including : injuring , 
disfiguring , removing or otherwise interfering with in any 
manner the monument or any notice or any other property 
situated on the site of the monument ; climbing on the 
monument ; digging up any soil or grass or plants ; 
unauthorized parking or leaving vehicles at the site ; 
bringing animals onto the site without permission ; lighting 
fires or fireworks at the site ; and throwing a stone or 
discharging a weapon . 
Regional and local designations 
Stonehenge Article 4 Direction : A Direction made by the 
local planning authority in 1962 under Article 3 of the Town 
and Country Planning ( General Permitted Development ) 
Order ( Article 4 in more recent amendments ) which 
withdraws permitted development rights relating to 
agriculture and forestry operations within an area of about 
20 square kilometres around Stonehenge . 
Closely related to the Article 4 Direction is a concordat 
between the Ministry of Defence , the local planning 
authorities , and advisory bodies which concerns 
procedures for approving planned development within the 
garrison at Larkhill . 
Conservation Areas : Areas of special local or regional 
architectural or historic interest and character designated by 
the local planning authority under national legislation . 
There are four conservations wholly or partly within the 
World Heritage Site ( Amesbury , West Amesbury , Wilsford , 
and Lake )  , and a further eight ( Bulford , Berwick St James , 
Durrington , Figheldean , Boscombe , Great Durnford , 
Orcheston , and Winterbourne Stoke ) wholly or partly within 
the Stonehenge Landscape ( Map D )  . 
Areas of Special Archaeological Significance : Areas defined 
and recognized in the Local Plan to help preserve the local 
archaeological interest of the landscape using existing 
legislation and the voluntary co-operation of landowners 
and farmers . A single large ASAS currently covers the 
Stonehenge Landscape and adjacent areas . 
Over and above these designations that apply to the 
historic environment , there are also a number of protected 
areas relating to nature conservation , ecology , and 
landscape character . Details of these are set out elsewhere 
( English Heritage 2000 , 2 . 5 . 29–34 )  ; Map D shows the extent 
of land designed as Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
( SSSIs ) within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
The Stonehenge Landscape is owned by a large number 
of private individuals and corporate bodies , the agricultural 
elements of which generally comprise large and fairly 
compact holdings . The single largest landowner , holding 
most of the northern part of the Stonehenge Landscape , is 
the Ministry of Defence who have developed and 
implemented an integrated land management plan for the 
area , including archaeological provisions ( Defence Estates 
2003 )  . The National Trust is also a major landowner with 
substantial holdings in the Stonehenge World Heritage Site 
( see English Heritage 2000 , figure 5 for details )  . 
Land-use is also mixed and , in the present climate of 
uncertainty within the agriculture industry , is inherently 
unstable and subject to change according to government and 
European agricultural policy . The most stable land is that held 
by the Ministry of Defence and that put down to permanent 
pasture by the National Trust . The National Trust has 
developed a detailed land-use plan for the Stonehenge Estate 
which includes a wide-ranging consideration of proposed 
changes to land-use and access ( National Trust 2001 , 9 )  . 
At the time of writing , no work had been done on Historic 
Landscape Characterization within the Stonehenge Landscape , 
although clearly there is considerable potential for this within 
the developing nation-wide coverage ( Clark et al . 2004 )  . 
REFLEXIVITY AND REVISION 
Like research itself , a Research Framework should be a 
dynamic and ever-changing structure that reflects the 
implications of the results of ongoing projects and new 
discoveries . This is the process of reflexivity – referring 
back to a position in order to move the arguments and 
ideas forward through what might be seen graphically as 
a never-ending spiral of change . The means and the 
mechanism for reviewing , developing , and revising the 
Stonehenge Research Framework are encapsulated in the 
objectives set out below : the creation of SARSEN – the 
Stonehenge Archaeological Research , Study , and Education 
Network ( Section 4 )  . The timetable for revision will depend 
on the speed of progress with the objectives set out below 
and the rate of change in archaeological method and theory 
over the next few years . 
32 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 17 PM Page 33 

Resour section2 
ce 
Assessment 

047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 17 PM Page 34 

SECTION 2 – RESOURCE ASSESSMENT 
 
 ‘ We speak from facts , not theory ’  
( Richard Colt Hoare 1812 , 7 ) 
SCOPING THE RESOURCE 
Good preservation , intriguing antiquities , and the 
prevalence in the region of scholars and antiquaries meant 
that the archaeology of Salisbury Plain attained a 
prominent place in documenting the ancient history of 
Britain at an early date . Reference has already been made 
to the use of Stonehenge by Geoffrey of Monmouth in his 
History of the Kings of Britain , written in AD 1139 , and the 
precocious excavations carried out for the Duke of 
Buckingham in AD 1620 . Overviews , general summaries , 
and listings of the archaeological resource have been a 
feature of antiquarian and archaeological studies for nearly 
two centuries , and prior to the development of county sites 
and monuments records it was these works that made 
essential data about the resource widely accessible to 
scholars and the public alike . One of the first was Richard 
Colt Hoare ’ s Ancient history of Wiltshire issued in five parts 
for binding in two volumes between 1812 and 1821 , the 
Stonehenge area being covered under the Amesbury 
Station in the first volume ( Colt Hoare 1812 , 112–222 )  . 
Colt Hoare ’ s synthesis came at the end of a long 
antiquarian tradition of writing county histories , but stands 
on the watershed of such endeavours as one of the first 
to draw on extensive archaeological investigations in a 
sophisticated way , exemplified by his motto cited at the 
head of the section . 
More than a century later the Victoria History of the 
Counties of England published the archaeological sections 
of the History of Wiltshire , this time in two parts issued in 
1957 and 1973 . The first part provides a detailed summary 
of the physical geography and geology of Wiltshire and , 
building on earlier work by E H Goddard ( 1913 )  , an extensive 
gazetteer of the recorded archaeological resource prepared 
by Leslie Grinsell using published sources and original 
fieldwork between 1949 and 1952 ( Pugh and Crittall 1957 ; 
Grinsell 1989 , 22–5 )  . The second part is a very valuable 
series of essays by Stuart Piggott , Barry Cunliffe , and 
Desmond Bonney summarizing the state of knowledge from 
the beginnings of human settlement through to the later 
first millennium AD ( Crittall 1973 )  . Wiltshire was not 
extensively covered by the county inventories prepared by 
the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of 
England , although a review of the field monuments in a 
select area of about 13 square miles around Stonehenge 
was carried out in the mid 1970s and published as an 
occasional paper ( RCHM 1979 )  . This usefully updates the 
earlier inventories of Colt Hoare , Goddard , and Grinsell . Two 
still more recent synthetic overviews of Wessex archaeology 
( Cunliffe 1993 ; Bettey 1986 ) bring the interpretation of the 
Wiltshire evidence up to date and usefully set it within its 
wider regional context . 
Together , these overviews define and scope what , in 
broad terms , may be considered the archaeological resource 
of the Stonehenge region . At the centre of this are the in 
situ monuments and deposits relating to the period from 
the earliest human occupation of the region down to 
modern times . The upper end of this chronological spectrum 
is , however , problematic . Colt Hoare was not much 
interested in archaeological remains later than RomanoBritish times , Grinsell ended with the Pagan Saxon period , 
while the Royal Commission dealt mainly with prehistoric 
monuments although they included some consideration of 
medieval and later structures under the heading of landuse . Wiltshire County Council ’ s Sites and Monuments 
Record initially used a cut-off date of AD 1500 for the items 
it recorded , but during the later 1990s this was extended to 
cover all periods up to the twentieth century . The scope of 
what is considered archaeological has also changed 
markedly over the last two decades . Historic buildings are 
now often considered within the scope of archaeological 
remains even though they may be still inhabited , as are 
military remains of the twentieth century and before . 
Ancient boundary features have long been part of the 
record , some still in use in the landscape such as 
hedgerows , banks , and fences . Tracks , paths , roads , street 
furniture ( milestones , signposts etc .  )  , boundaries and 
associated structures ( stiles , gateposts etc .  )  , ponds , 
agricultural installations , and woodland features are now 
equally well established as part of the overall 
archaeological resource . The Valletta Convention on the 
protection of the archaeological heritage ( CoE 1992 , Article 
1 . 2–3 ) usefully defines the archaeological heritage as : 
All remains and objects and any other traces of mankind 
from past epochs : 
• the preservation and study of which help to retrace the 
history of mankind and its relation with the natural 
environment ; 
• for which excavations or discoveries and other methods 
of research into mankind and the related environment 
are the main sources of information . 
The archaeological heritage shall include structures , 
constructions , groups of buildings , developed sites , 
movable objects , monuments of other kinds as well as 
their context , whether situated on land or under water . 
Thus the archaeological resource should not be seen as 
limited to in situ physical remains . Also of importance are 
the ex situ remains now curated in museums and stores ; 
archives and records of earlier events ( descriptions , plans , 
maps , photographs , drawings , digital data sets etc .  )  ; the 
cumulative body of knowledge and understanding that has 
built up over the centuries and which is mainly now 
recorded in books and papers ; and the human resource 
represented in the skills , knowledge , experience , insights , 
and memories of those visiting , living , and working in the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
34 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 17 PM Page 35 

The following sections are not intended to summarize 
all that is known about the archaeology of the Stonehenge 
Landscape , rather the aim is to provide a signposted and 
critical guide to the resource as currently perceived . Its 
preparation draws heavily on the earlier surveys already 
referred to , published site reports and survey reports , and 
the Wiltshire Sites and Monuments Record . It also makes 
extensive use of material prepared for an Environmental 
Assessment carried out for English Heritage and the 
National Trust in 1990 and 1991 ( Darvill 1991a )  , an 
archaeological resource assessment prepared for English 
Heritage by Wessex Archaeology in the summer of 2000 
( Walker 2000 )  , and the Stonehenge Landscape GIS 
maintained by English Heritage ( Batchelor 1997 )  . This lastmentioned source contains the dataset that has been used 
to compile the series of maps that accompany and 
illustrate this Section , and which has been used in the 
assembly of quantifications cited below . 
After a summary of the essential physical features of 
the Stonehenge Landscape and their relevance to 
archaeology the main body of this Section is arranged 
chronologically as a series of time-slices using a backprojected modern calendrical system and conventionally 
defined culture-historical phases . This is followed by a 
brief consideration of a number of diachronic themes , and 
finally some views outwards from the Stonehenge 
Landscape into the region and the wider worlds beyond . 
Both these approaches , a synchronic view and a 
diachronic view , involve a selective reading of the resource 
( see Section 1 )  . They were adopted , however , as they 
represent the dominant interpretative schemes applying at 
the time that the data on which they are based were 
collected . As new interpretative schemes inform the way 
material is collected and studied so new approaches to 
synthesis and review will take precedent . 
A series of time-slice maps of the Stonehenge 
Landscape have been prepared to accompany and 
illustrate this resource assessment : Maps E–P at the back 
of the volume . Based on the English Heritage GIS for the 
Stonehenge World Heritage Site , the data have been 
classified and expanded to suit the analysis presented 
here . Not all sites mentioned in the following sections are 
included because some are not sufficiently well recorded 
to allow accurate mapping at the chosen scale . Equally , 
there are sites on some maps that are not commented 
upon in detail in the accompanying text . There is a lot of 
evidence from the Stonehenge Landscape that is 
essentially undated but this does not appear on the maps 
unless a reasonably certain attribution can be given on the 
basis of morphology or similarities to better-dated 
examples . One of the biggest problems , however , relates 
to round barrows and ring-ditches which are inherently 
difficult to date without reliable associated finds or 
radiocarbon determinations . In cases where round barrows 
and ring-ditches are known to belong to a particular period 
they are included on the relevant map ; undated and 
uncertain examples are included on Map I as present 
evidence suggests that the majority of examples date to 
the early second millennium BC . The problem with ringditches , however , is still more acute as most are known 
only through aerial photography and have never been 
truth-tested in the field . In one recent case , detailed field 
evaluations at Rollestone Grain Store , Shrewton , in 1996 
failed to reveal a fairly certain ring-ditch previously 
identified on aerial photographs ( Anon 1998 , 163–4 )  . 
A DOWNLAND LANDSCAPE 
Physically , the Stonehenge Landscape comprises a 
substantial block of rolling chalk downland on the southern 
edge of Salisbury Plain ( Illustration 19 )  . Two rivers , the Avon 
to the east and the Till to the west , run broadly north to 
south through the landscape , subdividing it into three 
principal geo-topographical units ( Illustration 20 )  . Both 
rivers drain southwards , the Avon being the main river , 
emptying into the English Channel at Christchurch in 
Hampshire . The River Till is a north-bank tributary of the 
Wylye which itself flows into the Avon via the Nadder at a 
confluence near modern-day Salisbury . 
Illustration 19 
Salisbury Plain , a chalk 
downland landscape .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
Geologically , the area is dominated by the Middle and 
Upper Chalk which is an essentially calcareous bedrock giving 
rise to neutral or alkaline free-draining soils . This provides 
suitable geochemical conditions for the fair to good survival 
of many kinds of archaeological materials , including bone and 
calcium-rich materials such as molluscan remains . The area 
was subject to major geomorphological changes during the 
late Pliocene and Pleistocene ( Kellaway 1991 ; 2002 )  . Glacial 
and periglacial action in particular led to the formation of 
superficial deposits such as clay with flints , chalky drift , and 
loess that are less calcareous , and provide important parent 
material for the formation of soils ( mainly rendzinas , brown 
calcareous earths , and argillic brown earths )  . Together with 
buried soils these create microenvironments whose chemistry 
ranges from neutral to slightly acidic where calcareous 
material is less well preserved or absent , but pollen does 
occasionally survive . Bands of nodular flint occur within the 
chalk and where near the surface give rise to stony soils . 
Descriptions of soil cover and the effects on the archaeology 
of the area have been provided by Richards ( 1990 , 6–7 )  ; 
Findley et al .  ( 1984 ) provide the broader regional context ( see 
also Darvill 1991a , 37–45 )  . 
The downland east of the Avon rises steadily from 
around 100m OD along the river valley to about 140m OD at 
Silk Hill just 2 . 5km east of the river . A relatively elevated 
plateau represented by ( from south to north , see Map A ) 
Boscombe Down , Earl ’ s Farm Down , Bulford Field , Milston 
Down , Ablington Down , and Figheldean Down is 
characterized by thin soils and extensive views westwards . 
The central block of downland between the Avon and the 
Till is more undulating and relatively low-lying with most of 
the land between 70m and 100m OD comprising large open 
fields and isolated tree clumps . The highest points are at 
about 140m OD in the south near Druid ’ s Lodge and at 
Larkhill in the north . Several named areas of downland can be 
recognized ( from south to north , Map A )  : Lake Down , Horse 
35 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 17 PM Page 36 

Down , Wilsford Down , Normanton Down , Stonehenge Down , 
Winterbourne Stoke Down , Durrington Down , Knighton 
Down , and Alton Down . Throughout this region there are 
numerous small dry or seasonally running river systems , 
for example Stonehenge Bottom , and low eminences and 
ridges such as King Barrow Ridge . Stonehenge itself lies on 
such an eminence at about 100m OD . Some of the smaller 
valleys are fairly steep-sided . This land is mainly of 
agricultural grades 3 and 4 ( Darvill 1991a , 41–2 )  . 
Illustration 20 
The Stonehenge 
Landscape .  ( top ) Mosaic of 
landsat images with some 
of the main sites and 
monuments indicated .  
( bottom ) Digital terrain 
model .  [ Top image 
extracted from Millennium 
Map , by permission of 
Getmapping plc . Bottom 
image based on EDX 
Engineering Inc . data at 
50m intervals .  ] 
The land east of the Till is very similar in character to 
the central block , again with numerous small valley 
systems running westwards from the main river . Parsonage 
Down and High Down are the two main named areas of 
downland ( Map A )  . 
Both the Avon and the Till run through relatively narrow 
but pronounced valleys typically 1km wide . The rivers 
meander through these valleys and have built up fairly 
well-developed alluvial floodplains . A low terrace 
consisting of loamy flinty drift flanks the Avon Valley , while 
the alluvium of the floodplain floor is clayey and 
calcareous . Some of the seasonal valleys and dry valleys 
that carried rivers in earlier times also contain alluvial 
36 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 17 PM Page 37 

deposits which are believed to mask underlying 
archaeological evidence and which have recently been 
shown to preserve useful environmental sequences 
( Allen 1997 , 120 ; Cleal et al . 2004 )  . 
Colluvium deposits do not appear to be well 
represented in the Stonehenge Landscape , or at least in 
the areas examined to date . Accumulations up to 1 . 5m 
thick were reported within the southern part of the interior 
of Durrington Walls ( Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 23 )  . 
Rather less substantial deposits were revealed in a slight 
hilltop saddle occupied by Coneybury henge ( Richards 
1990 , 124 )  , and may be inferred from the presence of 
lynchets associated with early fieldsystems . However , a 
sampling programme involving the investigation of eight 
locations undertaken within the context of the Stonehenge 
Environs Project in 1981–2 failed to identify significant 
deposits ( Richards 1990 , 210–11 )  . More recently , deposits 
of colluvium have been recognized on Coneybury Hill 
( WA 1993a )  , on the west side of the River Avon below 
Durrington Walls ( Richards 1990 , 263 )  , and within and 
around the foot-slopes of Vespasian ’ s Camp where its 
accumulation may be dated to the later prehistoric , 
Roman , and medieval periods ( Hunter-Mann 1999 )  . 
Visibility and intervisibility within and across the 
Stonehenge Landscape has been explored using GIS 
technology to examine viewsheds under a range of 
predefined conditions . This analysis demonstrates not only 
the very strong visual relationship between Stonehenge 
and numerous contemporary monuments but also the 
intervisibility of the sites with each other ( Batchelor 1997 , 
71 ; Cleal et al . 1995 , 34–40 ; Exon et al . 2000 )  . 
PLEISTOCENE ENVIRONMENTS 
AND THEIR OCCUPANTS 
( TO 12 , 000 BC ) 
Preserved in situ deposits of Pleistocene origin are 
extremely rare in Britain and in this regard the Stonehenge 
landscape is no exception . Secondary ex situ deposits are 
more widespread , especially in the river valleys of central , 
southern , and eastern England , and provide important 
evidence of these early times ( Piggott 1973a ; Wymer 1999 ; 
Wenban-Smith and Hosfield 2001 )  . Such evidence as is 
available comes mainly from the study of buried soil 
profiles , artefact assemblages , stray finds , and collections 
of associated or contemporary faunal remains from river 
gravels and alluvial spreads . In this the Stonehenge 
Landscape has considerable potential . Map E shows the 
distribution of recorded evidence of the Palaeolithic period . 
At Durrington Walls , examination of a layer of coombe 
rock at the base of the two profiles suggested that the 
shallow valley , in which the site was carved out during a 
period of extreme cold , was nonetheless moist enough for 
solifluxion and the formation of the coombe rock . This 
possibly happened during the last Weichselian Glaciation 
c . 30 , 000 to 50 , 000 BC . Later frost-weathering created a 
series of involutions in which there was a snail fauna , 
suggestive of an open tundra environment , although the 
dating of this horizon is extremely uncertain ( Evans in 
Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 334 )  . Wider issues 
connected with the formation and subsequent loss of 
periglacial deposits on the Wiltshire chalklands have been 
discussed by John Evans ( 1968 )  . 
At least two finds of Pleistocene faunal remains have 
been made in the Avon Valley . Grinsell ( 1957 , 27 ) reports 
teeth of mammoth and woolly rhinoceros from a poorly 
recorded findspot in Amesbury parish , while a mammoth 
tooth was found in gravel in Durrington parish ( Grinsell 
1957 , 65 ; Stevens 1921 )  . Both finds confirm the potential of 
the Avon Valley floodplain deposits and gravel terraces as 
important potential sources of information about the area 
at this early date . 
Palaeolithic artefacts have been found at five sites 
within the Stonehenge Landscape ( Map E ; Illustration 21 )  . 
At Lake in the Avon Valley , discoveries made in the later 
nineteenth century include ovate handaxes (  ? Acheulean ) 
and flakes from the terrace gravels ( Evans 1897 , 627–8 ; Roe 
and Radley 1969 , 13 )  . A handaxe from south of Amesbury 
Abbey may also derive from the river gravels , while two 
handaxes from Alington , Boscombe , come from deposits in 
the valley of the River Bourne ( WA 1993b , Av3–1 )  . 
Illustration 21 
Palaeolithic implements 
from the Stonehenge 
Landscape . A–C from 
Stapleford . D from Lake .  
[ After Harding 1995 , 121 , 
and Evans 1897 , figure 468 .  ] 
37 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 17 PM Page 38 

There are also hints of finds on the interfluves between 
the main rivers in the area : a flint core of ‘ tortoise ’ type 
found southwest of Greenland Farm , Winterbourne Stoke 
( Anon 1973 ; DM 39 . 1972 )  , and a handaxe from ‘ near 
Stonehenge ’  ( WA 1993b , Av3–3 )  . In 1992 a group of three 
handaxes and associated worked flint was found on an 
upland field situated on a spur on the north side of the 
Wylye Valley just outside the Stonehenge Landscape at 
Stapleford ( Harding 1995 )  . 
All of these form part of a much larger body of material 
from the Avon Valley and its tributary valleys , itself 
connected to the Solent River in antiquity ( Wenban-Smith 
and Hosfield 2001 )  , and serve to emphasize the great 
potential of these deposits in the Stonehenge Landscape 
( cf . Roe and Radley 1969 , figure 1 ; Harding and Bridgland 
1998 ; Wymer 1999 )  . Most important is that the valley fill 
deposits in the Stonehenge Landscape ( Map E ) do not 
appear to have been extensively quarried , unlike those 
lower down the Avon , and they thus represent an 
important reserve . 
POST-GLACIAL HUNTERGATHERERS ( 12 , 000–4000 BC ) 
The late glacial , post-glacial , and early Holocene saw the 
transition from tundra environments to an open hazel and 
pine Boreal woodland : the Wildwood . Archaeological 
evidence for human activity mainly takes the form of 
scattered lithic debris and occasional evidence of 
constructed features . No sites in the Stonehenge Landscape 
have been excavated with the primary aim of investigating 
aspects of this period , although relevant material has been 
uncovered during salvage operations and the investigation 
of later monuments and features . Map F shows the 
distribution of findspots and sites relevant to the period 
c . 12 , 000 to c . 4000 BC . 
The extensive surveys of the Stonehenge Environs 
Project revealed very little evidence of late Upper 
Palaeolithic and Mesolithic activity beyond a light scatter of 
microliths . Richards ( 1990 , 16 ) suggests that this may be a 
result of inappropriate sampling strategies being applied . 
Another possible bias in the picture is caused by coverdeposits sealing land surfaces of this period . Richards 
( 1990 , 263 ) cites the results of a sample excavation through 
a colluviual bench on the western side of the River Avon 
below Durrington Walls which revealed an in situ bladebased flint industry with microliths . More recently , in 2004 , 
field evaluations west of Countess Farm carried out in 
connection with planning the A303 improvements revealed 
a hollow in the bed-rock with associated Mesolithic 
flintwork sealed beneath a layer of alluvium / colluvium 
( J Keyte pers . comm .  )  . Other similar deposits no doubt await 
discovery along the main river valleys . 
Early Mesolithic 
Nothing that can be ascribed to the late Upper Palaeolithic 
either on chronological ( c . 12 , 000–c . 9000 BC ) or on cultural 
grounds ( Creswellian or Cheddarian flintworking 
traditions ) has been recognized from the Stonehenge 
Landscape to date . The earliest evidence currently 
recognized belongs to what is conventionally referred to as 
the early Mesolithic , broadly the ninth to seventh millennia 
BC , which is often characterized culturally as the period of 
the Maglemosian hunters . 
No extensive early Mesolithic flint scatters are known 
within the Stonehenge Landscape , but , unusually , there is 
evidence for constructions of the period . The most securely 
dated comprise three substantial postholes and a tree-hole 
found during the construction of the Stonehenge car-park 
north of the modern A344 in 1966 ( Vatcher and Vatcher 1973 )  , 
and a pit ( known as Pit 9580 ) found about 100m to the east 
during alterations to the visitor centre in 1988–9 ( Cleal et al . 
1995 , 43–7 )  . Charcoal dates posthole A to 8560–8200 BC 
( HAR-455 : 9130±180 BP )  , posthole B to 7550–6550 BC ( HAR456 : 8090±180 BP )  , and the base of the recut secondary fill of 
pit 9580 to 8300–7750 BC ( GU-5109 : 8880±80 BP )  . The date 
of the tree-hole is not known although it is sometimes 
assumed to be contemporary and may in fact have been the 
focus of this small cluster of features . Their wider context in 
terms of potential relationships with areas outside the 
investigated trenches is unknown . No artefacts are 
associated with any of the features , but they are distinctive in 
having an abundance of pine charcoal which Allen ( in Cleal et 
al . 1995 , 52 ) associates with the Boreal biostratigraphic 
subdivision of the Flandrian . The pollen sequence and 
mollusca profile from Pit 9580 provide the first evidence for 
the character of the Boreal woodland actually within the 
chalklands : a birch , pine , hazel mix . 
The posts that once filled the postholes in the 
Stonehenge car-park are widely interpreted as ‘ totem-pole ’ ­
like structures ( e . g . Allen in Cleal et al . 1995 , 55–6 ; Allen 
1997 , 125–6 ) and as such would represent the first 
appearance of monumental features in the landscape . The 
possible connection between a tree as a ‘ natural ’ thing and 
an upright post as a ‘ cultural ’ thing may be relevant , and 
perhaps shows that some kind of special significance 
attached to the area even at this early date . More than 
anything , however , these postholes illustrate the 
importance of dating of even the most simple of features . 
Potentially contemporary features have been found at 
two other sites ; more may await recognition through the 
review of published excavation reports . Below the 
Winterbourne Stoke barrow G30 , situated in the western end 
of the Stonehenge Cursus , there was an oval hollow about 
1 . 8m by 2 . 8m in extent . It stratigraphically pre-dates the 
barrow and contained only pine charcoal as an indicator of 
its age ( Christie 1963 , 377 and 381 )  . Similarly , a subsoil 
hollow beneath the bank at Woodhenge contained abundant 
flecks of charcoal and a slightly calcined core-trimming flake 
of Mesolithic type associated with a woodland fauna ( Evans 
and Wainwright 1979 , 73 , 162 , and 192–4 )  . 
Stray finds of early Mesolithic types may well exist within 
existing assemblages from the area , but have yet to be 
recognized . That the Avon Valley was occupied during this 
period is , however , well attested by the substantial 
settlement known at Castle Meadow , Downton , just outside 
the Stonehenge Landscape south of Salisbury . Here structural 
evidence in the form of scoops ,  ‘ cooking holes ’  , and 
stakeholes was found , as well as a large flint assemblage 
( Higgs 1959 )  . Interestingly , like Stonehenge , Downton also lay 
within an area that was later used in the later third and early 
second millennia BC ( Rahtz and ApSimon 1962 )  . 
Late Mesolithic 
The late Mesolithic as expressed by conventional culturalhistorical terminology , broadly the sixth and fifth millennia BC , 
38 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 17 PM Page 39 

is widely regarded as a period of supreme interest and 
importance because it embraces the transition from 
essentially hunter-gathering lifestyles to agricultural 
subsistence systems . The early part of the period is 
characterized by small and obliquely blunted microliths and 
core tools , although insufficient assemblages from central 
southern England are known to allow accurate 
characterization . On present evidence the Stonehenge 
Landscape lies in a border region between two of Jacobi ’ s 
putative technologically based social territories : the South 
Western technology to the west and the Wealden technologies 
to the east ( Jacobi 1979 , 68 )  . By the very end of the period , 
around the start of the fourth millennium BC , there is the first 
appearance of novel implements such as leaf-shaped 
arrowheads and polished axes , ceramics , the construction of 
earth and stone monuments , and the deliberate opening up of 
the environment ( Phase A in Whittle ’ s ( 1993 , 35 ) scheme for 
the Avebury area )  . Most authorities believe that in southern 
England at least the change between these conditions was 
fairly gradual rather than abrupt , that elements of the patterns 
that appear in the fourth millennium BC can be traced back in 
the fifth and sixth millennia BC . 
Of the 30 or so findspots of Mesolithic material in the 
Stonehenge Landscape listed by Wymer ( 1977 ) most can 
tentatively be assigned to the later Mesolithic , although a 
full examination of the material in its wider context is long 
overdue ( cf . Roe and Radley 1969 , 20 ; Coady 2004 )  . The 
distribution of finds ( Map F ) shows an interesting 
concentration on the Avon–Till interfluve . 
Illustration 22 
Tranchet axes from the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
A : Starveall Plantation . 
B : Tumulus 22 . C : Holders 
Road , Amesbury . D : King 
Barrow Ridge . E : near 
Stonehenge .  [ Drawings by 
Vanessa Constant of 
implements in Devizes 
Museum ( A , B , D , and E ) 
and Salisbury and South 
Wiltshire Museum ( C )  .  ] 
At least five tranchet axes / adzes have been found 
( Illustration 22 )  , mainly on the downland , including a possible 
example from the Stonehenge car-park ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 
figure 203 ) and one from ‘ a field near Stonehenge ’ which also 
yielded a flake of Portland chert imported to the region from 
39 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 40 

outcrops on the south coast ( Wymer 1977 , 333 ; and cf . 
Palmer 1970 )  . Another possible import is the perforated 
dolerite pebble hammer , probably from the Welsh marches , 
found inside Durrington Walls ( Crawford 1929 , 49–50 ; but cf . 
Roe 1979 , 36 )  . Rankine ( 1956 , 159–60 ) lists two additional 
hour-glass perforated pebbles from within the Stonehenge 
Landscape – from Bulford and Winterbourne Stoke – but little 
is known about the findspots . 
Structures and deposits securely dated to the sixth and 
fifth millennia BC are scarce within the Stonehenge 
Landscape , as across southern England generally . At 
Stonehenge itself an animal bone from the packing of 
Stonehole 27 in the sarsen circle has been dated to 
4340–3980 BC ( OxA-4902 : 5350±80 BP ) and may be 
regarded as residual and indicative of pre-henge activity 
that is otherwise invisible ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 188–90 and 
529 )  . Excavations at Boscombe Down Sports Field revealed 
possible Mesolithic pits , but further details must await 
publication of the work . 
EARLY AND MIDDLE NEOLITHIC 
( 4000–3000 BC ) 
From about 4000 BC the quantity and range of archaeological 
evidence in the Stonehenge Landscape increases 
considerably . The fourth millennium BC , conventionally the 
early and middle Neolithic ( Phases B–D in Whittle ’ s ( 1993 , 35 ) 
sequence for the Avebury area )  , sees the construction of 
numerous earth , stone , and timber monuments . It was 
probably at this time that substantial clearings were opened 
in the Wildwood , with pasture and secondary woodland 
developing ( Allen 1997 , 126–7 )  . 
Illustration 23 
The Coneybury ‘ Anomaly ’  .  
[ After Richards 1990 , 
figure 24 .  ] 
Archaeologically , this period is well represented in the 
Stonehenge Landscape , with many of the main classes of 
evidence present . Investigations of these have , in one case , 
been used to define a nationally recognized class of 
monument , the oval barrow , while the Stonehenge Cursus is 
widely accepted as the first example of its kind to be 
40 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 41 

identified in modern times and the name applied at that time 
has since been used to refer to the class as a whole . Piggott 
( 1973b ) and Whittle ( 1977 ) provide useful general background 
accounts of the period relevant to the Stonehenge 
Landscape . Map G shows the distribution of recorded sites 
and finds relating to the early and middle Neolithic . 
Not all monuments of the period were substantial and 
upstanding . A large pit 1 . 9m across and more than 1 . 25m 
deep on Coneybury Hill ( known as the Coneybury 
Anomaly : Illustration 23 ) has been dated to 4050–3640 BC 
( OxA-1402 : 5050±100 BP )  . It is interpreted as a ceremonial 
feature associated with feasting on the basis of the rich 
faunal assemblage that includes abundant remains of 
cattle and roe deer together with lesser amounts of pig , 
red deer , beaver , and brown trout . Parts of at least 37 
ceramic vessels were represented as well as 47 flint 
scrapers , two leaf-shaped arrowheads , and a broken 
ground flint axe ( Richards 1990 , 43 )  . 
Mention should also be made of the Wilsford Shaft 
excavated in 1960–2 by Edwina Proudfoot and Paul Ashbee 
as a result of investigating the presumed pond barrow , 
Wilsford 33a , to the southwest of Stonehenge ( Ashbee et al . 
1989 )  . The chalk-cut shaft was 30m deep and 1 . 8m wide . The 
bottom section was waterlogged and preserved organic 
remains including wooden objects such as broken buckets 
and pieces of cord . Although conventionally dated to the mid 
second millennium BC , the series of radiocarbon dates 
begins at 3650–3100 BC ( OxA-1089 : 4640±70 BP )  . The 
earliest date relates to a section of wooden bucket and is 
both chronologically and stratigraphically the earliest date 
obtained . All the other dates from the site fall in good 
chronological order in relation to their depth within the shaft . 
The early date was rerun with a similar result and tests were 
carried out to check for contamination resulting from 
conservation with negative results ( Housley and Hedges in 
Ashbee et al . 1989 , 68–9 )  . Bearing in mind the use of antler 
picks for the digging of the shaft a Neolithic date for its 
construction and initial use followed by refurbishment and 
cleaning-out ( perhaps including dressing the walls with 
metal axes ?  ) should not be ruled out . At the very least the 
site has yielded the best evidence in Britain for a wooden 
bucket dating to the mid third millennium BC . Further work 
and additional dating on the assemblage of organic objects 
has much potential . Consideration might also be given to a 
role for the shaft in relation to a solar cosmological scheme 
given its position southwest of Stonehenge on the axis of the 
midwinter sunset as viewed from Stonehenge . 
Other , rather smaller , pits and clusters of pits also of the 
fourth millennium BC were found on King Barrow Ridge and 
Vespasian ’ s Ridge during the upgrading of the A303 , 
although details are scant ( Richards 1990 , 65–6 )  . Bone from 
the pit on King Barrow Ridge was dated to 3800–3100 BC 
( OxA-1400 : 4740±100 BP )  . Another small early Neolithic pit 
was found in 1968 during the laying of an electricity cable 
west of King Barrow Ridge . Sherds of a single vessel 
representing a small cup or bowl were found ( Cleal and Allen 
1994 , 60 )  . The exploration of a dense flint scatter northeast 
of the enclosure boundary at Robin Hood ’ s Ball revealed a 
cluster of shallow pits containing pottery , flintwork , and 
animal bones . Two have been dated to 3800–3100 BC ( OxA1400 : 4740±100 BP ) and 3650–2900 BC ( OxA-1401 : 4550±120 
BP )  . Their purpose is unknown , but similar arrangements 
have been noted at other enclosure sites in southern 
England including Windmill Hill ( Whittle et al . 2000 , 141–4 )  . 
Although early accounts of Neolithic enclosures in 
southern Britain cite Yarnbury as a possible example 
( Curwen 1930 , 37 )  , this was disproved by the results of 
Cunnington ’ s excavations in 1932–4 ( see Oswald et al . 2001 , 
157 )  . The only certain early–middle Neolithic enclosure in 
the Stonehenge Landscape is Robin Hood ’ s Ball , although 
other likely looking sites which have yielded Neolithic finds , 
such as Ogbury , deserve further attention . 
Illustration 24 
Robin Hood ’ s Ball from the 
air , looking northwest .  
[ Photograph : English 
Heritage NMR18220 / 31 
©Crown copyright ( NMR )  ] 
The enclosure of Robin Hood ’ s Ball exists as a wellpreserved earthwork towards the northwest corner of the 
41 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 42 

Stonehenge Landscape ( Illustration 24 )  . Small-scale 
excavations in 1956 confirmed the identification of the 
earthworks as a causewayed enclosure of fourth-millennium 
BC date ( Thomas 1964 ; Oswald et al . 2001 , 157 ; McOmish et 
al . 2002 , 31–5 )  , but no more precise information about the 
chronology of the site is available . Morphologically , the site 
has two roughly concentric ditch circuits . The inner circuit is 
sub-circular , the outer circuit pentagonal in plan with the 
flat base to the southeast ( Oswald et al . 2001 , 5 )  . The 
entrance in the inner circuit opens to the southeast . Surface 
evidence suggests complex patterns of ditch recutting and 
changes to the alignment of individual ditch segments . 
Despite the generally high level of aerial reconnaissance 
in the region , Robin Hood ’ s Ball seems to be a fairly isolated 
enclosure spatially associated with a relatively discrete 
cluster of long barrows and oval barrows fitting well with a 
dispersed pattern of middle Neolithic enclosures across 
central southern Britain ( Ashbee 1984b , figure 6 ; Oswald et 
al . 2001 , 80 )  . This pattern was interpreted by Colin Renfrew 
( 1973a , 549 ) in terms of emergent chiefdoms , with the long 
barrows representative of scattered local communities 
whose collective territorial focus was a causewayed 
enclosure ( and cf . Ashbee 1978b , figure 22 )  . 
Barrows in and around the Stonehenge Landscape have 
been the subject of surveys and investigations since the 
eighteenth century , and in some cases represent major 
contributions to the classification of such monuments . 
Several types can be recognized , of which the largest , 
typically over 50m in length , are the classic long barrows . 
At least eight long barrows can be recognized in the 
Stonehenge Landscape , although none have been fully 
excavated ( Illustration 25 )  . 
Illustration 25 
Long barrows in the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
A : Netheravon 6 . 
B : Milston 1 . C : Durrington 
24 . D : Amesbury 42 .  
[ A after McOmish et al . 
2002 , figure 2 . 4 ; B after 
Canham 1983 , figure 2 . 25 ; 
C after McOmish et al . 
2002 , figure 2 . 8C ; D after 
Richards 1990 , figure 64 .  ] 
Amesbury 42 at the east end of 
42 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 43 

the Stonehenge Cursus is recorded by Grinsell as being 80m 
long , 21m wide , and originally over 1 . 1m high ( 1957 , 137 )  . 
Excavations by John Thurnam revealed at least three burials , 
but details are scant ( Thurnam 1868 )  . The excavation of a 
single section across the eastern ditch , berm , and mound 
edge in 1983 revealed evidence for at least two phases of 
construction but no evidence for absolute dating was 
recovered ( Richards 1990 , 96–109 )  . A second well-known 
long barrow is at Long Barrow Crossroads ( Winterbourne 
Stoke 1 ; Illustration 26 )  . 
Illustration 26 
( top ) Winterbourne Stoke 1 
long barrow at Long 
Barrow Crossroads .  
( bottom ) Bowls Barrow .  
[ Photographs : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
Grinsell records this example as 
being 73m long by 21m wide and originally over 3m high 
( Grinsell 1957 , 146 )  . There have been no modern 
excavations here , and the work carried out by John Thurnam 
in 1863 is inadequate for anything more than a very 
superficial understanding of the site . What appears to have 
been a primary burial was represented by the remains of an 
adult male in flexed position and accompanied by a flint 
implement . Six probably secondary burials were discovered . 
Other long barrows include Winterbourne Stoke 71 , Milston 
1 , Figheldean 31 , and the destroyed Figheldean 36 . Lukis 
( 1864 , 155 ; Grinsell 1957 , 137 ) records what may be a 
chambered long barrow at West Amesbury ( Corcoran 1969 , 
43 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 44 

294 : WIL 13 ) that was destroyed prior to the mid nineteenth 
century ( but see also Bonney 1981 )  . 
Whether all of these long barrows belong to the earthen 
long barrow tradition ( Ashbee 1984b ) is far from certain 
given the nature and extent of recorded excavation . Russell 
( 2002 , 25–70 ) proposes the reclassification of some long 
barrows as structured mounds . In view of the apparent 
poverty of remains from early excavations it is possible that 
some of the long barrows around Stonehenge fit within a 
group of chamberless mounds in central southern England 
typified by South Street , Wiltshire , and others ( Ashbee et al . 
1979 ; Darvill 2004b , 113–14 )  . 
In 1865 John Thurnam proposed the identification of oval 
barrows as a distinct class of Neolithic monument on the 
basis of his excavations at Winterbourne Stoke 53 ( Thurnam 
1869 )  . Although this is sometimes regarded as simply the 
short end of the overall spectrum of long barrow sizes , 
recent work in Sussex ( Drewett 1986 ) and Oxfordshire 
( Bradley 1992 ) has endorsed Thurnam ’ s original proposition 
and shown the class to be long-lived through the fourth and 
third millennia BC . Such barrows ( also known as ‘ short ’ long 
barrows – see also McOmish et al . 2002 , 21–31 on Salisbury 
Plain examples ) are generally less than 45m long and rather 
squat in outline with curved side ditches . There are more 
than a dozen scattered across the Stonehenge Landscape 
( Map G )  , mainly between the Till and the Avon . From what 
little information about internal structure and date can be 
obtained from antiquarian excavations it seems that not all 
belong to the fourth millennium BC and some may well have 
been built in the third millennium BC ( Illustration 27 )  . 
Illustration 27 
Oval barrows in the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
A : Woodford G2 . 
B : Netheravon Bake .  
[ A after Harding and 
Gingell 1986 , figure 7 ; 
B after McOmish et al . 
2002 , figure 2 . 8 .  ] 
Excavations at the Netheravon Bake oval barrow yielded a 
date of 3710–3350 BC ( OxA-1407 : 4760±90 BP ) from antler 
from the base of the phase I ditch ( Richards 1990 , 259 )  , but 
further details of this site remain to be published . 
Immediately south of the Stonehenge Landscape the oval 
barrow Woodford G2 was fully excavated by Major and Mrs 
Vatcher in 1963 ( Harding and Gingell 1986 , 15–22 ) and 
perhaps shows what might be expected at some of the 
examples noted above . 
Rather surprisingly , none of the investigated round 
barrows in the Stonehenge Landscape shows conclusive 
evidence of an early or middle Neolithic construction date , 
despite the occurrence of a few such monuments elsewhere 
in southeastern England ( Kinnes 1979 )  . A crouched 
inhumation in a circular grave that was loosely associated 
with early Neolithic pottery in the fill was found in 1932 at 
Woodhenge , Totterdown . It may have been the focus of a 
round barrow ( RCHM 1979 , 7 )  , but equally it may be a pit 
grave , a type also distinctive of the period although little 
studied ( Kinnes 1979 , 126–7 )  . 
The long enclosure tradition found widely across Britain 
in the fourth millennium BC is well represented in the 
Stonehenge Landscape . At the small end of the sizespectrum is the long mortuary enclosure on Normanton 
Down excavated by Mrs Vatcher in 1959 ( Vatcher 1961 )  . 
Approximately 36m long by 21m wide the enclosure is 
defined by a discontinuous ditch and an internal bank . 
The remains of a structure , possibly a portal of some kind , 
lay inside what appears to be an entrance through 
the earthwork at the southeast end . A radiocarbon 
determination from antler in the ditch fill suggests a 
date of 3550–2900 BC ( BM-505 : 4510±103 BP )  . 
Rather larger is the so-called Lesser Cursus . Levelled by 
ploughing between 1934 and 1954 , this monument was 
originally bounded by a ditch with an internal bank . Sample 
excavations in 1983 showed that there were at least two 
main phases to its construction . Phase I comprised a 
slightly trapezoidal enclosure 200m by 60m whose ditch 
may have been recut more than once . In Phase 2 this early 
enclosure was remodelled by elongating it eastwards 
44 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 45 

by 200m . This extension comprised only two parallel side 
ditches ; the western end was open ( Richards 1990 , 72–93 )  . 
A sample of antler from the Phase I ditch has been dated to 
3650–2900 BC ( OxA-1404 : 4550±120 BP ) and , rather 
inconsistently , antler from the Phase II ditch to 3650–3050 
BC ( OxA-1405 : 4640±100 BP )  . A detailed survey of the site in 
1983 using magnetometry revealed the presence of an 
irregular oval enclosure c . 15m across off-centre near the 
eastern end . There are also numerous anomalies suggestive 
of pits within and around the main enclosure ( David and 
Payne 1997 , 87–9 )  . 
Longer still is the Stonehenge Cursus which also probably 
belongs to the fourth millennium BC , although this has never 
been firmly established . First recognized by William Stukeley 
in 1723 , the Stonehenge Cursus is nearly 3km long , and 
between 100m and 150m wide , and is defined by a chalk 
rubble bank and an external ditch . It is one of very few 
cursus monuments in the British Isles that remain standing 
as a visible earthwork , although part of what can be seen at 
the western end is a reconstruction based on its appearance 
prior to being bulldozed in the late 1950s . Four episodes of 
excavation have taken place at various points around the 
cursus , the results serving to emphasize its varied form and 
scale ( RCHM 1979 , 13–15 and Richards 1990 , 93 for 
summaries )  . The most recent excavations , in 1983 , made two 
cuttings through the southern ditch but recovered no 
significant dating evidence ( Richards 1990 , 95–6 )  . An antler 
recovered from the floor of the ditch of the southern 
boundary in 1947 ( Stone 1948 , 13 ) has been dated to 
2890–2460 BC ( OxA-1403 : 4100±90 BP ) but Richards has 
plausibly argued that it derives from an intrusive cut into the 
ditch fills and is thus not primary ( 1990 , 96 )  . Finds from the 
ditch fill include a sherd of undistinctive pottery , a fragment 
of bluestone , a piece of sarsen rubber , and a stone maul 
( Stone 1948 , 15 )  . The total excavation of the Winterbourne 
Stoke 30 bowl barrow in the western terminal of the Cursus 
( now restored as a mound ) provides the only substantial 
view of an area within the interior of the Cursus . A few prebarrow features were noted , but none could be securely 
dated or certainly associated with the Cursus ( Christie 1963 )  . 
Neither was the barrow itself securely dated as the primary 
burials were unaccompanied cremations . A substantial 
assemblage of struck flint recovered from the 1959 
excavation of the Cursus ditch includes the remains of in situ 
working at a time when the ditch was freshly dug ( including 
rejoinable flakes )  ; this has provisionally been dated on 
technological grounds to the late Neolithic ( Saville 1978 , 17 )  . 
Occupation sites of the early and middle Neolithic are 
few and interpretation of what is available is difficult . No 
houses have been recorded although they may be assumed 
to be rectangular structures , constructed on a timber frame 
and therefore represented archaeologically as postholes 
and bedding trenches ( Darvill 1996 )  . Round-bottomed 
pottery , a polished flint axe and leaf-arrowheads from below 
the bank of Durrington Walls suggest that activity in this 
part of the Avon Valley was extensive , although exactly what 
kind of activity the finds represent is uncertain ( Wainwright 
and Longworth 1971 , 192–3 )  . Three radiocarbon dates on 
charcoal from this pre-enclosure phase at the site are 
3650–3000 BC ( GRO-901 : 4584±80 BP )  , 3510–3090 BC 
( GRO-901a : 4575±50 BP )  , and 3550–2600 BC ( NPL-191 : 
4400±150 BP )  . 
The incidence of early and middle Neolithic finds sealed 
below or within later monuments is widespread within the 
Stonehenge Landscape , although , as with the Durrington 
Walls material , it is very hard to interpret . At Amesbury G39 
pottery , flintwork , and animal bone include eleven sherds that 
can be characterized as Windmill Hill Ware ( Ashbee 1980 , 18 )  . 
The sample of ten round barrows in the Stonehenge 
Landscape west of the Avon excavated by Major and Mrs 
Vatcher between 1959 and 1961 includes a pit containing 
large fragments of three Windmill Hill style bowls beneath 
Amesbury G132 ( Illustration 28 )  , and a selection of Windmill 
Hill ware and part of a carinated bowl from the ditch fills of 
Winterbourne Stoke G46 ( Gingell 1988 )  . Earlier Neolithic 
pottery was recovered from below all four of the Wilsford cum 
Lake G51–G54 barrows excavated by Ernest Greenfield in 
1958 , in the case of G52 amounting to more than 200 sherds 
( Smith 1991 , 34–5 )  . Elsewhere there is equally strong 
negative evidence . A selection of six round barrows in the 
Lake Group excavated in 1959 produced no residual early and 
middle Neolithic material ( Grimes 1964 )  ; likewise none of the 
18 round barrows excavated by Charles Green near Shrewton 
between 1958 and 1960 ( Green and Rollo-Smith 1984 )  ; and 
the same applies to the four round barrows east of the Avon 
excavated in September 1956 ( Ashbee 1984a )  . This apparent 
localization of early material mainly east and southeast of 
Stonehenge needs to be validated , but taken at face value 
contrasts with the situation around Avebury where early and 
middle Neolithic finds sealed below later monuments seem to 
be rather more widespread . 
It has sometimes been suggested that cultural material 
underneath later monuments has a special significance 
because of the imposition of the later monument . This 
deserves further investigation , but in the Stonehenge 
Landscape it is most likely that the Bronze Age round 
barrows are simply preserving a sample of earlier land 
surfaces , some of which happen to contain traces of earlier 
activity ; there are plenty of excavated round barrows that 
reveal no evidence of previous intensive land-use . 
Results from the Stonehenge Environs Survey 
fieldwalking add a little to the general picture of activity 
patterns for this period . Ground flint axes are well 
represented along King Barrow Ridge , especially on the east 
side of the Ridge ( Richards 1990 , figure 157 )  . This , together 
with earlier finds by Laidler and Young ( 1938 )  , the incidence 
of early and middle Neolithic pits in the same area , and the 
protected or residual finds in the matrix of later monuments , 
serves to emphasize the importance of King Barrow Ridge in 
this period . Other concentrations of flintwork of the period 
were also found in the area southeast of Long Barrow 
Crossroads , the fields west of Stonehenge , and the area 
north of the Stonehenge Cursus to the east of Fargo 
Plantation . In all cases these scatters were characterized by 
a range of tool types but polished axes were not especially 
common ( Richards 1990 , 265 )  . 
Stray finds from the Stonehenge Landscape are fairly 
numerous , but not always typologically date-sensitive to the 
extent that they can be assigned to this period . Stone and 
flint polished axes are amongst the most significant and in 
some cases may indicate the presence of settlements , or be 
related to important features of the period . A jadite axe 
probably found during the mid nineteenth century in ‘ a 
barrow near Stonehenge ’  ( Campbell Smith 1963 , 164 , no . 41 ) 
is one such find . 
A single sherd of bowl-style early / middle Neolithic 
pottery from Stonehenge may also be regarded as a part of 
the overall background noise of activity across the landscape 
( Cleal et al . 1995 , 350 )  . That at least some if not all these 
activities of the fourth millennium BC carried through in 
45 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 46 

some way to the succeeding millennium is amply 
demonstrated by the inclusion of ancient curated bone items 
placed in selected locations beside the entranceways to the 
circular enclosure at Stonehenge , a monument seemingly 
constructed in the opening century of the third millennium 
BC , perhaps around 2950 BC ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 529–30 )  . 
Illustration 28 
Neolithic pottery from the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
A , D , and H : Amesbury 132 . 
B and C : Winterbourne 
Stoke 46 . E and G : Wilsford 
cum Lake G51 . F : Wilsford 
cum Lake G54 . I and J : 
Wilsford cum Lake G52 .  
[ A , B , C , D , and H after 
Gingell 1988 , figures 18 and 
34 ; E , F , G , I , J after Smith 
1991 , figure 13 .  ] 
LATE NEOLITHIC AND METALUSING NEOLITHIC 
( 3000–2000 BC ) 
The late Neolithic of the British Isles , broadly the third 
millennium BC , is characterized archaeologically by the 
appearance of new forms of monuments ( notably henges , 
stone circles , round houses , and various types of burial 
site )  ; Peterborough Ware , Grooved Ware , and Beaker 
pottery ( mainly Case ’ s Group D ( Case 1995 )  )  ; and distinct 
types of stonework and flintwork . About 2400 BC copper , 
gold , and bronze objects begin circulating in the area , 
most of them imports to the region . The last four centuries 
of the third millennium BC have been termed the ‘ Metal 
Using Neolithic ’ by Needham ( 1996 )  . It has been suggested 
that in some parts of Britain there is a hiatus in activity , a 
shift in settlement patterns , and some evidence of soil 
exhaustion , scrub growth , and woodland regeneration at 
the beginning of the third millennium BC ( Whittle 1978 ; 
Smith 1984 , 116–17 ; and see also Davies and Wolski 2001 ) 
but at present there is no evidence for this in the 
Stonehenge Landscape ( Allen 1995 , 129–33 )  . The later 
Neolithic of the Stonehenge area spans phases E and F of 
the Avebury area sequence proposed by Whittle ( 1993 , 
35 )  . A general background to the period is provided by 
Piggott ( 1973c )  , Burgess ( 1980 )  , and Needham ( 1996 )  . Map 
H shows the recorded distribution of sites and finds 
relating to the third millennium BC . 
Overall , the third millennium BC is probably the bestrepresented phase in the history of the Stonehenge 
Landscape , at least in terms of the scale and character of the 
structures and monuments represented . This really is the 
 ‘ Age of Stonehenge ’  . Some existing structures whose origins 
lay in the fourth millennium BC continued to be visible and 
46 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 47 

played a part in ongoing activity , as for example the 
Stonehenge Cursus with its evidence for later Neolithic 
flintworking well down in the ditch fill ( Saville 1978 , 17 )  . 
Others , for example the Lesser Cursus and perhaps Robin 
Hood ’ s Ball , seem to have fallen out of use , their gradually 
eroding earthworks trapping archaeological material thereby 
providing a record of the process of abandonment . 
The creation of new monuments in the later Neolithic is 
amply demonstrated at Stonehenge itself ; both the overall 
sequence and the problems surrounding its robustness 
have been extensively published ( Cleal et al . 1995 )  . The 
main elements that can be assigned to the third millennium 
BC are as follows ( Illustration 29 )  : 
Illustration 29 
Schematic phase-plans of 
Stonehenge 3000–1200 BC .  
[ After Cleal et al . 1995 , 
figures 256–7 .  ] 
Phase 1 , a circular earthwork monument , constructed 
around 2950–2900 BC , comprised a ditch with an internal 
bank defining an area about 90m across . Immediately inside 
the bank was a ring of 56 equally spaced holes ( the socalled Aubrey Holes ) some of which probably contained 
upright posts . Outside the ditch was a small counterscarp 
bank . There were at least three entrances . Deposits of 
animal bones were placed on the bottom of the ditch in 
some areas , with particular emphasis on the entrances . An 
organic dark layer formed over the primary silting of the 
ditch ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 63 )  . It may be noted that the 
construction of the Phase 1 enclosure at Stonehenge is 
broadly contemporary with the construction of the bank and 
ditch at Avebury ( Pitts and Whittle 1992 , 205 )  . 
Phase 2 , 2900–2400 BC , the basic structure remained the 
same , but there is evidence for the deliberate back-filling of 
parts of the ditch , natural infilling , and some features cut 
into the fills . The Aubrey Holes survived as partly filled 
features lacking posts by this stage , but timber settings 
were constructed in the centre of the monument , at the 
northeastern entrance , near the southern entrance , and 
outside the earthwork boundary to the northeast . Towards 
the end of the phase , cremation burials were deposited in 
the Aubrey Holes , in the upper ditch , and around the 
circumference of the monument on and just within the bank 
( Cleal et al . 1995 , 115 )  . 
Phase 3i , broadly 2550–2200 BC , the first stone phase 
of the monument is built with the erection of a setting of 
paired bluestones , the plan of which is far from certain , 
47 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 48 

in the Q and R holes roughly in the centre of the space 
defined by the earlier earthwork . The main entrance to 
this structure was to the northeast and was marked by 
additional bluestones set inside the double circuit . It is 
possible that a large slab of greenish sandstone , the Altar 
Stone , was the focus of this structure ; other stones may 
have stood within and around it . External to the earthwork 
enclosure , it is likely that at least the first straight length 
of the Avenue belongs to this phase , as too stone settings 
around the entrance . 
Phase 3ii–v , broadly 2400–2000 BC , sees the demolition 
of the Phase 3i structures and their replacement ( perhaps 
gradual ) by an arrangement of four concentric stone 
settings which from the inside working outwards comprise : 
the bluestone horseshoe , five sarsen trilithons arranged in 
a horseshoe , the bluestone circle , and the sarsen circle . 
This is the stone structure that can be seen in a ruined 
state today . Modifications were also made to the peripheral 
arrangement of stones and the Avenue was extended to 
the River Avon . The burial of an adult male with evidence 
of traumatic pathology suggesting death caused by arrowshot found in a grave dug into the ditch of the northwest 
sector dates to about 2400–2140 BC ( Evans 1984 ; Cleal 
et al . 1995 , 533 )  . 
The apparent integrity of the phasing of Stonehenge and 
its associated structures hides a great deal of uncertainty 
( see for example Case 1997 )  . Only a few features have 
been dated , and some key events have very few secure 
associated dates . The distribution of elements over a large 
area limits the use of horizontal and vertical stratigraphy . 
The longevity of the sequence at the site inevitably 
introduces problems of residuality in the disposition of finds 
and datable material . Especially difficult issues include the 
relationship between the Phase 1 and Phase 2 features ; the 
form and plan of the Phase 3i structure ; the sequence of 
construction for individual elements of the Phase 3ii–3v 
settings ; the sequence and arrangement of features in the 
centre of the monument ( cf . Burl 1997 ; 2001 )  ; the sequence 
and arrangement of stone settings within and around the 
northeast entrance ( cf . Pitts 1982 ; Burl 1991 ; 1994 )  ; and 
both the internal phasing of the Avenue construction and 
the links between these and the development of the stone 
settings ( cf . Cleal et al . 1995 , 533–4 )  . 
There is now very little doubt that a major factor in the 
design of all phases of Stonehenge was the embodiment of 
key moments in the movement of the sun , especially the 
solstitial risings and settings . An analysis of patterning in 
the deposition of finds relating to Phases 1 and 2 at the site 
by Pollard and Ruggles ( 2001 ) suggests that the early 
structure of the monument , and the attendant depositional 
practices , embodied a scheme of radial division , including a 
symbolic quartering primarily demarcated by solstitial rising 
and setting points . Through sustained ritual practice , 
however , the motions of the moon came increasingly to be 
referenced through deposition , particularly cremations 
( Pollard and Ruggles 2001 , 69 ; cf . Burl 1994 , 91 )  . 
Juxtaposing the movements of the sun and moon is a 
feature of many early cosmological and calendrical schemes 
( Hodson 1974 )  , often reflecting concerns about day and 
night , the transition between the two , and the movements 
of one celestial body while the other is visually dominant . 
Alexander Thom and colleagues speculated that the 
markings on the gold lozenge from Bush Barrow may have 
allowed it to be used as an alidade-type instrument to fix 
the dates of 16 of the epochs in a 16-month calendar ( Thom 
et al . 1988 )  , while the discovery in the late 1990s of the 
Nebra sun-disc at a site in central Germany adds weight to 
the contention that the sun and moon were combined in the 
cosmologies of second-millennium BC Europe ( Anon 2004 )  . 
That the form and shape of the various elements of 
Stonehenge had specific functions and / or symbolic 
meaning is inherent to many interpretations of the 
structure . Hawkins , for example , suggested that the Aubrey 
Holes had been used as marker-positions for calculations 
that were made by moving stones between the positions to 
predict solar and lunar events ( Hawkins 1966a )  . Darvill has 
suggested that the earthwork of Phase 1 represents a 
microcosm of the local ‘ bowl-like ’ landscape ( 1997a , 181 )  , 
while Parker Pearson and Ramilisonina ( 1998 )  , drawing on 
cross-cultural ethnographic parallels , see the stone 
structures in metaphorical terms as a domain of the 
ancestors , durable and permanent , symbols of eternity 
occupied by the spirits of the dead . Barrett ( 1997 ) has 
emphasized the architectural order inherent to the structure 
and the way this might be perceived and understood by 
those entering the circle after walking up the Avenue from 
Stonehenge Bottom . In a similar vein , Whittle ( 1997a ) 
emphasized the three-dimensional nature of the structure , 
suggesting that in its architecture we may glimpse notions 
of inclusion and exclusion , unity and division . Taking a 
sideways view of the site from the field of medicine , Perks 
( 2003 ) notes the resemblance of the structure to the human 
vulva with the birth canal at its centre . 
Stonehenge is often regarded as entirely unique , 
and in terms of its overall sequence and survival this 
is probably true . Many of the individual elements 
represented can , however , be paralleled elsewhere and it 
remains an open question as to whether there were other 
structures of similar complexity elsewhere in Britain . The 
uniqueness of Stonehenge may lie in its survival rather 
than its construction . 
The earthwork elements of Stonehenge inspired 
Christopher Hawkes to coin the term ‘ henge ’ in relation to 
a group of prehistoric sacred places ( Kendrick and 
Hawkes 1932 , 83 ) subsequently defined more closely by 
Atkinson ( 1951 ) and Wainwright ( 1968 )  . As the range of 
sites that may be considered henge monuments has 
expanded so the utility of the term adequately to embrace 
the visible variation has been called into question , and in 
many respects Stonehenge Phase 1 may now be 
considered atypical and , in formal typological terms , more 
closely allied to Kinnes ’  ( 1979 , 63 and 65–9 ) enclosed 
cemeteries . Locally , Stonehenge Phase 1 shares many 
traits with the Flagstones enclosure near Dorchester , 
Dorset ( Woodward 1988 )  . 
Looking beyond Stonehenge , a survey of henge 
monuments and related sites by Harding and Lee in the 
mid 1980s proposed three sub-divisions of the broad family 
that had by that time become known as henges : hengeenclosures ; classic-henges ; and mini-henges ( Harding and 
Lee 1987 )  . These divisions have been widely adopted 
and there are examples of each within the Stonehenge 
Landscape ( Illustration 30 and Map H )  . However , as more 
henges are discovered across the British Isles it seems 
increasingly relevant to see mini-henges and classic-henges 
as part of an essentially continuous spectrum of 
architecturally diverse structures forming arenas for a 
range of activities at different scales ( Harding 2003 )  . 
48 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 49 

Henge-enclosures are large sub-circular enclosures , 
usually beside rivers and in valley-bottom or valley-side 
locations . Durrington Walls is one of the four known prime 
examples , all of which lie within the catchment of the 
Hampshire Avon ( the others are at Mount Pleasant , 
Knowlton , and Marden )  . Durrington Walls was extensively 
excavated in 1966–8 when the main A345 road through the 
site was realigned . This work revealed the presence of two 
multi-phase circular timber structures , a midden , and 
internal boundaries of various sorts ( Wainwright and 
Longworth 1971 )  . Parts of the site were well preserved 
below colluvial deposits . Geophysical surveys suggest that 
other similar structures exist within the site ( David and 
Payne 1997 , 91–4 )  . A great deal of Grooved Ware pottery 
was found during the 1966–8 excavations while the 
radiocarbon dates suggest that the main earthwork was 
constructed around 2600 BC , with the remodelling of the 
timber structures continuing down to around 2100 BC . Much 
debate has surrounded the interpretation of the timber 
structures , with some authorities seeing them as roofed or 
part-roofed buildings and others as formal arrangements of 
freestanding posts ( Piggott 1940 ; Musson in Wainwright and 
Longworth 1971 , 362–77 ; Parker Pearson 1993 , figure 58 ; 
Gibson 1998a , 97–121 )  . Likewise , the use and role of the 
site has been hotly contested , with the excavator favouring 
an essentially residential / habitational interpretation 
( Wainwright 1975 ; 1977 ) while others interpret the 
distribution of finds as indicating essentially ritual activities 
and feasting ( Richards and Thomas 1984 , 214–15 ; Albarella 
and Serjeantson 2002 )  . However , such binary distinctions 
between domestic and ritual activity are not especially 
helpful in the prehistoric context ; at such a large site , which 
has evidence of diversity in the scale and nature of the 
structures represented , more integrative interpretations 
deserve further exploration . 
In addition to Stonehenge itself , three other classichenges have been identified in the Stonehenge Landscape : 
Coneybury , Woodhenge , and Winterbourne Stoke ( Map H )  . 
All have a single entrance so belong to Class I henges in the 
typology expanded by Atkinson ( 1951 , 82 , following Piggott 
and Piggott 1939 )  . 
Coneybury lies on high ground west of the Avon and was 
for many years regarded as a ploughed-out round barrow . 
Aerial photography in the 1950s called this view into 
question and its status was confirmed through surveys and 
a carefully designed sample-excavation in 1980 as part of 
the Stonehenge Environs Survey ( Richards 1990 , 123–58 )  . 
Grooved Ware pottery was found in the primary ditch fill and 
internal features while Beaker pottery was common in 
secondary contexts . The central area of the monument was 
probably occupied by a timber building ( Pollard 1995b , 124 )  . 
Radiocarbon dates focus on the early third millennium BC 
and thus suggest contemporaneity with Stonehenge Phases 
1 and 2 . 
Woodhenge also occupies high ground on the west side 
of the Avon , immediately south of , and partly intervisible 
with , Durrington Walls . It was identified through aerial 
photography in December 1925 . The interior and cuttings 
through the boundary earthwork were excavated by Captain 
and Mrs Cunnington in 1926–8 ( Cunnington 1929 )  . A new 
section through the bank and ditch was cut in 1970 ( Evans 
and Wainwright 1979 )  . The site has a broad ditch and 
narrow external bank with its single entrance opening to the 
northeast . The interior is occupied by six oval concentric 
rings of postholes generally believed to be the foundations 
of a large timber structure although as at Durrington Walls 
there is considerable debate about how it should be 
reconstructed ( Pollard 1995a )  . A grave containing the burial 
of a child was found near the centre of the site and two 
sockets for stones were located on the southeast side . 
Grooved Ware was found in many of the internal features 
and in the ditch fill . Radiocarbon dates suggest the 
construction and use of the site in the later third millennium 
BC , contemporary with Stonehenge Phase 3i–v and the use 
of Durrington Walls . Analysis of the distribution of finds 
within the site suggests spatial patterning to the social use 
of space and considerable similarity to the patterns found in 
other comparable structures ( Pollard 1995a )  . 
Another possible Class I classic-henge has been defined 
by geophysical survey at Winterbourne Stoke ( David and 
Payne 1997 , figure 13A )  . Like Coneybury this site has for 
many years been listed as a round barrow ( Winterbourne 
Stoke 74 )  . The single entrance opens to east-northeast ; no 
internal features have been detected . 
Mini-henges ( also known as hengi-form monuments ) are 
small versions of the classic-henges , typically less than 10m 
across . They are often found in close association with other 
later Neolithic monuments such as classic-henges and 
cursus monuments . The best example in the Stonehenge 
Landscape is at Fargo Plantation some 100m south of the 
Stonehenge Cursus . Excavated in 1938 ( Stone 1939 ) the 
structure comprises a slightly oval ditch broken by a pair of 
opposing entrances . The internal space measures about 4m 
by 6m ; in the centre was a pit containing an inhumation and 
two cremations . Beaker pottery was associated with the 
inhumation . Other examples probably await discovery and 
there are a few tantalizing hints of possible examples on 
geophysical surveys and plots of the cropmarks represented 
on aerial photographs . 
A pit-circle comprising at least four rectangular pits 
arranged in a ring about 10m across was found at 
Butterfield Down in the early 1990s ( Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , 37 )  , the smallest of a group of similar 
structures known singly or as components of multi-phase 
monuments . A pit-circle about 50m in diameter that 
comprised a single ring of more than 30 pits , some 
containing postholes , was found at Boscombe Down in 
2004 ( Fitzpatrick 2004b )  . Rather similar is the ring of 56 socalled Aubrey Holes arranged in a circle some 87m in 
diameter just inside , and concentric with , the Phase 1 
earthwork at Stonehenge ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 94–107 )  . Some 
of these may also have contained postholes ; some were 
certainly used for the deposition of cremations . A third pitcircle having a single ring of pits has been identified from 
aerial photographs of the area immediately north of the 
egg-shaped enclosure at Woodhenge ( McOmish 2001 , figure 
4 . 3 )  . A double ring of pits or unused stone sockets is 
represented by the Y and Z holes assigned to Phase 3vi of 
the construction sequence at Stonehenge ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 
256–65 )  . Each ring comprised 30 pits , the inner circle ( Z 
holes ) being c . 40m in diameter , the outer circle ( Y holes ) 
being c . 53m across . Both rings are tentatively dated to the 
early second millennium BC . More complicated still is the 
set of four concentric rings of pits dug into the top of the 
postholes forming phases 2A and 2B of the Southern Circle 
at Durrington Walls ( Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 23–41 
and Appendix VIII ; and M Parker Pearson pers . comm .  )  . The 
outermost of these rings , broadly following Circle 2B of the 
earlier post-built structure , is about 18m in diameter ; the 
inner ring following Circle 2E is 7 . 6m in diameter . 
49 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 50 

Illustration 30 
Henge monuments in 
the Stonehenge Landscape : 
outline plans of the 
enclosure earthworks . 
A : Durrington Walls . 
B : Stonehenge . 
C : Woodhenge . 
D : Coneybury . 
E : Winterbourne Stoke . 
F : Fargo Plantation .  [ A after 
Wainwright and Longworth 
1971 , figure 2 ; B after Cleal 
et al . 1995 , figure 36 ; C 
after Cunnington 1929 , 
plate 3 ; D after Richards 
1990 , figure 97 ; E after 
David and Payne 1997 , 
figure 13 ; F after Stone 
1939 , plate II .  ] 
50 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 51 

A number of round barrows surrounded by a 
causewayed ( or segmented ) ring-ditch are known through 
excavation in the Stonehenge Landscape ( Illustration 31 )  . 
Illustration 31 
Late Neolithic causewayed 
barrows . A : Wilsford cum 
Lake G51 . B : Amesbury 
G51 . C : Shrewton 24 .  
[ A after Smith 1991 , figure 2 ; 
B after Ashbee 1978a , figure 
2 ; C after Green and RolloSmith 1984 , figure 16 .  ] 
Wilsford cum Lake barrow G51 , excavated in 1958 , shows 
several phases of construction on a site extensively used in 
middle Neolithic and later times to judge from the amount 
of residual material . The first phase comprised a 
causewayed ring-ditch dug to provide material for a small 
mound to cover an oblong grave containing the skeleton of 
a young adult associated with Beaker pottery ( Smith 1991 , 
13–18 )  . Amesbury G51 immediately south of the Stonehenge 
Cursus in the Cursus Group was also a barrow surrounded 
by a causewayed ring-ditch ( Ashbee 1978a )  . The central 
primary burial and a series of secondary burials in the ditch 
and mound were all accompanied by Beaker pottery . The 
head of one of the burials in the central grave had been 
trephined . Wood from a mortuary house containing the 
primary burial yielded a radiocarbon date of 2310–1950 BC 
( BM-287 : 3738±55 BP )  . Beaker pottery was also associated 
with the primary grave in the two-phase bowl barrow 
Shrewton 24 ( Green and Rollo-Smith 1984 , 285–6 )  . The first 
phase of the mound was surrounded by a causewayed 
ditch , the whole later being covered by a much larger 
mound with a continuous surrounding ditch . Levelled 
barrows of similar form can be identified from the 
segmented ring-ditch recorded by aerial photography and 
geophysical survey near the Winterbourne Stoke 
Crossroads , coincident with barrow Winterbourne Stoke 72 
51 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 52 
 
( RCHM 1979 , 3 ; David 1997 , figure 13B ) and at Amesbury 
( RCHM 1979 , 2 ( no . 146 )  ; Harding and Lee 1987 , 284 )  . 
Round barrows were a common kind of burial monument 
during the third millennium BC , developing earlier traditions 
( Kinnes 1979 )  , but not all can be distinguished by the 
presence of a causewayed or segmented perimeter quarry 
ditch . Without associated datable material , or absolute 
dates from appropriate deposits or construction material , it 
is impossible to separate them from the ubiquitous secondmillennium BC examples . Within the Stonehenge Landscape 
as a whole there are about 639 round barrows and 308 ringditches , an unknown proportion of which , perhaps 10–15 
per cent , date to the third millennium BC . 
In addition to the excavated barrows with causewayed 
quarry ditches already noted , all of which seem to be of 
third-millennium BC date , several other excavated round 
barrows appear to be of the same period but require further 
research to confirm their date . At Amesbury G71 the first 
phase of a multi-phase barrow comprised a continuous ringditch about 7m in diameter , within which was a sub-circular 
ring of stakes surrounding a central grave pit that was 
covered by a low barrow . This putatively late Neolithic 
barrow was later covered by a larger mound ( Phase II ) 
containing stake circles and enclosed within a ring-ditch 
about 23m in diameter . The central grave pit of the Phase II 
monument cut into the Phase I grave pit , disturbing the 
earlier burial . A radiocarbon date of 2900–2100 BC ( NPL-77 : 
3960±110 ) was obtained from charcoal in the grave of the 
Phase II monument ( Christie 1967 , 339–43 )  . Amesbury 22 
covered the primary burial of an adult male in the bottom of 
a shaft some 1 . 2m deep into the underlying chalk , above 
which was a secondary grave that included a Beaker 
( Grinsell 1957 , 150 )  . At Durrington Down W57 excavations in 
1983 as part of the Stonehenge Environs Project revealed a 
ditchless bowl barrow with a flint cairn over an oval grave 
pit containing the crouched inhumation of a juvenile 
accompanied by a large cattle lumbar vertebra and a 
fragment of antler , and the cremated remains of a second 
juvenile ( Richards 1990 , 171–84 )  . A radiocarbon 
determination on a sample of bone from the inhumation 
returned a date of 2500–1750 BC ( OxA-1398 : 3700±100 )  . 
Rather similar is Wilsford 87f where a primary inhumation , 
seemingly without any accompanying grave goods , was 
succeeded by a cremation accompanied by deer antlers 
( Grinsell 1957 , 199 )  . At round barrow Winterbourne Stoke 
56 , Colt Hoare revealed a primary adult male burial 
accompanied by a deer antler , above which was a cremation 
accompanied by a Beaker ( Grinsell 1957 , 202 )  . Bulford 27 
may be yet another example . The primary burial here was an 
adult male laid to rest in a rock-cut pit and accompanied by 
a Stage I battle axe of quartz dolerite from the Whin Sill in 
Northumberland ( Group XVIII ; Roe 1979 , 42 )  . This grave was 
also covered in a cairn of flints . Around about , on the 
original ground surface , were the inhumations of three men 
of fine physique . They had been buried with their heads 
towards the centre of the barrow , their bodies tightly 
doubled up but their forearms missing in each case . Over 
these were the skeletons of seven children , perhaps added 
when the large bowl barrow some 42m in diameter and 3m 
high was built ( Hawley 1910 , 616–17 )  . Shrewton G27 , 
excavated by William Cunnington , also had a primary burial 
accompanied by a Stage V battle axe of Hissington picrite 
( Group XII ) from the Welsh Marches ( Roe 1979 , 41 )  . 
Round barrows containing burials accompanied by 
Beaker pottery and associated artefacts span the period 
when metal objects begin to circulate . At least 17 excavated 
examples are known in the Stonehenge Landscape , some 
only from antiquarian records ( see Case 1995 , figure 1 for a 
recent map of sites )  . Three of the 18 barrows examined by 
Charles Smith near Shrewton in 1958 included burials 
accompanied by Beaker pottery : Shrewton G5a , 5e , and 5k 
( Green and Rollo-Smith 1984 )  . Of these , Shrewton 5K is 
especially important because the grave contained an N2 
style Beaker associated with a small copper dagger with 
remains of an organic hilt adhering to the tang and a bone 
pommel . Typologically , the dagger is of the Roundway style 
and may be assigned to Burgess ’ metallurgical Stage II 
within his Mount Pleasant Phase ( 1980 , 71–8 )  . A radiocarbon determination on bone from the primary burial 
provides a date of 2480–2200 BC ( BM-3017 : 3900±40 BP ) 
and makes this the earliest securely dated copper dagger in 
Britain . Southwest of Stonehenge , three of the four barrows 
excavated in 1958 by Ernest Greenfield at Wilsford cum Lake 
G51 , G52 , and G54 contained burials accompanied by 
Beaker pottery ( Smith 1991 )  . G51 has already been 
discussed because it has a causewayed ditch . G54 was a 
ditchless bowl barrow and is important because the primary 
grave ( which was found to be heavily disturbed and may 
contain more than one phase of burial : Illustration 32 ) 
contained at least three Beaker pots , six barbed and tanged 
arrowheads , a bronze dagger of Gerloff ’ s Type Butterwick 
( 1975 , 42 )  , and a stone battle axe of Roe ’ s Calais Wold 
group of spotted dolerite ( Group XIII rock ) from the Preseli 
Hills of Pembrokeshire ( Smith 1991 , 27–9 )  . 
Some round barrows containing graves with Beaker 
pottery seem to have had a long life as a series of burials 
accumulated . At Wilsford G1 , for example , excavations by 
E V Field in 1960 revealed a large bowl barrow over 15m in 
diameter with at least 11 burials in all . The central grave 
contained at least two inhumations and a cremation 
associated with at least one Bell Beaker and some deer 
antlers . The remaining eight burials were all on the north 
side of the barrow , six of them infants with associated 
Beaker pottery , one an infant with some kind of urn , and 
finally the crouched burial of a young adult with Beaker 
sherds and a slate replica of an Irish style bronze flat axe 
( Anon 1961 , 30 )  . Multi-phase development may also be 
suspected at Durrington 67 , excavated by Maud Cunnington 
in 1926–7 , where two concentric ditches surround a barrow 
covering the primary burial of an adult male accompanied 
by a Beaker pot and a colourful tourmaline granite axe 
hammer perhaps imported to the area from Cornwall 
( Cunnington 1928 , 42–5 )  . 
Excavations in advance of construction work for a school 
on the southeast edge of Amesbury in spring 2002 revealed 
two previously unknown burials of the late third millennium BC 
( WA 2002 ; Fitzpatrick 2002 ; 2003a ; and see also Shanks 2004 
for critical comment )  . Preliminary reports suggest that the first 
probably lay beneath a small ditchless round barrow . Within a 
large rectangular grave pit were the remains of an adult male 
perhaps 35–45 years of age together with nearly 100 grave 
goods including two stone wrist-guards , three copper knives , a 
pair of gold earrings or tress-rings , five Beaker pots , and many 
other stone , bone , and flint objects . Dubbed the ‘ King of 
Stonehenge ’ or the ‘ Stonehenge Archer ’ by the popular press 
( Illustration 33 )  , this is the richest Beaker grave yet found in 
the British Isles in terms of the number and quality of items 
represented . Provisionally dated to about 2400–2200 BC , 
this burial is more or less the same age as the Shrewton 5K 
burial which also contains an early copper dagger . Oxygen 
52 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 53 

Illustration 32 
Wilsford cum Lake barrow 
G54 .  ( top ) Plan of 
excavated features .  
( bottom ) Grave goods .  
[ After Smith 1991 , figures 
10 and 11 .  ] 
53 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 54 

Illustration 33 
The Amesbury Archer . 
Reconstruction drawing by 
Jane Brayne .  [ Reproduced 
courtesy of Jayne Brayne 
and Wessex Archaeology .  ] 
isotope studies of the Stonehenge Archer ’ s teeth suggest that 
he spent at least some of his life in or around the Alps , 
reopening the possibility of long-distance contacts between 
communities living in the Stonehenge Landscape and groups 
elsewhere in central and southern Europe . Jackie McKinley ’ s 
study of the skeletal remains suggest that for much of his life 
he had been disabled as a result of a traumatic injury to his left 
knee which would have caused him to limp . Many of the 
artefacts were probably locally made , but the metal used in 
one of the copper knives / daggers is Spanish , the gold could 
well be continental , and many of the stone objects come from 
sources at least 50km distant . 
About 5m away from this burial was another , a 
companion perhaps , also contained in a rock-cut pit and 
perhaps sealed below a ditchless barrow ( Fitzpatrick 2003a , 
150 )  . This was also a male , younger at about 20–25 years of 
age , and perhaps related to the first because they share 
minor abnormalities in their foot-bones . Radiocarbon 
determinations suggest that this burial is very slightly later 
than the first so they could be siblings or father and son . 
The younger man ’ s contained rather fewer grave goods : a 
single boar ’ s tusk and a pair of gold earrings or hair tresses . 
Together , these burials raise many questions about the 
extended trade networks and long-distance social ties of the 
period , as well as emphasizing the need for vigilance in 
monitoring development activity throughout the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
Further investigations about 700m away in May 2003 , 
during the course of monitoring the laying of a pipeline at 
Boscombe Down , revealed a rather different kind of burial of 
the late third millennium BC ( Fitzpatrick 2003b ; 2004 ; 
Fitzpatrick et al . 2004 )  . Here a large rectangular pit contained 
the partly disarticulated remains of three adult males , a 
teenage male , and three children , together with eight Beakers , 
flint tools , five barbed and tanged flint arrowheads , a boar ’ s 
tusk , and a bone toggle used as a clothes fastener . The burials 
had been inserted on several occasions over a period of time . 
A man aged between 30 and 45 had been buried on his left 
side with his legs tucked up and with his head to the north . 
Close to his head were the remains of three children ( one 
cremated )  . The teenager , aged about 15–18 , and the other two 
men , both aged 25–30 at death , were placed around the body 
of the older man . Scientific studies of these burials , dubbed 
 ‘ The Boscombe Bowmen ’  , suggest that the teenager and 
adults at least were all from the same family and isotope 
analysis of samples of tooth enamel suggests that they may 
have spent some time in southwest Wales , the area known to 
have been the source of stones used in the construction of 
Stonehenge Phases 3i to 3v ( Fitzpatrick 2004a )  . 
Other burials accompanied by Beaker pottery under 
round barrows include : Amesbury G51 and G54 ( Annable 
and Simpson 1964 , 39 )  ; Durrington G36 and G67 ( Annable 
and Simpson 1964 , 39–40 )  ; Wilsford G1 , G2b , and G62 
( Annable and Simpson 1964 , 40 and 43 )  ; Winterbourne 
Stoke G10 , G43 , and G54 ( Annable and Simpson 1964 , 38 
and 40 ; Ozanne 1972 )  . 
Oval barrows were considered in the discussion of fourthmillennium BC monuments but given that some are undated 
and several unexcavated it is probable that some at least of 
the examples noted above belong to the third millennium BC . 
Wilsford 34 , excavated by Thurnam in 1865–6 , is interesting in 
this connection as he found five contracted burials , one 
accompanied by a Beaker pot ( Cunnington 1914 , 405–6 )  . 
Excavated examples elsewhere in southern England suggest 
that single inhumations and multi-phase construction should 
be expected ( Drewett 1986 ; Bradley 1992 )  . 
Flat graves containing inhumation burials associated with 
later Neolithic or Beaker pottery are well represented in the 
Stonehenge Landscape . These include examples within 
monuments such as Stonehenge ( Evans 1984 )  , Woodhenge 
( Cunnington 1929 , 52 )  , and Durrington Walls ( Wainwright and 
Longworth 1971 , 4 )  . Seemingly isolated inhumation burials in 
flat graves or pit graves of the same period include those near 
Durrington Walls ( RCHM 1979 , 7 )  , at Larkhill Camp ( Short 
1946 )  , and at Totterdown Clump ( Wainwright and Longworth 
1971 , 5 )  . It may be noted , however , that many of these lastmentioned sites were chance discoveries and were mainly 
recorded with little attention to establishing context or 
associations . The reinvestigation of some sites might yield 
valuable information . Some other undated flat graves may 
also be related to this period . 
Cremation burials of the third millennium BC are also well 
represented , and include the group of about 52 deposits / 
burials from Stonehenge Phases 1 and 2 ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 
451 )  , the Durrington Down W57 barrow ( Richards 1990 , 176 )  , 
and a pit grave with a cremation and three sherds of Grooved 
Ware in Circle 2 south of Woodhenge ( Wainwright and 
Longworth 1971 , 3 )  . 
Enclosures of many forms are known to date to the third 
millennium BC . In addition to the henges already mentioned in 
this section , and the possibility that the Stonehenge Cursus 
also dates to the later Neolithic as discussed in the previous 
section , there are two other sites in the Stonehenge 
Landscape that deserve attention . First is the so-called 
 ‘ Palisade Ditch ’ or ‘ Gate Ditch ’ immediately west and north of 
Stonehenge , known through relatively small-scale excavations 
in 1953 , 1967 , and 1978 ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 155–61 ) and traced 
through aerial photography and geophysical survey for a 
distance of over 1km ( David and Payne 1997 , 87 )  . Each of the 
excavated sections differs in detail , but most show a V-profile 
54 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 55 

ditch cut to support upright timber posts which can be 
interpreted as a palisade or stockade . Dating is uncertain , but 
there is late Bronze Age pottery from the upper fills and in the 
1967 cutting it can be shown that the palisade pre-dates a 
crouched inhumation burial dated to the mid first millennium 
BC ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 157 )  . When this feature was excavated 
there was little by way of comparable sites known that could 
provide a wider context . However , since the later 1970s a 
number of very large later Neolithic palisaded enclosures have 
been discovered and sampled ( Gibson 1998b )  , including a 
notable group of such monuments in the valley of the River 
Kennet south of Avebury ( Whittle 1997b , 53–138 )  . A thirdmillennium BC date is consistent with the evidence from the 
Stonehenge Palisade Ditch although whether it should be 
seen as a full enclosure or simply a linear boundary remains to 
be determined . Whichever , its impact on the appearance of 
Stonehenge during Phases 3i–3v of its existence must have 
been considerable . It is possible that Stonehenge was simply 
a small monument immediately outside a much larger 
enclosure in rather the same way that Woodhenge lies just 
outside the henge-enclosure of Durrington Walls . 
A second possible enclosure , just as poorly understood 
as the Stonehenge Palisade Ditch , is the so-called North 
Kite . This lies south of Stonehenge on the eastern side of 
the Till / Avon interfluve . The site was recognized by Colt 
Hoare ( 1812 , map op . 170 ) and recorded from the air by 
Crawford and Keiller ( 1928 , 254 ) as a large three-sided 
earthwork enclosure of about 123ha , roughly trapezoidal in 
plan , which they regarded as being Romano-British in date . 
Since the 1920s the North Kite has been badly damaged by 
ploughing and it lies amid a series of later prehistoric 
boundaries and fieldsystems that rather confuse attempts 
to understand the earlier features . Two early Bronze Age 
barrows in the Lake Group stratigraphically overlie the 
southwestern boundary earthworks of the North Kite ( RCHM 
1979 , 26 )  , while small-scale excavations undertaken in 1958 
suggested a date in the later third or early second 
millennium BC and confirmed the absence of a fourth side 
( Annable 1959 , 229 )  . Further excavations in 1983 as part of 
the Stonehenge Environs Project yielded Peterborough and 
Beaker pottery from the buried soil below the bank broadly 
confirming the previously suggested date ( Richards 1990 , 
184–92 )  . The scale of the enclosure is impressive : the axial 
length is at least 400m ( north–south ) by 150m at the narrow 
northern end , expanding to 300m wide at the southern end . 
An unexcavated ring-ditch ( Wilsford cum Lake 93 ) lies 
roughly in the centre of the open southern end . The only 
comparable excavated monument is the early fourthmillennium BC three-sided trapezoidal ceremonial structure 
at Godmanchester , Cambridgeshire , with an axial length of 
336m and a maximum width of 228m ( McAvoy 2000 )  . 
Flint mines were recorded east of the Stonehenge Inn in 
1952 ( Illustration 34 )  . 
Illustration 34 
Flint mines at Durrington : 
plan and section of shafts 
4 and 5 .  [ After Booth and 
Stone 1952 , figures 1 
and 2 .  ] 
Three were shallow open-cast scoops 
about 0 . 6m deep while three others were rather deeper 
55 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 56 

shafts that included low galleries and undercutting to 
optimize the amount of flint extracted ( Booth and Stone 
1952 ; Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 6 )  . These finds have 
not been followed up but are amongst just three confirmed 
mining sites in Wiltshire ( Barber et al . 1999 )  . It may be 
notable , however , that a substantial collection of 
flintworking debris was found during field evaluations of the 
proposed Stonehenge Visitor Centre at Countess Road East 
only about 1km south of the Durrington flint mines . The bulk 
of the assemblage of more than 1500 pieces derives from 
the production of core tools , either functional items such as 
axes or knives or perhaps prestige items such as flint 
replicas of bronze daggers ( WA 2004 , 11 )  . Chipped flint axes 
with the appearance of being roughouts for polished 
implements have been found in the Stonehenge Landscape , 
for example at Bulford and Winterbourne Stoke . 
Pits and shafts , perhaps of ceremonial or ritual 
significance , continue earlier traditions through into the 
third millennium BC . On King Barrow Ridge there is the 
 ‘ Plaque Pit ’  , so-called because it included in its fill two 
square chalk plaques bearing incised decoration 
( Illustration 35 )  . The pit was discovered and excavated in 
1969 during the widening of the A303 ( Vatcher 1969 ; 
Harding 1988 ; Cleal and Allen 1994 )  . Sherds of Grooved 
Ware , an antler pick , and animal bones were also found in 
the pit . Two radiocarbon dates place the material in the 
early third millennium BC . These are amongst the earliest 
dates for Grooved Ware in southern Britain and illustrate the 
potential of the evidence from the Stonehenge Landscape to 
help illuminate the appearance of this highly distinctive 
ceramic tradition ( cf . Cleal et al . 1995 , 481 )  . Two seemingly 
isolated postholes about 30m apart were also found on 
King Barrow Ridge north of the Plaque Pit during the 
monitoring of a cable-trench in 1968 ( RCHM 1979 , 33 )  . One 
of these , Feature A , contained Grooved Ware pottery while 
the other was of early–middle Neolithic date ( Cleal and 
Allen 1994 , 60–2 )  . 
Excavations at Butterfield Down , Amesbury , revealed a 
number of pits that can be assigned to the late Neolithic on 
the basis of pottery and worked flint . Pit 2 contained an 
extremely large Beaker pot , one of the largest known in 
southern England , and because of its completeness 
considered to be in a non-domestic context ( Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , 37 )  . A decorated chalk plaque of the same 
date was found residual in a later context ( Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , 22–3 )  . 
One of the two chalk plaques from the Plaque Pit carries 
an incised image in the form of an opposing Greek key 
pattern set within a tram-line frame ; the other has a crosshatched design within a tram-line frame ( Harding 1988 )  . The 
example from Butterfield Down also has a tram-line frame , 
the interior being filled with parallel lines ( Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , 23 )  . All three plaques from the area carry 
images that compare with the decoration found on Grooved 
Ware and Beaker pottery and that also feature as 
component motifs within the British rock art traditions . 
Such rock art is typically found on natural rock surfaces , 
earthfast boulders , and components of stone-built 
monuments such as cairns , cists , standing stones , and 
stone circles . 
This tradition is also represented in the Stonehenge 
Landscape by the rock art on the structural components 
of Stonehenge itself ( Illustration 36 )  . This has been fully 
described by Walker and Lawson ( in Cleal et al . 1995 , 30–3 )  . 
Eleven stones are currently believed to carry prehistoric 
motifs : stones 3 , 4 , 5 , 9b , 23 , 29 , 30 , and 120 in the sarsen 
circle and 53 , 55a , and 57 in the sarsen trilithon horseshoe . 
Unhafted axe blades represented blade-up are the most 
common motif , although the dagger , knife , torso , and 
quadrilateral motifs have prompted the most discussion ( cf . 
Burl 1997 ; Scarre 1997 ; and see Loveday 1999 )  . Overall , this 
is the largest group of rock art panels currently known in 
southern England , but it is by no means certain that all the 
motifs and panels have yet been found at the site . Recent 
experiments with laser-scanning have certainly shown the 
possibilities for further discoveries ( Goskar et al . 2003 )  . At 
least one piece of carved chalk from Stonehenge is 
decorated ( Cleal et al . 1995 , figure 222 )  , while the chalk 
lump with a round , hollow depression in one face from a 
Phase 2 context may be a mobiliary cup-marked stone or 
decorated cobble of a type not uncommon in third- and 
second-millennium BC contexts in the British Isles ( Cleal et 
al . 1995 , figure 221 . 11 ; and cf . Beckensall 1999 , 145 )  . 
Thomas ( 1952 ) lists a further four similar ‘ cups ’ or cupmarked chalk blocks from sites within the Stonehenge 
Landscape : Wilsford ; Woodhenge ( two examples )  ; and 
Stonehenge ( from Hawley ’ s excavations of the ditch , but 
now seemingly lost )  . Another was found at Southmill Hill , 
Amesbury , in 1974 ( Anon 1976 , 134 )  . Rock art is also 
represented on the east wall of the central shaft-grave 
below the Shrewton G5k barrow . This small panel comprises 
groups of intercutting straight lines incised into the chalk 
( Green and Rollo-Smith 1984 , figure 12 )  . 
A standing stone , known as the Cuckoo Stone , is 
recorded on early maps and in antiquarian accounts 
although it now lies recumbent ( Colt Hoare 1812 , plan 
opposite page 170 ; Cunnington 1929 , 11 )  . The stone is a 
block of sarsen 2 . 1m long by 1 . 5m by 0 . 6m . Its position in 
line with the axis of the Cursus makes the definition and 
investigation of this site highly desirable . It is one of very few 
recorded single standing stones in central southern England . 
Spreads of features and occupation material resulting 
from chance finds , recorded observations of construction 
works , and small-scale excavations play a major part in 
understanding the archaeology of the third millennium BC 
and serve to illustrate the importance of continuing such 
work . A water-pipe trench cutting through Durrington Walls 
in 1950–1 revealed the existence of features outside the 
henge-enclosure which were followed up by excavations in 
1951–2 ( Stone et al . 1954 )  . These revealed a double line of 
postholes over a distance of nearly 21m with other 
postholes at right angles suggestive of the remains of a 
building or structure pre-dating the construction of the bank 
of Durrington Walls . Occupation debris accumulated around 
the posts and sealed the primary weathering of the adjacent 
bank . Half a dozen more pits were found in 1991 to the 
north and northeast of Durrington Walls during the 
construction of a pipeline parallel to the Packway ( Cleal et 
al . 2004 , 220–3 )  . Further south , investigations connected 
with the realignment of the A345 through Durrington Walls 
revealed the plan of one late Neolithic post-built structure 
and associated pits ( Structure A ) and a ditch ( Structure B ) 
also dated to the later Neolithic ( Wainwright and Longworth 
1971 , 44–7 )  . To the southwest , excavations in advance of 
tree-planting in 1970 revealed evidence for Neolithic 
settlement comprising four pits and a shallow ditch all 
associated with Grooved Ware pottery ( Wainwright 1971 , 
78–82 )  . Further south still , the Woodlands pit group was 
found in the garden of a house called Woodlands in 
Countess Road in 1941 and explored further in 1947 ( Stone 
56 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 57 

Illustration 35 
King Barrow Ridge ‘ Plaque 
Pit ’ and its contents .  [ A and 
B after Cleal and Allen 1994 , 
figure 5 ; C and D after 
Harding 1988 , figure 2 .  ] 
57 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 58 

Illustration 36 
Rock art at Stonehenge .  
( top ) Distribution of stones 
with prehistoric engravings .  
( bottom ) Axes and other 
motifs on Stones 3 , 4 , and 
53 .  [ After Cleal et al . 1995 , 
figures 17 , 18 , and 20 
with additions .  ] 
and Young 1948 ; Stone 1949 )  . There were four pits in all , 
each oval in plan and rather shallow . They contained 
Grooved Ware pottery , part of a Group VII stone axe from 
North Wales and a wide range of worked flint , worked stone , 
animal remains , fish remains , marine shells , and carbonized 
hazel-nut shells . The pottery provides the site-type name 
for one of the four recognized sub-styles of Grooved Ware 
( see Longworth in Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 238 )  . 
Most recently , field evaluations on the site of the proposed 
Stonehenge Visitor Centre at Countess Road East have 
revealed a possible pit , a section of ditch , and a substantial 
collection of flintworking debris that can provisionally be 
dated to the third millennium BC ( WA 1995 ; 2003a ; 2004 )  . 
All these features form part of what must be considered as 
a very extensive spread of third-millennium BC activity 
extending from King Barrow Ridge eastwards to the Avon , 
especially focusing on the higher ground south of 
Durrington Walls along the east side of the Avon Valley 
( Illustration 37 )  . This area has been labelled the Durrington 
Zone by Richards ( 1990 , 269–70 )  . 
East of the Avon , similar material was found at Ratfyn 
in 1920 ( Stone 1935 ; Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 5–6 )  . 
A ditch ( undated ) and pits were the main features 
represented . Finds included human skeletons , Grooved 
Ware pottery , an axe hammer , worked flints , animal bones , 
and a large scallop shell suggesting links with the coast . 
Further south is the site of Butterfield Down which also 
provides abundant evidence for activity in the later third 
and early second millennia BC ( Lawson 1993 ; Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , 10 and 37–8 )  . 
Scatters of pottery and flint artefacts dating to the third 
millennium BC are fairly numerous through the central part 
of the Stonehenge Landscape . The area around Durrington 
Walls is especially rich in findspots of Grooved Ware and 
Beaker pottery , mainly as residual finds in later contexts 
around the north , west , and south sides ( cf . Wainwright and 
58 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 59 

Longworth 1971 , 3–6 ; RCHM 1979 , 22–3 )  . These finds serve 
to confirm the significance of the area and the high intensity 
of activity here throughout the third millennium BC . 
Illustration 37 
Recorded archaeological 
sites and monuments in 
the ‘ Durrington Zone ’  .  
[ Sources : various .  ] 
Six pits containing Beaker pottery were excavated at 
Crescent Copse near Shrewton in 1997 ( Heaton and Cleal 
2000 ) but nothing is known of their wider context . The same 
applies to a group of three pits found in 1940 during military 
digging on Knighton Down , Durrington , and a group of pits 
found at the Rollestone Grain Store in 1996 ( Anon 1998 , 164 )  . 
The Stonehenge Environs Survey revealed several more 
or less discrete scatters of datable material . Pottery scatters 
are the most distinctive . Peterborough Ware first appears 
during the middle Neolithic ( around 3500 BC ) but is 
predominantly an early third–millennium BC tradition 
59 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 60 
 
( Gibson and Kinnes 1997 )  . Within the Stonehenge 
Landscape no Peterborough Ware has been recovered from 
pits , only occurring as surface finds , in buried soils ( see 
below )  , or within amorphous subsoil hollows . Surface 
scatters have been recorded on King Barrow Ridge , Wilsford 
Down , Fargo Wood / Packway , and Stonehenge Down 
( Richards 1990 , 267 )  . Similar scatters with Grooved Ware 
are far less common , and almost exclusively in the eastern 
part of the Stonehenge Landscape . The only exceptions are 
around Stonehenge and on Wilsford Down ( Richards 1990 , 
270 )  . Beaker pottery was found thinly scattered throughout 
the surface collections with a slight concentration on 
Wilsford Down ( Richards 1990 , 271 ; Cleal et al . 1995 , figures 
78 and 225 )  . What these scatters represent is not known , 
and they may in some cases simply be background noise 
representing the extensive off-site dimensions of activity 
that is otherwise locally intensive . Some of the scatters 
coincide , for example around Wilsford Down , and this has 
led them to be interpreted as significant places of some 
kind repeatedly visited over a long period of time ( Cleal et 
al . 1995 , 488 )  . 
Collections of worked flint from field survey are less 
diagnostic than pottery , but again provide evidence for the 
differential concentration of activity across the landscape . 
Two late Neolithic flint scatters were investigated during the 
Stonehenge Environs Survey . One , at King Barrow Ridge , 
revealed pits and stakeholes in four of the twelve 5m by 5m 
excavated trenches . Pottery and worked flint were mainly of 
Peterborough and Grooved Ware affinity . Interpretation is 
difficult , but is seen in terms of occupation and domestic 
activity ( Richards 1990 , 109–23 )  . The second area was on 
Wilsford Down . Here only one feature was recognized in the 
sixteen 5m by 5m trenches excavated . Activity here was 
mainly seen in terms of flintworking with minimal domestic 
occupation ( Richards 1990 , 158–71 )  . Together , these two 
investigations illustrate the diversity of activity represented 
by surface scatters and at the same time illustrate the 
potential for further investigation and the systematic 
characterization or ‘ fingerprinting ’ of assemblages collected 
from the ploughzone . 
Perhaps the most important collections are those 
preserved beneath the earthworks and mounds of later 
monuments , especially round barrows . These illustrate 
great potential for future work , although locating suitable 
places to target investigation is always going to be difficult . 
Woodhenge Circle 2 ( Durrington 68 : Illustration 38 ) 
preserved a setting of postholes that has been 
reconstructed as the remains of a late Neolithic structure , 
possibly a house ( Cunnington 1929 , 45 and plate 39 ; Pollard 
1995b )  , fairly typical of others around the country ( Darvill 
1996 , 107 and figure 6 . 8 )  . 
Illustration 38 
Late Neolithic house 
revealed below Durrington 
68 .  [ After Pollard 1995b , 
figure 2 .  ] 
Amesbury G39 and other barrows on King Barrow Ridge 
incorporated much Peterborough Ware , Grooved Ware , and 
Beaker pottery in the matrix of the mound ( Cleal and Allen 
1994 , 62–5 and 70 )  ; Amesbury 133 ( a twin bell barrow ) 
sealed a large hollow containing Peterborough pottery and 
the remains of an antler , and Grooved Ware was recovered 
from the buried soil ( RCHM 1979 , 4 )  ; excavations in the Lake 
Wood Group revealed Peterborough Ware and Beaker 
pottery within and under the mounds G36f , G37 , G38 , and 
G39 ( Grimes 1964 )  ; Amesbury G133 yielded a small but 
diverse assemblage of pre-barrow ceramics including 
Grooved Ware and Beaker pottery ( Gingell 1988 , 39 )  ; Beaker 
pottery was found at Winterbourne Stoke G39 and G47 
( Gingell 1988 , 54 )  ; but the largest group is from G51–54 
excavated by Greenfield in 1958 where 144 sherds of 
Peterborough Ware , 49 sherds of Grooved Ware , and 5 
sherds of Beaker pottery were found in pre-barrow contexts 
( Smith 1991 , 34–8 )  ; Amesbury G61 also yielded a range of 
Beaker pottery ( Ashbee 1984a , 76–9 )  . 
The potential for finding late Neolithic activity on the 
lower ground in the main river valleys is hard to assess 
because opportunites for looking have been few . Mention 
may , however , be made of the assemblage of late Neolithic 
flintwork recovered during watching briefs on pipeline 
developments near Netheravon on the Avon Valley 
( McKinley 1999 , 30 )  , and the extensive evidence for late 
Neolithic occupation , including a possible house structure , 
at Downton just outside the Stonehenge Landscape south 
of Salisbury ( Rahtz and ApSimon 1962 )  . 
Overall , evidence of sectoring within the landscape can 
be glimpsed even if it is not fully understood ( Richards 
1984 , 181 ; 1990 , 270 )  . Thorpe and Richards note the almost 
mutually exclusive distribution of associations between 
Beaker pottery and Peterborough Ware as against Beaker 
pottery and Grooved Ware ( Thorpe and Richards 1984 , 
figure 6 . 3 )  . This they attribute to the way that the users of 
Beaker pottery consciously sought to acknowledge and 
reuse earlier centres of power in the landscape . As a result 
of the Stonehenge Environs Survey it is possible to add 
further detail . The Durrington Zone along the east side of 
the Avon is perhaps to be associated with residential and 
domestic areas , Wilsford Down and the northeastern part of 
Durrington Down may be flintworking areas , while the 
central sector focused on Stonehenge and the Cursus may 
be considered sacred or ceremonial . Darvill ( 1997a , 182–9 ) 
has suggested that such divisions may be fitted with a 
quartering of the landscape based on a simple cosmological 
scheme grounded in a fourfold subdivision of space 
structured around the movements of the sun ( and cf . Pollard 
and Ruggles 2001 for a similar pattern within Stonehenge 
itself )  . Parker Pearson and Ramilisonina ( 1998 ) prefer a 
slightly different scheme in which the space is structured 
and conceived in terms of a domain of the ancestors centred 
on Stonehenge and a domain of the living centred on 
Durrington Walls . During the later third millennium BC the 
60 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 61 

River Avon acts as conduit for the transformation from life to 
death , with the Stonehenge Avenue providing a route for 
ancestral initiates to move from the River Avon to the circle 
of the ancestors ( Stonehenge )  . Oppositions between life 
and death are expressed in the deposition of ceramics , the 
range of material culture represented , and the metaphorical 
use of timber structures in the domain of the living but 
stone in the domain of the ancestors . 
The physical subdivision of the landscape during the 
third millennium BC is fairly well represented by several 
finds . Evidence of a fenceline in the form of a line of 
postholes was sealed below Shrewton G23 ( Green and 
Rollo-Smith 1984 , 281–5 )  . A group of five postholes on a 
NNW–SSE alignment were found below the Woodhenge 
Circle 1 ( Durrington 67 ) and may be interpreted as a 
possible fence ( Cunnington 1929 , plate 39 ; RCHM 1979 , 23 )  . 
A similar line of six postholes was found on the northern 
edge of the northern bank at Durrington Walls within the 
stripped road corridor , although their exact date , their 
relationship to the henge bank , and continuation to the 
northwest and southeast is a matter requiring further 
research ( Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 15–16 )  . All of 
these glimpses of what appear to be fragments of rather 
larger features suggest that by about 2000 BC parts at least 
of the Stonehenge Landscape were being formally divided 
up through the creation of physical boundaries . 
Some of these land divisions may be connected with an 
expansion of arable cultivation represented in the fill 
sequences of a number of ditches . At the Amesbury 42 long 
barrow changes in the mollusca populations and soil matrix 
suggest the onset of cultivation in levels associated with the 
presence of Beaker pottery ( Entwistle in Richards 1990 , 
108 )  . Below the neighbouring Amesbury G70 and G71 
barrows there is evidence for pre-barrow cultivation in the 
form of rip-ard marks cutting into the chalk bedrock surface 
( Christie 1967 , 347 )  . The importance of these old ground 
surfaces preserved below round barrows of the second 
millennium BC can hardly be overestimated . Collectively , 
the Bronze Age round barrows in the Stonehenge Landscape 
preserve underneath their mounds the largest sample of 
late Neolithic ground surface within such a small region 
anywhere in England . 
Stray finds broadly datable to the third millennium 
BC have been found widely across the Stonehenge 
Landscape . These include 15 flint and stone axes , of which 
at least two of the stone examples are of Cornish origin and 
three of the flint examples are listed on the GIS database 
as ‘ roughouts ’  . Rather surprising in view of the presence of 
early metalwork in graves is the apparent absence of early 
styles of copper or bronze axe as stray finds from the 
surrounding landscape . 
EARLY BRONZE AGE 
( 2000–1500 BC ) 
Early in the second millennium BC the styles of pottery , 
flintwork , and metalwork change fairly markedly in southern 
England , as too the form and use of funerary monuments 
and settlement sites . The circulation of Beaker pottery is 
over by about 1800 BC ( Kinnes et al . 1991 ; Case 1995 )  , its 
place in funerary contexts initially being overtaken by 
collared urns , food vessels , and cordoned urns , with various 
Wessex biconical urns and early forms of Deverel-Rimbury 
style urns following a few centuries later . Metalwork 
characteristically belongs to Burgess ’ industrial Stages V–VII 
within his Overton and Bedd Branwen periods ( 1980 , 
80–131 )  , Needham ’ s Period 3 and 4 ( 1996 , 130–3 )  . Map I 
shows the distribution of recorded sites and finds of the 
early second millennium BC . 
The early second millennium BC is synonymous with 
currency of the widely accepted Wessex Culture proposed 
originally by Stuart Piggott ( 1938 ; and cf . Piggott 1973d ) to 
embrace the material culture of a series of richly furnished 
graves found widely across the chalklands of southern 
England and extending northwards into the upper Thames 
basin and the Cotswolds . Of the 100 Wessex Culture graves 
listed by Piggott ( 1938 , 102–6 )  , 35 lie within the Stonehenge 
Landscape , emphasizing something of the significance of 
the area . 
Originally seen as the result of an incursion by a 
dominant aristocracy from Brittany , the sequence , 
relationships , and distribution of the rich Wessex graves 
have been elaborated and reviewed by ApSimon ( 1954 )  , 
Coles and Taylor ( 1971 )  , Gerloff ( 1975 )  , and Burgess ( 1980 , 
98–111 ) amongst others . Since the 1970s , increasing 
emphasis has been placed on the essentially indigenous 
character of the main body of archaeological material for 
the period with the proposal that the rather exceptional 
well-furnished burials ‘ were the graves of the rich and 
powerful in each chiefdom ’  ( Burgess 1980 , 99 )  . Humphrey 
Case has argued for a high degree of continuity between 
Beaker-using communities and those responsible for the 
Wessex graves on the basis of finds from Wilsford 7 ( Case 
2003 )  . Here , part of a Group B Beaker vessel appears to 
have been found alongside a primary series collared urn , 
the two vessels sharing some decorative motifs , especially 
criss-cross patterns and zonal lozenge and zonal 
herringbone motifs . Also accompanying the extended 
inhumation in the primary grave was an unspecified 
number of other objects including an accessory vessel 
( grape cup ) and a group of beads and pendants made 
of gold sheet , amber , jet or shale , fossil encrinite , and 
perhaps other stone . 
The single most richly furnished and best-known Wessex 
Culture burial is that from Bush Barrow on Normanton Down 
to the southwest of Stonehenge ( Illustration 39 )  . This 
barrow was investigated by William Cunnington and Richard 
Colt Hoare in September 1808 to reveal the burial of an 
adult male set north–south on the floor of the barrow ( Colt 
Hoare 1812 , 202–4 )  . Grave goods with this burial include : a 
bronze axe , two very large bronze daggers ( one with gold 
nails in the haft )  , two quadrangular gold plates , one gold 
scabbard-mounting or belt-hook , the head and bone inlay of 
a sceptre , and other fragments of bronze and wood ( Piggott 
1938 , 105 ; Ashbee 1960 , 76–8 ; Annable and Simpson 1964 , 
45–6 ; Burgess 1980 , 101 )  . The human remains appear to 
have been reburied at the site , and it is still far from certain 
that the burial examined was in fact the primary burial . The 
grave goods are widely regarded as representative of the 
early phase of the Wessex Culture ( Wessex I )  , but absolute 
dates for any graves within the tradition are extremely 
sparse and it has long been held as a priority to improve 
this situation . 
Within the Stonehenge Landscape the only dated 
Wessex Culture grave is the cremation burial accompanied 
by a jet button and jet and amber beads from Amesbury 
G39 on the western slope of King Barrow Ridge . On 
typological grounds this would be assigned to the later 
61 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 62 

Illustration 39 

Bush Barrow .  
 
( top ) The barrow in 

August 1993 .  
 
( bottom left ) 

Reconstruction of the 

main recorded burial .  
 
( bottom right ) Grave goods 

from the main burial .  
 
[ Photograph : Timothy 

Darvill ; bottom left after 

Ashbee 1960 , figure 24 ; 

bottom right after 

Annable and Simpson 

1964 , items 168–78 .  ] 

62 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 63 

stage of the Wessex Culture ( Wessex II )  , but it has a 
superficially rather early date of 2300–1650 BC ( HAR-1237 : 
3620±90 BP ) from oak charcoal from the area of burning in 
the centre of the barrow ( Ashbee 1980 , 32 ; and see Ashbee 
1986 , 84–5 for general comment on this and other available 
dates and Coles and Taylor 1971 for a minimal view on the 
duration of the Wessex Culture )  . 
The dating of the rich graves might most usefully be 
considered in the context of establishing the sequence and 
date of all the round barrows in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Although around 40 richly furnished graves are now known , 
they represent just 6 per cent of the 670 or so known round 
barrows within the Stonehenge Landscape ; only 4 per cent 
of such monuments if the 309 ring-ditches are considered 
as the remains of round barrows and also taken into 
account . Accepting that some round barrows pre-date the 
second millennium BC , the sheer number of remaining 
barrows that can be attributed to the five centuries between 
2000 BC and 1500 BC is impressive and may be estimated at 
a minimum of about 800 monuments . Since the work of 
William Stukeley in the eighteenth century round barrows 
have been classified on morphological grounds as bowl 
barrows ( the most long-lived form and including the 
Neolithic examples ) together with a series of so-called fancy 
barrows comprising : bell barrows , disc barrows , saucer 
barrows , and pond barrows ( cf . Thurnam 1868 , plate xi 
( based on Stukeley )  ; Grinsell 1936 , 14–25 ; Ashbee 1960 , 
24–6 )  . In general , barrows that survive well , or which were 
recorded by fieldworkers who were able to observe them 
prior to their more recent damage , can be classified 
according to this system ; however , many others remain 
unclassifiable with the result that it is now impossible to 
provide more than an impressionistic analysis of the main 
types and classes represented . Table 2 provides a 
breakdown of all recorded round barrows by type based on 
the information recorded on the English Heritage GIS for the 
Stonehenge Landscape ( see McOmish et al . 2002 , 33–50 for 
a discussion of the distribution and typology of round 
barrows within the SPTA )  . 
Table 2 
Summary of the main 
types of round barrow 
represented in the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
Round barrow type Number % 
Bowl barrows† 425 42 
Bell barrows 47 5 
Disk barrows 51 5 
Saucer barrows 15 2 
Pond barrows 18 2 
Unclassifi ed 115 12 
Ring ditches 309 32 
Totals 980 100 
† 
Including examples dated to the third and fourth millennia BC 
Various doubts have also been cast on the value of such 
typological analysis and since the mid 1990s considerable 
attention has been given to the study of landscape 
situation , visibility , position , and relationships ( e . g . Field 
1998 )  . Independently , Woodward and Woodward ( 1996 ) and 
Darvill ( 1997a , 194 ) recognized a concentric patterning to 
the distribution of round barrows around Stonehenge and 
suggested that this might somehow reflect belief systems 
and the physical representation of cosmological order ( and 
see Clarke and Kirby ( 2003 ) who propose a third , outer , ring 
of cemeteries )  . A rather different view was taken by Fleming 
( 1971 )  . He saw broad groupings of barrows as cemetery 
areas visited by pastoralist communities living within 
seasonally defined territories . 
Prominent amongst the distribution of round barrows in 
the central part of the Stonehenge Landscape is a series of 
barrow cemeteries or ‘ barrow groups ’  ( Ashbee 1960 , figure 
6 ; Illustration 40 )  . The barrow groups immediately around 
Stonehenge have been reviewed by Grinsell who described 
eight of them in some detail ( Grinsell nd )  . Further groups 
can be tentatively identified within the wider Stonehenge 
Landscape to give about 26 in all ( Map I )  : 
A Cursus Group ( Linear ) 
B Lesser Cursus Group ( Dispersed ) 
C Winterbourne Stoke Group ( Linear ) 
D New King Barrows ( Linear ) 
E Old King Barrows ( Dispersed ) 
F Normanton Down Group ( Linear ) 
G Lake Group ( Nucleated ) 
H Wilsford Group ( Nucleated ) 
I Lake Down Group ( Dispersed ) 
J Rollestone Barrows ( Dispersed ) 
K Durrington Down Group ( Nucleated ) 
L Countess Road / Woodhenge Group ( Linear ) 
M Countess Farm ( Linear ) 
N Silk Hill Group ( Dispersed ) 
O Milston Down West Group ( Dispersed ) 
P New Barn Down ( Linear ) 
Q Earl ’ s Farm Down Group ( Dispersed ) 
R Boscombe Down West ( Nucleated ) 
S Parsonage Down Group ( Nucleated ) 
T Addestone Group ( Nucleated ) 
U Maddington Group ( Nucleated ) 
V Elston Hill Group ( Linear ) 
W Ablington Group ( Nucleated ) 
X Brigmerston Group ( Nucleated ) 
Y Bulford Field Group ( Nucleated ) 
Z Stonehenge Down Group ( Nucleated ) 
Several different styles of round barrow cemetery are 
represented including linear , nucleated , and dispersed 
examples , but the integrity of identified groups needs 
further checking before being accepted . On present 
evidence the dispersed cemeteries are the largest and may 
contain several foci ; the nucleated groups are usually 
relatively small . Linear cemeteries often incorporate a 
penumbral scatter of loosely associated barrows . Most 
cemeteries are focused around an early barrow , usually a 
long barrow , oval barrow , or Beaker-phase round barrow 
that might be considered a ‘ founder ’ s barrow ’  . Richards 
( 1990 , 273 ) notes that many of the cemeteries around 
Stonehenge are positioned on the crests of low ridges , 
positions in which the mounds of the more substantial 
barrows are silhouetted against the skyline . Interest in the 
visibility of barrows within the landscape is considered in 
general terms by Field ( 1998 , 315–16 )  , and in detail for the 
Stonehenge area by Peters ( 2000 )  . Peters defines two main 
kinds of barrow mound – conspicuous and inconspicuous – 
the former being mainly built in the early Bronze Age on 
ridges and high ground ( 2000 , 355 )  . Within the Stonehenge 
Landscape , the largest and most conspicuous round barrow 
is Milston 12 on Silk Hill , 45m in diameter and 6m high , 
63 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 64 

which is surrounded by a bank and external ditch ( Grinsell 
1957 , 226 )  . Other large mounds include Amesbury 55 , the 
 ‘ Monarch of the Plain ’ as Colt Hoare called it , a bell barrow 
nearly 30m in diameter and 2 . 2m high at the western end of 
the Cursus Group . 
Illustration 40 
Winterbourne Stoke linear 
barrow cemetery northeast 
of Long Barrow Crossroads . 
View looking southwest .  
[ Photograph : English 
Heritage . NMR 15077 / 13 
©Crown copyright ( NMR )  .  ] 
None of the barrow cemeteries has been completely 
excavated , nor have any of the large ones been subject to 
detailed geophysical survey . A nucleated group of barrows 
within the Stonehenge triangle ( the Stonehenge Down 
Group ) has , however , been surveyed using magnetometry 
with good results that emphasize the great diversity of 
barrow forms even within the seven barrows represented 
( David and Payne 1997 , 83–7 ; Illustration 41 )  . 
Illustration 41 
Plot of the results of a 
geophysical survey over 
Stonehenge and the 
Stonehenge Down Group 
barrow cemetery .  [ Survey : 
English Heritage .  ] 
Available records suggest that about 40 per cent of known 
round barrows have been excavated to some degree , although 
the vast majority of these took place during the nineteenth 
century AD with the result that rather little is known about 
what was found . In many cases re-excavation has proved 
successful . Most of those studied have been upstanding 
mounds . Very little work has been done with the ring-ditches 
in the area ; none has been fully excavated although transects 
were cut through previously unrecorded examples in the Avon 
Valley near Netheravon during the construction of pipetrenches in 1991 and 1995 ( Graham and Newman 1993 ; 
McKinley 1999 )  . This group of four or five ring-ditches also 
serves to illustrate the potential for more such sites on lower 
ground in the river valleys . At Butterfield Down , Amesbury , the 
planning and sample excavation of a ring-ditch showed no 
evidence of a central burial , but a pit grave immediately 
outside the ring-ditch on the northeast side contained the 
burial of a child that included one sherd believed to be from 
an accessory vessel ( Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 , 10–11 )  . 
The range of finds recovered from the excavation of 
round barrows is impressive and very considerable . It 
includes not only the usual selection of pottery , ornaments , 
and weaponry ( well described by Piggott 1973d )  , but also 
some extremely unusual pieces such as the bone whistle 
made from the long bone of a swan from Wilsford G23 
( Megaw 1960 , 9 ; Annable and Simpson 1964 , 44–5 ) and the 
bronze two-pronged object from Wilsford G58 which has 
sometimes been seen as a ‘ standard ’ of some kind or part of 
a double handle and chain from a cauldron or similar vessel 
( Grinsell 1957 , 212 ; Annable and Simpson 1964 , 47–8 )  . The 
two unusual shale cups believed to be from the Amesbury 
64 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 65 

area also probably came from barrows although the 
circumstances under which they were found are not known 
( Newall 1929b ; Piggott 1973d , 369 )  . Evidence of cloth , 
wood , and leather has been found in the corrosion on the 
surface of several metal objects , as for example the dagger 
from Amesbury G58 ( Ashbee 1984a , 69–70 and 81 )  . Taylor 
( 1980 , 87–8 ) records the presence of gold objects in six 
barrows within the Stonehenge Landscape . Imported 
objects are also represented including the very rare glass 
bead from barrow Wilsford G42 ( Guido et al . 1984 ; 
Henderson 1988 , 448 )  , and an Armorican vase à anses from 
Winterbourne Stoke G5 ( Tomalin 1988 , 209–10 )  . 
Structurally , the early second-millennium BC round 
barrows typically comprise a turf or loam core covered by an 
envelope of chalk rubble derived from the perimeter ditch 
( Illustration 42 )  . The examination of sections revealed by 
storm damage to barrows on King Barrow Ridge suggests 
that here there were two main kinds of construction : the 
conventional turf mound and chalk envelope , and a less 
common form involving only a turf and soil mound without a 
chalk capping ( Cleal and Allen 1994 )  . Some structural 
elaboration is however represented . Amesbury 61 had a 
stake circle around the central burial and perhaps a 
rectangular stake-built structure in the centre ( Ashbee 
1984a , 55 )  ; Amesbury 71 also had a stake circle ( Christie 
1967 )  . Stakeholes were noted below Winterbourne Stoke 
G32 , G33 , and G38 but formed little by way of a coherent 
pattern . In contrast , G39 , G47 , and G50 each had a central 
setting enclosed by a ring of stakeholes and further groups 
of stakeholes both inside and outside the perimeter ditch 
( Gingell 1988 )  . All these features fall comfortably within the 
range of stake circle structures within British and 
continental round barrows ( Ashbee 1960 , 60–5 )  . Amesbury 
G70 had a single posthole marking the centre of the mound 
( Christie 1964 , 32 )  . 
Illustration 42 
Round barrows 
under excavation .  
( left ) Amesbury 58 under 
excavation in September 
1956 , showing the loam 
core of the mound 
and the old ground 
surface beneath .  
( right ) Winterbourne 
Stoke barrow 43 under 
excavation in December 
1960 after the removal 
of the mound .  [ Courtesy 
of the Wiltshire 
Archaeological and Natural 
History Society .  ] 
Most barrows of this period have a central burial pit for 
the primary burial . At Winterbourne Stoke 9 , Colt Hoare 
recorded the presence of a boat-shaped wooden coffin ; 
grave goods here included a necklace of shale and amber 
beads , a bronze dagger , a bronze awl , and a small ceramic 
vessel with impressed dot-motif decoration ( Grinsell 1957 , 
201 )  . At Amesbury G85 , excavations in 1930 showed that the 
central burial , an adult male aged about 50 , had been laid 
on a carpet of moss and yew branches , the remains of which 
were preserved by the corrosion products of a bronze 
dagger placed in the grave with the burial ( Gilmour in 
Newall 1931 , 440 )  . 
It is assumed that the reason why so many barrows 
concentrate in the area around Stonehenge is the ‘ draw ’ of 
Stonehenge itself as a special , presumably sacred , powerful 
place . Little appears to be happening at Stonehenge itself 
during the early second millennium BC , at least in terms of 
construction or modification . The last phased event is the 
digging and infilling of the rings of X and Y holes outside of 
and concentric with the sarsen circle ( Sub-phase 3vi ) probably 
around 1640–1520 BC ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 533 )  . The purpose of 
these holes is not clear , but they do not seem to have held 
posts or stones and may be seen either as an abandoned 
attempt to expand the circles or as rings of ritual pits . The 
absence of dated events relating to the early second 
millennium BC does not mean that the existing structure was 
not used , but it is odd that after a millennium of fairly constant 
change things all go rather quiet , with very little pottery or 
other datable material from this period either . It is possible , 
then , that the ‘ power ’ of Stonehenge in the early second 
millennium BC was not its use but rather an ancestral memory 
of what it had been and a desire to associate with its former 
glory in selecting a final resting place . In this context it may 
also be noted that dates of 2350–1650 BC ( BM-286 : 3630±110 
BP ) and 2300–1500 BC ( BM-285 : 3560±120 BP ) relate to 
hearths in the secondary fills of the ditches at Durrington 
Walls ( Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 20–1 ) and that none of 
the other henges and related monuments in the area seems to 
have evidence of primary usage after about 1900 BC . 
Settlements datable to the early second millennium BC 
are unknown in the Stonehenge Landscape , although the 
Stonehenge Environs Survey did reveal four concentrations 
of early Bronze Age pottery which might represent 
occupation areas : around Long Barrow Crossroads , east of 
Fargo Plantation between the Cursus and the Packway , on 
Durrington Down , and west of Stonehenge ( Richards 1990 , 
272 )  . Worked flint was found more widely , with slight 
concentrations not connected with pottery spreads on 
Wilsford Down and King Barrow Ridge . The interpretation of 
these requires further work . 
Early second-millennium BC flint assemblages have also 
been recovered from a number of excavations , notably 
those from work by Patricia Christie between 1959 and 1964 
later analysed by Alan Saville ( 1978 )  . Although these are 
tentatively considered as essentially domestic assemblages 
that happen to be preserved at or recovered from barrow 
excavations ( Saville 1978 , 22 )  , another possibility is that 
barrow sites provided a context for flint knapping either 
because of their ancestral connections or because they were 
by this time ‘ out of the way ’ places ( cf . Fasham 1978 )  . 
Excavation of a ring-ditch at Butterfield Down , Amesbury , 
also revealed a substantial quantity of primary knapping 
debris in the ditch fills ( Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 , 10 ) 
65 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 18 PM Page 66 

suggesting that perhaps such structures had similar roles to 
round barrows in respect of flintworking . 
Especially important are the finds of early metal objects 
that serve to complement the material deposited as grave 
goods associated with Beaker pottery ( Illustration 43 )  . Such 
finds include a flanged axe from near Stonehenge which is 
in the Lukis collection ( Grinsell 1957 , 29 )  ; a decorated 
flanged bronze axe of Irish type found on Stonehenge Down 
in 1952 ( Stone 1953 )  ; a flanged axe with slight stop-ridge 
from Durnford ( Saunders 1972 )  ; a short flanged axe from 
Beacon Hill , Bulford ( Grinsell 1957 , 52 )  ; a bronze axe of Irish 
origin with hammered chevron decoration on its butt found 
north of the recreation ground at Figheldean ( SM 1958 , 10 )  ; 
a flat axe with a slight stop-ridge from between Figheldean 
and Netheravon ( Saunders 1976 )  ; and a flanged bronze axe 
from Wilsford ( Grinsell 1957 , 123 )  . 
Illustration 43 
Early bronze tools from the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
A : Figheldean . B : Durnford . 
C : Stonehenge Down .  
 
[ A after Moore and 

Rowlands 1972 , Plate VI . 4 ; 

B after Saunders 1972 , 

figure 1 ; C after Stone 

1953 , 31 .  ] 

MIDDLE AND LATER BRONZE 
AGE ( 1500–700 BC ) 
The middle and later Bronze Age was a period of far-reaching 
and widespread change across the British Isles , represented 
archaeologically in fundamental changes to the very nature of 
the evidence recovered . This is best seen in the switch from a 
predominance of ceremonial and burial monuments to an 
archaeology dominated by what appear to be settlements , 
fieldsystems , and agricultural structures . Piggott ( 1973e ) 
provides a general overview of the period in Wiltshire . The 
metalworking traditions belong to Burgess ’ Bedd Branwen , 
Knighton Heath , Penard , and Wilburton traditions ( 1980 )  , 
Needham ’ s Periods 5 and 6 ( 1996 , 133–6 )  . Environmental 
evidence suggests an opening up of the landscape and the 
development of extensive agricultural systems after 1600 BC 
( Allen 1997 , 136 )  . Map J shows the recorded distribution of 
middle and later Bronze Age sites and finds . 
This shift in focus is well typified at Stonehenge itself 
where the only activity is represented by a small amount of 
Deverel-Rimbury style pottery , occasional finds such as the 
bone point from the upper fill of stonehole 8 , and silt 
accumulating in the gradually infilling Y holes ( Cleal et al . 
1995 , 334 and 491 )  . The only remaining question mark 
hangs over the phasing of the eastern part of the Cursus 
from Stonehenge Bottom to the River Avon . Radiocarbon 
dates from cuttings through it are inconclusive and suggest 
a long period of construction ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 291–330 )  , 
although not necessarily as long as Atkinson ( 1979 , 216 ) 
proposed with the eastern section being added in the late 
second millennium BC . Recutting and reuse of an earlier 
structure at this time are possible and Darvill ( 1997a , 195 ) 
has linked this to an increasing interest in wet places and 
rivers through the late second and early first millennia BC . 
The main filling of the Wilsford Shaft dates to the period 
from about 1500 BC through to about 700 BC ( Illustration 
44 ) although its initial construction may be much earlier 
( see above )  . Deverel-Rimbury pottery is well represented 
( Ashbee et al . 1989 )  . Broken wooden vessels and important 
environmental evidence suggestive of an agricultural 
landscape were recovered . Interpretation remains difficult , 
with the two main alternatives being a well serving the 
needs of local populations or a ritual shaft of the kind 
known in many parts of Europe from the mid third 
millennium BC onwards ( Ashbee et al . 1989 , 128–38 )  . Other 
environmental evidence confirms the picture of a mainly 
open landscape ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 491 )  . 
Four settlement sites of the period have been recorded 
and variously investigated , while others are suspected . At 
Winterbourne Stoke Crossroads watching briefs and 
recording work during the construction of a new roundabout 
at the A303 / A360 junction revealed the presence of at least 
three circular structures with substantial porches ( Richards 
1990 , 208–10 )  . A palisaded ditch to the west of the 
structures may be part of a surrounding enclosure , but it 
just might be connected with the putatively late Neolithic 
Stonehenge Palisade Ditch noted above . 
A second Bronze Age settlement is represented by a 
scatter of pottery and burnt flint towards the northern end 
of Fargo Plantation . Detailed test-pitting and the excavation 
of five 5m by 5m sample squares yielded substantial 
amounts of finds but little structural evidence ( Richards 
1990 , 194–208 )  . Subsequent work in the area in connection 
with the evaluation of a possible access route to the 
proposed Larkhill visitor centre site sampled a substantial 
ditch and yielded a bronze side-looped spearhead 
( WA 1991 , 13 )  . This site may originally have been enclosed . 
66 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 67 

Illustration 44 
The Wilsford Shaft .  
[ After Ashbee et al . 1989 , 
figure 7 .  ] 
A third middle or later Bronze Age settlement is 
represented at an enclosure known as the Egg , situated a 
little to the south of Woodhenge on the western slopes of 
the Avon Valley ( Illustration 45 )  . Discovered through aerial 
photography at the same time as Woodhenge , this 
enclosure was sampled through excavation by the 
Cunningtons ( Cunnington 1929 , 49–51 ; Wainwright and 
Longworth 1971 , 6 ; RCHM 1979 , 23 )  . The enclosure 
boundary comprised a palisade trench , one terminal of 
which is extended in a straight line southwards where it 
meets a linear ditch . In the interior were 25 pits , one 
containing carbonized barley . Subsequent analysis of aerial 
photographs and finds recovered from monitoring a pipe 
trench suggest that the Egg is part of a more extensive 
spread of middle Bronze Age occupation that would repay 
detailed investigation ( RCHM 1979 , 24 )  . A ditch excavated 
beside the Packway Enclosure north of Durrington Walls 
may also be part of the same system of boundaries 
( Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 324 )  . 
The fourth site is at Rollestone Grain Store , Shrewton . 
Here , field evaluations and excavations in advance of an 
expansion to the Wiltshire Grain Facility in 1996 revealed an 
enclosure some 60m by 50m in extent , bounded by a ditch 
2m wide and over 1m deep . A single entrance lay in the 
middle of the western side . Inside the enclosure was a dewpond ( Anon 1998 , 163–4 )  . 
67 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 68 

Illustration 45 
The Egg , Countess Road . 
An aerial view looking 
north across the 
cropmarks defining the 
enclosure .  [ Photograph : 
Peter Goodhugh , 
Copyright reserved .  ] 
Other settlement sites may be indicated by spreads of 
ceramics , burnt flint , and quern fragments recovered during 
the Stonehenge Environs Survey and subsequent field 
evaluations , for example : around the Packway north of 
Fargo Plantation ; on Durrington Down ; to the west of 
Stonehenge ( Richards 1990 , 276 )  ; and an enclosure east of 
Robin Hood ’ s Ball ( Anon 2003 , 236 )  . 
One of the most extensive features of this period is the 
arrangement of fieldsystems – the so-called Celtic fields . 
These have been discussed and described by the RCHM 
( 1979 , xiii and 29–31 )  , Richards ( 1990 , 277–9 )  , and McOmish 
et al .  ( 2002 , 51–6 )  . The following blocks can be tentatively 
recognized but need further testing through excavation 
( from west to east ; Map J )  : 
West of the Till 
A Parsonage Down / Shrewton system 
Between the Till and the Avon 
B Rox Hill and Wilsford Down 
C Long Barrow Crossroads 
D Stonehenge Down 
E Fargo Wood 
F Durrington Down 
East of the Avon 
G Amesbury Down 
H Earl ’ s Farm Down 
Not all these systems are necessarily contemporary , nor 
are all the features visible within them as earthworks or 
cropmarks recorded from aerial photographs . The present 
 ‘ blocking ’ of recognizable chunks of fieldsystem is almost 
certainly to do as much with survival patterns as with the 
original extent of coherent units . All of those systems 
recognized around the edge of the Stonehenge Landscape 
as defined here continue into adjacent areas ( see McOmish 
et al . 2002 , figure 3 . 1 for example ) and cannot easily be 
considered in isolation . Moreover , although it is widely 
believed that these systems have their origins in the mid or 
late second millennium BC , they are generally poorly dated , 
in many cases probably multi-phase , and even a superficial 
examination of the their plans and structural arrangement 
suggests that several quite different patterns are 
represented . A great deal of unpicking is needed to 
establish the nature of particular systems at given points in 
their development as well as the overall sequence . 
Apparently associated enclosures , possibly of Bronze Age or 
later date , can be recognized on Rox Hill ( RCHM 1979 , 24 )  , 
north of Normanton ( RCHM 1979 , 24 )  , and southwest of 
Fargo Plantation ( RCHM 1979 , 24–5 )  . 
A network of linear earthworks runs through the 
landscape variously pre-dating , joining , delimiting , and 
post-dating the fieldsystems ( Map J )  . They are especially 
notable on the southern part of the Avon / Till interfluve and 
have been fully described ( RCHM 1979 , xii and 25–9 )  . As 
with the fieldsystems , dating is difficult . The best preserved 
are those on Lake Down southwest of Stonehenge 
( Illustration 46 )  . Two sections through linear earthworks on 
Wilsford Down were cut as part of the Stonehenge Environs 
Project ( Richards 1990 , 192–3 )  . Both confirmed the presence 
of substantial , although different , bedrock-cut ditches , but 
neither yielded dating evidence for their construction . A pitalignment perhaps also of the early first millennium BC has 
been noted south of Normanton Down . 
Not all the linear boundaries are confined to the areas 
west of the Avon . On the east side they can be seen in a 
major arrangement on Earl ’ s Farm Down which lies within the 
68 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 69 

study area of the Wessex Linear Ditches Project ( Bradley et 
al . 1994 , figure 22 )  . A section through one part of this system 
at Butterfield Down , Amesbury , failed to yield firm dating 
evidence ( Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 , 38 )  . A section 
through two of the ‘ Wessex Linears ’ on Earl ’ s Farm Down in 
1991 showed that both were sizeable features about 3m wide 
and 1 . 5m deep , but neither contained diagnostic dating 
evidence from primary contexts ( Cleal et al . 2004 , 234–41 )  . 
Molluscan sequences from both ditches revealed that they 
lay within an essentially open downland environment . 
Overall , the linear boundaries within the Stonehenge 
Landscape form part of a much more extensive series of 
boundaries on Salisbury Plain ( Bradley et al . 1994 )  . 
Illustration 46 
Linear earthwork and 
barrow cemetery on Lake 
Down .  [ Photograph : English 
Heritage . NMR 1576 / 09 
©Crown copyright ( NMR )  .  ] 
Burials of the middle and late second millennium BC are 
usually represented by flat cemeteries typically involving 
the deposition of cremated remains in small pits or in 
ceramic containers usually known as ‘ urns ’  . Several 
different styles of urn have been defined , including Wessex 
biconical urns ( also known as Wessex handled urns or 
horseshoe handled urns ) and Deverel-Rimbury urns 
( including what are called bucket urns , globular urns , and 
barrel urns in older literature )  . All were mainly deposited 
inverted so as to both cover and contain the associated 
burial deposits . These burials are often adjacent to existing 
round barrows , and in many cases were cut into the mounds 
or ditches as ‘ secondary ’ deposits . In central southern 
England generally , cemeteries of the middle and late second 
millennium BC especially generally lie within a short 
distance ( 100m–500m ) of contemporary settlement sites , 
and are often intervisible with them ( Bradley 1981 )  . Within 
the Stonehenge Landscape evidence of small numbers of 
secondary burials is commonplace in excavated barrows , 
but fairly extensive cemeteries have been found at several 
sites including Woodford G12 ( 15 burials : Gingell 1988 , 
26–7 )  , Shrewton G5a ( 19 burials ( Illustration 47 )  : Green and 
Rollo-Smith 1984 , 262–3 )  ; Amesbury 71 ( 7 burials : Christie 
1967 )  ; Winterbourne Stoke 10 ( 7 burials : Grinsell 1957 , 201 )  ; 
and Bulford 49 ( 4 burials : Hawley 1910 , 618–20 )  . A fine 
Wessex biconical urn was found as a secondary burial at 
Bulford 27 ( Hawley 1910 , 617 and figure 1 )  , while at the 
nearby Bulford 45 bowl barrow a Deverel-Rimbury urn had 
been used ( Grinsell 1957 , 163 )  . A barrel urn with applied 
cordons decorated with fingertip impressions from 
Amesbury G3 is one of the largest ceramic vessels from the 
area , at nearly 0 . 6m high ( Annable and Simpson 1964 , 68 )  . 
It is colloquially known as the ‘ Stonehenge Urn ’  . Broken 
pottery from superficial contexts at and around other 
barrow sites may suggest the former existence of a flat 
cremation cemetery broken up and scattered by later 
ploughing as at Durrington 7 barrow on Durrington Down 
( Richards 1990 , 171–84 )  . 
Stray finds of the later second and early first millennia 
BC are surprisingly rare within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
The scatters of Deverel-Rimbury pottery generally match the 
areas of known settlement evidence and probable early 
fieldsystems ( Richards 1990 , figure 160 )  . Best represented are 
the finds of metalwork to complement that found with 
burials . An unlooped palstave was found west of Fargo 
Plantation ( Anon 1978 , 204 ) perhaps associated with the 
settlement in the area referred to above ; a socketed bronze 
knife was residual in a later context at a settlement on Fargo 
Road southwest of Durrington Walls ( Wainwright 1971 , 82 )  ; 
two socketed axes were also found in the same general area 
in the late nineteenth century ( Grinsell 1957 , 66 )  ; a bronze 
spearhead and a small socketed axe were found on Wilsford 
Down ( Grinsell 1957 , 122 )  ; a bronze spearhead was found 
during building work at Bulford Camp in 1914 ( Goddard 1919 , 
360 )  ; a socketed spearhead came from the Amesbury area 
69 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 70 
 
( Grinsell 1957 , 29 )  ; a side-looped spearhead came from the 
top of a barrow west-southwest of Stonehenge ( Grinsell 1957 , 
29 )  ; and a rapier was found on Wilsford Down ( Grinsell 1957 , 
122 )  . At Oldfield near Stonehenge a socketed axe , a class II 
razor , and a tanged tracer are said to have been found 
together , perhaps in or near a barrow ( Piggott 1946 , 138 , 
no . 54 )  . A miniature Bronze Age axe was found by a metal 
detectorist at Upavon ( Robinson 1995 , 62 , no . 9 )  , and an 
unlooped palstave of Werrar type and a socketed axe of 
Hädemarschen type were found in Steeple Langford parish 
just outside the Stonehenge Landscape ( Moore and 
Rowlands 1972 , 55 )  . Mention may also be made of the 
Figheldean hoard of 25 bronze socketed axes found in 1971 
on Figheldean Down some 2km north of the Stonehenge 
Landscape ( Coombs 1979 )  . All the axes were of the Sompting 
type , large , heavy , and with a rectangular section and 
decoration in the form of ribs , pellets , and roundels in various 
combinations on the outer faces . This large hoard dates to 
the Ewart Park phase of the later Bronze Age , c . 1000–850 BC . 
Illustration 47 
Shrewton barrow G5a and 
later Deverel-Rimbury 
cremation cemetery . The 
cremation cemetery 
comprised 19 burials , of 
which 6 were within 
ceramic vessels .  [ After 
Green and Rollo-Smith 
1984 , figure 4 .  ] 
The most significant find of metalwork is a hoard of 
bronze ornaments found in 1834 near Durnford ( Illustration 
48 )  , perhaps in or near a barrow ( Moore and Rowlands 
1972 , 61–3 )  . The hoard comprises 14 items , including 
twisted bar torcs , bracelets , and rings , and is typical of the 
Ornament Horizon of the Taunton industrial phase of the 
Bronze Age , Burgess ’ Knighton Heath Period of the twelfth 
and eleventh centuries BC ( 1980 , 131–58 )  . 
Evidence of metalworking has been recorded along the 
Nine Mile Water in Bulford in the form of part of a stone 
mould for casting socketed axes ( Grinsell 1957 , 52 with 
earlier references )  . The stone is recorded as syenite , a type 
of igneous rock that is very rare in the British Isles but 
whose identification is often confused with that of granite . 
One side of the mould has a matrix for casting South Welsh 
70 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 71 

axes of the type found widely across southern Wales , 
southwest England , Wessex , the Channel Islands , and 
northern France ( especially Brittany , Normandy , and the 
Loire basin )  . An axe that is very similar , if not identical , to 
those produced in the Bulford mould was found at 
Sandleheath on the Wiltshire / Hampshire Border ( Moore 
and Rowlands 1972 , 28 ; and see Needham 1981 )  . The other 
side of the Bulford mould has a matrix for casting a very 
rare kind of socketed axe which has two loops on different 
levels . Overall , the mould belongs within Burgess ’ Ewart 
Park industrial phase of the later Bronze Age ( Burgess 1968 , 
17–26 )  , a period of diversification and change . Moore and 
Rowlands ( 1972 , 33 ) suggest that peripatetic axe-smiths 
working in this tradition often set up their workshops close 
to river-crossings , a very suitable context for the Bulford 
mould . It is also notable that this evidence of 
bronzeworking is contemporary with the large hoard of 
Sompting axes from Figheldean Down discussed above . 
Illustration 48 
The Durnford Hoard of 
middle Bronze Age 
metalwork .  [ Drawings by 
Vanessa Constant of items 
in Devizes Museum 
( B , C , G–N ) and Salisbury 
Museum ( A , D–F )  .  ] 
IRON AGE ( 700 BC–AD 50 ) 
Although the Wessex region has a pre-eminent position in 
British Iron Age studies ( Champion 2001 )  , the period from 
700 BC through to the Roman Conquest is traditionally 
regarded as a time of relatively little activity in and around 
the southern part of Salisbury Plain ( see Cunliffe 1973a–c 
for regional context )  . In fact , however , many of the main 
features of the southern British Iron Age are well 
represented : open settlements , enclosures , and hillforts . 
The full chronology and sequence of these is poorly 
understood , but taken with the additional evidence of wellpreserved fieldsystems and boundaries this period has 
considerable potential for future research . Map K shows the 
distribution of sites and monuments of the Iron Age . 
Most of the earlier ceremonial monuments so 
characteristic of the second and third millennia BC show 
very little sign of activity after about 700 BC . Nothing firmly 
attributable to the period has been found at Stonehenge 
itself , and even the numerous barrows and cemeteries of 
the middle and later second millennium BC seem to have 
been left alone . The Wilsford Shaft was almost completely 
infilled by about 400 BC to judge from a small group of 
dated material in the very upper fill ( Ashbee et al . 1989 , 
figure 64 )  . The Stonehenge Environs Survey failed to yield a 
single piece of Iron Age pottery from its fieldwalking 
programme ( Richards 1990 )  . 
The best-known class of monument of the Iron Age is the 
hillfort , of which numerous variants have been recognized 
( Cunliffe 1991 , 312–70 )  . Within the Stonehenge Landscape 
there are two major hillforts . The largest is Ogbury 
overlooking the River Avon at Great Durnford . This poorly 
known site is a univallate enclosure of 26ha but it has never 
been adequately surveyed and is an obvious candidate for 
study . Crawford and Keiller ( 1928 , 150–2 ) provide the best 
description and illustrate their account with a fine nearvertical aerial photograph ; accounts of the site extend back 
to Stukeley ’ s visit in the early eighteenth century . Internal 
71 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 72 

boundary features have been noted and Grinsell ( 1957 , 65 ) 
recorded finding Iron Age pottery at the site in 1951 . Flints 
are also reported from the site and it has tentatively been 
suggested that what can be seen today represents a multiphase site with elements extending back into earlier 
prehistory ( Darvill 1997a , 182 : note 6 )  . 
The second hillfort , Vespasian ’ s Camp on the north bank 
of the Avon west of Amesbury , is better known as a result of 
recent investigations ( RCHM 1979 , 20–2 ; Hunter-Mann 1999 ; 
Illustration 49 )  . It is a univallate enclosure of 16ha with two 
phases of glacis-type rampart constructed around the hill in 
the early Iron Age around 500 BC . 
Illustration 49 
Vespasian ’ s Camp , 
Amesbury .  [ After HunterMann 1999 , figure 1 .  ] 
Outside the Stonehenge Landscape 1 . 5km to the 
southwest is the multivallate hillfort of Yarnbury Castle and 
a series of associated settlements and enclosures at 
Steeple Langford and Hanging Langford ( Crawford and 
Keiller 1928 , 68–71 and 162–4 : Cunnington 1933b , 198–217 )  . 
Slightly further away , 5km to the south , is Old Sarum ( RCHM 
1981 , 1–24 ) and 4km to the southeast is Figsbury Ring 
( Cunnington 1925 ; Guido and Smith 1981 )  . About 4km to the 
northeast is Sidbury ( Applebaum 1954 ; McOmish et al . 
2002 , figures 3 . 6 and 3 . 25 )  , and 6 . 5km to the north 
Casterley Camp ( Cunnington and Cunnington 1913 ; 
McOmish et al . 2002 , figures 3 . 7 and 3 . 28 )  . These sites , and 
others in the vicinity too , illustrate the point that much of 
the high-order settlement pattern of the area has to be seen 
in a regional rather than a local context . In the early Iron 
Age the Wessex chalklands supported a scatter of hillforts 
of various kinds each serving a relatively small local territory 
in some way ( Cunliffe 1991 , 348–52 )  . In this pattern , Ogbury 
and Vespasian ’ s Camp have important positions relative to 
the ‘ East Avon ’ routeway between England ’ s south coast 
and the Irish Sea proposed by Andrew Sherratt ( 1996b , 
figure 2 )  , but the Stonehenge Landscape itself is only one 
small part of the wider picture . By the middle Iron Age there 
are rather fewer , but larger , hillforts ( so-called developed 
hillforts ) with much more extensive territories around them . 
By this time the Stonehenge Landscape lay on the junction 
of the putative territories of four developed hillforts outwith 
the Landscape itself : Yarnbury , Old Sarum , Casterley Camp , 
and Sidbury ( Cunliffe 1971 , figure 14 )  . 
More common are the enclosed and open settlements 
which for much of the later first millennium BC represent the 
basic settlement pattern of compounds , hamlets , and 
farmsteads . Within the Stonehenge Landscape the most 
extensively known settlement area is around Durrington 
Walls and along the western flanks of the Avon Valley ( see 
McOmish 2001 )  , perhaps perpetuating the focus of late 
Neolithic settlement in the area although generally slightly 
separated from the earlier evidence in a way that suggests 
settlement drift within a limited compass ; this would no 
doubt repay further investigation . 
To the southwest of Durrington Walls a series of 
excavations was carried out in 1970 , in advance of treeplanting , and revealed a few pits associated with Iron Age 
pottery ( Wainwright 1971 , 82–3 )  . Within Durrington Walls a 
small cluster of Iron Age pits containing Little Woodbury 
style pottery was recorded in 1951 ( Stone et al . 1954 , 164 )  . 
The 1966–8 excavations also recorded Iron Age features 
inside the henge-enclosure including a palisade trench 
perhaps forming part of an enclosure and a group of pits , 
postholes , and a linear ditch north of the northern circle 
( Wainwright and Longworth 1971 , 312–28 )  . Immediately 
north of Durrington Walls is the Packway Enclosure , partially 
excavated in 1968 during the construction of a roundabout 
on the A345 west of the Stonehenge Inn ( Illustration 50 )  . 
This kite-shaped four-sided enclosure had an entrance on 
the south side . Little was recovered from the inside of the 
enclosure because of the circumstances of discovery which 
had truncated the natural chalk surface and it remains 
poorly dated within the Iron Age ( Wainwright and Longworth 
1971 , 307–11 ; and see Graham and Newman 1993 , 52–5 )  . 
Illustration 50 
The Packway Enclosure , 
Durrington .  [ After Graham 
and Newman 1993 , 
figure 18 .  ] 
72 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 73 

Northwards of Durrington Walls at Figheldean / 
Netheravon in the Avon Valley excavations in connection 
with pipeline construction in 1991 and 1995 revealed a 
large multi-sided ditched enclosure on the west side of the 
river ( Illustration 51 )  . Within the main boundary are 
numerous smaller enclosures and suggestions from 
geophysical surveys of round houses and pits ( McKinley 
1999 with earlier references ; McOmish et al . 2002 , figure 
3 . 31 )  . This site continued in use through into the Roman 
period ( see below )  . 
Illustration 51 
Later prehistoric and 
Roman settlement at 
Netheravon compiled from 
excavations , aerial 
photography , and 
geophysical survey .  
[ After McKinley 1999 , 
figures 2–4 .  ] 
Another major group of Iron Age sites was investigated 
at Boscombe Down West by Kitty Richardson and others in 
1948–9 in advance of the construction of the Boscombe 
Down RAF station ( Richardson 1951 )  . Early Iron Age 
settlement comprised an extensive spread of pits and 
working hollows on the northern part of the site ( Area Q ) 
and another about 650m to the south ( Area R ) which again 
included pits perhaps set within a small ditched enclosure . 
The pits were generally large and contained a rich material 
culture . Of later Iron Age date was a double-ditched 
enclosure , roughly circular in plan with an internal space 
some 200m across . Many pits were seen in the interior here . 
The limited excavation undertaken included what was 
probably one of the earliest instances in the country of the 
use of a drag-line excavator in an archaeological situation to 
remove ditch fills ( Richardson 1951 , plate 5 )  . Further 
evidence of pits and a posthole were recorded at Boscombe 
Down in 1998 by Wessex Archaeology . 
Within the World Heritage Site , excavations on Wilsford 
Down in 1910–13 revealed traces of a settlement that again 
included two storage pits . One pit yielded a bronze chape 
and binding for the scabbard of a sword or dagger ; chalk 
loom weights , spindle whorls , hammerstones , animal bone , 
and pottery were also found . Various stray finds from the 
area , including a bronze penannular brooch and a variant 
style ring-headed pin , suggest a fairly extensive settlement 
( Grinsell 1957 , 122 )  . 
Several separate finds of Iron Age material at Southmill 
Hill , Amesbury , suggest the presence of a settlement site . 
Numerous pits and a V-sectioned ditch have been reported 
over a period of more than 50 years ( Grinsell 1957 , 29 ; Anon 
1976 , 134 )  . Evidence of other sites represented by accidental 
finds of storage pits or collections of Iron Age pottery include 
an area of settlement east of Ogbury Camp investigated by 
Colt Hoare ( 1812 , 220 ; Crawford and Keiller 1928 , 151 )  , and 
two pits revealed during excavations of the Stonehenge 
Avenue near West Amesbury ( Smith 1973 , 50–2 )  . 
Possible and probable Iron Age enclosures known 
through accidental discoveries , sample excavations , or 
surveys include a large circular earthwork at Ratfyn 
discovered during the construction of a railway line in about 
1908 ( Hawley 1928 , 166–7 )  ; a pair of conjoining curvilinear 
enclosures north of Druid ’ s Lodge , Berwick St James ( RCHM 
1979 , 22 )  ; a square-shaped example north of Normanton 
( RCHM 1979 , 24 )  ; and a circular example southeast of 
Druid ’ s Lodge in Woodford parish ( RCHM 1979 , 25 )  . 
Geophysical surveys at Scotland Farm , Winterbourne Stoke 
( Illustration 52 )  , added much detail to an oval enclosure 
previously known from aerial photography ( David and Payne 
1997 , 96–7 )  , while a square enclosure , possibly of 
prehistoric date , was discovered on King Barrow Ridge 
( David and Payne 1997 , 98 )  . This work demonstrates very 
clearly the potential for geophysical surveys as an aid to 
understanding later prehistoric settlement patterns . 
Iron Age burials are generally rather rare in southern 
Britain but several have been found in the Stonehenge 
Landscape . In 1967 , a crouched adult inhumation was found 
in a grave cut into the top of the Stonehenge Palisade Ditch . 
It has since been dated to 770–410 BC ( UB-3820 : 2468±27 
BP )  ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 161 )  . Others include a flexed 
inhumation in a pit on Parsonage Down , Winterbourne 
Stoke ( Newall 1926 )  ; Boscombe Down West where an oval 
pit in Area R contained an inhumation burial of a kind now 
well recognized as an Iron Age burial rite ( Richardson 1951 , 
131 )  ; disarticulated human remains mixed with animal 
bones and early Iron Age pottery dated to the period 
760–400 BC in the upper fill of the Wilsford Shaft ( Ashbee et 
al . 1989 , 69 )  ; and two pits containing burials at Southmill 
Hill , Amesbury ( Anon 1976 , 134 )  . 
Many of the fieldsystems discussed above continued in 
use and were presumably modified during the later first 
millennium BC ; some may originate in these centuries . The 
physical connection between the Parsonage Down system 
and the hillfort at Yarnbury is especially strong and worthy 
of note . Connecting fieldsystems and settlements was a 
series of trackways . Most are now lost although glimpses 
can be seen in the arrangements of boundaries visible on 
aerial photographs . Hunter-Mann ( 1999 , 39 ) suggests that 
an ancient track known as the Harrow Way may connect the 
Stonehenge area with southeastern England ; it runs past 
the northern side of Vespasian ’ s Camp ( and see the 
Ordnance Survey ’ s Map of Roman Britain )  . 
Stray finds of Iron Age date from the area include pottery 
from superficial contexts at half a dozen or so barrows ; a 
large saddle quern from Druid ’ s Head Wood , Stapleford ; a 
late bronze stater found near Amesbury before 1891 ( Grinsell 
1957 , 29 )  ; a bronze drachma of the Hellenistic King Menander 
from ‘ near Stonehenge ’ before 1880 ( Grinsell 1957 , 29 )  ; 
a Durotrigian silver stater from Middle Farm , Shrewton ; a 
silver Durotrigian silver stater from Stonehenge or near-by 
( Robinson 1991 )  ; another Durotrigian coin said to have been 
found at Amesbury ( Robinson 1991 , 119 )  ; a gold stater of the 
73 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 74 

Illustration 52 
Scotland Farm , 
Winterbourne Stoke .  
( left ) Geophysical survey .  
( right ) Interpretative plan 
of features in relation to 
four field-evaluation 
trenches .  [ Survey : English 
Heritage . Interpretative 
plan reproduced courtesy 
of Gifford and Partners .  ] 
Illustration 53 
Late Iron Age tribal 
territories in southern 
Britain .  [ Based on Cunliffe 
1993 , figure 8 . 1 .  ] 
74 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 75 

Armorican tribe the Aulerci Cenomani from Lake , Wilsford 
( Robinson 1991 , 119 )  ; and a Carthaginian bronze coin found in 
March 1956 north of the Boscombe to Amesbury Road . 
By the first century AD the Stonehenge area lay on the 
periphery of several major territorial units , perhaps tribal 
lands or small kingdoms : the Durotriges to the southwest , the 
Dobunni to the northwest , the Atrebates to the northeast , and 
the Belgae to the southeast ( Illustration 53 )  . It also lay on the 
boundary between the southeastern tribes which are 
sometimes seen as occupying a core area having close contact 
with the Roman world and the peripheral tribes who had much 
less contact and were perhaps more traditional in their social 
organization and lifestyles ( Cunliffe 1991 , figure 14 . 38 )  . 
ROMANO-BRITISH ( AD 50–450 ) 
The Roman invasion of AD 43 and the subsequent 
annexation of southern Britain to the Roman Empire over the 
ensuing decade or so have been extensively discussed with 
reference to central southern counties and the west country 
( Branigan 1973 ; Cunliffe 1973d ; Manning 1976 )  . The 
Stonehenge area lies within the lands taken during the first 
few years of the conquest , being well to the southeast of the 
Fosse Way frontier believed to have been established by AD 
47 . Manning ( 1976 , 19 ) noted , however , that in the area 
north of Old Sarum , across what is now Salisbury Plain , there 
are no known Roman forts and very little evidence for the 
presence of the Roman army . The reason for this is probably 
the peripheral position of the region relative to the centres of 
the surrounding tribal territories which were the focus of 
Roman attention ( Illustration 54 )  . Nonetheless , a substantial 
Romano-British settlement developed around a junction of 
four or five roads at Old Sarum just 5km south of the 
Stonehenge Landscape ( see RCHM 1981 , 1 ; James 2002 ) and 
this must naturally have influenced developments around 
about . Map L shows the distribution of recorded RomanoBritish sites and finds in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Illustration 54 
Roman civitates in 
southern Britain .  
[ Based on Frere 1967 , 1 .  ] 
Within the Stonehenge Landscape it is clear that some 
existing Iron Age settlements continued and perhaps 
expanded . This is certainly the case at Boscombe Down 
West where settlement drift is evident ; Area P contained 
late Iron Age and first- to second-century AD pits while Area 
S saw occupation of the third and fourth centuries AD and 
Area R contained contemporary burials ( Richardson 1951 , 
136 )  . Rather significant are the imported butt beakers and 
St Remy ware found in Area P which perhaps arrived from 
Gaul via Poole Harbour , and the imitation Terra Nigra 
platters perhaps from eastern England ( Richardson 1951 , 
149–53 )  . Equally , at Figheldean / Netheravon , occupation of 
the large multi-sided enclosure beside the River Avon 
continued through into the second century AD with 
unenclosed occupation , a Roman villa , and a cemetery of 
the later Roman period ( Graham and Newman 1993 ; 
75 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 76 

McKinley 1999 ; McOmish et al . 2002 , figure 3 . 31 )  . 
A similar picture can be seen in other parts of Salisbury 
Plain ( Bowen and Fowler 1966 )  , with the strongest evidence 
coming from the Great Ridge – the Nadder / Wylye interfluve – 
just to the southwest of the Stonehenge Landscape , with its 
characteristic single and multi-ditched enclosures and villages 
such as Ebbsbury , Hamshill Ditches , Hanging Langford , and 
Stockton ( Cunnington 1930 , 194–5 ; Corney 1989 )  . 
The traditional view of Salisbury Plain in the second to 
fourth centuries AD period is that it was an imperial estate , 
or saltus , and for this reason contained rather few large 
Roman settlements and villas of the kind found elsewhere 
across southern Britain ( Collingwood and Myers 1937 , 224 ; 
Branigan 1976 , 123 ) but this view is being gradually eroded 
by the accumulating evidence ( Cunliffe 1973e ; 1973f ; 
Graham and Newman 1993 , 51–2 )  . Within the Stonehenge 
Landscape the Avon Valley is the focus of Roman occupation 
of the second century and beyond , some of it fairly 
substantial and involving a number of what appear to be 
villa-based settlements ( Map L )  . 
Starting at the northern end , at Netheravon House just 
outside the Stonehenge Landscape , a villa site with a 
mosaic pavement and bath-house was uncovered in 1907 
( Grinsell 1957 , 90–1 for summary )  . Sample excavations were 
carried out at the site in 1996 confirming most of the earlier 
observations ( Rawlings 2001 )  . To the south , within the 
Stonehenge Landscape at Figheldean , excavations along 
pipeline routes in 1991 and 1995 revealed extensive 
occupation and a cemetery of at least four graves within the 
long narrow trenches . A T-shaped oven or corn-drying kiln 
was also found , together with ceramic building materials 
and stone slates suggesting the presence of a fairly 
substantial structure in the vicinity ( Graham and Newman 
1993 , 34–6 )  . Good samples of animal bones and carbonized 
plant remains were also found and this is clearly a site that 
would repay further investigation ( McKinley 1999 for 
overview and the results of geophysical surveys )  . 
About 4km south of Figheldean is another area of 
Romano-British settlement of later third- and fourth-century 
date sampled by excavation prior to tree-planting west of 
Durrington Walls ( Wainwright 1971 ; and see RCHM 1979 , 
24 )  . Postholes , pits , gullies , and hollows were recorded in 
Site II , while in Site I on the north side of Fargo Road two 
small ditched enclosures , one containing a corn-drying kiln 
and two infant burials , were examined . These features were 
regarded as peripheral agricultural facilities with the main 
focus of the settlement , perhaps a villa of some kind , lying 
on the higher ground to the west . Pieces of roofing tile in 
stone and ceramic from the excavations hint at a substantial 
structure in the vicinity . The scale of the site is considerable 
to judge from quantities of Samian ware and other pottery 
recovered over many years from both sides of Fargo Road on 
Durrington Down ( Cunnington 1930 , 186 ; and see Richards 
1990 , figure 17 )  . An inhumation burial set within a ditched 
enclosure was found at the Durrington Reservoir in 1991 
( Cleal et al . 2004 ) and may be associated with this 
settlement . About 1km south again , around Countess Farm 
and to the northwest of the Countess Road roundabout a 
scatter of Roman material found by metal-detector users 
suggested another site ( Darvill 1993b , 63–8 ) which has 
since been confirmed by field evaluation for the proposed 
Stonehenge Visitor Centre site on the east side of Countess 
Road ( WA 2003a ; 2004 )  . 
On the east side of the River Avon on Butterfield Down , 
Amesbury , an unenclosed settlement of about 6ha included 
timber-framed buildings and a corn-drying oven very similar 
to the example already noted from Durrington Walls . Cattle 
and sheep were the most common farm animals 
represented . An infant burial within the settlement and the 
possibility that a ring-gully represents the remains of a 
shrine indicate aspects of the religious side of life at the site 
( Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 , 38–40 )  . Nearby , excavations 
in advance of development for a new school on the eastern 
outskirts of Amesbury revealed an inhumation cemetery of 
the third and fourth centuries AD . Set within what has been 
interpreted as a garden of remembrance , there is some 
suggestion that these may be early Christian burials 
( Fitzpatrick 2003a , 147 )  . 
South of Amesbury evidence of Roman settlement 
appears less abundant but this is probably a result of fewer 
opportunities . Finds made over a long period of time at 
Boscombe Road / New Covert in Amesbury suggest another 
extensive site here . A pot containing a hoard of bronze and 
silver coins and three silver finger-rings was found in c . 1842 
( Cunnington 1930 , 172 ; Grinsell 1957 , 30 )  ; more recently a 
midden and pits were seen by Mr St John Booth . 
Just outside the Stonehenge Landscape the small town 
of Sorviodunum developed beside the Avon around Old 
Sarum and modern-day Stratford-sub-Castle ( James 2002 )  . 
Roman settlement was not confined to the Avon Valley . 
East of the Avon occupation on Boscombe Down West 
continued into the third and fourth centuries in Area S and its 
associated cemetery in Area R ( Richardson 1951 )  . On Earl ’ s 
Farm Down , Amesbury , pottery and foundations suggest a 
substantial site ( Cunnington 1930 , 173 ; Grinsell 1957 , 30 )  . 
On the high ground between the Avon and the Till there is 
evidence for occupation at Wilsford Down which has yielded 
a number of brooches , ornaments , and ironwork ( Cunnington 
1930 , 208 ; Grinsell 1957 , 122 ) and is revealed as a pottery 
scatter in the fieldwalking undertaken for the Stonehenge 
Environs Project ( Richards 1990 , figure 17 )  . At Normanton 
Ditch , Wilsford , a possible pewter hoard is recorded as having 
been ploughed up about 1635 ( Cunnington 1930 , 208 ; 
Grinsell 1957 , 123 )  . A second area of Roman settlement is 
represented by two groups of finds , connected by a linear 
ditch , one either side of the Amesbury to Shrewton road on 
Winterbourne Stoke Down ( Colt Hoare 1812 , plan op . 170 ; 
Cunnington 1930 , 209 ; Illustration 55 )  . Strangely , this pair of 
sites is not represented in finds made during the Stonehenge 
Environs Project fieldwalking , although the fieldwork would 
have only touched the eastern edge . 
A third area of settlement may lie on Rox Hill to judge 
from a scatter of Roman pottery recorded during the 
Stonehenge Environs Survey ( Richards 1990 , figure 17 )  , 
possibly the Romano-British village referred to by Colt 
Hoare ( 1812 , 227 ; Cunnington 1930 , 208 )  . West of the Till , 
there are again substantial traces of occupation at 
Maddington Farm , Shrewton , on the very far western side of 
the Stonehenge Landscape . Here , two burials found during 
the construction of a pipeline led to the excavation of a 
wider area and the identification of a small farmstead of 
third–fourth-century date together with an associated 
inhumation cemetery ( McKinley and Heaton 1996 )  . 
Cunnington ( 1930 , 209 ) recorded another settlement on 
High Down , Winterbourne Stoke , northwest of the Coniger , 
confirmed as such by Colt Hoare ( 1812 , 95 )  . On Berwick 
Down in the southwest corner of the Stonehenge Landscape 
there is extensive evidence of Roman occupation tested ‘ by 
the spade ’ by Colt Hoare in the nineteenth century 
( Cunnington 1930 , 174 )  . 
76 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 77 

Illustration 55 
Romano-British settlement 
on Winterbourne Stoke 
Down depicted by Colt 
Hoare .  [ From Colt Hoare 
1812 , plan opp . 170 .  ] 
It is important to note that in all these areas there are 
hints of settlement sites provided by antiquarian finds and 
early rescue excavations but it is really only since the mid 
1980s that firm indications of the nature of these sites have 
really come to light as a result of evaluation and recording 
work at development sites . In all cases it seems that the 
areas available for investigation were peripheral to the main 
occupation zones ; there is thus considerable potential at all 
these sites for further exploration and research . It is also 
worth noting that northwards , within the SPTA , what appear 
to be rather different kinds of settlement involving compact 
villages , linear villages , and extensive evidence of cultivation 
have been revealed by detailed ground survey and the study 
of aerial photographs ( McOmish et al . 2002 , 88–106 )  . 
Whether similar arrangements were also present on the 
downlands Stonehenge Landscape east and west of the villabased settlements along the Avon Valley remains to be seen . 
Romano-British pottery and coins have been recovered 
at a number of barrow and other prehistoric sites within the 
Stonehenge Landscape ( see for example Cunnington 1929 ; 
Newall 1931 , 432 ; Ashbee 1980 ; Hunter-Mann 1999 )  . Even 
though the finds are unstratified , the evidence supports 
fairly extensive Romano-British occupation / activity within 
the Stonehenge Landscape . Stonehenge itself was clearly 
visited during the Roman period as a fairly substantial 
collection of finds suggests : 20 coins ranging in date from 
AD 41–50 through to AD 330–395 ; pottery ( 1857 sherds 
found in twentieth-century excavations )  ; and personal 
ornaments , brooches , pins , toilet equipment , and possibly 
some graffiti ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 431–5 and 491 )  . Whether 
these visits were made out of curiosity or because of some 
residual significance attaching to the site is not known . 
Ritual and ceremonial activity of Roman date seems to be 
poorly represented in the Stonehenge Landscape , although 
perhaps it is just difficult to see . No conventional temples or 
major shrines have yet been found , which is rather odd 
given the prehistoric significance of the area . At 
Woodhenge , however , the Cunningtons ’ excavations of 
1926–8 revealed the remains of infant burials in the upper 
ditch fills associated with Romano-British pottery and there 
is a possibility that the infant buried in the centrally placed 
grave at the site is also of this date ( Cunnington 1929 , 60 )  . 
In addition to the burials noted in association with 
settlement sites , Roman graves have also been recorded at 
four other sites , including a cemetery at Boscombe Down , 
Idmiston , excavated in 1995 but not yet published ; an 
inhumation at Ratfyn ( Grinsell 1957 , 29 )  ; and a cremation 
southeast of Milston Farmhouse , Figheldean . 
Some of the fieldsystems in the Stonehenge Landscape 
undoubtedly originated in the early first millennium AD 
while many earlier ones continued in use or were reused . 
The Fargo Road settlement noted above is located on the 
periphery of a major fieldsystem and lynchets were 
recognized in the excavation areas ( Wainwright 1971 )  . 
A detailed landscape characterization focusing on the 
morphology of linear features and field patterns could 
perhaps further elucidate the connections between 
settlements and associated agricultural features . 
The only substantial Roman road identified within the 
Stonehenge Landscape is the Old Sarum to Mildenhall road 
which is likely to be a Romanized trackway . The trackway 
passes just east of Amesbury running in a northnortheasterly direction , through Boscombe Down Camp and 
Bulford Camp , although its precise route on the ground has 
never been checked ( Margary 1973 , 99–100 )  . Other 
routeways include the Harrow Way ( Ordnance Survey Map 
of Roman Britain ) and the Old Sarum to Mendip Hills road 
which passes just south of the Stonehenge Landscape 
( Margary 1973 , 101–3 )  . 
Overall , the density of known Romano-British sites , their 
fairly regular spacing , and the range of available stray finds 
and snippets from antiquarian reports suggest that much if 
not all the Stonehenge Landscape was significantly more 
intensively used in the early first millennium AD than many 
recent commentaries would suggest , and with abundant 
scope for further research . 
SAXON AND EARLY MEDIEVAL 
( AD 450–1100 ) 
Archaeological evidence relating to the period from about AD 
450 through to the Norman Conquest and even a little 
beyond is widely regarded as being notoriously difficult to 
find , and hazardous to interpret . This problem is exacerbated 
by the general desire to integrate purely archaeological 
evidence with tradition , myth , and written historical sources . 
There is a general perception that within the Stonehenge 
Landscape there is very little evidence relating to the later 
first millennium AD ; this is not , however , entirely so . For 
while there is certainly rather less than for some phases of 
prehistory , there are clear indications that the six centuries 
following AD 450 are strongly represented and provide much 
potential for research ( and see Cunnington 1933a ; Bonney 
1973 ; Cunliffe 1973f ; Hinton 1977 ; and Eagles 1994 and 2001 
for regional background studies )  . Map M shows the 
distribution of recorded Saxon and early medieval sites and 
finds within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Eagles ( 2001 ) has argued that Germanic migrations into 
Wiltshire took place within the framework of the former 
Romano-British civitates , with the Avon Valley seeing an 
Anglo-Saxon presence relatively early , accompanied by the 
development of new cultural identities and social order 
among local communities . The River Avon itself was 
undoubtedly a significant route into Wessex from the south 
coast , and recent finds around Breamore south of Salisbury 
have led to suggestions that the river below Charford was 
77 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 78 

within Jutish territory while its northern part was firmly 
within Anglo-Saxon lands , perhaps the territory of the 
Wilsaete ( Eagles and Ager 2004 , 93 )  . 
Within the Stonehenge Landscape , activity in the fifth 
century AD is well represented at Butterfield Down on the 
east side of Amesbury . Here a hoard of eight gold and one 
silver coins was found by a metal-detector user outside the 
area of the excavations . The group is believed to have been 
deposited sometime after AD 405 , making it one of the 
latest Roman coin hoards in Britain ( Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , 19 )  . Within the excavations was a sunkenfloor building containing much third- and fourth-century AD 
pottery ( Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 , 13–14 ; Illustration 
56 )  , perhaps an example of the increasingly widely 
recognized class of native British sunken-floor or terraced 
structures seen also at Figheldean Site A ( Graham and 
Newman 1983 , 19–22 ) and further afield at Poundbury , 
Dorset , and Godshill , Wiltshire ( Eagles 2001 , 210 )  . 
Illustration 56 
Sunken-floor hut and 
related features at 
Butterfield Down , 
Amesbury . A : General plan 
of excavation trenches and 
features . B : Detail of the 
sunken-floored building .  
[ After Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , figures 
8 and 10 .  ] 
78 
Other evidence of mid first-millennium AD activity around 
Amesbury includes a group of inhumation burials from London 
Road to the north of the town . Found in 1834 , they are 
considered sub-Roman or early Saxon in date ( Bonney 1982 ; 
Chandler and Goodhugh 1989 , 6 )  . Kurt Hunter Mann ( 1999 , 51 ) 
has suggested limited use of Vespasian ’ s Camp during the 
later Roman and sub-Roman period , but there is no 
substantial archaeological evidence represented in the areas 
examined . Saxon pottery attributable to the fifth to eighth 
centuries AD was found during field evaluations on the site of 
the proposed Stonehenge Visitor Centre northeast of Countess 
Roundabout in 1995 ( WA 1995 , 19 )  ; at least two brooches 
datable to the fifth to seventh centuries have been found in 
the area ( Darvill 1993b , 63–8 ) and other finds of mid firstmillennium AD date have been reported in the Avon Valley 
north of Amesbury ( McOmish et al . 2002 , 109 and figure 5 . 1 )  . 
Further field evaluations on the visitor centre site in 2003 and 
2004 provide a secure context for these finds : five sunken­
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 79 

floor buildings ( WA 2003a ; 2004 )  , seemingly of the classic 
Germanic grubenhaus form with a large posthole at either end 
of the sunken area , conventionally dated to the fifth to eighth 
centuries AD . Pottery of the early / middle Saxon period , 
including organic tempered ware , was recovered , together 
with charred cereal grain and animal bone representing sheep , 
cow , and chicken . These are the first such buildings to have 
been found in the Stonehenge Landscape and they suggest a 
fairly substantial settlement in the area . 
Burials and finds suggestive of burials of the pagan 
Saxon period are probably the most widespread form of 
evidence available . Grinsell ( 1957 ) gives examples from all 
but three of the 16 modern parishes that include territory 
within the Stonehenge Landscape : 
• Amesbury : Barrow G44 intrusive interment ; Barrow G85 
socketed iron spearhead and other objects perhaps 
associated with an intrusive interment ; Stonehenge 
burial ( see below )  . 
• Bulford : Socketed iron spearhead found on Bulford 

Down in 1861 and a similar piece found at Bulford 

Camp in 1906 . 

• Durnford : Barrow G1 or 2 intrusive interment . 
• Durrington : Barrow G ?  ( pond barrow ) yielded a skull 
possibly from an intrusive interment ; possible cemetery 
site of 30 + graves ( see below )  . 
• Figheldean : Barrow G25 inferred intrusive interment 
from the socketed iron spearhead found ; Netheravon 
Aerodrome find of an interment believed to have been 
deposited in a wooden coffin . 
• Idminster : Barrow G23 intrusive interment with iron 
shield-boss that is unlikely to be later than the mid sixth 
century AD , socketed spearhead , and wooden bucket 
with bronze mounts . 
• Milston : Barrow G3 intrusive interment ; barrow G7 
intrusive interment ; small pot and fragment from a comb 
above a chalkpit . 
• Netheravon : Two burials found during the construction 
of the Aviation School in 1913 , one accompanied by 
weapons , a bronze pin , and perhaps a bucket . 
• Orcheston : Inhumations ( one adult and one youth ) 

with an iron knife found at Elston before 1856 
 
( Robinson 1987 )  . 

• Shrewton : Inhumation found at Shrewton Windmill , 
accompanied by a bronze armlet ,  ? girdle-hanger , iron 
knife , and pot . A second burial was found in the same 
area in 1968 ( SMR 12320 )  . A split iron spearhead 
suggests a third unlocated burial in the parish . 
• Wilsford cum Lake : Barrow Wilsford G3 , intrusive 
interment ; Barrow G50b intrusive interment ; long barrow 
G30 intrusive interment . 
• Winterbourne Stoke : Barrow 4 , five intrusive interments ; 
Barrow 61 intrusive interment ; Barrow 23a glass bead of 
Saxon type suggestive of an intrusive burial . 
• Woodford : Socketed iron spearhead found in 1863 . 
To these can be added the large Saxon inhumation 
cemetery northwest of the allotment gardens in 
Maddington , Shrewton ( Wilson and Hurst 1968 , 241 )  . 
The possible cemetery on Durrington Down found in 
1864 is intriguing . Grinsell ( 1957 , 66 ) suggested that it is 
near Fargo and that the graves were orientated north to 
south . Ruddle ( 1901 , 331 ) indicated that they were in an 
arable field near the Durrington / Winterbourne Stoke 
boundary and that while 30 were found only two were laid 
north to south . He also mentioned that these two burials 
had flints set like a low wall around and over the skeletons 
( and see RCHM 1979 , 7 )  . Unfortunately , the exact position of 
this find is not known . It may be significant , however , that 
during the examination of Barrow G7 on Durrington Down as 
part of the Stonehenge Environs Project , a scatter of 22 
sherds of grass-tempered Saxon pottery was found 
( Richards 1990 , 182 )  . In addition , M Cunnington found a 
group of eleven inhumations in shallow graves intrusive to 
barrow Durrington 67 ( Cunnington 1929 , 43–4 ; RCHM 1979 , 
7 )  . Taken together these finds suggest the strong possibility 
of one or more Saxon occupation sites and cemeteries along 
the high ground between Fargo Road and Fargo Plantation . 
A bronze late Saxon mount was found at Knighton Farm , 
Figheldean ( Robinson 1992 , 66 , no . 5 )  . 
Two recently identified burials of the later first millennium 
AD illuminate a quite different aspect of how the dead were 
treated . The first is an extraordinary ‘ bog burial ’ at Lake in 
the Woodford Valley ( McKinley 2003 )  . Radiocarbon dated to 
AD 400–620 ( GU-4921 : 1560±50 BP )  , this was the burial of a 
young adult female aged about 20–25 years at death . She 
had been buried fully prone and extended with the left arm 
flexed with the hand resting on the abdomen and the right 
arm fully extended . The body had been covered with at least 
18 oak planks . The position of the grave adjacent to the River 
Avon in a wetland context raises the question of whether this 
was a ritual burial or a sacrifice of some kind . 
The second unusual burial comes from Stonehenge 
itself , an inhumation burial found by Hawley in November 
1923 adjacent to Y-Hole 9 , just outside the circle to the 
southeast , which at the time of excavation was discounted 
as Roman or later and of no great interest ( Hawley 1925 , 
30–1 )  . The roughly cut rather shallow grave contained the 
slightly contracted remains of an adult male aged about 
28–32 years at death . The grave was flanked by two 
postholes ( Illustration 57 )  . Originally considered to be of 
Roman date , radiocarbon determinations have now shown it 
to be of the seventh century AD ( 610–780 AD ( OxA-9361 : 
1359±38 BP ) and 430–660 AD ( OxA-9921 : 1490±60 BP )  ) and 
forensic analysis suggests a traumatic death through 
decapitation by a single blow with a sharp blade from the 
rear-right side of the back of the neck . Scientific studies of 
the individual ’ s tooth enamel suggest that during his 
childhood he lived fairly locally , to the northeast of 
Stonehenge ( Pitts 2001b , 319–20 ; Pitts et al . 2002 )  . In the 
light of this evidence the two postholes near the burial can 
be interpreted as the remains of a gallows and the 
possibility raised that Stonehenge was an execution site in 
the later Anglo-Saxon period . At least two other 
inhumations were found by Hawley at Stonehenge , one in 
the outer ditch and another within the central bluestone 
horseshoe , while a human tarsal was found near the Heel 
Stone in a context containing medieval pottery during 
excavations in 1979 ( Pitts 1982 , 90 )  . In addition , a small 
amount of organic tempered Saxon pottery and a penny of 
Aethelred II ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 432–5 ) serve to strengthen 
the evidence for considerable activity at the site in the later 
first millennium AD . Cunnington ( 1933a , 171 ) also refers to 
an Anglo-Saxon silver belt ornament from the site in 
Salisbury Museum . The liminal position of Stonehenge and 
its powerful associations with an ancient order make the 
site ideal for executions , a point that links with David 
Hinton ’ s comments on the derivation of the very name of the 
site – the stone hanging place ( Hinton 1998 ; and see 
Reynolds and Semple in Pitts et al . 2002 , 139–43 )  . 
79 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 80 

Illustration 57 
Postholes possibly forming 
a gallows at Stonehenge . 
A : Stonehenge with the 
area of the detailed plan 
( B ) indicated . C : Section 
through the grave and 
stonehole Y9 .  [ After Pitts et 
al . 2002 , figure 2 .  ] 
Evidence of execution may also be provided by the cleft 
skull of one of the intrusive burials in the Wilsford G3 long 
barrow near the Wilsford–Charlton parish boundary 
( Cunnington 1914 , 403 )  . Bonney ( 1966 ) has noted the 
prevalence of pagan Saxon burials near parish boundaries 
which he takes as evidence for both the pre-parish system 
origins of the boundaries themselves and the peripheral 
location of burials relative to the main settlement areas . This 
arrangement does , however , deserve further exploration as 
the location of settlements remains largely unknown . 
At a larger scale , the administrative units that would later 
become known as hundreds ( see below ) are believed to have 
been established in the seventh century ( Yorke 1995 , 89–90 )  , 
perhaps reflecting a post-Roman tribal landscape of so-called 
 ‘ micro-kingdoms ’  ( Reynolds and Semple in Pitts et al . 2002 , 
143 )  . By the ninth century , the Stonehenge Landscape is 
comfortably within the still-larger early medieval Kingdom of 
Wessex ( Illustration 58 )  . Documentary evidence for this period 
is rather better than it is in surrounding areas , mainly because 
of the ecclesiastical and royal associations with Amesbury . 
The town of Amesbury has been subject to several 
historical investigations which together provide a fairly 
detailed understanding , although tentative , of its early 
development ( Hinton 1975 ; Haslam 1984 ; Chandler and 
Goodhugh 1989 ; Illustration 59 )  . There are references 
relating to Amesbury in Saxon charters , the Will of King 
Alfred ( d . 899 ) bequeathing ( aet ) Ambresbyrig to his 
younger son Aethelweard , and lands left in King Eadred ’ s 
( d . 955 ) will to his mother Eadgifu ( Finberg 1964 )  . It has 
been suggested that the place-name aet Ambresbyrig 
probably indicates its early existence as a burh or 
fortification belonging to Ambre ( Gover et al . 1939 , 358 )  . 
Indeed , the place-name Ambre may have pre-Saxon origins 
and perhaps represents the name of the semi-mythical 
Ambrosius about whom legends were well established by 
the eighth century ( Gover et al . 1939 , 358 ; Morris 1973 , 
100 )  . If so , it may support the notion that Ambrosius 
Aurelianus established a garrison in response to the 
resistance against the Saxon invaders during the third 
quarter of the fifth century ( Bond 1991 , 385 )  . Alternatively , 
the personal element could represent Ambri , who is 
mentioned in Geoffrey of Monmouth ’ s legend of Stonehenge 
and ‘ of the hill of Ambrius ’ although Geoffrey does not 
specify where this was ( Chandler and Goodhugh 1989 , 5 )  . 
If the origins of Amesbury are obscure , so too is much of 
its early development . If it was the centre of a royal estate , 
as has been suggested ( Haslam 1976 , 5 )  , then it is likely to 
have been a settlement for the estate staff . Such a 
settlement might have consisted of a minster , a 
headquarters for the priests working throughout the estate , 
a mother church for all Christian worship , and various staff 
premises : the beginnings of a small town ( Hinton 1975 , 
27–8 )  . The king held assemblies at Amesbury in AD 932 and 
AD 995 ( Bond 1991 , 386 ) and in AD 979 a new abbey was 
founded by Queen Aelfthryth , one of only two churches 
dedicated to St Melor in the country ( Haslam 1984 , 130–1 )  . 
In AD 1177 the church was refounded in its present location 
as a priory under the Order of Fontevrault , suggesting that 
an earlier church of the order had existed prior to the tenth 
century . Some evidence for the earlier church has come to 
light in the form of pieces from two Saxon crosses that came 
to light during restoration works in 1907 ( Ball 1979 )  . One of 
the crosses takes the form of a simple plain equal-armed 
cross with chamfered edges and a central recessed disc 
containing a concentric ring of small bosses . It probably 
dates to the late eleventh or early twelfth century . The 
second cross is more ornate and is represented by two 
joining fragments from a wheelhead cross of the tenth or 
eleventh century , made of sandstone . The design includes 
two concentric wheels with a continuous interlacing design 
on the faces and edges . The location of this putative early 
settlement is , however , wholly conjectural , the best 
estimate being that it lies somewhere near the ‘ ancient ’ 
river crossing at Queensberry Bridge near Vespasian ’ s Camp 
and perhaps extending along the present High Street 
( Chandler and Goodhugh 1987 , 7 )  . Given the ecclesiastical 
importance of Amesbury a royal palace might also be 
expected , but none has yet been found . 
The Domesday survey records that Amesbury was held by 
the King in 1066 and had never paid geld nor had they been 
assessed in hides , the usual form of taxation . Instead , tax had 
been paid in kind , probably the earliest form of formalized 
taxation known in England and generally dating at least as far 
back as the seventh century ( Chandler and Goodhugh 1989 , 
6 )  . By the eleventh century , Amesbury was the focal point for a 
hundred , which was accredited with substantial areas of 
woodland . It has been proposed that the original estate could 
have incorporated the whole of the Hundred of Amesbury 
80 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 81 
 
( Bond 1991 )  . The hundred extended from Biddesden in Chute 
Forest to below Durnford in the Avon Valley , and eastwards to 
the Hampshire border ( Thorn and Thorn 1979 )  . 
Illustration 58 
Anglo-Saxon and 
contemporary kingdoms in 
southern Britain .  [ Based on 
Hill 1981 , figure 42 .  ] 
It is assumed that smaller settlements must have been 
developing in the countryside surrounding Amesbury , 
probably along the Avon and Till valleys in situations that 
later became the villages still familiar in today ’ s landscape 
( see McOmish et al . 2002 , figure 5 . 2 for the Avon Valley )  . 
Certainly , the majority of the present settlements are 
mentioned in the Domesday Survey of 1086 . Parish units 
must also have been established in this period , in many 
cases utilizing prehistoric barrow cemeteries and indeed 
individual barrows as boundary markers and alignments 
( Bonney 1976 )  . To what extent the existing later prehistoric 
and Romano-British fieldsystems continued in use , or were 
abandoned , is not known . 
Illustration 59 
Amesbury . Plan of the 
modern town showing 
the position and extent 
of early features and 
principal excavations .  
[ Sources : various .  ] 
LATER MEDIEVAL 
( AD 1100–1500 ) 
The later medieval period sees the continuing importance 
of the crown and the church as formative agents in the 
development of the towns and the countryside alike . 
Castles , palaces , churches , monasteries , towns , villages , 
hamlets , and farmsteads form elements in a complicated 
81 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 82 

and structured system . Bettey ( 1986 ) and the papers in the 
volume edited by Aston and Lewis ( 1994 ) provide a 
background to this period and the archaeology of it . 
Indeed , Aston and Lewis ( 1994 , 1 ) suggest that Wessex as a 
whole has great potential for the study of the medieval 
rural landscape owing to its abundance of documentary 
evidence and variety of landscape types . Map N shows the 
distribution of recorded sites and finds relevant to the 
medieval period . 
The Conquest period is represented by a small 
horsehoe-shaped ringwork castle at Stapleford in the Till 
Valley in the southwest corner of the Stonehenge 
Landscape . The ringwork was later expanded to operate in a 
manorial capacity with the addition of a fishpond and suite 
of paddocks ( Creighton 2000 , 111 )  . The much larger castle 
with its associated royal and ecclesiastical centre at Old 
Sarum lies about 6km south of the Stonehenge Landscape 
on the east bank of the Avon ( RCHM 1981 )  . 
All of the settlements recorded in the Domesday Survey of 
1086 grew to become established villages in the succeeding 
period , together suggesting fairly densely populated river 
valleys with more open land between . Table 3 shows the 
names of the main settlements and the hundreds within 
which they lay . Illustration 60 shows the extent of the 
identified hundreds around Stonehenge . 
Table 3 
Later medieval settlements 
and hundreds within the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
Modern parish / 
settlement 
Domesday 
reference ? 
Domesday 
hundred 
Allington† Amesbury 
Boscombe Amesbury 
Amesbury† Amesbury 
Ratfyn Amesbury 
Berwick St James† – – 
Bulford† Amesbury 
Durrington† Amesbury 
Knighton Amesbury 
Figheldean† Amesbury 
Idmiston† Amesbury 
Porton Alderbury 
Milston† Amesbury 
Brigmerston Amesbury 
Netheravon† Elstub 
Orcheston† Dole 
Shrewton† Dole 
Addestone Dole 
Maddington Dole 
Stapleford† Branch 
Wilsford† Underditch 
Winterbourne Stoke† Dole 
Woodford† – – 
† 
indicates modern parish centres . 
Place-names in italic are non-parish centres . 
Several of the modern parishes have been created out of 
the amalgamation of medieval tithings or townships but some 
original medieval land units still remain ( Illustration 61 )  . As 
observed on modern Ordnance Survey maps , Wilsford cum 
Lake , for example , was created out of the medieval townships 
of Normanton , Lake , and Wilsford . Also , Shrewton 
incorporated the medieval townships of Rollestone , Netton , 
Shrewton , Maddington , Bourton , Addestone , Normanton , and 
part of Elston ( Aston 1985 , 40–1 and 79–80 )  . Some township 
units seem to have incorporated prehistoric features at 
certain points on their boundaries , perhaps reflecting earlier 
land-divisions . West Amesbury , Winterbourne Stoke , and 
Normanton townships , for instance , converge at Barrow 10 of 
the Winterbourne Crossroads barrow group . Amongst others , 
potential prehistoric boundaries can be found at the bell 
barrow Amesbury 55 , where Amesbury Countess , West 
Amesbury , and Winterbourne Stoke converge , and the north 
bank of the Cursus forms part of the Durrington / Amesbury / 
Countess boundary ( Bond 1991 , 394 )  . 
Amesbury remained the largest settlement throughout 
the medieval period , and the two manors in the town are the 
only ones in the area to have been researched in any great 
detail ( Pugh 1948 )  . During the later eleventh century , the 
royal estate of Amesbury was divided into two smaller 
manors : one consumed into the Earl of Salisbury ’ s estate 
and the other owned by the Sheriff of Wiltshire and later by 
his grandson , Patrick , Earl of Salisbury in 1155–6 ( Bond 1991 , 
392 )  . For some four centuries the Amesbury manors and 
associated lands passed through many hands and were 
divided , detached under multiple ownership , and finally 
reunited with almost all of their lands intact in 1541 . Edward , 
Duke of Somerset and Earl of Hertford , acquired the manor 
of Amesbury Earls in 1536 and Amesbury Priors in 1541 . 
Until the Reformation , the Benedictine Abbey of Amesbury 
continued to flourish as a nunnery , gradually increasing in 
size and wealth . In 1256 , there were 76 nuns and by 1318 the 
nunnery housed 117 nuns with 14 chaplains ( Bettey 1986 , 74 )  . 
By the fifteenth century , the abbey had become the second 
wealthiest and fifth largest in England until its dissolution in 
AD 1540 ( Haslam 1984 )  . The buildings were given to Edward 
Seymour who dismantled the abbey ( Jackson 1867 )  . 
It is likely that the settlement of Amesbury grew up 
alongside the abbey during its prosperous years , but little is 
known of the town from an archaeological perspective . The 
only known surviving domestic medieval building seems to 
be West Amesbury House . With a fifteenth-century core , 
medieval screens passage with an in situ wooden screen , 
arched doorways and a medieval arch-braced and windbraced roof in the west wing , the medieval building is 
proposed to be located within the remains of a grange of 
Amesbury Priory ( Chandler and Goodhugh 1989 )  . 
Throughout the medieval period , Amesbury Hundred 
constituted part of the Royal Forest of Chute , the earliest 
known documentary evidence for which dates from the 
twelfth century ( Bond 1994 , 123 )  . 
Villages , as we recognize them today , appear to have 
developed during this period , although some presumably 
have Saxon or earlier origins . Settlement has a propensity 
to centre along the river valleys , particularly the Till and 
Avon . The eighteenth-century map by Andrews and Drury 
provides a detailed overview of pre-enclosure settlement 
within the Stonehenge Landscape , covering the whole of 
Wiltshire . Villages tended to be either compact nucleated 
82 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 83 

agglomerations or regular rows with contiguous tofts 
running parallel with the valley ( Lewis 1994 , 173–4 )  . 
Medieval settlement evidence has been found at : 
Orcheston ; Nettleton ( c . AD 1330 )  ; Shrewton ; Stapleford ; 
Berwick St James ; Rollestone ; Winterbourne Stoke 
( earthworks )  ; Bulford ; Brigmerston ; Milston ; Ratfyn ; 
Durnford ; West Amesbury ; Durrington ; Pickney Farm , 
Durrington ; and Wilsford . There are also crofts and house 
platforms in the gardens of Lake House , and in Figheldean 
at Syrencote House ( Sexhamcote 1227 )  , Knighton Farm , and 
Ablington Farm . Illustration 60 
The medieval hundreds of 
Wiltshire .  [ Based on Gover 
et al . 1939 .  ] 
During the later medieval period , landscape and 
documentary evidence exists for settlement desertion and 
shrinkage along the valleys of the Till and the Avon ( Aston 
1982 , 11 ; 1983 , 11 )  . Durrington has been the subject of 
detailed study and shows a decline from 30 customary 
tenant families in the mid-fourteenth century down to 19 at 
the end of the fifteenth century . By AD 1506 just 12 virgates 
were held by five tenants in contrast to the situation in the 
thirteenth century when there was individual virgate 
ownership ( Hare 1981 , 167 )  . In common with many chalkland 
settlements in Wessex , Durrington shows a varied pattern of 
shrinkage and desertion while still maintaining its traditional 
agricultural and settlement character ( Hare 1980 )  . 
Now a polyfocal village , Shrewton once existed as eight 
separate hamlets each with its own church or dependent 
83 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 84 

Illustration 61 
Modern parishes wholly 
or partly within the 
Stonehenge Landscape .  
[ Based on Gover et al . 1939 .  ] 
chapel : Shrewton , Maddington , Netton , Rollestone , Elston , 
Homanton , Addestone , and Bourton ( Illustration 62 )  . The 
latter three are now deserted , whereas Elston , Netton , 
Maddington , and Rollestone are largely shrunken . 
Shrinkage can also be observed elsewhere within the 
Stonehenge Landscape . Empty crofts and paddocks , for 
example , have been found at the small compact hamlet of 
West Amesbury , and Ratfyn , which now only exists as a 
single farm . The documentary record also provides evidence 
in support of deserted settlement . Hyndurrington , a ‘ lost ’ 
hamlet in Durrington parish , is recorded in the Lay Subsidy 
and Poll Tax returns of the fourteenth century , but not in the 
field ( Aston 1985 , 41 )  . 
Each township unit comprised a mix of three land-types : 
meadow on the valley bottoms which was a valuable source 
for hay production ; arable open fields on the lower slopes ; 
and downland common pasture on the higher , more remote 
areas . Although there is some evidence to support 
enclosure , most of the arable land remained in open fields 
until the eighteenth century . Indeed , the basic pattern of 
three-field land-types can still be seen in many of the 
modern parishes ( cf . Aston 1985 , figure 15 )  . 
The local economy was largely based upon the 
production of corn , particularly wheat and barley , up until 
the later nineteenth century . In order to produce and 
maintain good yield , the thin soil required folding of sheep 
to fertilize the land ; they were set out to pasture on the 
chalk downland during the day and close-folded on the 
arable land of the lower slopes at night ( Bond 1991 , 407 )  . 
It has been proposed that the ‘ extensive pasture resources 
and more balanced economy ’ of the Wiltshire chalklands 
enabled communities here to resist the late medieval 
general agricultural depression experienced elsewhere in 
the country even though evidence in support of settlement 
shrinkage exists during this period ( Bond 1991 , 397 )  . An 
undated rectangular enclosure on Winterbourne Stoke 
Down has been identified through early aerial photography 
and comprises a narrow bank and external ditch with no 
apparent entrance . It has been suggested that this 
earthwork may have been used for sheep penning during 
84 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 85 

Illustration 62 
Shrewton : a polyfocal 
village .  [ Based on Aston 
1985 , figure 41 .  ] 
85 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 86 

medieval or later times ( RCHM 1979 , 25 )  . There are a 
number of other undated enclosures on the SMR , which 
may also be pennings ( see also McOmish et al . 2002 , 117 )  . 
The place-name Coneybury Hill in West Amesbury refers 
to a rabbit-warren in the area during medieval times . The 
earliest records date to an Inquisition of 1382 in which the 
lord of Totness and Harringworth granted the manor of 
Amesbury called ‘ le Conynger ’  ( Bond 1991 , 398 )  . Another 
medieval warren site is at the Coniger , an earthwork 
enclosure at Winterbourne Stoke , first mentioned in 1574 , 
and recorded as encompassing a number of Bronze Age 
barrows ( RCHM 1979 , xxi )  . The utilization of barrows as 
rabbit warrens was probably fairly widespread , but is hard 
to document because rabbits naturally seek accommodation 
in such features . Documentary evidence is the most reliable 
source of information ( RCHM 1979 , xxii )  , although 
excavations around the North Kite by W F Grimes in the late 
1950s included the examination of a pillow mound 
southwest of Druid ’ s Lodge . 
The creation of parks was a feature of the Wiltshire 
landscape during medieval times , but the Stonehenge 
Landscape is remarkably devoid of known examples ( Watts 
1996 , figure 2 )  . 
Stonehenge itself is first mentioned in available written 
sources around AD 1130 , presumably as a place of interest , 
intrigue , and the source of patriotic and mythical schemes for 
early British history ( Chippindale 2004 , 6 )  . To what extent 
Stonehenge was robbed of some of its stones during later 
medieval and post-medieval times has been a matter of some 
discussion . Newall ( 1921 , 435 ) records a fragment of 
bluestone , perhaps originally from Stonehenge , in a cottage 
garden at Lake , and two sarsens that are thought to have 
come from Stonehenge have been recorded at Berwick St 
James some 6 . 5km to the southwest of Stonehenge , although 
their status is far from certain ( Wiltshire SMR PRN 2606 )  . 
Following earlier writers , Atkinson ( 1979 , 85–6 ; cf . Long 1876 , 
75–7 ) favoured the deliberate destruction of parts of the site , 
perhaps in the Roman or early medieval period , but Ashbee 
( 1998 ) suggests that noncompletion may have as much to do 
with its present condition as slighting and dilapidation . The 
discovery of pottery dating to about AD 1400 inside the main 
cist of the primary burial at Amesbury G85 suggests that here 
at least there was robbing or investigation of the mound 
( Newall 1931 , 433 )  . A bronze skillet handle of medieval date 
found within Durrington Walls ( Short 1956 , 393 ) may indicate 
activity at this much earlier monument too . 
POST-MEDIEVAL ( AD 1500–1800 ) 
From about AD 1500 the Stonehenge Landscape and the 
communities living within it come into sharper focus as 
additional written and cartographic sources become 
available . These have been extensively discussed by Bond 
( 1991 ) as part of a landscape regression analysis for the 
Stonehenge Conservation and Management programme . 
The wider background is provided by Bettey ( 1986 ) and 
Lewis ( 1994 )  . Map O shows the distribution of recorded 
sites and features relevant to the archaeology of the postmedieval period within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Through the sixteenth century the traditional medieval 
settlement pattern prevailed , dominated by the town of 
Amesbury and the villages along the Avon and the Till 
valleys , as too the agricultural regime based on sheep 
rearing and corn husbandry . Compared to the claylands of 
northern Wiltshire , the Stonehenge Landscape was a 
relatively unpopulated area through the post-medieval 
period ( cf . Lewis 1994 , figure 8 . 5 )  . The land needed to 
support the population included valley-bottom meadowland , valley-side land , and upland pasture . Access to 
these three resources by the inhabitants of each settlement 
is reflected in the organization and lay-out of manors 
Illustration 63 
Aerial view of abandoned 
watermeadows in the Avon 
Valley .  [ Photograph : 
English Heritage . 
CCC8603 / 1688 ( NMR )  .  ] 
86 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 87 

and parishes . Beresford and Hurst ( 1971 , 206–7 ) record 
eight deserted / shrunken villages and farmsteads within 
the Stonehenge Landscape , but none has been examined 
in sufficient detail to shed light on the date or cause of 
desertion . Close scrutiny of other settlements may well 
reveal more cases . 
Changes to the physical character of the medieval 
landscape during the post-medieval period can however 
be observed in the documentary record and from 
archaeological evidence . One of the most significant 
changes during the seventeenth century was the 
introduction of floated meadows along the valley bottoms 
( Kerridge 1953 ; 1954 ; Atwood 1963 ; Illustration 63 )  . Floated 
meadows were created at Wylye and Chalke in around 1635 ; 
many other villages followed their lead later in the 1640s 
( Aubrey 1969 )  . The Amesbury water meadows were also 
constructed during the seventeenth century , some time 
before 1680 , as written records mention repairs and 
replacements to the water meadow machinery ( Bettey 1979 ; 
Cowan 1982 )  . The water meadows along the west bank of 
the Avon at Woodford , Lake , were also constructed in the 
seventeenth century , an act that drew a lawsuit claiming 
that construction of bay and weir dammed the excellent 
fishing on this section of the river ( McKinley 2003 , 8–9 )  . 
The expansion of arable farming from the seventeenth 
century , with the subsequent diminution of the downland , 
also contributed to the changing character of the physical 
and cultural landscape . Widespread evidence from placenames shows the extent of these changes ( Kerridge 1959 , 
49–52 )  . The fieldname ‘ Burnbake ’ on later maps is 
indicative of a method of turf removal , known as 
 ‘ burnbeating ’  ,  ‘ burnbaking ’  , or ‘ devonshiring ’  . Examples can 
be found on the south side of Durrington Down where new 
fields were created , and in the fields of Amesbury Countess 
where existing arable fields were extended beyond the 
Seven Barrows ( Bond 1991 , 409 )  . 
Studies of fieldnames have also contributed to an 
understanding of the development of agriculture and 
farming , and subsequently the changing character of the 
Stonehenge Landscape . For instance , a tithe award for 
Durnford gives the fieldname ‘ Sainfoin Piece ’ to land on the 
northern boundary of Normanton tithing ; it suggests that the 
leguminous crop sainfoin was cultivated here presumably to 
reduce the fallow period . Much more work remains to be 
done with the place-name evidence and it has relevance to 
the post-medieval period and perhaps earlier times . 
Concerns over the impact on archaeological remains of 
expanding arable agriculture and ploughing up the 
downland were expressed by antiquarians . William Stukeley , 
for example , records that ( 1740 , 1 )  : 
The Wiltshire downs , or Salisbury plain ,  ( as commonly 

call ’ d ) for extent and beauty , is , without controversy , one 

of the most delightful parts of Britain . But of late years 

great encroachments have been made upon it by the 

plough , which threatens the ruin of this fine champain , 

and of all the monuments of antiquity thereabouts . 

A parish by parish account of the extent and impact of 
eighteenth-century and later agricultural change and its 
impact on the archaeological remains is provided by the 
RCHM ( 1979 , xvi–xix )  . Ridge and furrow cultivation , some 
of it perhaps quite late in origin , is represented on lower 
ground and hill-slopes , especially along the main river 
valleys . Very little survives as earthworks , most being 
recorded through aerial photography as soilmarks or 
cropmarks ( Illustration 64 )  . 
Illustration 64 
Aerial view of medieval 
ridge and furrow cultivation 
visible as cropmarks near 
Hill Farm , southeast of 
Winterbourne Stoke . 
Modern cultivation marks 
as well as prehistoric ringditches and linear 
boundaries can be seen 
against the regular slightly 
curved stripes left by the 
ridge and furrow 
cultivation .  [ Photograph : 
English Heritage . NMR 
930 / 083 ©Crown copyright 
( NMR )  .  ] 
Enclosure certainly began late in the Stonehenge 
Landscape , probably during the second half of the eighteenth 
century . However , no Acts or Awards have been found for 
Amesbury , Bulford , or Wilsford and it must therefore be 
assumed that enclosure was by ‘ agreement ’  . Written sources 
87 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 88 

suggest that , at least for Amesbury , open fields were still used 
up until the mid eighteenth century , after which they were 
piecemeal and limited . Towards the end of the eighteenth 
century all the land owned by the third Duke of Queensberry 
( largely around Amesbury ) was enclosed and divided between 
six farms : West Amesbury ; Countess Court ; Red House ; Earl ’ s 
Court ; Kent House ; and South Ham ( Bond 1991 , 419 )  . 
Durrington , Shrewton , and Winterbourne Stoke were not 
enclosed until the nineteenth century . Elsewhere , essentially 
medieval patterns of land ownership were reorganized with a 
propensity towards the merging of smaller holdings and 
development of existing larger farms ( Bond 1991 )  . 
Work on the manorial history for the Stonehenge 
Landscape is fairly limited but includes Chandler and 
Goodhugh ’ s ( 1989 ) accounts of Amesbury . Edward Seymour 
procured the manor of Amesbury Priors in 1541 after the 
dissolution of Amesbury Priory ( Chandler and Goodhugh 1989 , 
25–6 )  . Five years earlier , Seymour had been bequeathed 
Amesbury Earls manor which combined both estates and thus 
largely comprised the whole of Amesbury . The Amesbury 
estate changed hands a number of times during the postmedieval period . In 1676 the Bruce family acquired the manor , 
but in 1720 sold it to Lord Carleton who , before his death in 
1725 , devised it to his nephew , Charles Douglas , the third 
Duke of Queensberry . Upon the Duke ’ s death in 1778 , the 
estate was passed to his cousin , William Douglas , the fourth 
Duke of Queensberry who died in 1810 ( Pugh 1948 , 70–110 )  . 
These changes in land ownership affected the character of 
the cultural landscape and the extent of innovation and 
development within it , especially the development of 
Amesbury Park which sees a period of improvement and 
expansion under Charles Douglas who lived at Amesbury for 
most of the time between 1725 and 1778 followed by a period 
of neglect and decline between 1778 and 1810 when the 
fourth Duke was mainly absent ( English Heritage 1987 ; 
Chandler 2002 ; Illustration 65 )  . In 1735 , for example , the third 
Duke purchased West Amesbury manor which included land 
to the west of Vespasian ’ s Camp and Stonehenge Down , 
allowing him to create an area of parkland which he 
progressively enlarged . Landscaping features west of the river 
included tree-planting within Vespasian ’ s Camp ( previously 
arable land )  ; the creation of a grotto known as Gay ’ s Cave ; 
establishing a number of serpentine and straight walks , 
glades , and radiating vistas such as the prospect towards 
Stonehenge ; building a Chinese temple over the Avon ; and 
the construction of a balustraded bridge ( Bond 1991 , 419 )  . By 
1773 , the Duke extended the park further to the north , as far 
as the Amesbury–Durrington road , and to the west 
incorporating the Seven Barrows , which engulfed existing 
open fields at West Amesbury and Amesbury Countess . By 
the time of his death in 1778 the park covered about 120ha . 
Until about 1800 most of the park was under pasture and 
there is no evidence that any of it had been ploughed . Over 
the ensuing two decades , however , most of the former park 
was ploughed up and remained in arable usage at least until 
the tithe commutation of 1846 ( Chandler 2002 , 15 )  . 
Illustration 65 
Amesbury Park . A plan of 
the park in 1738 .  
[ Reproduced courtesy of 
The Bodleian Library , 
University of Oxford . 
Copyright reserved .  ] 
During the third Duke ’ s occupation , the wider estate 
experienced a period of investment in building construction . 
The Countess Court Farmhouse , originally constructed in the 
early to mid seventeenth century , received a new three-bay 
façade in the Georgian style . To the south of the house , a 
five-bayed timber-framed stavel barn and granary were 
constructed during this improvement period ( Slocombe 
1989 , 26–7 ; Illustration 66 )  . Estate cottages were also built 
on Countess Road , but have since been demolished for the 
construction of Amesbury bypass ( Chandler and Goodhugh 
1989 , 71 )  . 
Several earlier extant buildings dating from the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries can be found within the 
Stonehenge Landscape ; these include West Amesbury 
House and Diana House in Amesbury . Medieval in origin , the 
shell of West Amesbury House was extensively altered 
during the late seventeenth century . The alterations 
consisted of an entirely new stone and flint exterior , a new 
gabled and symmetrically fenestrated frontage and 
mullioned windows . Diana House in Amesbury , south of the 
Avon beyond Grey Bridge , was probably built by the Earl of 
Hertford as a lodge around 1600 . Also noteworthy is the 
domed lock-up at Shrewton ( Illustration 67 )  . 
Rabbit warrens continued to be an important part of 
the rural economy of the area ( RCHM 1979 , xxi ; Betty 
2004 )  . In the early seventeenth century the planned 
introduction of rabbits to the barrows at Amesbury Abbey 
is well recorded . An account of AD 1609–10 shows that in 
1605 ‘ Two round connye berryes were made to his 
Lordship ’ s appointment and at the same time 14 couple of 
conies put into the ground . Which 14 couple of cunnies 
with theire encrease did breade and feed there ’  ( RCHM 
1979 , xxi ; WRO 283 / 6 )  . Stonehenge had become a wellestablished rabbit warren by the early 1720s , although by 
the later eighteenth century rabbits were regarded locally 
as a nuisance ( Bond 1991 , 420 )  . 
The construction of sheep-folds was widespread during 
the eighteenth century , and sometimes occasioned damage 
to ancient sites . One fold was cut into the southwestern 
side of Bush Barrow with a small spinney of thorn bushes 
planted for shelter on top ( Bond 1991 , 417 ; RCHM 1979 , title 
page and xxi )  . 
Evidence for roads and trackways within the Stonehenge 
Landscape during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
88 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 19 PM Page 89 

is rather limited . However , Ogilby ’ s road book of about 1675 
shows the line of the London–Barnstaple road just north of 
the present A344 . This may relate to the apparently 
unfinished road still visible as an earthwork ( RCHM 1979 , 
31–2 )  . The eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century 
documentary record is slightly more comprehensive , and 
includes Andrews and Drury ’ s county map of 1773 , the map 
of the Amesbury Hundred published by Colt Hoare in 1826 , 
the first edition OS map ( 1817 )  , and various eighteenthcentury manorial court records . Many of the tracks and 
roads which appear on the Andrews and Drury map have 
ceased to exist or exist in a relocated and realigned form in 
the present Stonehenge Landscape . These include parts of 
the old Amesbury–Market Lavington road , a track from the 
Avenue in Stonehenge Bottom to head northeastwards 
towards Durrington , and part of the Old Marlborough Road 
( Bond 1991 , 421 )  . Queensberry Bridge , Amesbury , built in 
c . 1775 , may mark the route used for many years previously 
as a trackway running north and northeast of Stonehenge 
( RCHM 1979 )  . 
89 
Illustration 66 
Countess Farm , Amesbury . 
Plan of the farm in 1887 and 
2003 with plans and 
photographs of the main 
surviving buildings .  
[ Reproduced courtesy of the 
National Trust and Wiltshire 
County Council Library and 
Heritage Service Wiltshire 
Buildings Record .  ] 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 90 

Illustration 67 
Shrewton lock-up .  
[ Photograph : Neville 
Stokes . Copyright reserved .  ] 
Illustration 68 
Milestone beside the 
modern A344 northeast 
of Stonehenge .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
Illustration 69 
Eighteenth-century view 
showing trippers at 
Stonehenge .  [ From 
Stukeley 1740 , TAB XXII .  ] 
90 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 91 

The present Salisbury to Devizes road ( A360 ) was 
turnpiked in 1760 . Soon after , in 1762 , the Amesbury 
Turnpike Trust was established by Act of Parliament . This 
body constructed a road followed by the modern A344 . 
Roads were turnpiked soon after 1762 , subsequently 
realigning and improving the existing network . A number 
of listed milestones and toll-houses exist within the 
Stonehenge Landscape ( DoE 1988 ; Illustration 68 )  . 
Although the economy of the Stonehenge Landscape 
was largely based upon sheep-crop husbandry , there is 
considerable evidence for various industrial activities 
around Amesbury . For example , in 1662 Thomas Fuller wrote 
that ‘ the best [ pipes ] for shape and colour … are made at 
Amesbury ’  ( Brown 1959 )  . This accolade seems to relate to a 
clay-pipe factory owned by the Gauntlet family from c . 1600 
to 1698 . It was situated at Wrestler ’ s Gate outside the Priory 
Manor between Normanton and West Amesbury . Remnants 
of clay-pits were found at the site in c . 1840 ( Ruddle 1895 )  . 
Small-scale gunflint-making sites have been identified on 
Rox Hill and at Rox Hill Clump , part of a little researched but 
seemingly fairly extensive industry around the Salisbury 
area ( Fowler and Needham 1995 )  . 
Mills were also present along the main rivers , some 
perhaps on earlier sites ; a millstone and a number of 
timbers have been recorded at Durrington . 
Intellectual interest in Stonehenge and its surroundings 
increased with visits by notable antiquarians of the day , 
Inigo Jones between 1633 and 1652 , John Aubrey in the 
1660s , William Stukeley in the 1720s , and John Wood in 1747 
amongst them . The wider interest they promoted no doubt 
led to others making visits and it is interesting that several 
views of the site from the 1750s onward show casual visitors 
arriving by carriage and on horseback . One picture of 1790 
shows a shepherd-guide wearing a smock showing two 
gentlemen and a lady one of the great trilithons ( Illustration 
69 )  . Graffiti carved into the stones from the seventeenth 
century onwards is further evidence of its attraction to 
visitors , in some cases perhaps because of the midsummer 
games that in 1781 at least included a sack-race , cricket , 
wrestling , and bowling ( Goulstone 1985 , 52 )  . Other ancient 
monuments in the area also found novel community uses , as 
with the Prophet Barrow ( Wilsford 43 in the Lake Group ) 
which according to local tradition was used as a preaching 
place by French prophets in about 1710 ( Grinsell 1978 , 38 )  . 
NINETEENTH CENTURY AD 
Bond ’ s ( 1991 ) analysis of a major part of the Stonehenge 
Landscape provides an excellent overview of nineteenthcentury changes . Map P shows the distribution of the principal 
recorded sites and features relevant to the nineteenth-century 
archaeology of the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Enclosure through Act of Parliament played a major role 
in altering the physical organization of the countryside in 
some areas during the nineteenth century . Amongst the 
earliest parishes to enclose open fields and downland under 
the Parliamentary Act were Shrewton , Winterbourne Stoke 
in 1812 , and Durrington in 1823 ( Bond 1991 , 424 )  . Later 
piecemeal mergers and subdivisions have also contributed 
to the present form of the field boundaries . Prompted by the 
desertion of communal farming techniques and the 
introduction of enclosure , isolated farmsteads and field 
barns appear in the nineteenth-century landscape : 
Durrington Down Barn by 1811 ; Fargo Cottages west of 
Stonehenge in 1847 ; Grant ’ s Barn in Winterbourne Stoke by 
1841 ; and Greenland Farm by 1887 . 
Not all areas were enclosed however . Extensive tracts 
of the higher ground remained under permanent pasture , 
retaining their existing characteristics ; these included 
Tenantry Down ; Durrington Down ; Normanton Down ; 
Countess Court Down ; West Amesbury Down ; 
Winterbourne Stoke Middle Down ; and Wilsford Down . 
New turnpike roads were created during the early 
nineteenth century . The Swindon , Marlborough and 
Everleigh Trust turnpiked the modern A345 Amesbury– 
Old Sarum road in 1836 , and in 1840 the Amesbury– 
Rushall–East Kennet road was turnpiked by the Kennet 
and Amesbury Trust . A number of public and private roads 
in Durrington and Winterbourne Stoke were constructed to 
replace unfenced tracks and open-field baulk and headland ways . 
Water meadows created in the eighteenth century 
continued in use and benefited from the introduction of 
better mechanical systems for sluices and drainage . Most 
were in the Avon Valley below Ham Hatches , at Durrington , 
and at Winterbourne Stoke in the Till Valley . 
Plantations of trees , both conifer and deciduous , were 
a new feature of the landscape from the early nineteenth 
century . Early plantings were mainly for shelterbelts , game 
coverts , and ornamental clumps . These include the Long 
Barrow Plantation in Wilsford ; Normanton Gorse ( also 
known as Furze Cover )  ; Fargo Plantation ; and 
Luxemborough Plantation ( Bond 1991 , 425 )  . Extending to 
the north of Vespasian ’ s Camp and to the west towards 
King Barrows are dispersed sets of ornamental clumps 
which first appear on the Ordnance Survey map of 1879 . 
Since the 1960s it has been widely believed that these 
clumps represent the disposition of ships at the opening 
of the Battle of the Nile ( 1798 ) or Trafalgar ( 1805 )  . 
However , there is no evidence to support this idea ( RCHM 
1979 , xxi )  , and recent studies have concluded that in fact 
the clumps were planted about 30 years before 1798 and 
therefore can have nothing to do with the Battle of the Nile 
( Chandler 2002 , 15–16 )  . 
Although attempts to rear rabbits in formal warrens had 
ceased by the early nineteenth century , the rabbit 
population of the area remained high and Long ( 1876 , 118 ) 
notes how in 1863 the under-gamekeeper of Sir Edward 
Antrobus was digging deeply for rabbits in the vicinity of the 
fallen trilithon at Stonehenge . 
Many local crafts and industries continued , chalk-pits 
for example being worked in most parishes to provide roadmetal and top-dressing for cultivated land ( Bond 1991 , 426 )  . 
The scale of visitor interest in Stonehenge increased 
through the nineteenth century , and from the 1860s a 
Mr Judd ran a photographic business at the site 
photographing visitors and then developing the pictures 
in a mobile dark-room ( see Chippindale 2004 , 148–9 )  . 
Goulstone ( 1986 ) has drawn attention to a mid 
nineteenth-century description of hare-coursing around 
Stonehenge and suggests the presence of a turf-cut 
geoglyph or emblem in the form of a shepherd ’ s crook at 
or near Stonehenge itself . There are several superb 
pictures of the site by renowned artists from the early 
nineteenth century , including watercolours by Bridges in 
about 1820 , Turner in 1828 , and Constable in 1835 
( Chippindale 1987 ; 2004 )  . 
Perhaps the biggest change of the nineteenth century , 
and one that has had a far-reaching impact ever since , was 
91 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 92 

the acquisition of land for military training . In 1897 the Army 
purchased about 40 , 000 acres of land for about £10 per 
acre , mainly west of the Avon around Durrington and 
Rollestone , but some east of the Avon around Bulford . 
TWENTIETH CENTURY AD 
The last century was a period of great and profound change 
for the Stonehenge Landscape , although not yet 
documented in detail ( see Bond 1991 for a useful start 
based on a landscape regression analysis )  . Map P shows 
the distribution of the principal recorded sites and features 
relevant to the twentieth-century archaeology of the 
Stonehenge Landscape . 
Following the acquisition by the Army of 40 , 000 acres of 
land in the southern part of Salisbury Plain in 1897 ( see 
above ) the military presence has been marked . A century 
later the physical remains of military activities here and 
elsewhere have attracted considerable attention ( Bond 1991 ; 
Schofield and Lake 1995 ; Dobinson et al . 1997 )  , and in 1998 
a detailed assessment of the twentieth-century military 
activity was carried out by Wessex Archaeology ( WA 1998a ) 
to assess the potential impact of past and future occupation 
and land-use , and to emphasize its value as part of the 
archaeological record of the area . The research , based 
mainly on written sources , proved effective and allowed the 
documentation and interpretation of extant and sub-surface 
remains , as well as temporary structures which had long 
been dismantled . The assessment covers activity from before 
World War 1 through to the post World War 2 period . 
The military land , now known as the Salisbury Plain 
Training Area ( SPTA )  , has been the subject of archaeological 
surveys and management initiatives ( DLA 1993 ; Bradley et al . 
1994 ; McOmish et al . 2002 )  . The effect of military occupation 
on earlier remains has been a matter that has aroused 
considerable general interest . There is certainly evidence of 
localized damage to sites and monuments , but against this 
must be set the widespread preservation of earthworks and 
structures that had they been subject to agriculture as 
elsewhere on the Plain would surely have disappeared long 
ago . In many respects the training areas have become 
archaeological reserves of considerable importance . 
The military remains themselves also have an important 
story to tell ( Bond 1991 , 435–6 ; Schofield 1998 ; WA 1998a )  . In 
1902 , a permanent camp was established at Bulford Barracks , 
the most easterly part of the Stonehenge Landscape ( Bond 
1991 )  . Later , in 1914 , Larkhill was also made a permanent 
base by the School of Artillery ( Watkin 1979 , 115 )  . Evidence 
for temporary military camps has been revealed through 
documentary sources , including the ‘ extensive hutted 
encampment ’  , constructed at the eastern end of the 
Stonehenge Cursus during the First World War and still in 
place into the 1920s ( RCHM 1979 , xxiv ; Bond 1991 , 435 )  . 
Balloons were the first form of aircraft used by the Army 
and came to play an important role in the Boer War . War 
balloons were launched on Salisbury Plain and the earliest 
aerial photographs of Stonehenge were taken from such a 
platform in 1906 ( Capper 1907 )  . Larkhill Airfield is one of the 
earliest surviving military airfields , constructed in 1909 , and 
was one of the very first flying schools in England ( Watkin 
1979 , 115 )  . It was later involved in training pilots in preparation 
for the First World War ( WA 1998a , 16 )  . The aeroplane sheds at 
Larkhill , built during this time , are still used by the Army today . 
The remains of other airfields or landing strips can also be 
found dotted around the Stonehenge Landscape . These 
include airfields at Stonehenge Down , Lake Down , Rollestone 
Balloon School , Oatlands , Shrewton , Bulford Fields , and the 
still operational Boscombe Down . 
From 1906 onwards Salisbury Plain has been extensively 
used as a practice ground for target exercises ( James 1983 , 
20 )  . Former military sites also include military railways , 
hospitals , military housing , memorials , defensive structures 
and paraphernalia such as pillboxes and anti-tank 
obstacles , and recreational facilities . Records have been 
particularly useful as they have revealed sites previously 
unknown , such as the Fargo Camp Military Hospital . The 
hospital was out of use in 1925 , but was still occupied , 
although on a reduced scale , until at least 1939 , when it 
was known as Fargo Lodge ( Bond 1991 , 436 )  . Narrow-gauge 
railways and standard-gauge military railways built from 
1916 onwards were used for moving military supplies and 
for tank firing practice ( Cross 1971 )  . 
A series of excellent vertical aerial photographs taken on 
Christmas Eve 1943 show the extent of military works at the 
end of World War 2 ( Illustration 70 )  . Especially notable are 
defensive works and trenches on the south side of the 
training area , well within the Stonehenge Landscape . Some 
of these were sampled by excavation in 1991 as part of the 
evaluation work at a prospective new visitor centre site at 
Larkhill ( Wessex Archaeology in Darvill 1991a , 491 )  . 
War graves are known at Durrington , Bulford Village , 
Maddington , Orcheston St Mary , Hewetson Cross in Fargo 
Plantation , and the Lorraine / Wilson Cross at Airman ’ s Cross 
on the A360 / A344 / B3046 junction ( Illustration 71 )  . At Wood 
Road , Larkhill there is a brass plaque to mark the site of the 
first military airfield at Larkhill . The Bulford Kiwi is a modern 
geoglyph cut into the chalk hillside east of Bulford Camp by 
New Zealand troops stationed at Sling Camp in 1918 
( Newman 1997 , 202–3 )  . 
The population of the Stonehenge Landscape rose 
considerably during the twentieth century , some 
attributable to the increasing scale of military occupation . 
In Bulford , for example , there were 341 residents in 1891 , 
which had increased to 4000 by 1941 ( Bettey 1986 , 288 )  . 
A large village was created to accommodate the soldiers 
and their families . As a result of rises in the population 
there was very considerable settlement expansion around 
Amesbury and all the other established settlements too . 
During the early 1950s there was a renewed period of 
arable expansion within the Stonehenge Landscape . This led 
to the levelling of many archaeological monuments and 
fundamental changes to the appearance of the landscape . It 
was in response to these agricultural changes that a number 
of important excavations were carried out ( see Section 1 )  . 
The road network was considerably modified during the 
1960s , prompted by the regrading in 1958 of the A303 as a 
trunk road linking London with the west country . Local to 
Stonehenge , the single biggest change was the creation of 
the Amesbury bypass on the A303 in 1967–8 . Associated 
work was carried out on the A345 in 1966–8 ( see 
Wainwright and Longworth 1971 )  , and around Long Barrow 
Crossroads in 1967 ( Richards 1990 , 208–10 )  . 
Stonehenge visitor numbers rose dramatically through 
the twentieth century . In 1901 the site was enclosed and 
arrangements for the use of a number of tracks in the area 
changed ( Chippindale 1976 )  . The tourist potential of the area 
was widely recognized and prompted much comment 
( Illustration 72 )  . The triangle of land containing Stonehenge 
and bounded by the A303 , the A344 , and a trackway now 
92 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 93 

known as By Way 10 was gifted to the nation in 1918 by Mr 
( later Sir ) Cecil Chubb . A programme of restoration and 
investigation was instigated by the Ministry of Works in 1919 
and lasted through to 1926 ( Chippindale 2004 , 179–83 )  . Much 
of the surrounding land was acquired by the National Trust 
piecemeal from 1927 onwards when about 587ha was 
purchased following a public appeal ; the estate totalled about 
760ha by 1990 . As part of the management of the estate 
through to the later twentieth century much arable land was 
returned to pasture and a selection of monuments was 
restored to the condition they had been in the 1950s . Further 
excavations took place at Stonehenge itself most years 
between 1950 and 1959 with some later work in 1964 and 
1978 ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 11–12 )  . In 1967–8 a major infrastructure 
development took place north of the A344 to the northwest of 
Stonehenge to create car-parks , visitor facilities , and an 
underpass to provide access to the monument ( Illustration 
73 )  . A Stonehenge Festival took place in fields around Fargo 
Plantation between 1974 and 1985 , eventually leading to a 
decade or more of conflict and tension between the 
authorities and a wide range of interest groups ( Chippindale 
1986b ; Dobinson 1992 ; Bender 1998 )  . From the mid 1970s , 
Stonehenge became the only ancient monument in England to 
be subject to its own piece of parliamentary legislation with 
the passing of the Stonehenge Regulations which were 
revised in 1983 and updated again in 1997 ( Statutory 
Instrument 1997 No . 2038 )  . These regulations provide controls 
over public access to Stonehenge and its surroundings . 
Illustration 70 
Vertical aerial photograph 
of the area north of 
Stonehenge , taken on 
Christmas Eve 1943 by the 
USAF . North is to the top . In 
the upper part of the view 
is the Larkhill Garrison with 
traces of an underlying 
prehistoric fieldsystem 
between the buildings . 
Earthwork remains of 
defensive trenches and 
emplacements can be seen . 
The Stonehenge Cursus 
runs obliquely across the 
frame just below centre ; 
some of the mounds of the 
Cursus barrow cemetery 
are visible bottom left .  
[ Photograph : US / 7PH / 
GP / LOC122 / 1062 English 
Heritage ( NMR ) 
USAAF Photography .  ] 
Illustration 71 
The Lorraine / Wilson 
memorial at Airman ’ s Cross 
on the A360 / A344 / 
B3046 junction west 
of Stonehenge .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright 
reserved .  ] 
93 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 94 

Iluustration 72 
Stonehenge for tourists .  
( top ) Cartoon vision of 
how things might have 
been if adjacent land 
was developed .  
( middle ) How Stonehenge 
might have been 
popularized if the 
Government had bought the 
site , through the eyes of 
Punch ( 30 August 1899 )  .  
( bottom ) View westward 
from Stonehenge Bottom in 
1930 with the Custodian ’ s 
cottages to the left and the 
Stonehenge Café to the 
right .  [ Reproduced courtesy 
of the Illustrated London 
News Picture Library ( top )  , 
Punch ( middle )  , and English 
Heritage FLO1500 / 02 / 003 
( NMR )  ( bottom )  .  ] 
94 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 95 

Various proposals were made to provide a more worthwhile 
celebration ( e . g . Chippindale 1985b ) but it was not until 2000 
that general access to the stones at the summer solstice was 
restored , a move that prompted a mixed reaction ( Dennison 
2000 ; and see Worthington 2002 and 2004 for an overview of 
celebrations at the solstice )  . Archaeologically , however , the 
activities of 1974–85 resulted in the installation of new 
security measures and will have left familiar kinds of features 
such as pits , postholes , and artefacts in the topsoil in the 
areas of temporary encampment . 
Illustration 73 
Aerial photograph of 
Stonehenge looking east 
with construction works for 
the present visitor facilities 
and underpass in progress 
in 1966 .  [ Photograph : 
English Heritage . SU1242 
©Crown copyright ( NMR )  .  ] 
As part of the ongoing programme of management works 
at Stonehenge a new enclosure and visitor pathway through 
the site was made in 1981 in order to protect the stones from 
direct public access ( Bond 1982 )  . Other works have been 
undertaken in the wider landscape in order to deal with the 
Illustration 74 
Modern-day stone circle 
constructed at Butterfield 
Down , Amesbury , on the 
edge of a new housing 
development in c . 1998 .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
95 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 96 

results of natural catastrophes such as the devastating gales 
of October 1987 and January 1990 ( Cleal and Allen 1994 )  , and 
to implement the National Trust ’ s Stonehenge Estate Land 
Use Plan ( National Trust 2001 ) and the Stonehenge World 
Heritage Site Management Plan ( English Heritage 2000 )  . 
Throughout the Stonehenge Landscape and beyond 
there are numerous references to Stonehenge in the names 
of local hostelries ( e . g . The Stonehenge Inn at Durrington )  , 
schools ( e . g . the Stonehenge Comprehensive School in 
Amesbury )  , and businesses ( e . g . Stonehenge Construction 
based in Amesbury )  , and in murals and art displayed in both 
public and private spaces ( e . g . the wall-paintings in the 
Rajpoot Tandoori Restaurant in Fisherton Street , Salisbury )  . 
One expression of this is a continuing interest in the 
construction of ‘ ancient monuments ’  , most clearly seen in 
the stone circle built on the edge of a new housing 
development at Butterfield Down , Amesbury , in 1998 
( Illustration 74 )  . And on a still wider canvas there is a 
bewildering range of direct and indirect references to 
Stonehenge and its surroundings in popular literature , art , 
film , and music ( Darvill 2004a )  . 
DIACHRONIC THEMES 
Cross-cutting the chronologically based narrative presented 
above it is possible to pursue a number of themes and 
developments that run through many periods and which 
thus provide rather different perspectives . 
Holocene environments ( 10 , 000 BC to the 
twentieth century ) 
Environmental archaeology has made considerable progress 
in documenting the palaeoenvironment of the Stonehenge 
Landscape , at least in broad outline . A general setting for the 
prehistoric environment is provided by the papers brought 
together by Ian Simmons and Michael Tooley ( 1981 )  , and 
detailed accounts are provided by Michael Allen on a general 
chronology ( in Richards 1990 , 254–8 ) and in relation to the 
phasing of Stonehenge ( in Cleal et al . 1995 , 470–91 ; Allen 
1997 )  . This and other work can be summarized in terms of a 
changing series of distinct environments . 
Holocene wildwood characterizes the period from before 
8000 BC down to about 4000 BC . The Boreal climate was 
relatively warm and dry . The chalkland at this time had a thick 
cover of brown earth or argillic brown earth soils ( perhaps up 
to 1m thick ) supporting open woodland dominated by hazel 
and pine . Vegetation was not static , and periods of more 
open conditions may have punctuated a generally more 
closed woodland . Human populations as well as animal 
populations may have played parts in these changes . 
Tamed wildwood characterizes the period from 4000 to 
3000 BC , as the impact of human communities gets 
stronger . Soils of this period sealed beneath later 
monuments are thinner than for earlier millennia and 
include rendzina soils . Charcoal suggests the presence of 
elm , ash , oak , hazel , and yew within the woodland , but the 
extent of woodland was reducing and several buried soil 
profiles suggest that areas of grassland were already 
established before 3000 BC , often providing the setting for 
the construction of monuments . Allen ( 1997 , 127 ) has 
described the vegetation cover in this period as a ‘ complex 
mosaic … with areas of ancient denser woodland , light open 
mixed hazel and oak woodland and clear-felled areas of 
shrubs and grassland for grazing , browse , cultivation , and 
occupation ’  . Some cereal cultivation was practised , 
probably in small clearance plots or ‘ gardens ’  . Hazelnuts 
and tubers are represented amongst the palaeobotanical 
material recovered from fourth-millennium BC sites 
( Carruthers in Richards 1990 , 251 )  . Domesticated cattle are 
well represented ; pig and sheep are present in small 
numbers amongst the earliest faunal assemblages from the 
area . The native fauna is known to include red deer , roe 
deer , and beaver , but other species may well have been 
present too ( perhaps including brown bear , wolf , wild cattle , 
wild pig , horse )  . The rivers supported fish ; a brown trout is 
present amongst the assemblage from the Coneybury 
Anomaly ( Maltby in Richards 1990 , 57 )  . 
Emergent downland characterizes the period from about 
3000 BC down to 1600 BC , with the balance between 
woodland and grassland shifting so that for the first time 
grassland predominates . The process by which this 
happened is currently seen in terms of expanding initial 
clearances ( Allen in Cleal et al . 1995 , 477 )  . Many of the main 
monuments established at this time were constructed 
within areas of grazed downland , although Coneybury 
provides an exception and seems to have been built in a 
small woodland clearing that was allowed to become 
overgrown ( Bell and Jones in Richards 1990 , 157–8 )  . The 
existing range of domestic animals continued to be 
represented , although the relative abundance of species 
changed slightly , with some sites showing a higher 
proportion of pig than cattle . Sheep are poorly represented 
until well into the second millennium BC . Mallard was 
reported from Site A Figheldean ( Egerton et al . in Graham 
and Newman 1993 , 38 )  . Wheat and barley were cultivated . 
Little is known about the wild plant species in this phase , 
but palaeobotanical material recovered includes onion 
couch , chickweed , stinging nettle , hazelnut , and hawthorn 
( Carruthers in Richards 1990 , 251 )  . Although the extent of 
woodland is not known , charcoal suggests that its 
composition can be seen to include oak ( used in cremations 
at Durrington Down G3 )  , hazel , blackthorn , and 
hawthorn / whitebeam / rowan ( Gale in Richards 1990 , 
252–3 )  . Evidence for ploughing , perhaps with a rip ard , 
sometime around 2000 BC is preserved below the mounds 
of Amesbury G70 ( Christie 1964 , 33 ) and G71 ( Christie 1967 , 
347 )  . The increasing extent of cultivation through the early 
second millennium BC may also account for the presence of 
mobile sediments in the secondary fills of ditches dug in the 
third millennium BC . Soil erosion does not , however , seem 
to be a major problem at this period . 
Farmed downland characterizes the period from about 
1600 BC down to perhaps as late as AD 1500 . Formal 
fieldsystems were established by the later Bronze Age to 
provide the framework for mixed agriculture that included 
both arable and pasture . Wind-blown sediment trapped in 
archaeological features suggests that some arable land 
was left as open ground for part of the year . Elsewhere , 
the grazing was characterized by open short-turfed 
grassland . It is currently believed that many of the 
fieldsystems established in later prehistoric times 
continued in use through the early first millennium AD , 
although this has yet to be fully demonstrated . Ridge and 
furrow cultivation cuts earlier fieldsystems in several 
96 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 97 

areas , for example south of Long Barrow Crossroads , and 
on Rox Hill ( RCHM 1979 , xiv )  . Ridge and furrow cultivation 
is also visible on aerial photographs of the land east of 
King Barrow Ridge ( RCHM 1979 , plate 9 )  . Mapping the 
former extent of this distinctive phase of land-use would 
provide a useful perspective on monument survival as well 
as an insight into the medieval economy . 
Late first-millennium BC and early first-millennium AD 
environmental evidence from Boscombe Down West includes 
emmer wheat , bread wheat , club wheat , spelt , and barley ; 
charcoal representing birch , holly , beech , and oak as wood 
exploited by the users of the site ; and animal bones 
representing cattle , horse , sheep / goat , pig , red deer , fox , 
raven , and frog ( Richardson 1951 , 165 )  . Carbonized plant 
remains from a grain drier at Butterfield Down ( Illustration 75 ) 
confirmed the use of wheat and barley during Roman times 
( Allen in Rawlings and Fitzpatrick 1996 , 35 )  . Animal remains 
from the same site revealed a wide range of wild and domestic 
species including cattle , sheep , horse , dog , pig , chicken , red 
deer , hare , bird , and amphibian . The cattle bones were heavily 
butchered and there was evidence for the use of all body-parts 
amongst both sheep and cattle ( Egerton in Rawlings and 
Fitzpatrick 1996 , 35–6 )  . Broadly the same range of animal 
species was recorded at Figheldean ( Site A : Egerton et al . in 
Graham and Newman 1993 , 38 ) and both wheat and barley 
were present in samples from the Roman corn drier here too . 
The range of wild plants and weeds from the site as a whole 
gives an impression of the diversity represented in the Roman 
landscape : corn gromwell , campions , orache , goosefoot , 
lesser knapweed , medicks , poppies , plantain , knotgrass , 
sheep ’ s sorrel , buttercups , cleavers , eyebright , bartsia , corn 
salad , fat hen , chickweed , bindweed , dock , tare , red clover , 
mugwort , mayweed , and various grasses and legumes ( Ede in 
Graham and Newman 1993 , 38 ; Allen in McKinley 1999 , 29 )  . 
Illustration 75 
Romano-British corn drier 
found at Butterfield Down , 
Amesbury .  [ Reproduced 
courtesy of Salisbury and 
South Wiltshire Museum . 
Copyright reserved .  ] 
Pasturelands are believed to characterize much of the 
Stonehenge Landscape during the post-medieval period from 
AD 1500 down to the early twentieth century , although 
detailed studies are absent and generalization is therefore 
extremely difficult . The higher ground more remote from 
settlements along the main river valleys was open grassland ; 
nearer the settlements there was a higher incidence of 
cultivated ground . However , the balance between these uses 
shifted according to economic and political circumstances , 
with increases in the extent of arable in the early seventeenth 
century and again in the mid nineteenth century . A fair 
reflection of the situation about 1840–50 is provided by the 
Tithe Award maps which show extensive arable along the 
Avon Valley in particular ( RCHM 1979 , Map 3 )  . 
The eighteenth century was probably the all-time lowpoint in the level of woodland cover in the landscape . 
Deliberate planting began soon after , and in the nineteenth 
century a number of fairly substantial plantations were 
added , including Fargo Plantation and Luxenborough 
Plantation . In some cases these developed into mature 
stands , protecting monuments within them ( Illustration 76 )  . 
Illustration 76 
Woodland clearance at New 
King Barrows following the 
storms of January 1990 .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
Since the early twentieth century there have been a 
number of changes to the environment of the central part of 
the Stonehenge Landscape . Intensive military usage until 
1950 gave way to a period of agricultural intensification in 
the wake of clearing away many of the former military 
installations . Following acquisition of the Stonehenge Estate 
by the National Trust an ongoing programme of downland 
reversion has been pursued , gradually returning arable land 
to grazed pasture with consequent opportunities for the reestablishment of grassland fauna and flora populations . 
Cybernetic approaches to early societies 
Axiomatic to much processualist analysis of prehistoric and 
historic societies is the recognition , modelling , and study of 
related themes – technically subsystems of a cultural system 
– and the way that through linkages , communications , and 
control mechanisms ( i . e . cybernetic processes ) the content 
and articulation of these change through time ( Clarke 1968 , 
101–23 ; Renfrew 1972 , 22 and 486 )  . The number , nature , and 
scope of the themes selected depends on the nature of the 
inquiry , the exact questions being asked , and the way in 
Illustration 77 
Cybernetic model of a 
dynamic social system 
comprising four subsystems , situated within an 
environment , each with a 
charted trajectory of change .  
[ After Clarke 1968 , figure 14 .  ] 
97 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 98 

which an ancient society is being conceptualized ( Illustration 
77 )  . Thus rather than attempting to provide a detailed 
analysis of a particular set of themes here , the following 
notes are intended to illustrate the potential for further 
study relating to a selection of overlapping themes or subsystems common to many broad conceptualizations of social 
and environmental systems . 
People , health , and populations : The preservation of human 
skeletal remains within the Stonehenge Landscape is 
generally good and several hundred individuals are 
represented amongst excavated assemblages ( Illustration 78 )  . 
Much additional material was reburied after being excavated 
and this too could be recovered for analysis with minimal 
effort and disturbance . Although some studies relating to the 
physical anthropology of these populations have taken place 
( e . g . Davies and Thurnam 1865 ; Thurnam 1868 ) there is much 
potential here , especially in the application of forensic 
archaeology , biochemical analysis in relation to health and 
diet , and DNA studies of genetic relationships . The material is , 
however , widely scattered and a first step to its use would be 
the development of a gazetteer of what is extant , where it is 
kept , and what condition it is in . 
Illustration 78 
The Boscombe Bowmen .  
( left ) Beaker pot and 
associated items from 
the grave .  
( right ) The grave under 
excavation .  [ Photographs : 
Tom Goskar and 
Dave Norcott ; reproduced 
courtesy of Wessex 
Archaeology . Copyright 
reserved .  ] 
98 
Settlement and land-use patterns : The longevity and high 
intensity of activity within the Stonehenge Landscape are one 
of its great strengths in terms of research potential . Like many 
areas of Britain there is what appears to be a fundamental 
difference between the period before about 1000 BC when 
the archaeological record is dominated by what appear to be 
ceremonial monuments and later times where what might 
be termed settlement archaeology predominates . Inevitably , 
attempts have been made to find settlements in the early 
periods and ceremonial sites amongst the archaeology of later 
periods . These have largely failed , in all probability because 
the basic categories that are being imposed ( settlement , ritual 
site etc .  ) are inappropriate to material under scrutiny . New 
categories that are more sensitive to the archaeology itself are 
needed to overcome this interpretative conundrum . 
The Stonehenge Environs Project and subsequent 
fieldwalking and test-pitting programmes provide an 
extensive , although as yet incomplete , picture of activity at 
different times , mainly within the World Heritage Site . From 
this work it is clear that different things happened in 
different places at different times . Models of settlement drift 
and the structuration of space have been applied to these 
data . Perhaps the most important focus of activity through 
prehistory and historic times is the valley of the River Avon 
and the slope-land on either side . Although this area is 
heavily disturbed in places by modern settlement , a 
detailed study , including the detailed mapping of existing 
finds and investigations , would not only create a better 
picture of the disparate material already recognized , but 
also allow better targeting of future research and 
development control activity . 
There are limitations to what can be recovered through 
this approach , but the SEP is a very good example of its type . 
Work is currently in progress to reanalyse the lithic 
assemblages ( see Section 4 )  , and in due course the results 
will be integrated with the very extensive museum collections 
of flintwork that have built up over the last two centuries . 
Equally important is the mapping of the fieldwalking 
data against archaeological features represented as 
earthworks and cropmarks on aerial photographs ( Map D )  . 
Picking all the cropmark evidence apart and setting out its 
relationships will need sample excavations and field-testing . 
The greatest potential for enhancing understandings of 
settlement patterns comes through combining geophysical 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 99 

and geochemical surveys to create detailed plots of 
anomalies to set alongside the aerial photographic evidence , 
and broad use-pattern fingerprints to set alongside the 
evidence of artefact scatters . In some cases the importance 
of such work revolves around the definition of incompletely 
known structures and monuments , for example the 
Stonehenge Palisade Ditch , and here blanket rather than 
selective geophysical studies are needed . 
Combining data sets derived from a range of techniques , 
based as they are on different sample intervals and with 
markedly different constraints , will be a challenge for future 
data capture , storage , analysis , and visualization systems . 
Ceremony , ritual , and belief systems : In one sense this is 
the most extensive and robust element of the database 
relating to the Stonehenge Landscape . The density of 
prehistoric ceremonial and ritual monuments in this small 
area is probably greater than for any other part of the 
British Isles . However , the proportion of sites that have 
been excavated to modern standards with opportunities for 
scientific studies that allow detailed insights into the date 
and sequence of events , spatial variations in the nature and 
extent of activities , and sampling for macroscopic and 
microscopic environmental data is very low . While much has 
been made of the results of antiquarian excavations , and 
there is undoubtedly more to be learnt , new excavations at 
typical sites within the Stonehenge Landscape are needed . 
Social organization : Many papers and studies dealing with 
prehistoric social organization and socio-cultural evolution 
have used the Stonehenge area as a case study ( e . g . Renfrew 
1973a ; Thomas 1999 , 163–83 )  , yet critical elements of the 
picture are missing . This is most acute in relation to habitation 
sites . It remains an outstanding issue as to whether people 
lived in the Stonehenge area at all ; a secondary issue being 
whether such occupation may have been temporary , seasonal , 
or more or less permanent . And beyond this there is the 
question of settlement size and composition . Only in this way 
will it be possible fully to address issues such as the scale and 
organization of social units . 
Economy , craft , and industry : Although the Stonehenge 
Landscape is famed for its ritual and ceremonial monuments , 
recent surveys and the results of excavations over the last 
century or so show plentiful evidence for what is conventionally 
referred to as industrial activity , especially flintworking . In fact 
of course , the association of this work with ceremonial activity 
may not be fortuitous and the question of embeddedness 
between apparently diverse activities deserves further 
attention . Small-scale flintworking is represented at a 
surprising number of sites , throughout the fourth , third , and 
second millennia BC , amongst them : in the ditch of the 
Amesbury 42 long barrow , including refitting material ( Harding 
in Richards 1990 , 99–104 )  ; and in Christie ’ s cutting V through 
the ditch of the Cursus ( Saville 1978 , 17 )  . Larger-scale activity is 
represented by the working areas recognized at Wilsford Down 
( Richards 1990 , 158–71 ) and the mines north of Durrington 
( Booth and Stone 1952 )  . Geophysical surveys in both areas are 
needed to define more closely the extent of these activities , 
especially the presence of quarries and extraction pits . 
Technical and comparative studies of in situ flintworking 
assemblages have been undertaken by Saville ( 1978 ) and 
Harding ( in Richards 1990 , 213–25 )  , while specific classes of 
flint artefact from sites in the Stonehenge Landscape include 
Riley ’ s review of scrapers and petit tranchet derivative 
arrowheads ( in Richards 1990 , 225–8 )  . Saville ’ s ( 1978 , 19 ) 
comments on the use of flint derived from the clay with flint 
deposits at the Winterbourne Stoke G45 barrow as against 
the more commonly exploited chalk-derived nodules serves 
to emphasize the need for further technological and 
typological analyses ( and cf . Piggott 1971 , 52–3 )  . 
Trade and exchange : Discussions of this theme have been 
dominated by the matter of the Stonehenge bluestones , their 
origins , and the means by which they came to Salisbury Plain 
( Green 1997 ; Scourse 1997 ; Williams-Thorpe et al . 1997 )  . 
Although the glacial-action theory has attracted supporters 
over the years , human agency is generally considered the 
most likely means of transport . As suggested below , however , 
the further investigation of this topic requires work around the 
source areas in southwest Wales as well as on Salisbury Plain . 
The incidence of bluestone in other monuments around 
Stonehenge is often commented upon in excavation reports 
and remains intriguing . In some cases the material is assumed 
to be waste from dressing the pillars of the bluestone circles 
and horseshoe erected in Stonehenge Phase 3 . In other cases , 
as for example the block from Bowls Barrow ( Cunnington 
1889 )  , the stone seems to be an original piece rather than 
waste . It has long been postulated that another bluestone 
monument existed in the area , perhaps near to where the 
Stonehenge Cursus enters Fargo Plantation , but this is as yet 
not proven . A quantification and mapping exercise to plot the 
density and spread of bluestone fragments within monuments 
around Stonehenge , building on the work already done ( e . g . 
Thorpe et al . 1991 , figure 4 and table 2 )  , may be enough to 
highlight search areas to help pinpoint such a structure . 
The bluestones and other structural components for 
monument building were by no means the only items being 
moved around in the Stonehenge Landscape or brought in 
from other areas of Europe . In the early and middle 
Neolithic exotic items such as the jadite axe from near 
Stonehenge and the stone axes from western and northern 
Britain travelled hundreds of kilometres from their source . 
Together with several axes imported from Cornwall , mention 
may also be made of the gabbroic pottery identified by 
Peacock ( 1969 ) from Robin Hood ’ s Ball on the very eastern 
edge of the distribution of such ware . Despite the potential 
for petrological work on the pottery from other Neolithic and 
Bronze Age sites in the Stonehenge Landscape , using both 
macroscopic and microscopic analysis , very little seems to 
have been done to date ( cf . Cleal 1995 )  . 
During the later third millennium and early second 
millennium BC the range of imports to the area increased 
with the availability of new stone sources , metal objects , 
and imported pottery . Amongst the stone artefacts known 
to date , some of the finest include the Group XIII ( spotted 
dolerite ) axe hammer from Wilsford G54 ( Annable and 
Simpson 1964 , 43 )  , and the battle axe from Shrewton 
barrow G27 ( Annable and Simpson 1964 , 49 )  . The origin of 
possibly imported metal objects , shale , amber , and faience 
beads from Wessex Culture contexts have been extensively 
discussed ( Branigan 1970 ; Newton and Renfrew 1970 ; 
McKerell 1972 ; Watkins 1976 ; Barfield 1991 ; Needham 2000 ; 
Illustration 79 )  . Bradley and Chapman ( 1986 ) have 
considered the general nature and development of longdistance relations in the later Neolithic of the British Isles . 
The continuation of long-distance relationships into the 
later Iron Age may be suspected on the basis of coin finds 
which form part of a widespread pattern across southern 
England ( De Jersey 1999 )  . 
99 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 100 

Illustration 79 
Imported objects found 
with early Bronze Age 
burials in the Stonehenge 
Landscape . A : Stone axe 
hammer from Wilsford G54 . 
B and C : Bronze daggers 
from the Bush Barrow . 
D : Stone battle axe hammer 
from Shrewton G27 . E : Goldbound amber disk from 
Wilsford G8 . F : Goldcovered shale bead from 
Wilsford G7 . G : Gold-plated 
bone disk from Wilsford G8 . 
H : Halberd pendant with 
amber and gold haft from 
Wilsford G8 . I : Shale bead 
from Wilsford G7 .  [ After 
Annable and Simpson 1964 , 
items 143 , 157 , 169 , 170 , 
180 , 181 , 182 , 197 , 237 .  ] 
Archaeoastronomical interests in Stonehenge 
and its landscape 
Contributed by Clive Ruggles 
Over the years , the sarsen monument at Stonehenge has been 
portrayed variously as a cosmic temple ( e . g . Hawkes 1962 , 
168 ; North 1996 , xxxv ; Aveni 1997 , 85 and 91 )  , a calendrical 
device ( e . g . Burl 1987 , 202–4 )  , and an astronomical 
observatory and calculating device or ‘ computer ’  ( Hawkins 
1964 ; Newham 1966 ; Thom 1975 ; Hoyle 1977 )  . Many of these 
ideas have attracted widespread public interest . 
The majority of astronomical theories concerning 
Stonehenge are based on the idea that , at one stage or 
another , the monument incorporated deliberate 
architectural alignments upon horizon rising and setting 
positions of celestial bodies , particularly the sun or moon . 
To be plausible , such claims must be consistent with 
broader archaeological facts and chronologies , must be 
viable astronomically , and must also pay attention to the 
fact that astronomical alignments can easily arise 
fortuitously , since every oriented structure must point 
somewhere . Most of the ideas proposed in the 1960s and 
1970s were subsequently shown to be seriously 
questionable on archaeological , astronomical , or statistical 
grounds , or a combination of these ( Heggie 1981 , 145–51 
and 195–206 ; Castleden 1993 , 18–27 ; Ruggles 1999a , 35–41 ; 
Chippindale 2004 , 216–35 )  . 
A more general problem with theories of this type is that 
they tend to be based on drawing lines between points on a 
site plan of the monument or a map of the wider landscape – 
an abstract exercise undertaken from an external perspective . 
It is better to focus on how people experienced and perceived 
Stonehenge and its landscape , moving within or around it 
( Darvill 1997a ; Whittle 1997 , 162 )  . This opens up a vast range 
of possibilities , which are only just starting to be explored 
using modern computer techniques for 3D-visualization and 
100 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 101 

for reconstructing ancient skies . However , it is important not 
to abandon quantitative studies of astronomical potential : a 
careful balance is needed ( Ruggles 2001 )  . 
The solstitial axis of Stonehenge Phase 3 remains the only 
really uncontentious astronomical alignment at the site 
( Ruggles 1997 ; 1999a , 136–9 ; Illustration 80 )  , although even 
here there is continuing debate as to whether the principal 
focus of attention was the midsummer sunrise to the 
northeast and / or the midwinter sunset to the southwest ( e . g . 
Burl 1994 ; Parker Pearson and Ramilisonina 1998 )  . It is 
generally accepted that the adjustment of the main axis to a 
solstitial orientation represented an attempt to reinforce the 
symbolic power of the monument at the time of its 
reconstruction in stone ( cf . Bradley 1993 , 100 )  . Despite muchquoted claims to the contrary , there are no structural features 
in Stonehenge Phase 1 or 2 that convincingly indicate an 
earlier interest in the moon , although some evidence to 
support the idea has emerged recently from studies of the 
spatial patterning of carefully placed animal and human bone 
deposits , human cremations , and other artefacts in the ditch 
and Aubrey holes ( Pollard and Ruggles 2001 )  . 
Illustration 80 
Stonehenge showing the 
main astronomical axes 
and alignments . 
A : Alignments proposed 
by Gerald Hawkins for 
the early phases of 
Stonehenge and ( B ) 
alignments through the 
central trilithons . C : The 
main northeast–southwest 
axis projected onto 
Phase 3 of the monument . 
D : Schematic representation 
of the main solar 
movements in relation to 
Phase 3 of the monument .  
[ A and B based on Hawkins 
1966a , figures 11 and 12 ; 
C after Cleal et al . 1995 , 
figure 79 ; D after Atkinson 
1987 , 11 .  ] 
A more widespread but coarser concern with astronomy , 
manifested in consistencies of orientation amongst widely 
spread groups of monuments that could only have been 
achieved in relation to the diurnal motion of the sky , is 
evident even in the early Neolithic . Burl ( 1987 , 26–8 ) has 
noted that the orientations of 65 long barrows on Salisbury 
Plain are consistently between north-northeast and south . 
Although Burl ’ s own lunar interpretation has been 
questioned ( Pollard and Ruggles 2001 ) this pattern fits a 
 ‘ sun rising – sun climbing ’ explanation that applies to many 
groups of Neolithic tombs and temples throughout western 
Europe ( Hoskin 2001 )  . An alternative suggestion that 
alignments on various bright stars were widespread in early 
and middle Neolithic Wessex ( North 1996 ) has been heavily 
criticized ( Aveni 1996 ; Ruggles 1999b )  . Systematic studies 
of the siting and orientation of monuments in the 
Stonehenge area landscape , from the early Neolithic 
onwards , are needed to clarify such issues . 
Broader cosmologies remain relatively unexplored . Darvill 
( 1997a , 186–7 ) has presented a case that Stonehenge 2 and 
3 lay at the centre of a conceptual quadripartitioning of 
space , demarcated by the solstitial directions , that 
influenced patterns of monument construction and many 
other activities ( e . g . flint mining )  . The spatial distribution of 
 ‘ formal ’ deposits at Stonehenge itself bears strongly upon 
this issue , but because the available data are limited to the 
eastern part of the site , their ability to distinguish between 
various possible prevailing cosmological schemas is severely 
limited , something that would be altered drastically if it were 
ever possible to excavate critical sections of the 
northwestern and southwestern parts of the ditch . 
101 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 102 

STONEHENGE IN ITS REGION 
There can have been few if any times in prehistoric and 
historic times when the Stonehenge Landscape as defined 
here represented the total living-space of a community ; the 
Stonehenge Landscape must be seen as part of much larger 
environments , territories , and regions . Such spaces can be 
seen in the structure of medieval and later administrative and 
political units : first estates , townships , and hundreds ; more 
recently parishes , districts , and counties . The earliest 
identifiable territorial division relevant to the Stonehenge 
Landscape is the Roman civitas of the Belgae centred on 
Venta Belgarum ( Winchester )  . The Stonehenge area lies in the 
northwestern corner of this administrative region but it may 
have provided many of the social , political , and economic 
needs of the numerous communities living around 
Stonehenge at the time ( Frere 1967 , figure 1 )  . How far back 
the geographical limits of these tribal Romano-British units 
can be projected is not known , but it is interesting that 
throughout the later first millennium BC and early first 
millennium AD the Stonehenge Landscape was on the edge 
of , or at the junction of , a series of four or five large territorial 
units extending off in all directions . A similar territory may 
have existed in the sixth and fifth centuries BC to judge from 
the distribution of All Cannings Cross – Meon Hill style pottery 
( Cunliffe 1991 , figure 4 . 4 )  . Ellison ’ s ( 1981 ) analysis of DeverelRimbury ceramics of the later second millennium BC allows 
the recognition of a wide distribution of Type I fine wares 
across central southern England , again possibly indicative of 
a social territory of some kind . In the second millennium BC 
differences in the construction styles of round barrows either 
side of Bokerley Dyke / River Avon have been noted , at least 
in relation to its southern reaches ( Bowen 1990 , 79–81 )  , with 
ring-and-tongue barrows confined to the area west of the line 
and elongated paired barrows only east of the line . 
During the third millennium BC , when Stonehenge was 
at its zenith , there is some evidence to suggest that the 
group of monuments hereabouts was at the centre rather 
than the edge of a sphere of interest . In this connection it is 
interesting that the Stonehenge Landscape lies fairly central 
to the main distribution of Case ’ s Group D series Beaker 
pots ( Case 1993 , 260–3 and figure 3 )  . All across Britain 
there are major ceremonial centres of the third millennium 
BC at intervals of about 40–50km . Around Stonehenge 
these include Knowlton to the south ; Priddy to the west ; 
Marden and Avebury to the north ; and Dorchester on 
Thames to the northeast . Each comprises a selection of 
monuments of similar general types drawn from a fairly long 
list of possibilities : henges , henge enclosures , palisade 
enclosures , hengi-forms , pit circles , cursuses , and so on . 
Many lie near earlier foci . Various interpretations have been 
placed on these sites , amongst them the idea of central 
places within substantial chieftain-based territories 
( Renfrew 1973a , 547–54 )  , or that they were fixed points 
within cycles of movement by essentially peripatetic 
communities ( Barrett 1994 ; Whittle 1997c )  . 
In the fourth millennium BC the region within which the 
Stonehenge Landscape fits might be rather different and 
based more on the catchment of the Avon and the group of 
long barrows and oval barrows clustered to the west side of 
the Avon and around the Nine Mile River ( Ashbee 1984b , 
figure 6 )  . These may be associated with the causewayed 
Illustration 81 
Social territories in 
Neolithic Wessex : 
Renfrew ’ s 1973 model of 
developing organizational 
scale . A : Fourth millennium 
BC . B : Third millennium BC .  
[ After Renfrew 1973a , 
figures 3 and 4 .  ] 
102 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 103 

enclosure at Robin Hood ’ s Ball which in Renfrew ’ s model of 
Neolithic Wessex ( 1973a ; Illustration 81 ) lies at the centre of 
the east Salisbury Plain region . 
Still greater uncertainty attaches to what can be said 
about the relationships of the area before about 4000 BC . 
Roger Jacobi ( 1979 ) has mapped the regional variations in 
tool type for the later Mesolithic to create a series of social 
territories across northwest Europe . On this model , the 
Stonehenge Landscape lies within an extensive territory 
between areas characterized by Wealden type assemblages 
to the east and the southwestern type to the west . No 
distinctive type of assemblage is defined for what is 
essentially Wessex ; doing so remains a challenge for the 
future and is important in setting the scene for the 
development of the regionally distinct traditions and 
territories already referred to . 
STONEHENGE WORLDS 
Beyond its region the archaeology of the Stonehenge 
Landscape suggests much wider connections for the 
communities who occupied it . Here there is no one 
Stonehenge World but a whole series of spatially diverse 
worlds . Focusing on the Age of Stonehenge , the fourth to 
second millennia BC , it is clear that the groupings of 
monuments at different periods within that period are 
replicated in many other parts of the British Isles from 
mainland Orkney ( Ritchie 1990 ; Barclay 2000 ) to the Boyne 
Valley of Ireland ( Eogan 1997 )  , and the Carnac area of 
Brittany ( Burl 2000a , 331–48 )  . The range of monument 
types represented at each of these centres varies , but the 
age-span and essential mix of ceremonial enclosures , burial 
monuments , stone settings , and residential sites 
concentrated in an area of perhaps 20 square kilometres 
remains constant . In this sense , what we see in the 
Stonehenge Landscape and its surrounding region is 
entirely consistent with the activities of other communities 
in the Stonehenge World of the third and early second 
millennia BC . 
Movements and contacts within the Stonehenge World 
have long been recognized . These are most obviously 
visible in the range of raw materials used in the 
construction of Stonehenge Phase 3 , much of which must 
ultimately have derived from outwith the Stonehenge 
Landscape and probably from outwith the Stonehenge 
Region . The sarsen stones , the biggest elements in the 
construction , may have come from Salisbury Plain , but are 
most likely to have come from the Marlborough Downs 
some 40km to the north ( Green 1997 , 260–3 ; and see 
Bowen and Smith 1977 )  . No extraction pits or quarries have 
yet been positively identified , although such may await 
discovery . Variations in the petrology of the sarsens from 
Stonehenge have been noted ( Howard in Pitts 1982 ) and 
other possible source areas such as the downs of Dorset 
and eastern Kent also deserve to be more fully investigated . 
It is possible that more than one source is represented . 
Since the early 1920s , when H H Thomas confirmed by 
petrological analysis earlier suggestions ( Thomas 1923 )  , it 
has been known that the bluestones used in Stonehenge 
Phase 3 ultimately derive from the Preseli Hills of southwest 
Wales ( Illustration 82 )  , as too the rhyolite used for some 
pillars and the sandstone used for the Altar Stone ( Green 
1997 with earlier references )  . Much debate has surrounded 
the means by which these stones reached the Stonehenge 
Landscape but the inescapable conclusion is that they were 
brought there by human agency , whether rolled along on 
logs , carried on sledges or stretchers , or loaded onto boats 
and shipped by water . Stone axes and perforated stone 
implements were also moved around the country in much 
the same way . A recent reanalysis of the provenancing of 
recorded bluestone axeheads confirmed a marked cluster of 
imported items in central southern England ( WilliamsThorpe et al . 2004 )  , further strengthening the evidence for 
Illustration 82 
Dolerite outcrops at Carn 
Menyn in the Preseli 
Hills , Pembrokeshire .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
103 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 104 

links between Saisbury Plain and southwest Wales . Perhaps 
the most impressive thing about the bluestones , however , is 
not the simple fact that they moved but rather the scale of 
the achievement . As with the sarsens , there is still much 
work to be done in exploring the exact sources of the 
stones , especially in the application of archaeological 
fieldwork to unpick the cultural landscape , rather than the 
purely geological landscape , of the Preseli Hills and 
surrounding areas . Preliminary work along these lines is 
already yielding interesting results ( Darvill and Wainwright 
2002 ) including the close connections between Stonehenge 
and southwest Wales visible in the form and construction of 
oval stone settings ( Darvill and Wainwright 2003 )  . 
The novelty of Stonehenge and the richness and variety 
of objects deposited as grave goods in the surrounding 
barrows has long attracted attention in terms of the wider 
social , cultural , and trading links represented . In 1938 , 
Stuart Piggott made a very strong case for links between his 
Wessex Culture of southern England and the early Bronze 
Age of northern France , especially Brittany ( Piggott 1938 )  . 
These proposed links were investigated further by Sabine 
Gerloff ( 1975 ) in a study of early British daggers which 
essentially reinforced Piggott ’ s views . More recently , Stuart 
Needham ( 2000 ) has suggested that there is little evidence 
for the migration of more than a few individuals between 
the two areas and that similarities between them were 
driven by the procurement of exotic materials and goods 
through what he calls ‘ cosmological acquisition ’  . Humphrey 
Case ( 2003 ) has argued that the Breton links can be seen as 
far back as the later third millennium BC and that the 
Illustration 83 
Hilversum and Wessex 
biconical style urns from 
burials in the Stonehenge 
Landscape . A : Bulford 47 . 
B : Amesbury 71 . C : Bulford 
40 . D : Bulford 47 . 
E : Winterbourne Monkton 
2 .  [ After Piggott 1973e , 
figure 23a , e–g and j .  ] 
104 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 105 

development of the rich Wessex burials draws on a 
combination of local as well as exotic inspirations , 
centuries-old traditions as well as up-to-date innovations . 
Debate has also surrounded possible parallel 
connections between the same regions in terms of 
monument construction , design , and meaning . Aubrey Burl 
( 1997 ) proposed a series of similarities between the form of 
Stonehenge 3 and the rock art it carried with various 
horseshoe-shaped settings and rock art in Brittany , a view 
subsequently challenged by Scarre ( 1997 ) who prefers the 
autonomous development of these structures and motifs in 
the two areas . However , focusing on relatively few sites and 
limited geographical areas rather misses the point . 
Connections along the Atlantic façade of Europe through 
prehistoric and later times are well established and well 
documented ( Cunliffe 2001 , 213–60 )  ; what is needed is a 
more wide-ranging review of similarities and differences in 
the structure and form of stone monuments dating to the 
later third and second millennia BC throughout the Irish Sea 
basin and western approaches . 
Continental links extending beyond the stone circles and 
megalithic constructions are represented in the form and 
structure of round barrows and the timber monuments . The 
use of stake-circles within barrow mounds has long been 
recognized as a regular feature of monuments on both sides 
of the English Channel , but especially in southern England 
and the Netherlands ( van Giffen 1938 ; Glasbergen 1954 ; 
Gibson 1998a , 70–5 )  . There are also close similarities in the 
design of some metal artefacts and in the form and 
decoration of the associated ceramic vessels in the two 
regions , especially the Wessex biconical urns and the 
Hilversum and Drakenstein urns of the Netherlands and 
surrounding areas ( Butler and Smith 1956 ; ApSimon 1972 ; 
Illustration 83 )  . Gibson ( 1998a , 63–70 ) has drawn attention 
to certain similarities between the design of British 
palisaded enclosures and contemporary examples on the 
continental mainland . Recognizing that the English Channel 
is as likely to encourage communications as to hinder it , 
and that continental Europe is rather closer to central 
southern England than many northern and western parts of 
the British Isles , there is clearly much scope for further 
studies of early prehistoric artefacts and monuments . That 
communities living in or visiting the Stonehenge Landscape 
were closely involved in those connections , perhaps through 
links with coastal communities via the River Avon , is amply 
demonstrated by the presence of imported objects such as 
the Armorican vase à anses from Winterbourne Stoke G5 
( Tomalin 1988 , 209–10 )  . 
Still longer-distance relationships have been proposed 
for some archaeological elements within the Stonehenge 
Landscape , although the evidence is contentious and 
difficult to interpret . As far back as the later nineteenth 
century , for example , the possibility of contact with the 
eastern Mediterranean was discussed in some seriousness . 
In a paper to the British Archaeological Association in 
August 1880 , Dr John Phené reviewed analogies between 
Stonehenge and sites in the Mediterranean , noting 
especially the Cyclopean walling and other architectural 
details found in the fortified citadels of Mycenean Greece . It 
was a link later picked up by Oscar Montelius ( 1902 ) and 
others , and reinforced by the recognition that at least some 
of the rich grave goods in barrows of the Wessex Culture 
could be paralleled amongst objects from the shaft graves 
of Mycenae itself ( and see Piggott 1938 , 94–6 ; Atkinson 
1979 , 165–6 )  . Yet more support was provided by the 
recognition of what was interpreted as a Mycenean dagger 
of Karo B type amongst the rock art discovered at 
Stonehenge in the early 1950s ( Crawford 1954 , 27 )  . By 1956 , 
Richard Atkinson felt able to ask :  ‘ is it then any more 
incredible that the architect of Stonehenge should himself 
have been a Mycenaean , than that the monument should 
have been designed and erected , with all its unique and 
sophisticated detail , by mere barbarians ?  ’  ( Atkinson 1956 , 
164 )  . A decade later , this Aegean view , and the diffusionist 
perspective that it represented , were called into question by 
Colin Renfrew ( 1968 ; 1973b ) when it became apparent from 
radiocarbon dating that the main features of Stonehenge 
were more than 1000 years older than the supposed 
prototypes in Greece . Discussion and debate has continued 
because further refinements to the dating have made the 
picture still more complicated ( see Selkirk 1972 for useful 
summary ; also Barfield 1991 )  . Here it is important to 
separate out Stonehenge itself from the contents of the rich 
graves round about . The construction and associated 
primary use of Stonehenge can now be placed very clearly 
within the third millennium BC ; there is very little evidence 
for constructional work after about 2000 BC , although it 
may of course have continued in use in the form that it had 
reached by that stage . This is clearly too early for any 
significant connection with Mycenean architecture securely 
dated to the middle centuries of the second millennium BC , 
and Renfrew ’ s argument stands . 
By contrast , the rich graves of Piggott ’ s Wessex Culture 
seem to belong mainly to the first half of the second 
millennium BC and thus appear to post-date the main 
constructional activity at Stonehenge . Amongst the items 
from these graves that may have been imported from the 
Mediterranean are : the crescentic earring from Wilsford 
Barrow G8 , faience beads , and the Bush Barrow bone 
mounts . Amber spacer plates may have been moving in the 
opposite direction , from northern Europe to the 
Mediterranean ( Harding 1984 , 263 )  . However , within the 
broad span of the early and middle second millennium BC , 
the dating of Wessex Culture burials remains difficult and it 
is still uncertain to what extent the conventionally 
recognized Wessex I and II sub-phases should be seen as 
successive , partly overlapping in duration , or essentially 
contemporaneous ; this is a matter that could usefully be 
clarified by a programme of radiocarbon dating material 
from excavated graves . With the dating of the Mycenean 
shaft graves and associated Late Mycenean / Late Helladic 
material culture to the period from 1600 BC through to 
about 1200 BC ( Harding 1984 , 12–15 ) there is clearly some 
potential chronological overlap with the Wessex Culture , 
and thus the possibility of links whether through the 
exchange of actual objects ( cf . Branigan 1970 ) or through 
the transfer of knowledge . Concluding his exhaustive review 
of the Myceneans overseas , Anthony Harding noted that 
 ‘ one has no alternative but to reject the possibility of any 
regular contact between Britain and Mycenean Greece … 
sporadic contact … can be accounted for by very few 
individual acts of exchange ’  ( 1984 , 265 )  . If the object carved 
on the inner face of Stone 53 is indeed a Mycenean dagger , 
there is no need to associate it with the construction or 
primary use of the site ; the addition of individually 
meaningful symbols to existing structures as ‘ graffiti ’ is a 
millennia-old practice that still continues . By the middle of 
the second millennium BC , Stonehenge had clearly become 
a sufficiently significant place to attract more than its fair 
share of the richest burials in the British Isles to its 
105 
047-120 section 2 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 20 PM Page 106 

immediate hinterland , so perhaps it was also a place of 
pilgrimage and visitation by people from afar . Indeed , given 
the links between southern England and northern France , 
contacts with the Mediterranean world are most likely to 
have been indirect and articulated through much wider 
networks of relationships with communities falling within 
the Reinecke A1–B1 horizons of central Europe ( and see 
Gerloff 1975 , 245–6 )  . 
Long-distance links between communities in the 
Stonehenge Landscape and other parts of Europe should 
not be ruled out . In 1962 Stuart Piggott published a 
remarkable paper entitled ‘ Salisbury Plain to south Siberia ’ 
in which he explored the relationships of the perforated 
bone points and associated objects from Upton Lovell 
barrow 4 , Wiltshire , finding parallels in a ‘ well defined but 
scattered series of similar interments stretching across 
Eurasia from the Baltic Sea to Lake Baikal ’  ( Piggott 1962 , 
93 )  . The Upton Lovell barrow lies 17km west of Stonehenge 
but well within the central distribution of Wessex Culture 
barrows . That the occupant of the grave might be a shaman 
was tentatively considered by Piggott ( 1962 , 96 ) and has 
been taken up by others since ( e . g . Burl 1987 , 167–8 )  . Shell 
( 2000 ) has also raised the possibility , originally noted by 
John Thurnam , that this is a metalworker ’ s grave . In 
November 2004 the Russian news and information agency 
Novosti carried a story about the discovery of a Russian 
 ‘ Stonehenge ’  ( Sobolevskaya 2004 )  . Quoting archaeologist 
Ilya Akhmedov , the account described the discovery of a 
circular monument edged with timber pillars overlooking 
the confluence of the rivers Oka and Pron in the central 
Russian region of Ryazan , dating to about 2000 BC . 
The entrance into the circle is marked by two pillars forming 
a gateway , the entrance gap opening towards the 
midsummer sunrise . Perhaps more ‘ Woodhenge ’ than 
 ‘ Stonehenge ’  , this site joins a growing list of vaguely similar 
circular monuments scattered across central and eastern 
Europe ( see also Behrens 1981 ) which perhaps support the 
possibility of long-distance connections raised by Piggott 
and at the very least deserve further inquiry and crosscultural comparison . 
Hard science is also beginning to help address some of 
the wider issues connected with the movements of people 
and artefacts and has much to offer in future . Isotope 
studies of samples of tooth enamel from the Amesbury 
Archer , for example , suggest that he spent formative 
periods of his life in continental Europe , probably in the 
Alps , while chemical analysis of the composition of some of 
the objects found with him suggests that the copper knife is 
Spanish and that the gold could also be from continental 
Europe ( Fitzpatrick 2003a )  . By contrast , the Boscombe 
Bowmen seem to have spent their formative years in 
southwest Wales according to isotope analysis of tooth 
samples ( Fitzpatrick 2004a ; Fitzpatrick et al . 2004 )  . 
Permeating all these studies are questions about how 
people in the notional Stonehenge Landscape , Stonehenge 
Region , and Stonehenge World related to each other ; the 
role of particular places and the significance attached to 
them ; connections between specific individuals and 
communities established through kinship or alliance 
structures ; and , above all , the meaning of objects , whole 
artefact assemblages , and monumental constructions , in 
the lives of these communities . 
106 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 107 

R
section
esear
3 ch 
Agenda 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 108 

SECTION 3 – RESEARCH AGENDA 
 
 ‘ The known is finite ; the unknown infinite ; intellectually we stand on an islet in the midst of an illimitable ocean of 
inexplicability . Our business in every generation is to reclaim a little more land .  ’  
( Thomas Huxley 1888 , 204 ) 
DEVELOPING AN AGENDA : 
DEFINING ISSUES 
The small islet of Huxley ’ s allegory is , for Stonehenge and 
its landscape , represented by the body of knowledge that 
has built up over the last 300 years or so , some of it secure , 
some less so ( Section 2 )  . How that body of knowledge can 
be expanded in the foreseeable future , how more can be 
added to the islet , is the subject of this section . 
Axiomatic to modern traditions of research is the idea 
that clear well-articulated questions lead to good results . 
This is especially the case for problem-orientated 
research , but , equally , to make good use of curiositydriven research there needs to be a clear vision of what is 
being looked for and what is really important and worth 
pursuing if and when it is recognized . There are many 
different kinds of research question , some simply 
interrogatory , others interlocutory . In broad terms they can 
be divided into three groups reflecting different scales of 
approach ( Darvill 1998 , 5 )  : 
Questions : These are matters that are capable of relatively 
direct solution given some kind of carefully planned and 
direct inquiry : things such as the date of a site or structure ; 
the relationship of one thing to another ; or the association 
of one group of material with another . 
Problems : These are substantial matters that do not have 
a simple answer . Rather they require careful resolution , 
probably over a period of time , based on the structured 
accumulation of verifiable data using specific 
methodologies . The quality of solution to any problem is in 
part a consequence of the methodology adopted . Typical 
problems might , for example , include the dating of a 
particular kind of pottery , the nature of settlement in a 
defined region , the nature of associations between one set 
of things and another , or the essential characteristics of a 
type of archaeological deposit . Unlike the solutions found 
for specific questions , the resolution of a well-defined 
problem provides the basis from which confident 
interpretations can thereafter be made , at least until the 
problem is redefined . 
Themes : These are general interpretative matters that are 
not so much specific studies as broad subject domains that 
can bind together and embrace a series of connected but 
not necessarily united studies . 
Collectively , these can most easily been seen as 
 ‘ issues ’  , namely important subjects for consideration , 
discussion , debate , or resolution through research , 
inquiry , experimentation , or investigation . Listed together 
such issues form a research agenda of the kind envisaged 
by Olivier ( 1996 , 5 )  , but there are many different ways 
of looking at issues , what they cover , their philosophical 
and theoretical underpinnings , and the interest groups 
they serve . 
Issues generally arise from a critical reflection of what is 
already known ( Section 2 above )  , sparks of inspiration from 
seeing things in a new light , or making new connections 
between established ideas . In trying to move research 
forward there is always a danger of simply perpetuating 
existing knowledge through over-reliance on traditional 
classifications and ways of thinking . Thus rather than 
following the regularized chronological subdivision of the 
past into rigid slices , or exploiting the cybernetic logic of 
integrative themes , the aim here is to allow issues to be 
self-defining in terms of being essentially reactions to 
existing interpretations . For presentational reasons , and to 
assist in evaluating them , they have been arranged below 
into four main groups : 
Period-based and site-based issues : Synchronic views of 
some particular part of the past in the present or a 
particular site ; the classic snapshot image of what 
happened at a particular moment in time and space . In 
many cases these are the BIG issues that visitors focus on 
when looking at or being shown a particular site . 
Subject-based issues : Diachronic views of a currently 
defined field of interest that cross-cuts time and space , 
often focused at the landscape or inter-site level . 
Contextual and interpretative issues : Perspective or 
process-based fields of interest that relate to fundamental 
understandings of the archaeological material , its 
formation , biases , strengths , weaknesses , and what we 
make of it . 
Management-based issues : Matters which relate directly to 
the integration of research with day-to-day , medium-term , 
and strategic management issues , including the 
effectiveness of management works in conservation , 
protection , and presentation . 
In many cases individual issues naturally span more 
than one heading , and indeed some overlap in terms of 
their coverage . Some of the issues relate to a particular 
site , some to the whole archaeological resource of the 
World Heritage Site , and others to still wider contexts . 
There is no attempt here to privilege one kind of issue over 
another ; their inclusion here indicates that at least one 
sector of the research community concerned with the 
Stonehenge Landscape considers them important and 
worthy of pursuing . 
108 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 109 

PERIOD-BASED AND SITEBASED ISSUES 
Issue 1 : What is Stonehenge ? 
Probably the most frequently asked question about 
Stonehenge itself , although recognized by archaeologists 
as a series of questions about each of the different 
articulations ( phases ) of the site ( Illustration 84 )  . There is 
probably no single answer . The archaeological focus on the 
construction phases has shifted attention away from its use ; 
although ethnographic models suggest that divisions 
between construction and use are perhaps rather artificial 
and that the act of construction , modification , and 
reconstruction is central to the meaning of the structures 
themselves . Some elements look like well-known kinds of 
monument : for example the ditch looks like that of a 
causewayed enclosure while some of the stone settings 
match with settings found at stone circles elsewhere in 
northwest Europe . What is unique , as far as can be told , is 
the sequence represented and the use of five massive 
trilithons with stone lintels as the central setting . Whether 
Stonehenge was unique in the Neolithic world or unique 
only in being the one that survives is not known , but again 
deserves attention . 
Closely linked to this issue are the matters of : Why build 
Stonehenge ? How many Stonehenges were there on the 
site ? How was it used ? What was the precursor to the 
visible Stonehenge ? 
Illustration 84 
Stonehenge : the bluestone 
oval and surrounding 
sarsen structures .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright 
reserved .  ] 
Issue 2 : Who built Stonehenge ? 
A superficially simple question but one that connects into a 
wide range of problems and themes . Since it is not known 
whether the present Phase 1 is indeed the earliest structure 
on the site there is the matter of whether it is a thirdmillennium BC community or an earlier one that is the target 
of attention . Taking the main recorded phases of the 
monument , there has been considerable debate about the 
role of cultures outside Wessex in the Stonehenge World and 
indeed beyond . Henges are generally considered unique to 
the British Isles , although there is increasing evidence that 
superficially similar structures may exist in continental 
Europe . It is therefore relevant to ask which other prehistoric 
cultures in Europe built similar structures . And whether there 
is any evidence for contact between them . 
For the later phases of Stonehenge , connections with 
Mycenean Greece have been much discussed ( see Renfrew 
1968 ; 1997 , 5–6 )  , as too possible influences from Armorica 
( Burl 1997 ; Scarre 1997 )  . The International Millennium 
Exhibition staged in 2001 in Nuremburg ( Germany ) and 
entitled ‘ Mycenae : Nuremburg : Stonehenge ’ suggested 
that there is still considerable interest in the very longdistance links represented by later Neolithic and Bronze Age 
constructions across the Old World . The scientific evidence 
for population movements represented by the Amesbury 
Archer ( Fitzpatrick 2002 ; 2003a ) serves to reopen these 
debates which must also embrace discussion of the material 
culture of the later third and second millennia BC ( see Issue 
22 )  . Although matters such as migration , colonization , and 
population movements are not academically fashionable at 
present , the question of whether the builders and users of 
Stonehenge were local indigenous populations , 
representatives of communities elsewhere in southern 
Britain , or partly or wholly derived from further afield is 
critically important to an understanding of the monument 
and to its representation to international tourists . 
Closely linked to this issue are questions such as : What 
kind of social organization prevailed ? What geographical area 
did the builders and users of Stonehenge come from ? And 
was it some kind of ‘ central place ’ for the area , the region , the 
whole of the British Isles , or wider still ? The earlier phases of 
the structure seem well within the abilities of later Neolithic 
communities to judge from their other achievements , but the 
sarsen trilithons and peristyle demanded labour on a quite 
different scale . Perhaps this southern monument ended up 
being a truly national undertaking . 
The potential of facial reconstruction should not be 
overlooked as it provides a very direct view backwards in 
time to the people buried at sites within and around 
Stonehenge . Obvious candidates include some of the 
recently excavated burials including the Amesbury Archer 
and the Boscombe Bowmen , as well as the man buried in 
the ditch at Woodhenge , the Beaker-age burial from ditch 
segment 98 at Stonehenge , and some of the burials under 
round barrows of the early second millennium BC . 
Issue 3 : How was Stonehenge built ? 
The construction of Stonehenge , and indeed related 
monuments such as the Stonehenge Cursus and Durrington 
Walls , individually and collectively represents a huge 
investment of labour , not least in terms of their physical 
construction , assembly , fitting together of the stonework , 
and building earthworks . Some estimates of labour 
requirements have been made ( Renfrew 1973a )  , and there 
have been experiments and proposals for simple tasks such 
as ditch-digging using bone and antler tools as well as more 
complicated tasks such as moving and raising the large 
stones at Stonehenge ( e . g . Richards and Whitby 1997 ; 
Adamson 2002 )  . Many of these exercises explore a range of 
possibilities and carry out time and motion studies to 
provide quantifications and insights that strike at the very 
heart of thinking about how , in practical terms , Stonehenge 
was built . Some of this work challenges traditional 
assumptions , for people are still mesmerised by Richard 
Atkinson ’ s ( 1979 , 105–22 ) experiments and his insistence 
upon sledges and the use of vast teams of human beings to 
pull them . As the date of the large stone settings becomes 
more sharply focused ( 2550–1660 BC ) the possibility that 
some kind of wheeled vehicles were used must be 
entertained and deserves further exploration . Experiments 
using replica stones blocks and oxen is one approach . 
109 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 110 

The search for clues at Stonehenge itself in the form of ruts 
( Paul Ashbee reports seeing numerous ruts , apparently 
undated , along the line of the Avenue near Stonehenge 
during excavations in the 1950s ) is another . More work is 
also needed , especially using the ethnographic evidence of 
the twentieth-century sarsen industry in Wiltshire and the 
experience and skill of modern-day communities who have 
made similar achievements using comparable technologies . 
Specific matters to investigate include : 
• The process of shaping and dressing the sarsen stones 
• Raising the lintels 
• How much time , labour , energy was needed to achieve 
various defined tasks . 
Issue 4 : Where did the builders and users of 
Stonehenge live ? 
Although half a dozen timber structures dating to the period 
3000–1500 BC are known in the Stonehenge Landscape 
there is polarized debate about their interpretation 
( Illustration 85 )  . Some see the timber structures as 
essentially secular dwellings or dwellings also used for 
ceremonial purposes ( Wainwright 1977 , 6 )  . Others unfold 
the argument that all timber structures are essentially 
ceremonial features ( not necessarily buildings at all )  , as a 
consequence of which there are no dwellings , and thus the 
population was highly mobile ( Thomas 1996 , 2 )  . Is this 
right ? What variation exists ? What should be expected given 
the known range of habitations in the Stonehenge World ? 
Where might they be preserved ? Do such contexts exist ? 
How can they be explored archaeologically ? Are existing 
categories referring to structures and buildings appropriate ? 
Should we be looking for a ‘ new ’ kind of archaeological 
evidence such as yurt-like shelters represented 
archaeologically as rings of stakeholes , a hearth , one or two 
pits ( possibly latrines )  , and light scatters of rubbish ? Should 
all pits be regarded as similar or can differences be seen 
here too ? Specific matters to investigate include : 
• Problematizing what is meant by ‘ occupation features ’ 
and the signature likely to be left by various settlement 
systems and the ways in which domestic and ceremonial 
practices were spatially and temporally interwoven in the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
• Understanding the nature of posthole structures , their 
variability , and their interpretation 
• Reviewing the nature and content of excavated pits and 
the preparation of suggestions for the future 
investigation of such features . 
Illustration 85 
Reconstruction of the 
Southern Circle at 
Durrington Walls in Phase 
2 . Viewed from the 
southeast .  [ From 
Wainwright and Longworth 
1971 , figure 84 ; drawing 
and associated research by 
Chris Musson .  ] 
Issue 5 : The appearance and later history 
of Stonehenge 
Depictions of Stonehenge with complete rings of stone 
uprights are based on a series of untested assumptions 
( Ashbee 1998 )  . There are insufficient stones at the site 
today to complete the circular settings , but little evidence 
has been advanced for the systematic robbing or 
destruction of the site as , for example , is documented at 
Avebury . Equally , obvious destinations need to be fully 
checked : use for road-metalling on the adjacent turnpike 
( now the A344 )  ; hardcore to prevent carts and carriages 
getting bogged down in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries AD ( are the layers of chippings recorded by 
Hawley and others all working waste or are some broken-up 
orthostats ?  )  ; the fabric of local churches and Roman villas ; 
the fabric of Amesbury Abbey ; and the rockeries of Wilton . 
A line of holes made by a stone-breaker ’ s jumper visible 
in the now supine Slaughter Stone strongly suggests 
systematic robbing at some period ( see Long 1876 , 75–8 
for early views on the destruction of Stonehenge )  . 
The original position and arrangement of some stones 
are far from certain , yet are also critical to understanding 
the appearance and use of the site . A case in point is the socalled Altar Stone in the central area ( Burl 2001 )  . What 
happened at Stonehenge between about 1500 BC and AD 
1800 when the first systematic records of the site began to 
be made represents a big gap in knowledge and one that 
has very considerable implications for understanding and 
presenting the earlier periods too . Specific matters to 
investigate include : 
• Position and arrangement of the Altar Stone 
• Were the sarsen and bluestone circles ever complete ? 
• What happened to the missing stones ? 
• When were the Aubrey Holes dug and what did they 
contain ? What is the date-range and significance of the 
cremation burials at Stonehenge ? What were the Y and Z 
holes ? 
• Were there standing stones along the banks of the 
Avenue as suggested by geophysical survey ? Is the 
sarsen debris scattered across the site only the result of 
construction activity or is there also debris from stonebreaking ? 
• How was the site used in later periods ? 
• How did an Anglo-Saxon inhumation come to be placed 
within Stonehenge ? Was there stone robbing that has so 
far gone unnoticed ? 
Issue 6 : Carvings , rock art , and the surfaces of 
the stones 
The presence of rock art on the surfaces of some of the 
stones at Stonehenge was first recognized in 1953 , since 
when the material has been much discussed ( Cleal et al . 
1995 , 30–3 )  . The antiquity of the carvings , mainly axes , is 
based on stylistic grounds . No detailed full systematic study 
of the surfaces of the extant stones has been carried out 
( which must include the tops of the lintels )  , although some 
110 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 111 

latex moulds were made in the 1950s ( now seemingly lost ) 
and in 1967 stereometric photography was used ( see Cleal 
et al . 1995 , figure 9 )  . Recording could now be done using 
laser-imaging to create micro-topographic models that can 
be illuminated from any angle during computer analysis . 
One of the key matters is to resolve conflicting 
interpretations of motifs such as the ‘ box ’  ( Burl 1997 ; Scarre 
1997 )  ; another is to separate out as far as possible the 
relatively modern graffiti from potentially authentic 
prehistoric rock art . Knowing its full extent and character is 
a first step , recognizing that some may have been on the 
stones before they were brought to Stonehenge . Surface 
models would also provide a means of monitoring change to 
the rock surfaces . 
The similarity of Stonehenge to the site of Flagstones , 
Dorset , raises the question of whether there was rock art on 
the sides of the Stonehenge ditch as there was at 
Flagstones ( Woodward 1988 )  . Indeed it must be queried 
whether other monuments in the Stonehenge Landscape 
carry rock art , as seems to be increasingly recognized 
elsewhere in central southern England . 
Issue 7 : The linear structures in the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
A great deal of attention has focused on the circular 
elements of the Stonehenge Landscape , especially the 
henges and barrows . Also of note are the many linear 
structures . The Cursus is the most investigated so far , but 
even here excavation has been minimal and detailed survey 
almost non-existent ( Illustration 86 )  . It is probably the most 
completely preserved cursus so far known in the British 
Isles , and was the first to be recognized and so named . 
Detailed topographic surveys at the Cleaven Dyke , Scotland 
( Barclay and Maxwell 1998 , 27–9 )  , show the complexity of a 
broadly similar linear structure and the value of such work . 
Further afield , note may be made of the ‘ Banqueting Hall ’ 
at Tara in Ireland . Geophysical survey would also repay the 
effort , as shown with the so-called ‘ Lesser Cursus ’  ( David 
and Payne 1997 , 88 ) which is probably more at home in the 
long mound / bank barrow tradition of the Wessex later 
Neolithic ( cf . Bradley 1983 )  . Work at the Stonehenge Avenue 
suggests that stone settings may be present along the 
banks , but this has never been tested . The phasing of the 
Avenue also remains unresolved . 
Illustration 86 
Stukeley ’ s view of the 
Cursus in the early 
eighteenth century . Looking 
southeastwards towards 
King Barrow Ridge . 
Stonehenge is below the 
letter ‘ c ’ towards the righthand side .  [ From Stukeley 
1740 , Tab . XXX .  ] 
111 
The Palisade Ditch located on the west side of the 
Avenue and running for over 1km on the northwest side of 
Stonehenge itself has been sectioned on three occasions 
( 1953 , 1967 , and 1978 )  . A burial dated to the later Bronze 
Age was found cut into the top of the ditch in 1967 , but the 
palisade itself is clearly earlier ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 155–61 ) 
and perhaps related to the now widely recognized series of 
later Neolithic palisaded enclosures from many parts of the 
British Isles ( Gibson 1998b )  . The Stonehenge Palisade Ditch 
urgently needs to be dated properly , set within the wider 
sequence , and traced to determine whether or not it is part 
of an enclosure . Stonehenge may turn out to be a small 
structure immediately outside a far more substantial timberwalled enclosure , perhaps analogous to the relationship 
between Woodhenge and Durrington Walls . 
The long barrows within the Stonehenge Landscape have 
not been studied much in recent years . Many have been 
damaged by cultivation over the last century or so and their 
original outline and form obscured . It is clear , however , that 
there are several different shapes and sizes represented . 
Within the WHS only two long barrows , Winterbourne Stoke 
Crossroads and Durrington 42 at the east end of the Cursus , 
fully deserve that classification ; the remaining examples , 
including perhaps the so-called long mortuary enclosure on 
Normanton Down , appear to be oval barrows ( cf . Drewett 
1975 , 137–8 ) but this again needs checking . No details of 
the internal arrangement of these barrows are known : 
whether there are stone or wooden chambers , for example . 
Geophysical surveys could help here , but excavation will 
ultimately be needed for dating and to determine internal 
sequences of construction . 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 112 

Issue 8 : Anglo-Saxon Stonehenge and the 
Christian transition 
One of the major advances in recent studies of Stonehenge 
and its surroundings is the recognition that the Anglo-Saxon 
presence at the site was rather greater , and perhaps more 
significant , than previously thought . The seventh-century 
burial accompanied by possible evidence for a gallows ( Pitts 
2001b ; and see Hinton 1998 ) together with coins from the 
area and a fair scatter of Anglo-Saxon pottery suggests that 
there is more to be found . Other undated features at 
Stonehenge may indeed prove to belong to this phase . Leslie 
Grinsell records a number of pagan Saxon burials in the area 
and there is an intriguing reference to a cemetery on 
Durrington Down ( Grinsell 1957 , 66 ; see above Section 2 )  . 
A number of recent studies have considered the role and 
place of prehistoric monuments in the lives of Anglo-Saxon 
communities ( Williams 1998 ) and it is well known that many 
such monuments were ‘ Christianized ’ in the later first 
millennium AD ( Grinsell 1987 )  . Stonehenge thus provides a 
highly appropriate case-study for helping to understand this 
important transitional period when Christianity was replacing 
earlier , and potentially very deep-rooted ideologies . 
SUBJECT-BASED ISSUES 
Issue 9 : Barrow cemetery evolution , structure , 
and meaning 
The Stonehenge Landscape contains more than 30 clusters 
of barrows of the sort conventionally referred to as 
cemeteries . Many have been partly or wholly damaged by 
agricultural activities with the result that there is not a 
single undamaged group around Stonehenge . A fair number 
of barrows have also been excavated , although no cemetery 
has been completely examined . Little or nothing is known 
about the flat graves that might be expected between and 
around the barrows of the major cemeteries . It is , however , 
clear that cemeteries typically include barrows of different 
date and form ( Grinsell no date ; Woodward 2000 )  . 
Much reliance has been placed on traditional typologies 
and classifications of upstanding and recorded monuments , 
but none has adequately been defined in terms of the 
number and variety of burials represented , their area and 
limits , their ‘ non-monumental ’ components , and the 
absolute dating of the constructional sequence and use 
patterns . Some human remains and cremations do survive 
in museum collections and could be used as the basis for a 
dating programme ( see Grinsell 1957 , 231–8 for a 
provisional list of cremations )  . In other cases it is known 
that their excavators reburied human remains ; reopening 
earlier trenches could easily recover these . 
The relationship of the Wessex barrow cemeteries to 
those found elsewhere in the British Isles is also deserving 
of attention . Recent surveys of Bodmin Moor , the Dorset 
Ridgeway , and the Lincolnshire Wolds , for example , provide 
useful comparanda . 
Issue 10 : Monumentality , materiality , memory , 
identity , and the changing landscape 
It is widely recognized that the Stonehenge Landscape 
contains a concentration of monuments the like of which is 
rare on a European scale . This is often explained as the 
result of some kind of persistent recognition of the 
importance or significance of the place . Both these 
assumptions need to be challenged and tested , and if 
supported some understanding established of what that 
importance or draw might have been . Critical in this regard 
is recognizing when the process of monumentalization 
began . The presence of postholes dating to around 7500 BC 
to the northwest of Stonehenge has been cited as being 
significant ( Parker Pearson and Ramilisonina 1998 , 323 )  , as 
too the presence nearby of an ancient and substantial tree 
( Darvill 1997a , 174–6 )  . Because of the way these features 
came to light ( through excavations connected to 
management works in 1966 and 1988–9 ) very little of their 
context is known ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 43–56 )  . It is possible 
that the tree-hole is an incompletely excavated posthole 
( Cleal et al . 1995 , 56 ) and this needs to be checked next 
time that the car-park surface is renewed . 
One approach is to focus on the idea of ‘ planning ’ in the 
landscape and to see how successive additions were 
influenced or otherwise by the disposition of the 
monuments already in place . Critical here is the recognition 
that some of the animal remains deposited in the ditch at 
Stonehenge were several centuries older than the 
monument itself and had presumably been brought from 
somewhere else . Where might this be ? One possible line of 
inquiry is whether or not a ‘ bluestone-henge ’ existed in the 
area prior to the construction of the Phase 3i structure at 
Stonehenge itself . The presence of worked stones from a 
lintelled structure at Stonehenge with no obvious 
corresponding sockets or pits has long been seen as strong 
evidence for such a monument either in the locality or in 
southwest Wales ( see Cleal et al . 1995 , 207 )  . W E V Young 
( in 1934 ) and J F S Stone ( in 1947 ) independently discovered 
a concentration of bluestone fragments immediately south 
of the Stonehenge Cursus near to where it enters Fargo 
Plantation from the east ( Stone 1948 , 17–18 and figure 4 )  . 
This may simply be an area where pillars were trimmed and 
worked before being used at Stonehenge , but equally it may 
be the remnants of an unknown monument . Geophysical 
survey and trial excavations may shed light on the question , 
or at least help explain the apparent concentration of 
bluestone fragments in the area . 
On a broader front , the long-term awareness ( right down 
to the present day ) of existing monuments in the landscape 
affects people ’ s perception and understanding of that place 
even though the original meaning of some elements may be 
lost . Through the material expression of ideas that 
themselves may be hard to gauge , Stonehenge stands at 
the core of many different identities . Some will never be 
known , but in the modern world the monument is just as 
much a symbol of antiquity for professional archaeologists 
as it is for followers of New Age thinking . A relatively narrow 
and simple question – why is Stonehenge where it is ? – 
allows a very broad and complicated theme about the 
meaning of monuments to be explored in a way that 
resonates with research issues for monuments in the Heart 
of Neolithic Orkney World Heritage Site ( Downes et al . 2002 , 
part 3 )  . Specific matters to investigate include : 
• What was the cultural context of the area before 

Stonehenge ? 

• How were Stonehenge and surrounding monuments 

reused / resignificated in later times ? 

• What is the nature of the tree-hole found in the 

Stonehenge car-park in 1966 ? 

112 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 113 

• What is the date of the hollows / scoops below barrow 
Winterbourne Stoke 30 and the bank at Woodhenge and 
might these be representative of the first ‘ monuments ’ in 
the area ? 
Issue 11 : Sacred shapes , forms , and intervisibility 
The shape and form of Stonehenge itself , and all the other 
monuments in the Stonehenge Landscape too , were 
deliberately constructed and are likely to embody a range of 
meanings in their position , shape and form , orientation , and 
the materials used in their construction . Aspects of these 
possibilities have already attracted attention and have led 
to new ways of viewing the sites ( Darvill 1997a ; Whittle 
1997a ; Parker Pearson and Ramilisonina 1998 ; Pollard and 
Ruggles 2001 )  . The intervisibility of monuments has also 
begun to be explored using the capabilities of GIS 
( Batchelor 1997 )  . There is far more to d
least drawing in anthropological model
o on this theme , not 
s to provide new 
insights into the way things might have been treated . 
As it is often perceived , the Stonehenge Landscape tends 
to be constrained by the better preservation of monuments 
west of the River Avon . There are , however , fair numbers of 
barrows east of the Avon and these should perhaps be 
brought into the picture even though less visible . The 
Stonehenge Management Plan calls for a research-driven 
review of the boundaries of the World Heritage Site ( English 
Heritage 2000 , 4 . 4 . 17 ) and a preliminary to this would be a 
systematic review of representation of monuments east of 
the Avon and west of the Till . 
Issue 12 : The social use of space 
Considerable attention has been given to the reconstruction 
of the physical environment ( although there is still more to 
do here )  , rather less to the way societies treated and used 
space . This is probably critical to understanding questions 
about the role and purpose not only of Stonehenge but also 
Illustration 87 
A model of the social use of 
space around Stonehenge .  
[ After Parker Pearson and 
Ramilisonina 1998 , figure 7 .  ] 
113 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 114 

114 
of all the other sites around about . It cannot be assumed to 
be static , and the processes by which one society regards 
space in the light of its own heritage is itself a matter of 
general interest that work within the Stonehenge Landscape 
may shed light on ( Illustration 87 )  . 
Distributions of a vast range of archaeological material 
need to be reviewed : one example is the spread of rich 
Wessex-style graves which , looked at regionally , cluster east 
of the Avon rather than around Stonehenge itself ( see 
Cunliffe 1993 , figure 3 . 16 for a useful summary map )  . Scale 
is important here , as the way space was regarded may well 
find expression at the small scale within individual sites and 
structures as well as across larger expanses ( cf . Pollard and 
Ruggles 2001 ; Darvill 1997a , 173 )  . Specific matters to 
investigate include : 
• Why do so few barrows occur immediately around 

Stonehenge itself ? 

• Where are the cemeteries and associated settlements of 
Roman , Anglo-Saxon , and medieval times ? 
Issue 13 : Rivers , valleys , and water 
Although the chalk downlands have long been the centre of 
archaeological interest , the Stonehenge Landscape contains 
two main river valleys running broadly north to south : the 
Till to the west and the Avon to the east ( Illustration 88 )  . 
The Avon in particular runs close to a number of key 
monuments including Durrington Walls ( with its southeast 
entrance opening to the river )  , Woodhenge , Vespasian ’ s 
Camp , and Ogbury . Long known as the focus of medieval 
and later settlements , the valley has hardly been explored in 
terms of its place in the prehistoric settlement system . The 
Stonehenge Avenue connected Stonehenge with the Avon . 
The Avon is also widely believed to have played a role in the 
transportation of the Bluestones to Stonehenge whether 
by the northern route along the Bristol Avon / River Wylye / 
Wiltshire Avon route or by the southern route using the 
Hampshire Avon / Wiltshire Avon ( Atkinson 1979 , 107 )  . 
Darvill ( 1997a , 179 ) has proposed that Phase 1 of 
Stonehenge is a microcosm of the wider landscape , with the 
flow of the river represented in the position of the main 
entrances into the enclosure . Parker Pearson and 
Ramilisonina ( 1998 , 318 ) suggest that the river links the 
domain of the living with the domain of the ancestors , 
journeys along it representing the transformation from life 
to death . The role of the Stonehenge Cursus crossing the 
interfluve between the Avon and the Till may also be relevant . 
What are now seasonal watercourses or dry valleys 
deserve some further investigation as part of the need to 
examine the overall topography of the prehistoric 
landscape . Some may well have been more conspicuous 
and perhaps also more significant features in early times . 
It is notable , for example , that Stonehenge Bottom connects 
with the Avon Valley and may at one time have been a 
feeder tributary or even a former river-course . The fact that 
the Stonehenge Avenue runs into Stonehenge Bottom on its 
first leg before running over King Barrow Ridge to join the 
Avon may be worthy of further investigation . 
Sherratt ( 1996b ) has drawn attention to possible 
connections between all the various river Avons in southern 
Britain , suggesting that they were considered as one in 
ancient times :  ‘ The River ’  . Coles ( 1994 ) has shown that 
other river systems in southern England might also be 
regarded as transportation routes . 
Illustration 88 
River Avon north of 
Amesbury .  [ Photograph : 
Timothy Darvill . Copyright 
reserved .  ] 
Specific matters to investigate for this issue include : 
• The nature and extent of alluvium in the Avon Valley ; 

river regimes and water heights in the past 

• The extent and date of peat sequences in the Avon 

Valley north of Amesbury 

• The nature and extent of buried land surfaces in the 

river valley 

• The possibility of waterfronts adjacent to established 
monuments ( this problem is already being pursued by 
Mike Parker Pearson for Durrington Walls ) 
• The history and early status of Stonehenge Bottom as a 
permanent or seasonal watercourse and its relationship 
to the Avenue . 
Issue 14 : Materials , resources , and the origins 
of structural components and objects in the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
Much attention has focused on the source of the Bluestones 
at Stonehenge and elsewhere , and the means by which they 
may have been moved . While it is universally recognized that 
the Preseli Hills of southwest Wales represent the source 
area , the identity of the actual outcrops exploited remains 
far from clear . Even the definition of the main petrologically 
identified rock-types and the ascription of particular 
artefacts to them have got into a mess . And there are many 
other kinds of material from archaeological contexts whose 
origins deserve to be more closely examined . 
The sarsen stones at Stonehenge have traditionally been 
assumed to derive from the Avebury area , but this has not 
been scientifically demonstrated through characterization 
studies . Investigations of stone from the 1979–80 
excavations around the Heel Stone by Hillary Howard 
suggested that not all the sarsen came from the 
Marlborough Downs ; the only other likely source is east 
Kent where builders of the Neolithic Medway tombs used 
sarsen but this has not been followed up . 
There is much more work to be done on the sources of 
ceramics , stone objects , and metal objects , and perhaps on 
the movement patterns of human beings buried around 
Stonehenge . Scientific methods of characterization and 
analysis provide new ways of exploring the materials 
represented in structures and objects . 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 115 

Issue 15 : Astronomy , attitudes , the idea of 
sacred spaces , and cosmology 
The existence of astronomical alignments within the 
structure of Stonehenge and other monuments in the area 
( including Woodhenge ) has been a recurrent theme of many 
descriptions and is an assumed element of many 
interpretations . The nature of these alignments has been 
the subject of investigation over the last century or so 
( Lockyer 1909 ; Atkinson 1978 ; Hawkins 1989 ; Ruggles 1997 )  , 
and some can be supported by the design and architecture 
of the monuments . In particular , the analysis of a survey of 
the Station Stones ( Atkinson 1978 ; Hawkins 1989 ) has been 
germane , and further accurate on-site measurements 
should be made , including the gaps in the trilithons . There 
have been important shifts in the perception of such 
alignments away from the back-projection of twentiethcentury precision astronomy and descriptive geometries 
towards more realistic views of how alignments may be 
embedded in prehistoric structures . 
One remaining matter is the widespread imposition of 
binary oppositions onto the archaeological material and the 
need to break down inappropriate oppositions ( e . g . 
settlement :  : ritual site / ritual landscape :  : secular 
landscape )  . Patterns of deposition and cosmology will be 
found not only in architecture , but also in the nature , use , 
and deposition of artefacts ( Darvill 1997a ; Pollard and 
Ruggles 2001 )  . There has for a long time been a focus on 
Stonehenge , but what of the other structures and sites in 
the area such as Coneybury and Durrington Walls ? 
The archaeology of significated places is also a theme that 
deserves to be explored . Examples include places of high 
visibility , or the focus of attention from within established 
monuments : what was on the skyline at the point where the 
midsummer sun rises when viewed from within Stonehenge ? 
Issue 16 : Fieldsystems and the early 
agricultural landscape 
In 1957 , Grinsell listed all the recorded ancient fieldsystems 
in Wiltshire as essentially Iron Age in date , following 
conventional wisdom at the time ( Grinsell 1957 , 272–9 )  . It is 
now known that fieldsystems are of many different types 
and of various dates from the later Neolithic through the 
Roman period ( Fowler 1983 , 94–119 ; Fowler and Blackwell 
1998 , 42–56 )  . The evidence of aerial photography in the 
Stonehenge Landscape has revealed more than a dozen 
main blocks of fieldsystem ; on morphological grounds there 
are several types represented and these deserve to be 
examined and characterized . 
Such fieldsystems are notoriously difficult to date , but 
that should not prevent carefully targeted investigations . 
The temptation to date the construction and use of the 
fieldsystems by the dominant material spatially associated 
with them through surface recovery is to be avoided as such 
material could potentially relate to a period in history when 
manuring took place or cultivation has scattered earlier or 
later cultural material . Some investigation of the nature of 
the various assemblages recovered from fieldwalking in 
terms of the depositional characteristics of the material 
might help identify different sources . 
The evolution of the fieldsystems is also important . 
Excavations elsewhere suggest that many have long 
histories consequent on the major investment in landscape 
organization that they represent . Are those in the 
Stonehenge Landscape which appear to be Bronze Age 
actually late Neolithic in origin ? 
Issue 17 : Landscape evolution and design 
The modern landscape is a complicated palimpsest built up 
since early prehistoric times . There are a number of major 
gaps in the overall understanding of how things have 
changed over time . 
The early prehistoric landscape , mainly the immediate 
post-glacial and Mesolithic periods ( 10 , 000–5 , 000 BC )  , is 
very poorly understood in terms of both its physical and 
environmental form ( including topography , geomorphology , 
and appearance )  , and its cultural components such as the 
disposition and intensity of occupation . The importance of 
more fully understanding this phase of the landscape is the 
increasing recognition of its importance in setting the scene 
and perhaps providing the impetus for the extraordinary 
range and density of sites and structures that characterize 
the rather better-known landscape of the Neolithic and 
the Bronze Age . 
The first millennium BC and first millennium AD are 
periods for which detailed knowledge is sparse . The role of 
major monuments such as Vespasian ’ s Camp in relation to 
nearby sites such as Yarnbury and Ogbury needs to be 
explored . In some cases the Stonehenge Landscape may be 
too small an area for meaningful analysis . 
Much of what is visible in the World Heritage Site today 
is the result of post-Roman activities and especially recent 
land management policies by the principal landowners , the 
National Trust and the Ministry of Defence . Embedded in the 
modern structure of the landscape are many ancient 
features , as Bonney ( 1976 ) showed with reference to the 
Winterbourne Stoke / Wilsford cum Lake parish boundary 
which utilizes the alignment of the Winterbourne Stoke 
linear barrow cemetery and the Monarch of the Plain 
barrow . The relatively modern needs to be separated out 
from the potentially ancient . 
Post-medieval landscape design has not been explored 
in much detail within the Stonehenge Landscape , yet is 
potentially rather important and illuminates many of the 
lines of inquiry currently being tackled elsewhere 
( Williamson 1995 )  . This is well demonstrated by the 
expansion of Amesbury Abbey Park in the eighteenth 
century AD with the creation of the grotto ( Gay ’ s Cave , with 
its ‘ civilized ’ classical form emerging from the vermiculated 
rough stone ) and the distant rides through Vespasian ’ s 
Camp to a distant view of the ultimate romantic ruin in the 
form of the ‘ druidical ’ Stonehenge . 
Unpicking such a palimpsest requires great care and the 
use of multiple sources , especially for the medieval and 
later periods ( cartography , historical documents , estate 
records , aerial photographs , oral history etc .  )  . The GISbased mapping already available at English Heritage 
provides a solid starting point and could be developed to 
provide a map-regression analysis of the landscape . This 
will be especially important in relation to : 
• The physical and cultural landscape of early prehistory 
• The landscape of the first millennium BC and first 

millennium AD 

• The development of the medieval landscape and the 

Hundred of Underditch 

• The Enclosure of the area ( building here on the RCHM 
1979 , xv–xxiv work ) 
115 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 116 

• The emparkment of some areas ( especially around 

Amesbury ) 

• The impact of successive phases of military training 
• Mapping and fully documenting the historic buildings in 
the Stonehenge Landscape . 
CONTEXTUAL AND 
INTERPRETATIVE ISSUES 
Issue 18 : The relationship between physical 
access , experience , and people ’ s sense of place 
Physical access to the Stonehenge Landscape is currently 
structured by existing roads , pathways , entrances , exits , and 
boundaries ( Illustration 89 )  . How do these relate to known 
patterns in the sub-division of space in the past ? How does 
the modern experience of space relate to former experiences ? 
How can movement and experience be modelled ? To what 
extent are place-names a reflection upon how the historic 
landscape has been perceived through the ages ? 
Illustration 89 
Pathways and signing 
around Stonehenge . 
Looking westwards along 
the line of the Cursus .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright 
reserved .  ] 
Issue 19 : The robustness of assumed 
knowledge based on earlier investigations 
More than three-quarters of archaeological work in the 
Stonehenge Landscape was done in the nineteenth century 
and early twentieth century before the availability of 
techniques such as radiocarbon dating , soil analysis , and 
environmental sampling . Many of the things we think we 
know about Stonehenge and other monuments around 
about we don ’ t actually know at all ; even though many have 
become ‘ facts ’ and major planks in the support of general 
arguments and interpretations . 
Much has been achieved through the reanalysis and 
study of early archives and reports on this work , but it is not 
always clear exactly what antiquarian excavators mean 
when they report particular observations . Reinterpretation 
is sometimes possible , but in many cases this simply raises 
possibilities that deserve to be checked . Work at the 
Sanctuary near Avebury ( Pitts 2001a ) shows how much can 
be achieved through the careful re-examination of 
antiquarian excavations . Indeed , the Council for British 
Archaeology recommended the re-excavation of barrows 
unscientifically dug in the past in their 1948 field research 
policy document ( CBA 1948 , 92 )  , a proposal that was 
considered to apply when Paul Ashbee re-excavated 
Amesbury Barrow 51 in 1960 and found that William 
Cunnington ’ s excavation for Sir Richard Colt Hoare in 1805 
had in fact done relatively little damage ( Ashbee 1976 )  . 
This issue is essentially a contextual one , involving a 
large number of site-specific questions . For Stonehenge : 
• Do the timber structures ( Phase 2 ) really pre-date the 

first stone phase ( Phase 3 )  ? 

• Do we really know what the stone phase of the 
monument looked like ? Was there another stone circle 
around the inside edge of the bank of which only the 
two Station Stones now remain ? 
• What date are the Station Stones ? 
• Are the lines of postholes in Phase 2 part of a 

timber avenue ? 

• What is the relationship of the Heel Stone and Stone 

97 with the central settings ? 

• What was the function of the Aubrey Holes ? 
• When were the ‘ barrow ’ ditches around two of the 

Station Stones and the Heel Stone dug ? 

• Can any of the numerous undated features be identified 
as part of an earlier ( pre-Phase 1 ) monument ? 
For the Stonehenge car-park : 
• Are the postholes discovered so far isolated structures 
or are they part of a larger entity ? 
For Bush Barrow : 
• Was the adult male inhumation associated with the wellknown set of rich grave goods excavated by William 
Cunnington in 1808 really the primary grave ? 
Issue 20 : Understanding and using the artefacts 
and ecofacts from the Stonehenge Landscape 
The 700 plus investigations in the Stonehenge Landscape 
over the past three centuries have yielded a vast collection 
of artefactual and ecofactual material . This is widely 
scattered amongst local and national museums . Some 
material that was excavated in the nineteenth century is 
known to have been reburied at its place of discovery and 
could , if exhumed , provide major new collections . Some 
artefactual material has been well catalogued and described 
( e . g . Annable and Simpson 1964 ) and there have been a 
number of studies of particular classes of material , often in 
the context of geographically broader reviews . Site-based 
studies of excavated assemblages are available for more 
recent excavations . There is no general corpus of excavated 
artefacts from the Stonehenge Landscape ( although a 
listing and concordance of material from excavated barrows 
is awaiting publication )  , and major groups of material , such 
as later prehistoric pottery , flintwork , and stone objects , 
have never been adequately surveyed . Technical 
investigations of extant artefacts , such as the study of usewear patterns , breakage , and fragmentation , is urgently 
needed . In the case of human remains there is scope for 
biomolecular studies , such as DNA characterization . 
There is much scope for the reanalysis of faunal remains 
from early excavations within the Stonehenge Landscape 
and for looking at the wider social questions that these 
remains raise . A starting point is provided by the work of 
Albarella and Serjeantson ( 2002 ) who re-examined the 
exceptionally large and well-preserved collection of animal 
bones from the 1967-8 excavations at Durrington Walls . 
116 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 117 

They had not previously been washed , and cleaning them 
revealed that some contained tiny splinters of flint , perhaps 
the tips of arrowheads . The new study also showed 
evidence for the large-scale slaughter of domesticated 
young pigs , the use of distinctive and simple butchery 
practices , roasting the butchered meat on fires , and 
consuming the meat and bone marrow together . 
Much of this work involves thematic studies whose 
execution involves looking inside the Stonehenge Landscape 
and outside it to other parts of the Stonehenge World . 
Issue 21 : The meaning and utility of traditional 
monument classifications 
Early work in the Stonehenge Landscape was instrumental 
in defining the categories used for the classification of 
archaeological monuments . In some cases these have been 
expanded and applied to other parts of Britain with little 
critical review of their utility . Amongst the most significant 
such classifications are those relating to barrows . Since 
Stonehenge is in some senses the homeland of these 
classifications it would be appropriate to revisit them and 
deploy modern methods of investigation as well as new 
approaches to classification and taxonomy in order to 
consider the coherence and integrity of these traditional 
systems . Specific matters to investigate include : 
• Long barrows : their structure , internal arrangement and 
relationship to regional groupings 
• Oval barrows : the extent to which they can be separated 
out as a distinctive class 
• Fancy barrows : the integrity of the grouping and the 
distinctiveness of the typical component forms ( e . g . bell 
barrow , disc barrow , saucer barrow , pond barrow etc .  )  . 
Issue 22 : Contemporaneity and the 
relationships between monuments at the 
landscape , regional , and world scale 
Although Stonehenge is unique in terms of some of its 
structures and the particular succession of structures on 
the same site over a period of more than 2000 years it is 
also very much part of a tradition of late Neolithic and early 
Bronze Age ceremonial centres . Examples are known at 
intervals of roughly 40km across much of the British Isles . 
In Wessex they include : Avebury ( Wiltshire )  , Dorchester on 
Thames ( Oxfordshire )  , Dorchester ( Dorset )  , Knowlton 
( Dorset )  , and Priddy ( Somerset )  . Most contain a selection 
of monuments drawn from a wider repertoire such that not 
every centre has the same set ; all have common elements . 
Such a pattern has been used by Colin Renfrew ( 1973a ) 
to look at social change ( and see also Ashbee 1978b , 83 
and 101 )  . 
Accessibility may have been a key element to the 
positioning and distribution of these centres and associated 
monuments . In the wider Stonehenge world there are 
similar sites around Newgrange in the Boyne Valley of 
Ireland , Mainland Orkney , and Carnac in Brittany . Each is 
separated by a degree of physical distance , but there are 
major questions also about the social distance between 
centres – questions of identity and territory – and whether 
there are lesser-order centres of some kind in between . 
On a wider scale still , there is the question of how the 
architecture of Stonehenge 3 fits into the contemporary 
traditions found in other parts of Europe . 
Issue 23 : Filling the gaps and understanding 
distributions 
A considerable amount of survey work has been done 
around Stonehenge , much of it methodologically tied to the 
prevailing land-use regimes . Thus , south of the Packway , 
most work has concentrated on fieldwalking and the 
recovery of material from cultivated land ; north of the 
Packway there is very little opportunity for such work , and 
instead the focus has been on topographic survey and 
earthwork plotting . Combining earthwork evidence and 
cropmark evidence visible on aerial photographs provides 
one means of developing broader overviews even though 
the nature of the data on which such plots are based is 
variable . Aerial photographs do not , however , give total 
coverage of relevant archaeological features . Small features 
such as graves and pits are poorly represented and need to 
be sought by other means . 
The use of other techniques which would serve to link 
existing surveys , provide consistent data over broader 
areas , and fill physical gaps in existing data sets with 
comparable data is possible . The use of test-pits to quantify 
topsoil content where fieldwalking is impractical is one 
possibility whose potential has been demonstrated . Further 
extensive geophysical and geochemical surveys would 
provide another layer of distributional information . 
Some comparative studies drawing in other areas of 
southern Britain would provide a more secure understanding , 
in absolute and relative terms , of the distributional data 
available . Many of the approaches applied here can be nondestructive or involve only minimal intervention . Taking the 
broad view there is also work to be done on understanding 
why preservation is apparently so different in different parts 
of the landscape , and what the implications of this are for 
interpreting what is already known and targeting future work . 
One critical question of wider interest , but potentially 
answerable with data from the Stonehenge Landscape , 
concerns understanding the meaning and interpretation of 
flint scatters and some understanding of their variability . 
Issue 24 : Populating the record for postRoman studies 
While the importance of understanding the post-Roman 
landscape is widely recognized and frequently acknowledged , 
the database from which to work on these matters is 
generally inadequate . The ability to draw on sources of 
evidence such as place-names , documentary sources , 
cartographic evidence , legal instruments , distributions of 
stray finds and , for the most recent periods , oral histories , 
provides a rather different complexion to the essential 
research resource . There is an urgent need to integrate these 
traditional sources for post-Roman archaeological studies 
with the existing database which focuses on the kinds of data 
most relevant to prehistoric archaeology . 
Much of the conventional archaeological data for the 
post-Roman period has accumulated as the incidental 
outcome of work focused on other matters . Surveys of the 
area with more explicitly defined objectives in relation to 
later periods ( e . g . historic buildings ) provide an obvious 
means of redressing the balance . Specific matters to 
investigate include : 
• Where are the later first-millennium BC cemeteries and 
burial places ? 
117 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 118 

• Is it possible to find cartographic and physical evidence 
of early medieval boundaries and territorial units ? 
• Which modern settlements were established in early 

medieval times ? 

Issue 25 : Environment and change to the 
physical landscape 
It is well known that the Stonehenge Landscape visible 
today is a relatively modern creation . Major advances have 
been made in the understanding of earlier environments , 
and a set of predictive models built up from available local 
sequences ( Allen 1997 )  . Many questions remain , however , 
on a site-by-site basis and with the Stonehenge Landscape 
as a whole . The need to provide this was well recognized in 
the Stonehenge Management Plan ( English Heritage 2000 , 
4 . 7 . 6 )  . The basic issue here is how people in the past 
intentionally or unintentionally transformed , modified , or 
changed the physical landscape either independently or in 
response to more deep-seated cycles , trends , or 
catastrophes . Various models are available to assist in 
exploring these matters : progressive change ; punctuated 
equilibrium ; global catastrophe events ; and so on . 
Resolving this issue will involve rather wider considerations 
than might be found solely within the Stonehenge 
Landscape , although locally important matters include : 
• When was the post-glacial woodland cover cleared ? 
• What was the make-up and extent of the woodland 

cover during the third and fourth millennia BC ? 

• Was grassland ubiquitous or were monuments mainly 
only built in grassland areas in the Neolithic and 
Bronze Age ? 
• What happened to the rich soils of the untamed 

wildwood ? 

Issue 26 : The hidden landscapes 
The rolling downland and incised river valleys of the 
Stonehenge Landscape provide a number of situations for 
the preservation of early land surfaces below more recent 
layers of colluvium . Sampling to date in areas such as 
Stonehenge Bottom shows that the accumulation and 
movement of mantle-deposits is complicated and not easily 
predicted . Deeper cover-deposits are , however , known along 
the Avon ( Illustration 90 )  . A systematic programme of 
modelling local site formation processes and the movement 
of soil and sediment in the environment would provide a 
major interpretative filter on distributional data , and explain 
at least some gaps in the current spread of site data . 
Another major source of information about early 
landscapes is the buried soils sealed by structures such as 
barrows and ramparts . Many of these may be accessible 
using the holes excavated by nineteenth-century 
investigations . The extent of later Neolithic land surface 
sealed beneath the many hundreds of early Bronze Age 
barrows is probably one of the most important 
archaeological resources in the British Isles . 
Illustration 90 
Test-pit excavated through 
floodplain deposits beside 
the River Avon near 
Amesbury . Dark organicrich sediments can be seen 
at the bottom of the cutting 
with a series of surfaces 
and make-up above .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright 
reserved .  ] 
Issue 27 : The missing slices of time 
The Stonehenge Landscape is best known for the archaeology 
of the ‘ Age of Stonehenge ’  . Very little is known about major 
slices of time either side of the later Neolithic and early 
Bronze Age , and yet these are very much part of the 
Stonehenge story . Especially poorly known is the archaeology 
( in conventional cultural-historical periods ) of the : 
• Later Mesolithic 
• Later Bronze Age 
• Iron Age 
• Roman 
• Anglo-Saxon 
• Medieval 
• Post-medieval 
• Modern . 
Issue 28 : Chronology and dating the undated 
Telling a good story about Stonehenge and its landscape 
requires a clear and full understanding of the dating of sites 
in terms of their internal sequence ( order , duration etc .  ) and 
the contemporaneity of particular elements with phases or 
horizons at other sites both near and far . The extensive 
series of radiocarbon dates for Stonehenge itself has 
radically changed views on the development and 
relationships of that structure . There are also likely to be 
some surprises , as the dating of the isolated burial at 
Stonehenge to the seventh century AD shows ( Pitts 2001b )  . 
Few other sites in the area are as well dated , and many are 
simply not dated or are assigned to broad phases on the 
basis of form or assemblages of artefacts excavated in the 
nineteenth century . The need to provide a more robust and 
extensive framework for all periods was well recognized in 
the Stonehenge Management Plan ( English Heritage 2000 , 
4 . 7 . 6 )  . Opportunities to redress the balance are provided by 
the absolute dating of human remains and objects , or the 
recovery of new samples from graves , pits , ditches , or old 
land surface through the reopening of previous excavations . 
Aerial photography , fieldwalking , and surface survey 
have revealed a great many archaeological sites and 
scatters of material , many of which are undated . From flint 
scatters to cropmarks suggesting the presence of ploughlevelled ditched enclosures , the majority of material cannot 
be fitted into robust synchronic views of the landscape at a 
particular time or the sequence of changes viewed over the 
long term . 
Some material is conveniently used to fit particular 
models or views of the landscape without much recognition 
of the uncertainties over the chronological position of the 
material in question . This expanse of recorded archaeology 
needs making useful in terms of its contribution to the 
Stonehenge story by selective excavation to confirm its 
existence ( or former existence )  , and , where possible , 
118 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 119 

provide a date . Only in this way can reasonable sampling 
schemes be developed to investigate the archaeology of 
particular periods or regions . 
MANAGEMENT-BASED ISSUES 
Issue 29 : Erosion and rates of change 
The Stonehenge Landscape is one of the most intensively 
managed for archaeological objectives in England . As such it 
therefore provides an opportunity to monitor monument 
decay processes over long periods and match the patterns 
recorded against a detailed knowledge of land-use practices , 
weather conditions , visitor attention , and other factors that 
have been recognized as potentially significant for the 
preservation and conservation of sites . Woodland , pasture , 
and arable land provide three key starting points for such 
monitoring , although benchmark studies of a sample of 
monuments in each will be needed as the starting point . 
Changes to the surfaces of the stones at Stonehenge itself 
could be monitored through a rock art recording programme 
( see above )  . The need to provide research-based information 
about the condition of sites and monuments within the 
World Heritage Sites was well recognized in the Stonehenge 
Management Plan ( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 4 . 18–19 ) 
Issue 30 : Publishing the outstanding 
investigations in the Stonehenge Landscape 
The publication in 1995 of the twentieth-century excavations 
at Stonehenge and monuments closely associated with it 
made accessible a vast body of data that had previously 
been hidden in unpublished archives and records ( Cleal et 
al . 1995 )  . In the last decade of the twentieth century a great 
deal of work was carried out in the Stonehenge World 
Heritage Site in connection with the evaluation of possible 
sites for the proposed new visitor centre and road corridors 
for access tracks and the much trumpeted upgrading of the 
A303 . Many of these studies were field evaluations of 
various kinds involving targeted trenching , surface 
collection , test-pitting , and extensive geophysical surveys . 
Some property development within the World Heritage Site 
also took place . It is also known that there are a few 
unpublished excavations of barrows and other features in 
the landscape from the 1960s . In future the publication of 
archaeological work is likely to be more closely phased with 
the planning process and the completion of mitigation 
works . Specific matters to investigate include : 
• Draw together and publish investigations connected with 
the Stonehenge Conservation and Management 
Programme ( principally the road schemes and visitor 
centre schemes ) 
• Publish outstanding developer-assisted evaluation and 
mitigation work from the Stonehenge Landscape 
• Publish the results of the remaining 1950s , 1960s , and 
1970s excavations in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Issue 31 : Shaping popular perceptions 
There are many stories , myths , legends , and popular 
perceptions about both ancient and modern aspects of the 
Stonehenge Landscape . They are documented since at least 
the time of Geoffrey of Monmouth and are reflected in many 
aspects of popular culture through recent centuries : 
literature , poetry , music , painting , drawing , and most 
recently advertising and product endorsement . How such 
things have influenced people ’ s perception of Stonehenge 
and its landscape is not fully known . Equally , the seemingly 
endless discussions about the future placement of visitor 
facilities and the controversy surrounding plans for road 
improvements impact on shared and individual perceptions 
of the site and its surroundings : well evident in the level of 
press coverage and the number of cartoons based on 
particular readings of the issues ( Illustration 91 )  . 
The influence of popular perceptions on visitor interest 
and the levels of expectation that visitors have are major 
components relevant to visitor management and the 
presentation of the site and its surroundings . 
Illustration 91 
Stonehenge in 
contemporary humour . 
A cartoon that appeared 
in the London Evening 
Standard on 17 November 
1969 .  [ Reproduced 
courtesy of Express 
Newspapers .  ] 
Issue 32 : The human experience of the 
research process 
How does archaeological knowledge of the Stonehenge 
Landscape get from the hole in the ground to the words on 
a signboard ? Visitors to the World Heritage Site have a 
general interest in all stages of that process . There are 
questions of control and the politics of the way knowledge 
is created . Most people visiting the area have questions in 
their minds ( some are those set out here ) and are interested 
in the process of resolving them . How has knowledge of the 
site and the landscape changed ? Is it any better now than 
100 years ago ? It is often said that the best thing about 
Stonehenge from the visitor ’ s perspective is the ‘ mystery ’ 
element ; can that thrill of uncertainty be harnessed ? 
Issue 33 : Linking research and site 
management 
It is well established that research leads to discoveries 
which in turn influence the ways in which land managers 
tackle fundamental issues such as access , land-use , 
conservation , interpretation , development control , and the 
need for further investigation and fieldwork . At one level 
this requires co-ordination , but the relationship is a twoway one as there are also numerous opportunities for 
research that arise through management works . Nor do all 
management works within the landscape arise from 
archaeological management ; there are other interests too 
and many stewards of other physical and economic 
resources . The spotlight tends to fall on large-scale 
management operations , themselves often controversial , 
such as road-improvement schemes . There are many other 
119 
121-134 section 3 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 27 PM Page 120 

situations , far less visible and rarely controversial , where 
management works and research opportunities can be 
fitted together . 
Issue 34 : Restoration and access 
A major component of management works within the 
Stonehenge World Heritage Site concerns the restoration or 
establishment of appropriate land-use regimes , the creation 
of vistas and views , and the provision of routes and 
pathways through the landscape . The viability and 
authenticity of these are major concerns . Specific matters to 
investigate include : 
• Which views into , across , and out from the Stonehenge 
WHS should be restored or enhanced ? 
• What were the prehistoric , Roman , medieval , and postmedieval routeways through the Stonehenge Landscape 
and which ones is it appropriate to use today ? 
• How did the prehistoric and later landscape look in 

terms of the balance between grassland / arable land / 

tree cover / shrub growth / animal populations ? 

Issue 35 : Importance and vulnerability 
The Stonehenge World Heritage Site and its surroundings 
contain a lot of very diverse archaeological monuments , 
remains , and deposits . Not all of it is necessarily of the 
same archaeological importance , nor can the significance of 
sites or areas be judged simply on the basis of visibility or 
size . Vulnerability to a range of anticipated threats also 
needs to be considered – visitor use , stock grazing , planting 
patterns , and so on . Specific matters to investigate include : 
• Which are the most important and significant sites , 
areas , or deposits within the Stonehenge World Heritage 
Site and the Stonehenge Landscape ? 
• Which are the most vulnerable kinds of sites , areas , 

and deposits ? 

• Which monuments or structures could usefully be 

enhanced ? And what is the best way of doing that ? 

Issue 36 : Co-ordination , interpretation , 
and recording 
The process of carrying out research in the Stonehenge 
Landscape potentially involves many individuals and 
organizations ; indeed this is already the case . The sharing 
of results , information , and resources potentially enriches 
the overall research endeavour . One of the suggestions 
made in the Stonehenge Management Plan is for the 
creation of an archaeological research group of some kind 
( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 7 . 3 )  . 
A physical resource through which research can be 
facilitated is also lacking at Stonehenge . Such a facility might 
not only provide a local base from which work could be coordinated , but also provide a setting for the public display of 
recent findings and a guide to ongoing work . One of the 
suggestions made in the Stonehenge Management Plan is for 
the creation of a research facility at the proposed new visitor 
centre site ( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 7 . 5 and 4 . 7 . 8 )  . 
The present Stonehenge Landscape GIS maintained by 
English Heritage provides a substantial integrated record of 
archaeological interventions , sites , and monuments . As a 
tool to capture and present the vast body of data that has 
accumulated over the last 300 years or more it works well . 
Looking ahead , however , the nature of the data that will be 
generated through future fieldwork programmes is likely to 
be far more complicated in its structure and able to be used 
in far more sophisticated ways through combining data sets 
and using immersive digital technologies in the field and for 
visualization exercises for academic research and public 
display . Integrative approaches to diverse data sets such as 
have already been developed by the Stonehenge 
Landscapes Project ( Exon et al . 2000 ) are an important first 
step in the greater use of digital technology . 
Issue 37 : What was it like to dig 
at Stonehenge ? 
It is more than 50 years since substantial excavations 
have taken place at Stonehenge , and more than two 
decades since the last small-scale excavations . What was 
it like carrying out these high-profile investigations ? How 
did the teams interact ? What was the gossip about ? And 
what can we understand about the work from 
contemporary observations ? 
All of the archaeologists responsible for the early 
twentieth-century excavations are now dead – Richard 
Atkinson , Stuart Piggott , Marcus Stone – and it is well 
known that the records they made of their work were less 
than fulsome . Some of the students and volunteers who 
worked with these people are , however , still alive and no 
doubt have recollections of what was done that would be 
worth collecting together as an oral history archive . 
Equally , most of those who excavated at Stonehenge in the 
later twentieth century are still alive and might also 
contribute to such an archive . Because Stonehenge is such 
a high-profile visitor attraction there is also scope for 
collecting together any photographs or cine-film that 
members of the visiting public may have taken of the 
excavations in progress . Another strand of inquiry would be 
the archives of the BBC , ITV and local radio stations in 
southern England ; numerous programmes have been 
broadcast about Stonehenge and in some cases additional 
unused material may also exist . 
120 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 121 

R
section 
esear
4 ch 
Strategy 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 122 

SECTION 4 – RESEARCH STRATEGY 
 
 ‘ The only interesting answers are those that destroy the questions ’  
( Susan Sontag 1963 , 240 ) 
CREATING OBJECTIVES 
Defining coherent issues through the close specification of 
questions is the first step towards developing new 
knowledge or understandings . This section seeks to move 
the process forward by identifying objectives that can form 
the basis of projects or initiatives wholly or partly to resolve 
issues . The plan for problem-orientated research , and the 
proposed context for the promotion and support of curiositydriven research , over the next few years is here called the 
Research Strategy and is the programme of work referred to 
in the management plan for the Stonehenge World Heritage 
Site ( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 7 . 2 )  . Like archaeology itself , 
however , knowledge generation is a destructive business as 
Sontag so forcefully reminds us in the quotation above . 
There is no one-to-one relationship between issues and 
objectives ; some objectives may address more than one issue 
while other issues are addressed through several objectives . 
Some issues may be recognizable but cannot be addressed 
without further definition and analysis . Equally , the infinite 
nature of what cannot currently be perceived needs to be 
accepted , and an ability to respond to unforeseen possibilities 
and curiosity-driven research is firmly embedded in the overall 
plan of action for future operations . In this there is a positive 
recognition that issues listed in Section 3 will inevitably arise 
as the research process unfolds , while unexpected discoveries 
will either prompt previously unimagined avenues of inquiry or 
lead to the redefinition of recognized issues . Thus a balance 
must be struck between setting out a pathway that can be 
followed to produce first-rate research outcomes and allowing 
enough flexibility to respond quickly and decisively to 
unforeseeable opportunities . 
Most of the issues recognized in Section 3 carry through 
into the objectives set out here , although some only in a 
minor way . Table 4 summarizes the linkages and 
relationships between the objectives discussed here and 
the issues identified in Section 3 . 
Any strategy is , in a very real sense , the art of war : the 
way of achieving clearly defined general aims through the 
implementation of specific actions . In this case it involves 
the struggle to overcome our ignorance of the past . The 
overall aims are to aid public awareness , improve current 
ideas about the past in the public interest , engender a 
sustainable approach to the use of archaeological 
resources , and inform appropriate management . It is 
achieved by creating and then implementing a set of clearly 
defined objectives which seek to produce : 
• New perspectives on the nature and meaning of 

archaeological remains 

• Better understandings of what has already 

been discovered 

• Fresh comprehension of existing interpretations and 

conventional wisdom 

• Original knowledge about the past 
• Robust baseline data for monitoring and characterizing 
the archaeological landscape . 
The defined objectives will individually or collectively 
contribute to the overall resolution of currently identified 
issues as problem-orientated research and / or put in place a 
structure for the pursuit of curiosity-derived research to 
exploit unforeseen opportunities . Thus objectives are 
components of the overall strategy that can be aimed for , 
sought after , and realistically achieved in a reasonable time . 
In defining such objectives it is important to address a 
series of important matters : 
How will the objectives be achieved ? Is the work a one-off 
operation ; a recurrent activity involving many separate events ; 
a short-term activity ; a long-term activity ; or could it only be 
achieved through the gradual accumulation of source data ? 
Who will pursue the objectives ? Is the work a single 
venture ; a collaboration ; promoted by a facilitator ; and does 
it need a manager ? It is hoped that this and earlier sections 
will stimulate interest and action amongst individuals and in 
many different organizations , including : national heritage 
agencies ; local authorities ; archaeological contractors and 
consultants ; university departments ; postgraduate students 
and research fellows ; and amateur societies and groups . 
Success in implementing a research strategy will come 
through individuals and organizations wanting to carry out 
research rather than feeling that they must . 
In what contexts can the objectives be pursued ? In some 
cases the collection and analysis of data sets can be made 
integral to site management works and thereafter carried 
out as part of a capital programme or ongoing conservation 
programme . Other contexts include those provided by 
property development and land-use change ( often funded 
in such cases by the developer )  , or initiative-based 
programmes of investigation and research undertaken by 
university departments , local societies , or in some cases 
individual researchers . 
What issues does an objective relate to ? Having defined 
and specified the things that are considered to be of 
current concern the objectives of future research 
programmes can be securely tied back to these to ensure 
that they are being addressed . As noted above , Table 4 
summarizes the main linkages . 
What priority does an objective have ? Given constraints on 
resources available to carry out archaeological research it is 
important that priorities are established . In general , the 
greater the number and range of issues that a defined piece 
of research can realistically address the higher its priority , 
122 
Table 4 
Relationships between 
defined Issues ( Section 3 ) 
and proposed Objectives 
( Section 4 )  . 
Objective Links to main issues Other related Issues Priority 
The BIG Questions 
1 Investigating the essential importance and 
distinctiveness of Stonehenge past and present 
1 , 18 5 , 8 , 10 , 15 , 22 H 
2 Monument dating programme 2 , 9 , 19 , 28 21 , 22 , 27 H 
3 Modelling environment and land-use change 10 , 17 , 25 12 , 13 H 
4 Understanding occupation 4 , 12 17 , 19 , 20 , 23 H 
Stonehenge and related monuments 
5 The Stonehenge structural sequence , phasing , 
and interpretation 
5 , 19 3 M 
6 The Avenue – ground checking geophysical 
anomalies and mapping 
7 , 10 , 6 , 12 , 17 , 22 M / H 
7 Mapping the surfaces of the Stonehenge stones 6 , 29 5 , 12 H 
8 Investigating the Palisade Ditch northwest 
of Stonehenge 
1 , 5 , 7 , 10 11 , 12 , 17 , 22 H 
9 Review of oval barrows and the excavation of a 
selected example 
21 10 , 19 , 22 M 
Landscape and regional objectives 
10 Barrow cemetery surveys 9 7 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 17 , 21 M / H 
11 Creating a database of place-names and 
cartographic data for the Stonehenge Landscape 
24 11 , 17 M 
12 Characterizing and investigating the main 
fieldsystems within the Stonehenge Landscape 
16 12 , 25 M / H 
Integrating monuments and landscapes 
13 Extending the fieldwalking data set 4 , 12 , 23 16 , 17 , 25 , 26 , 27 H 
14 Compiling a geophysical map of the 
Stonehenge area 
16 , 23 , 26 , 27 4 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 17 , 24 M 
15 Filling data gaps 23 , 26 19 , 25 M 
16 Validating and dating features revealed by 
aerial photography 
10 , 23 , 26 , 27 , 28 12 , 16 , 17 H 
17 Understanding recent land-use change 25 , 29 26 M 
Research infrastructure 
18 Create SARSEN : The Stonehenge Archaeological 
Research , Study and Education Network 
33 , 36 32 H 
19 Establish a Stonehenge Research Centre 33 , 36 32 M 
20 Publish outstanding investigations in the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
30 33 H 
21 Prepare and publish a Stonehenge Landscape 
Research Handbook 
32 , 36 31 M 
22 Compile a corpus of material culture from the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
20 12 , 19 , 27 , 28 , 31 , 33 H 
23 Compile a corpus of human remains from the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
9 , 20 2 , 19 , 23 , 24 , 27 , 28 H 
24 Develop enhanced mapping and visualization 
programmes for archaeological data sets 
10 , 11 , 12 , 18 , 20 4 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 23 , 32 , 
34 , 35 
H 
25 Create a social history archive of the twentiethcentury excavations at Stonehenge 
37 30 , 31 , 32 M 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 123 

123 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 124 

although there will be exceptions . Table 4 summarizes the 
priority established through consultation for each objective . 
Implementing the Research Strategy through the pursuit 
of the recognized objectives inevitably means a degree of 
engagement between researchers and archaeological 
materials whether those materials are in situ in the field or 
ex situ in archives and museum collections . The exact 
nature of such engagements will of course depend on the 
methodologies being pursued , while the form of the 
outcomes and resultant discourse from these engagements 
will very much depend on the philosophical and theoretical 
perspectives used . It is not the intention here to privilege 
particular methods or perspectives , but because of the need 
to provide inclusive access to researchers both now and in 
the medium- and long-term future it is appropriate to apply 
a few simple rules to structure the engagement between 
researchers and primary archaeological data . 
ETHICS AND PRACTICE 
The valuable , important , and finite nature of the 
archaeological resource within and around the Stonehenge 
World Heritage Site is well recognized and widely 
acknowledged . Sustainability is fundamental to policy 
development and accordingly a balance has to be struck 
between the conservation of the archaeological materials 
for future generations to exploit as they see fit and the more 
immediate use for tourism , recreation , and education , and 
as the source of material for new insights and knowledge of 
the past to fuel the activities and aspirations of the present 
generations . Naturally , there exists the freedom for anyone 
to pursue research of any kind that does not damage or 
diminish the archaeological resource or impact on the rights 
of others to do the same . Where intervention is involved , 
careful management provides the means of achieving the 
necessary balances , the principles and implementation of 
which are set out in the Stonehenge Management Plan 
( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 7 . 8-9 )  . A more extensive 
explanatory statement of how these principles apply to 
archaeological work has been agreed between the partners 
to the Stonehenge Master Plan ( English Heritage et al . 2001 ) 
and may be summarized as follows : 
• Make the best use of data that have already been 

collected before new material is acquired 

• Make the best use of non-invasive techniques before 

using destructive invasive techniques 

• Where invasive techniques are applied the interventions 
used should cover the minimum area necessary to 
resolve the issues being addressed 
• Archaeological works should not erode , and where 

possible should enhance , the visual character of 

archaeological monuments or their setting 

• All archaeological work should be carried out by 
competent and archaeologically qualified individuals and 
organizations following appropriate professional codes , 
guidance , good practice , and standards 
• The results of all interventions should be disseminated 
in an appropriate format and assimilated into the local 
Sites and Monuments Record and the Stonehenge World 
Heritage Site GIS record . 
The need for archaeological interventions to advance 
archaeological knowledge of the area is widely accepted , 
although views vary about exactly how and when such works 
may usefully be carried out ( e . g . Pomeroy-Killinger 2003 )  . 
The guiding principle here relates to the balance between 
the perceived value and importance of the issue , and the 
rarity and value of the material available to address it . Thus , 
for example , any proposals involving the examination of 
deposits within Stonehenge itself where only a few square 
metres of the site remain intact should be viewed in a rather 
different way from proposals to examine a small sample of 
extremely extensive deposits such as the boundaries of later 
prehistoric fieldsystems . It is not proposed that 
archaeological deposits should be formally zoned in terms of 
their availability for research , although attention may be 
drawn to the broad grading of importance and sensitivity 
based on the recorded extent of known monuments and the 
results of extensive fieldwalking ( Batchelor 1997 , plan 5 )  . 
CURRENT INITIATIVES 
At the time of constructing the Research Framework a 
number of projects of different scale and duration were 
known to be taking place within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
In some cases these will contribute to the resolution of 
issues identified in Section 3 above , and all have been 
contributory to the development of the objectives set out in 
this section . The following projects were brought to the 
attention of the team constructing the Research Framework . 
Stonehenge Visitor Centre improvement works 
Preparation studies and the development of planning 
applications and environmental impact statements for a 
series of proposals for the resiting of the visitor centre and 
ancillary works have been undertaken at intervals since 1990 . 
Current work is focused on the proposed new visitor centre 
site east of Countess Road . This area was subject to a deskbased assessment in April 1993 , and a first phase of field 
evaluation in 1995 . Further evaluations were carried out 
by Wessex Archaeology in spring 2003 and spring 2004 . 
A planning application and accompanying Environmental 
Statement were submitted to the Local Planning Authority in 
September 2004 ( Chris Blandford Associates 2004 )  . Ongoing . 
A303 improvement scheme 
Initial surveys with the aim of providing a general overview 
of the archaeology of the area were carried out in 1992 on 
behalf of the Department of Transport . Since that time 
detailed studies have been carried out , including 
geophysical surveys , fieldwalking , and field evaluation on a 
large number of options . Following the announcement in 
June 1999 of a preference for an on-line solution , efforts 
have focused on the corridor defined by the present A303 . 
Several phases of field evaluation were carried out by 
Wessex Archaeology in 2002–3 and an environmental 
impact statement prepared ( BBCHG 2003 )  . A Public Inquiry 
into the proposals was held in Salisbury between the 17 
February and 11 May 2004 . Ongoing . 
WHS Earthworks Condition Survey 
In spring 2002 English Heritage commissioned Wessex 
Archaeology to undertaken a baseline survey of the 
condition of recorded earthwork monuments within the 
124 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 125 

Stonehenge World Heritage Site and to make management 
recommendations for each . The survey is the first of its kind 
at a detailed level ( Illustration 92 )  ; the first results have 
been presented as a client report ( WA 2003b )  . 
Illustration 92 
Durrington 35 round 
barrow in the Old King 
Barrow cemetery .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
Stonehenge Landscape Project 
Based in the Department of History and Archaeology in 
Birmingham University , this project is the largest digital 
analysis of the archaeological landscape and monuments of 
Stonehenge ever attempted . The study uses data from more 
than 1200 monuments within a phenomenological study of 
the development of the Stonehenge landscape from the 
Mesolithic to the early Bronze Age . The contents of the 
Stonehenge barrows are also collated for the first time and 
presented in a series of appendices to the published work . 
The project explores how the Stonehenge landscape 
emerged over time , the developing relationships between 
the public monuments , and how these monuments created 
new spaces for social action in prehistory . The manner in 
which monuments were used and perceived is discussed 
and the results are demonstrated through interactive 
software which displays GIS data , and animations of 
movement along monuments and through the landscape , as 
well as 3-dimensional views of the landscape , embedded 
panoramic photographs , and videos . Readers can access all 
the project data from the publication and via a web browser , 
permitting them to perform their own studies and produce 
their own reading of the landscape of Stonehenge . The full 
version of Stonehenge Landscapes was published in 
November 2001 ( Exon et al . 2001 )  . Ongoing . 
Avon Valley Landscape Survey 
Selected cultivated areas of SPTA land in the Avon Valley 
north of Durrington are being systematically fieldwalked 
by staff and students from Salisbury and South Wiltshire 
College and the Department of Archaeology at Bristol 
University . To date the work has mainly been to the north 
of the Stonehenge Landscape , focusing on Casterley 
Camp and around Netheravon , but other areas will be 
examined in future . Ongoing .  [ Information from Paul Tubb , 
November 2004 ] 
Flint scatter analysis 
The Stonehenge Environs Project produced an enormous 
quantity of lithic material that has been the subject of only a 
most basic analysis . Using a sampling programme designed 
to maintain total coverage my ongoing doctoral research 
utilizes a technological and metrical approach to reveal the 
extent of technological variability across the landscape . This 
project gives an alternative understanding of the nature of 
inhabitation of the Environs , and provides a counterpoint to 
previous monument-based interpretations .  [ Contributed by 
Ben Chan , October 2001 ] 
Grave goods from Bronze Age burials 
In order to refine the digital database used in the 
Stonehenge Landscapes project it was necessary to collate 
various categories of data concerning grave goods from the 
barrows . This involved the correlation of project identifier , 
Wiltshire SMR number , parish , Grinsell barrow number , 
Devizes Museum Catalogue number ( s )  , and published 
corpus numbers for Beaker pottery , collared urns , food 
vessels , daggers / knives , daggers , and amber . A definitive 
list of all ‘ Wessex Culture ’ graves was also prepared . This 
task has never been attempted previously , and the results 
will provide a launch pad for further detailed analyses .  
[ Contributed by Ann Woodward , October 2001 ] 
Examination of ritual and dress equipment 
from early Bronze Age graves 
The exotic and impressive grave goods of the ‘ Wessex 
Culture ’ in early Bronze Age Britain are well known and 
have inspired influential social and economic hypotheses , 
invoking the existence of chiefs , warriors , merchants , 
and high-ranking pastoralists . These traditional 
interpretations are now being increasingly queried , 
not least through a renewed interest in the archaeology 
of ancient religious activity , including shamanism . This 
project aims to identify more accurately the significance 
of these burial assemblages using technical scientific 
studies of the objects themselves , for example use-wear 
analysis , characterization , and sourcing .  [ Contributed by 
Ann Woodward and John Hunter , June 2003 ] 
The Stonehenge Riverside Project 
This is a study of the relationship between Stonehenge 
and its Avenue and the timber circles and henge at 
Durrington Walls as linked by the course of the River 
Avon . The Project will investigate the riverside and riverine 
deposits close to Durrington Walls and at the southeastern 
end of the Avenue , with the aim of identifying any deposits 
and structures associated with activities in the third 
millennium BC . The project is expected to run until 2008 .  
[ Contributed by Mike Parker Pearson , October 2001 ; and 
see Parker Pearson et al . 2003 and www . shef . ac . uk / 
archaeology / research / stonehenge / index . html for results 
of ongoing investigations ] 
SPACES : The Strumble–Preseli Ancient 
Communities and Environment Study 
Although not directly focused on the archaeology of the 
Stonehenge Landscape per se , this Project is concerned 
with the archaeology at the western end of the Bluestone 
trail in west Wales . It therefore directly contributes to 
understandings of the Stonehenge World and the 
communities that are tied to Stonehenge through the supply 
125 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 126 

of source materials . Ongoing .  [ Contributed by Timothy Darvill 
and Geoffrey Wainwright , June 2002 ; and see Darvill and 
Wainwright 2002 and Darvill et al . 2003 for recent results ] 
STRATEGY , OBJECTIVES , 
AND PROJECTS 
In the following five sub-sections the main objectives 
identified during the construction of the Research Framework 
are arranged under a series of general headings that reflect 
the nature and the scale of the work proposed . All are outline 
proposals and they are arranged in no particular order of 
priority ; they should not be taken as commitments on the part 
of any organizations or individuals who might be involved in 
the implementation of these objectives . In some ways , each 
objective set out here can be seen as a ‘ Project Outline ’  , the 
implementation of which will require detailed consideration 
and further discussion . In most cases this will involve the 
preparation of some kind of Project Design ( cf . English 
Heritage 1991 )  , whether to structure the unfolding of the 
project or to seek funding and consents for its execution . It is 
also hoped that the definition of these objectives will prompt 
the recognition of others either related to them or tangential in 
other cognate areas . It should be noted , however , that few 
objectives map onto the issues identified in Section 3 so as to 
totally resolve them ; indeed , this would be very difficult since 
most identified issues are extremely broad . In all cases , 
therefore , the attainment of the following objectives should be 
seen as contributions to the resolution of identified issues . 
Until recently , the sites available for research within the 
Stonehenge Landscape have been mainly confined to those 
outside the Salisbury Plain Training Area . Since 2001 , 
however , archaeological monuments within the military 
training lands are now available for academic archaeological 
research ( A Morton pers . comm .  )  . This provides a major 
opportunity for new research , especially in such matters as 
the integration of monuments with wider landscape issues . 
THE BIG QUESTIONS 
This first group of objectives relate to some of the BIG 
questions that are asked by archaeologists and ordinary 
visitors to Stonehenge alike : What was Stonehenge ? Who 
built it ? Why ? When ? What was the landscape really like 
back then ? Superficially , these questions seem simple and 
obvious , but in fact they are complicated and contain many 
hidden dimensions . They can be answered at many different 
levels , and in greater or lesser detail , but in all cases can 
really only be addressed by breaking them down into 
smaller , more easily manageable pieces . The focus here is 
therefore to start quarrying away at them in a modest way 
rather than trying to crack them all at once . 
Objective 1 : Investigate the essential 
importance and distinctiveness of Stonehenge 
past and present 
Researching why Stonehenge was , and is , important to past 
and present communities holds the key to many of the ‘ who 
built it and why ’ questions . Critical here is an appreciation 
of the extent to which , at its height in the late third and 
early second millennia BC , the monument itself and the 
cluster of contemporary structures around it were truly 
unique in local , regional , and Neolithic World terms . This 
requires a view outward from Stonehenge to other areas as 
well as the reverse , looking in to Salisbury Plain from other 
areas . The extent of the similarities and overlaps with other 
contemporary structures will illustrate its familiarity and 
integration , or lack of it , amongst other communities . The 
historical context of its appearance in relation to preexisting traditions will help explain why it is like it is . 
The modern preoccupation with Stonehenge needs to be 
compared with what can be glimpsed of its ancient status . It 
may be that Stonehenge seems important only because of 
the way it satisfies modern desires : it is eighteenth-century 
and later scholars who have become so preoccupied with it 
despite the abundance of equally old and unusual 
monuments elsewhere in Britain . 
This objective could be pursued as a series of interlinked 
parallel investigations focusing on different aspects of the 
problem . Perspectives from a wide range of sources are 
needed to be successful , although in many cases these may 
be lone researchers brought together to explore these 
issues through workshops and seminars . A medium-term 
project is needed here , one that will feed directly into the 
interpretation of the site . 
Objective 2 : Monument dating programme 
The collection of new dating evidence to help answer the 
 ‘ when ’ questions is a high priority ( English Heritage 2000 , 
4 . 7 . 6 )  . Some progress could be made using material in 
existing museum collections , although cautions regarding 
reliance on multi-year samples for radiocarbon dating 
( Ashmore 1999 ) point towards the importance of newly 
collected high-integrity samples . The needs of radiocarbon 
dating and environmental sampling in terms of exposed 
deposits for sampling are very similar and could usefully be 
combined ( see Objective 3 below ) through the selective 
reinvestigation of antiquarian excavations dug into barrows 
and earthworks . The samples selected for study need to be 
spatially structured to provide good areal control of the 
Stonehenge Landscape and chronologically structured to 
span the fourth to second millennia BC , bearing in mind 
that buried soils represent the period preceding the 
foundation date of the superimposed monument that 
serves to protect them . 
Key extant samples that might be considered for 
dating include : 
• The skeleton of a young man buried on the bottom 

of the ditch at Woodhenge ( Pitts 2001b , 132–3 ) 

• Human bone from postholes C13 and C14 at 

Woodhenge (  ? in Devizes Museum ) 

• Antler from the Durrington flint mines 
 
(  ? in Salisbury Museum ) 

• Antler from postholes in the southern circles at 
Durrington Walls to refine the chronology of the various 
phases to the structure ( antler in Salisbury Museum ) 
• Cremation deposits from Stonehenge and Woodhenge 
( see Aerts et al . 2001 on dating cremations ) 
• Cremation burials from a selection of excavated round 
barrows in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
This objective requires a multi-disciplinary team with 
access to radiocarbon facilities and environmental 
laboratories . It might usefully be pursued as a collaborative 
126 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 127 

venture involving specialist teams from a number of 
universities using externally derived initiative funding . Short 
or medium term in its execution , it would be set within the 
context of exploiting development-related opportunities 
wherever possible and targeted investigation . 
Objective 3 : Modelling environment and 
landscape change 
One of the great fascinations of the Stonehenge area in 
particular is the long-term pattern of how periodically 
people and natural forces transformed the landscape . In 
many ways the Stonehenge Landscape represents a 
microcosm of this over much wider areas , and also provides 
a way of communicating this particular piece of research to 
a wider audience . Over the last 150 years , there have been 
more studies undertaken within a relatively limited compass 
than for almost any area of the country , not least through 
the numerous extensive surveys undertaken in connection 
with management initiatives over recent decades . This 
evidence needs to be synthesized and used . Critical here is 
the use of environmental data in order to help reconstruct 
the local environment and answer some of the ‘ what it was 
like ’ questions ( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 7 . 6 )  . 
Although a fair amount of data relating to environmental 
change is already available from within the Stonehenge 
Landscape it has been gathered as and when it can within 
the context of other determining factors . As a result it is 
patchy and there are gaps in coverage both spatially and 
chronologically . A programme of sampling to achieve highquality environmental reconstruction is urgently needed . 
The results will form a major component of future 
interpretative and presentational materials . Like the dating 
programme ( Objective 2 )  , use can be made of antiquarian 
excavations to recover samples from existing sections . This 
objective should be pursued whenever development-related 
opportunities arise , and may also be relevant in cases of 
relatively minor management works . Targeted investigations 
will be needed as well , and this can be done in conjunction 
with monument dating work . 
Objective 4 : Understanding occupation 
Finding out where the builders and users of Stonehenge 
lived is widely perceived as a key issue , although not 
without problems in terms of how it can be resolved . 
A primary objective is therefore to identify the ‘ signature ’ 
of the sort of settlements ( using the term here in a general 
sense ) that might be expected within the Stonehenge 
Landscape . Key data sets can then be reviewed . One is the 
concentrations of surface lithics that have been identified 
and characterized , but which we know little about in terms 
of what lies beneath them . Stray finds also need to be 
considered , residual material in the matrix of later 
monuments , and the structure and variability of identified 
pits and pit clusters . 
The objective needs some desk-based research to start 
with , followed by sample excavations and field-checking . It 
is one of the areas , however , where unexpected discoveries 
could make rapid advances . Every opportunity provided by 
development work and ground disturbance as a result of 
management works should be checked for postholes , pits , 
beam slots , and occupation debris . During the 1930s and 
1940s this kind of observation was very successful around 
Countess Road , and it could be again . Especially important 
is the full investigation of medium and large areas along the 
Avon Valley where occupation is most strongly suggested . 
STONEHENGE AND 
RELATED MONUMENTS 
This second group of objectives relates to issues connected 
with specific monuments and our interpretation of them , 
including Stonehenge itself . 
Objective 5 : The Stonehenge structural 
sequence , phasing , and interpretation 
The publication in 1995 of the twentieth-century excavations 
at Stonehenge ( Cleal et al . 1995 ) allowed for the first time a 
clear view of the supporting evidence , or lack of it , for the 
main threefold phasing of Stonehenge . The report highlights 
many areas of uncertainty , the fact that many key features 
cannot be firmly attached to established core phases , and 
the plethora of other undated features . The post-Bronze Age 
history of the monument and its decay is hardly touched 
upon through the twentieth-century excavations and this 
needs to be solved . Many of these could be tied down with 
limited closely targeted excavation and re-excavation . 
This objective could be achieved in one season with 
relatively little damage to undisturbed deposits . It needs to 
be done under the direct control and patronage of English 
Heritage , although the participation of specialists and other 
interested parties is to be encouraged . 
Objective 6 : The Avenue – ground checking 
geophysical anomalies and mapping 
The geophysical surveys carried out on the Avenue in 1990 
revealed localized anomalies tentatively interpreted as pittype features and in some cases perhaps stone sockets on 
the line of the internal banks ( Cleal et al . 1995 , 506–10 ; 
Illustration 93 )  . Testing this proposition is relatively 
straightforward and would involve the excavation of only 
about 25 square metres . If these anomalies are stone sockets 
then the conventional interpretative reconstructions of the 
Avenue will need to be significantly amended ; Stonehenge 
would also fit more closely into the wider pattern of 
contemporary avenues , as at Avebury and Stanton Drew . 
Only a part of the Avenue has so far been surveyed and 
mapped using geophysical survey . Confirming the exact 
location and route of the remaining ( eastern ) section of the 
Avenue would be of very considerable benefit for the 
management of the site as well as being of importance for 
interpreting its construction and use . 
The first part of this objective could be undertaken as a 
straightforward piece of contract-based research that could 
be carried out by any one of a number of organizations over 
a short period . There would probably be considerable public 
interest in such an investigation and this should be factored 
into the project . Mapping the remaining length of the 
Avenue ( east of Stonehenge Bottom ) is a piece of nondestructive research which might make a valuable fieldtesting ground for new approaches , or the practical 
component of a geophysical training programme . Equally , 
the need for future management decisions relating to landuse patterns may provide a suitable opportunity to carry out 
and fund this work . 
127 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 128 

Illustration 93 
Geophysical surveys and 
excavations along the 
Avenue .  [ Based on Cleal et 
al . 1995 , Plan 3 , with 
additions .  ] 
Objective 7 : Mapping the surfaces of the 
Stonehenge stones 
Although a number of attempts have been made to record 
the surfaces of the stones of Stonehenge in the past , none 
has been entirely successful and none has been useful in 
the analysis of carvings ( ancient and modern )  . The 
availability of high-resolution laser scanners that can 
produce highly accurate surface models means that the 
technology is now available to overcome this long-overdue 
need . As well as providing a resource for the study of the 
carvings it also provides base-line data for monitoring the 
condition of the stones . The process is indirect in the 
sense that there need not be any direct contact with the 
stone surfaces , although a number of control points would 
need to be established to allow sections of the survey to 
be tied together . 
Either tied to this work or separately , further 
characterization of the stones themselves would be 
desirable , especially the ‘ bluestones ’  . The use of a 
portable XRF device would allow the non-destructive 
analysis of the near-surface geochemistry of the stones 
and provide a quantitative study of intra-stone variability 
as well as inter-stone comparisons to complement the 
petrological studies and laboratory-based chemical 
analyses undertaken to date . 
This objective is a one-off short-term initiative in the 
first instance , repeatable at intervals ( perhaps every 10 
years or so ) for monitoring purposes . Such monitoring 
might be done on a sample basis rather than with total 
coverage , as a full survey to the level of detailed required 
to measure change over short time periods would be very 
time-consuming . The data would be of interest to a wide 
range of researchers . 
Objective 8 : Investigate the Palisade Ditch 
northwest of Stonehenge 
One of the little-known features of the Stonehenge 
Landscape whose potential importance was highlighted 
in the report on twentieth-century excavations is the 
Palisade Ditch northwest of Stonehenge revealed by 
excavations and perhaps also in geophysical surveys 
( Cleal et al . 1995 , 154–60 )  . The dating , constructional 
details and interpretation of this feature urgently require 
definition . Initially , a single well-placed excavation would 
provide most of the essential data , but tracing the feature 
to determine whether it is a linear boundary or an 
enclosure will require further geophysical survey in the 
area between the present A344 and the Stonehenge 
Cursus together with a series of targeted sample 
excavations to ground-truth the geophysical survey . 
Consideration must also be given to the relationship 
between the palisade ditch and the fieldsystems on 
Stonehenge Down . The implications for the interpretation 
of Stonehenge itself , whether for example this feature is 
an enclosure or a boundary , are very considerable . The 
broad similarity of the Stonehenge Palisade Ditch to the 
boundaries of the West Kennet enclosures near Avebury 
has been noted ( cf . Whittle 1997b )  ; this is an objective 
128 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 129 

that might be pursued in parallel with additional work 
under the research agenda for the Avebury World Heritage 
Site ( AAHRG 2001 , 64 , item 10 )  . 
This objective requires a sustained programme of 
complementary destructive and non-destructive studies 
over perhaps two seasons . Much could be achieved by 
making this objective a research training school involving 
the geophysical survey capabilities of English Heritage and 
the excavation and teaching skills of a contracting unit and 
a university department . Both elements should include 
scope for wider participation and in such a way may be selffunding . The results of this work will potentially have a huge 
impact on the interpretation of Stonehenge and the 
Stonehenge Landscape . High priority . 
Objective 9 : Review of oval barrows and the 
excavation of a selected example 
The range of established and familiar monument classes 
within the Stonehenge Landscape is very considerable , and 
examples of many have been explored in modern times 
illustrating the great diversity that exists even within 
superficially simple classes . One group of monuments that 
has been relatively neglected , however , is the Neolithic long 
barrows . John Thurnam , working with an example on 
Winterbourne Stoke Down northwest of Stonehenge 
( Thurnam 1869 )  , suggested that long barrows as the large 
trapezoidal and rectangular structures might usefully be 
separated from oval barrows which are generally shorter 
and , as the name suggests , oval in plan . During the 
twentieth century the differences between these two groups 
were played down , and instead the class of long barrow was 
seen as all-embracing . Recently , however , excavations in 
Sussex ( Drewett 1986 ) and Oxfordshire ( Bradley 1992 ) have 
reopened the earlier debate and shown that oval barrows do 
seem to exist as a discrete class , and moreover that in 
chronological terms they seem to have been built over most 
of the fourth and third millennia BC and were thus a 
tradition of far longer duration than the more conventional 
long barrow . 
Within the Stonehenge World Heritage Site it is clear 
that Winterbourne Stoke 1 and Amesbury 42 are long 
barrows in the conventional sense , the latter having been 
sampled as part of the Stonehenge Environs Project 
( Richards 1990 , 96–108 )  . Most of the remaining ‘ long 
barrows ’ in the Stonehenge Landscape have been ploughed 
at some stage , and their form , shape and size altered . 
Some are likely to be oval barrows . The whole category 
deserves to be surveyed using topographic and geophysical 
methods and any possible oval barrows identified and 
differentiated from long barrows . The absence of any 
modern investigation of such a class of monument makes 
the excavation of such a site a medium priority , should a 
suitable opportunity arise through development work or 
management needs . 
Overall , this is a two-stage objective , the first of which 
involves surveys and analysis that could be cumulative 
and carried out over several seasons , perhaps as a project 
taken up by an independent research team , or perhaps 
based in a university or local society . Any plans to 
sample-excavate a selected oval barrow would need to 
await the outcome of the initial study and the 
identification of suitable examples . Oval barrows are 
probably the least well-known class of prehistoric barrow 
in the Stonehenge Landscape . 
LANDSCAPE AND 
REGIONAL OBJECTIVES 
Beyond the scale of the monuments there are many other 
kinds of archaeological deposits and structures , some of 
which extend beyond the Stonehenge Landscape into the 
Stonehenge Region and indeed still further into the 
Stonehenge World . 
Objective 10 : Barrow cemetery surveys 
Barrow cemeteries are one of the most conspicuous 
features of the Stonehenge Landscape , and yet very little is 
known about them . None remains intact , and yet none has 
been excavated or surveyed to modern standards . They 
represent a real articulating element that comprises 
numerous monumental built components yet blends in with 
the landscape as a whole around about . Nationally , very few 
barrow cemeteries have been looked at in their entirety . 
Much could be achieved here using non-destructive 
techniques . In the first instance detailed topographic 
surveys and geophysical surveys of the principal barrow 
cemeteries in the Stonehenge Landscape need to be carried 
out as an initiative-based study . A selection of barrow 
cemeteries would also provide a very useful measure of 
change and decay rates in relation to known land-use 
patterns . The extent to which the Stonehenge barrow 
cemeteries are surrounded by peripheral features is a major 
consideration for site management . For presentational 
purposes , consideration might also be given to the way 
barrow cemeteries may have looked when in use . To be 
carried out by a competent body or consortium who would 
seek initiative funding for the work . 
Objective 11 : Create of database of placenames and cartographic data for the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
The need for an up-to-date study of the place-names of the 
area is widely recognized , especially in relation to 
fieldnames and general topographical names ( hills , valleys 
etc .  )  . Such work could usefully be linked to a cartographic 
study that took a holistic view of the mapped information 
from the seventeenth century AD down to the mid-twentieth 
century AD ( Illustration 94 )  . The product could be linked to 
the existing Stonehenge Landscape GIS . 
This objective needs special handling and should be 
undertaken by a small expert team perhaps attached to a 
local library or source of suitable historical documents . 
If public access to the cartographic and related sources is 
given priority this may be an objective to develop into a 
project for National Lottery Funding . 
Objective 12 : Characterize and investigate 
the main fieldsystems within the 
Stonehenge Landscape 
Fieldsystems of one sort or another cover a high 
proportion of the Stonehenge Landscape and are assumed 
to originate during many periods from the Bronze Age 
through to the twentieth century AD . Some provide the 
framework of the modern agricultural landscape . The 
detailed information available from aerial photography 
combined with existing and perhaps future geophysical 
129 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 130 

Illustration 94 
Nineteenth-century Tithe 
Award map ( c . 1840 ) of the 
Stonehenge area .  
[ Reproduced courtesy of 
the Wiltshire County 
Council Library and 
Heritage Service Wiltshire 
Buildings Record .  ] 
surveys , excavations , and fieldwalking provides the 
opportunity for detailed morphological study of the 
fieldsystems both as synchronic monument-like 
phenomena and in the diachronic perspective of changing 
structures and relationships . The degree of reuse and the 
integration of earlier elements into later systems are 
important threads to explore as well . 
Initially this objective is essentially a desk-based 
analysis of existing data , probably using GIS technology for 
mapping and analysis . Some fieldwork and ground-truthing 
will , however , be necessary in order to understand the 
different structures and constructions , and to verify 
relationships and collect samples for dating ( Illustration 95 )  . 
The extensive nature of fieldsystems means that 
opportunities to sample the boundaries will occur during 
development related and management related work and 
these should be seized wherever possible . The longer-term 
analytical work could be carried out by an interested 
researcher or research team and would make an ideal 
project for initiative funding , perhaps as a postgraduate 
research studentship . 
Illustration 95 
Targeted excavations of 
low-relief fieldsystem 
boundaries east of Fargo 
Plantation .  [ Photograph : 
Timothy Darvill . 
Copyright reserved .  ] 
INTEGRATING MONUMENTS 
AND THE LANDSCAPE 
Linking up the archaeological evidence within the Stonehenge 
Landscape itself and with surrounding areas is critically 
important , and is the subject of this fourth group of objectives . 
Objective 13 : Extending the fieldwalking 
data set 
The extensive data set compiled from systematic 
fieldwalking during the Stonehenge Environs Project 
provides a robust foundation for the mapping of activity over 
a wide area through prehistoric and later times . Although 
subject to certain constraints inherent to the sampling 
process used and the visibility or otherwise of sections of 
the archaeological record , this is one of the finest such data 
sets in the country . Some land that was not available for the 
Stonehenge Environs Survey has since become available and 
in some cases has been walked to the same specification as 
the original surveys . Over time further areas will become 
available through the natural succession of land-use change 
in the landscape . Other areas might become available 
through development . Expanding the existing data set to 
comparable standards would greatly enhance and assist 
studies into the social use of space , where people lived at 
130 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 131 

various times , the Anglo-Saxon landscape , and in some 
cases finding the missing slices of time . 
The Stonehenge Environs Project used two different 
collecting grids , the most appropriate for further work being 
the extensive surface survey strategy ( Richards 1990 , 11-12 )  . 
Consideration must also be given to the post-survey 
treatment of the material as thinking and practice in this 
area has naturally developed since the late 1980s . Simplistic 
post-survey treatment will only add further dots to the map 
and confirm things that are already known from the very 
substantial sample . Further work is needed to establish a 
new set of approaches to bring existing data sets into line 
with what is now possible . 
This objective is a long-term one that can be built up 
cumulatively . The key contributors will be curatorial 
archaeologists . Within the development control process any 
land within the Stonehenge Landscape that is identified for 
field evaluation should be fieldwalked to the Stonehenge 
Environs Project specification . In some cases it may be 
reasonable to ask for fields to be ploughed as a one-off for 
this purpose , albeit out of step within prevailing rotational 
arable cycles . Within managed land-use change schemes ( for 
example the extensification of pasture land and the 
balancing of pasture and arable proposed in the Stonehenge 
Management Plan ( English Heritage 2000 , 4 . 4 ) fieldwalking 
could be introduced as a land-use transition activity , 
especially where cultivated ground is likely to be converted 
to long-term pasture . The costs of the work could be covered 
by organizations and individuals making applications for 
land-use change where such work falls under Town and 
Country Planning Regulations . In other cases alternative 
funding will need to be found ; for example as part of the 
landscape topic reports produced for land covered by the 
Countryside Stewardship Scheme ( Carey et al . 2000 , 15–17 )  . 
Objective 14 : Compiling a geophysical map of 
the Stonehenge area 
The landscape around Stonehenge is highly susceptible to 
geophysical survey , especially magnetometry , and has 
consistently yielded good-quality results . Large areas have 
been covered , but mainly as closely targeted blocks relating 
to particular monuments or specific management-related or 
development proposals . This objective suggests a more 
carpet-based approach , taking in large tracts of the available 
landscape around Stonehenge that have hitherto not been 
surveyed and joining these together and with existing survey 
units . A number of issues could be addressed with extensive 
geophysical surveys to hand , and it would usefully 
complement the replotting of aerial photography . Other 
objectives also call for geophysical surveys of one sort or 
another and these could be rolled together . 
This medium-term objective could be achieved by a 
consortium of universities , geophysical survey groups , and 
the English Heritage geophysical survey group at relatively 
modest cost . The data could be amalgamated on the English 
Heritage GIS as well as made available to other related 
projects . This process could be helped by the inclusion of 
geophysical surveys in the specification for all field 
evaluations undertaken within the Stonehenge Landscape . 
Objective 15 : Filling data gaps 
Information about the archaeology of some parts of the 
Stonehenge Landscape is absent or meagre . With notable 
exceptions , much effort has been directed at the 
monuments , with the consequence that the spaces 
between are less well documented ( Illustration 96 )  . 
Sampling the apparent gaps through geophysical survey , 
auger transects , and perhaps test-pitting would allow clear 
insights as to the responsiveness or otherwise of these 
areas to particular techniques ( e . g . aerial photography , 
fieldwalking etc .  )  . In this sense the objective is about 
validating the voids , although to do so will mean applying 
the same approaches to areas with known archaeology in 
order to develop valid comparisons . Additionally , there is a 
need to test assumptions inherent to current 
understandings of the archaeological data based on smallscale work and low-level sampling . 
Attention may also be given to the hidden landscapes in 
the river valleys and beneath colluvium . Any geological 
sections relating to the late Pleistocene and Holocene in 
particular should be checked for buried land surfaces , and 
drift deposits in particular should be sampled for artefacts 
and environmental data . Such data would usefully contribute 
to the identified research themes relating to the Palaeolithic 
and Mesolithic periods in Britain ( Gamble 1999 , 4–5 )  . 
This objective can be fulfilled incrementally by using 
opportunities presented by development control works 
( especially field evaluation programmes ) and routine 
management operations ( e . g . fence replacement etc .  )  . The 
work would be funded by those requiring the operations to 
be carried out . 
Illustration 96 
Linear evaluation trench 
at Larkhill , showing one 
approach to the problem 
of checking apparent voids 
and filling data gaps .  
[ Photograph : Timothy 
Darvill . Copyright reserved .  ] 
Objective 16 : Validating and dating features 
revealed by aerial photography 
The extensive indications of archaeological remains 
throughout the Stonehenge Landscape as a result of 
detailed studies of aerial photographs provide an 
extremely detailed picture ( Illustration 97 )  . Cropmarks and 
other features visible on the photographs do not always 
correspond to archaeological features , however , and these 
need to be verified wherever and whenever possible . 
Likewise , many of the features plotted are undated . While 
some may be attributed to broad cultural-historical phases 
on the basis of plan , morphology , or spatial association , 
there are dangers inherent to the perpetuation of 
traditionally ( and mainly untested ) assumptions . Where 
possible , features recorded through aerial photography 
need to be evaluated and independently dated . 
This medium- to long-term objective can be fulfilled 
incrementally through the close involvement of curatorial 
archaeologists by using opportunities presented by 
131 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 132 

development control works ( especially field evaluation 
programmes )  , mitigation schemes connected to development 
or land-use change , and routine management operations ( e . g . 
fence replacement etc .  )  . In all cases the verification of 
cropmarks as archaeological features and the dating of those 
features where present is the main aim . The work would be 
funded by those requiring the operations to be carried out . 
Illustration 97 
Henge monument on 
Coneybury Hill , Amesbury , 
looking northwest in 1954 . 
The line of the A303 can be 
seen top-right .  
[ Photograph : English 
Heritage . NMR 968 / 169 
©Crown copyright .  ] 
Objective 17 : Understanding recent land-use 
change and Historic Landscape 
Characterization 
The way in which the Stonehenge landscape has changed 
over the last 100 years or so is widely recognized as a 
significant factor in the preservation or otherwise of 
monuments and in large measure determines the pattern of 
survival and decay in the archaeological record as a whole . 
Tracking the land-use history , and especially the history of 
agricultural practices , through map regression , available 
aerial photographs , and perhaps recent remote sensing from 
satellite images would provide an important set of controls 
on understanding the disposition of existing data sets , the 
potential for the collection in due course of new data , and 
the constraints and opportunities for management . In 
interpretative terms , such an exercise would provide real 
insights into why it is that the modern landscape looks the 
way it does . Part of this work would involve the 
characterization of the landscape ( HLC )  , focusing at the subregional level on what it comprises and what makes it 
distinctive . The development of an effective methodology in 
this landscape would have considerable potential for 
application elsewhere in the British Isles and beyond . 
This objective can be pursued as a series of connected 
studies by interested researchers ; the map regression 
studies might be connected with other objectives noted 
above and would link with the national programme of 
Historic Landscape Characterization ( Clark et al . 2004 )  . 
Achieving this objective requires initiative funding . 
RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE 
Research cannot exist in isolation and does not simply 
happen in a magical kind of way ; all research develops off 
the back of or in response to what has already been done . 
For this reason it is important to have a robust 
infrastructure so that researchers can be aware of what has 
been done and is being done , have access to the results and 
data from earlier work , and know where to find the things 
they need . This final group of very important objectives is 
concerned with these matters of infrastructure . 
Objective 18 : Create SARSEN : The Stonehenge 
Archaeological Research , Study and 
Education Network 
Establish an independent Stonehenge Archaeological 
Research , Study and Education Network ( SARSEN ) with 
formal links to the Avebury Archaeological and Historical 
Research Group ( AAHRG ) to co-ordinate and facilitate 
research in the Stonehenge Landscape . Membership would 
simply comprise anyone actively pursuing research in the 
area , convened in the first instance by English Heritage and 
the National Trust but supported in the medium and long 
term by the proposed WHS Co-ordination Unit . This 
objective is closely linked to the development and 
enhancement of the management-related infrastructure , 
especially expanding and periodically updating the 
132 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 133 

interpretation of Stonehenge and its landscape . High 
priority . In due course , SARSEN would become the vehicle 
for the review and revision of this Research Framework . 
Although the overall membership of SARSEN would be 
wide , a small committee would probably be needed to 
review proposals for excavation or intrusive investigation 
within the World Heritage Site . On a wider front , a simple 
membership scheme for anyone carrying out research on 
the Stonehenge Landscape would allow ( through the 
Internet ) access to the Stonehenge GIS , bibliography , and 
updated index of research . 
Objective 19 : Establish a Stonehenge 
Research Centre 
Set up a Stonehenge Landscape Research facility at the 
proposed new visitor centre to form a physical focus for 
ongoing research programmes and the dissemination of 
information and research results to land managers , the 
general public , and the archaeological community 
( Illustration 98 )  . There may be scope to link the use of this 
centre with work in both the Avebury and Stonehenge 
sectors of the World Heritage Site . It could be built and 
supported by the visitor centre operators , and run by 
SARSEN in the context of ongoing long-term site 
management . This objective is directly linked to the issues 
of co-ordination and interpretation . 
The proposed centre would not be a venue for the 
display of finds or collections currently held by existing 
museums in the region , although material from new 
investigations might be displayed on a temporary basis 
before being deposited with an established museum for 
long-term curation . The focus of the centre would be very 
much orientated towards ongoing research and as such it 
would be a ‘ shop-window ’ for research , office 
accommodation and meeting space for SARSEN , and an 
operational base for those carrying out research in the area . 
Illustration 98 
Researcher visiting 
Stonehenge in the early 
eighteenth century .  [ From 
Stukeley 1740 , Tab XIX .  ] 
Objective 20 : Publish outstanding 
investigations in the Stonehenge Landscape 
The publication in 1995 of the twentieth-century excavations 
at Stonehenge and its immediate landscape illustrates very 
well the value of such collective reports on scattered 
investigations and survey events . Looking rather wider , a 
similar exercise would be highly desirable to bring to 
publication any remaining investigations from the twentieth 
century outside the immediate environs of Stonehenge and 
to present the results of the very considerable programme 
of field evaluations carried out in connection with the 
selection and development of plans for the Stonehenge 
Visitor Centre Site and the early stages of implementing the 
Stonehenge Master Plan , the removal of existing visitor 
centre facilities , and the rerouting of roads . Most of these 
form part of the ‘ grey literature ’ of archaeological 
endeavour , although they have been listed and summarized 
up to 1996 ( Darvill 1997b ) and copies are available in the 
library of the Society of Antiquaries of London . An analysis 
of the Excavations Index records for the Stonehenge 
Landscape would reveal other known fieldwork events that 
have not yet been written up and placed in the public 
domain through publication . Part at least of this objective 
could be met using a combination of conventional 
publication and the Internet . 
The objective could be pursued and funded by 
English Heritage , perhaps in partnership with other 
interested parties . 
Objective 21 : Prepare and publish a 
Stonehenge Landscape Research Handbook 
Interest in using the Stonehenge landscape , and 
monuments within it , as case studies and exempla within a 
wide range of research contexts runs high . The last 
consolidated bibliography of Stonehenge publications was 
published in 1902 ( Harrison 1902 ) and while there have 
been a number of smaller-scale endeavours ( e . g . Hatchwell 
1969 ) and some extremely useful lists of references in 
recent major publications a consolidated reference list 
remains problematic . A printed and web-based research 
handbook covering material produced since 1945 together 
with listings of the major museum collections , archives , and 
collections of photographs and illustrations would be a 
considerable help to a very wide range of researchers . The 
web-based version could include links to electronic 
publications and might include a sample of illustrations of 
Stonehenge . Especially important is the inclusion of limited 
circulation reports and outputs disseminated in less 
accessible sources or media . In due course it may be 
possible to make the texts of existing conventionally 
published texts available on-line too . This work requires a 
consortium of interested parties , perhaps involving 
museums and university departments , and will require 
initiative funding . 
Objective 22 : Compile a corpus of material 
culture from the Stonehenge Landscape 
Existing record systems for the Stonehenge Landscape 
naturally focus on sites and monuments as the essential unit 
133 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 134 

of record because of their role in the curatorial and 
management process . Although finds and connected 
archives are recorded in some cases , treatment is far from 
exhaustive , and individual finds and their contexts are not 
routinely recorded . Finds from the Stonehenge Landscape 
are distributed between several museums , and while there 
are exceptionally good illustrated catalogues available for 
some sectors of the collections ( e . g . Annable and Simpson 
1964 )  , coverage to date is partial . Good progress has been 
made assembling inventories of finds from barrow 
excavations in the area ( see above )  , but there is a larger 
body of artefacts and environmental materials than this 
which deserve listings with appropriate drawings and 
archive / storage information . One important body of data is 
the prehistoric metalwork from the area . Such a catalogue 
would fill a data gap ( see Objective 15 ) and assist with the 
dating of monuments containing metalwork ( cf . Objective 2 )  , 
while identifying what classes of metalwork were present or 
absent ( tools , weapons , ornaments etc .  ) could help explain 
occupation patterns ( cf . Issue 4 / Objective 4 )  . Another task 
would be to document the increasingly important source of 
information represented by the stray finds made by metaldetector users , many of which help to populate the Roman 
and later record of activity . The potential benefits of even a 
basic inventory with identifications are considerable , and 
impact on many issues . There are three stages to the 
development of the corpus : an inventory that is essentially a 
list of what there is , where it comes from , and where it is 
now . Beyond this a detailed illustrated catalogue would 
benefit from specialist input to the description and analysis 
of particular bodies of material ( which might include the 
results of selected analyses and technical studies )  . Further 
down the road still is the full corpus which cross-relates the 
catalogue to contextual material relating to the discovery 
and subsequent history of the material and its treatment . It 
would include copies of the relevant archival sources and 
may be delivered wholly or mainly on-line . 
This objective is a long-term task t
involvement of numerous specialists a
staged , progression to each successiv
the results of previous work . Getting a
the immediate priority , perhaps to be l
of the Stonehenge Research facility di
Objective 23 : Compile a corpus of human 
remains from the Stonehenge Landscape 
hat will require the 
nd experts . Being 
e level can be based on 
n inventory is therefore 
inked with the creation 
scussed above . 
The Stonehenge Landscape has yielded remains from a 
large number of human beings , many recovered through the 
excavation of round barrows and burial monuments 
( Illustration 99 )  . There is no detailed list of what has been 
found , what exists , where it is , and what it is . Although 
many antiquarians arranged for anthropological studies of 
the remains they found , the descriptions were often ad hoc 
and could not benefit from modern methods of study and 
standardized reporting . In addition to locating and 
documenting human skeletal material and cremated 
remains a preliminary examination and recording should be 
carried out by a suitably qualified physical anthropologist / 
forensic archaeologist . A standardized recording system 
should be applied . The listing should include records of 
skeletal material uncovered by excavation and subsequently 
reburied on the site . A later stage of the work might include 
the selective recovery of a sample of this material for 
analysis and dating . 
This objective is a medium-term project that will involve 
trawling museums , SMRs , published sources , and 
anatomical collections regularly used by antiquarian 
investigators and their advisors . It will involve a multidisciplinary team of researchers . 
Illustration 99 
Reconstruction of the 
Beaker burial found in 
Shrewton 5k .  [ Photograph : 
Salisbury and South 
Wiltshire Museum . 
Copyright reserved .  ] 
Objective 24 : Develop enhanced mapping and 
visualization programmes for archaeological 
data sets 
Archaeological data sets are complicated and both 
methodologically and theoretically tied to the collection 
procedures used to acquire them . Hitherto many data have 
been viewed as unproblematic ,  ‘ actual ’ and perfectly well 
provided for in normatively constituted input and retrieval 
systems such as GIS . These approaches and their associated 
technologies will probably not satisfy future needs . This 
objective focuses on the experimental development of new 
approaches . Developed with reference to the Stonehenge 
Landscape , they are equally likely to have utility and 
application elsewhere . The aim is to further develop software 
and hardware to provide an enhanced reality environment for 
data capture and display . It is already apparent that future 
research and public display will require a more personalized 
immersive experience . In some cases these will be wearable 
and could be taken into the field . Such a system would 
combine data on the real world ( e . g . aerial photographs , 
astronomic data etc .  ) with visualizations of transformed 
archaeological data ( e . g . geophysical data or artefact 
concentrations etc .  ) and archaeological interpretations ( e . g . 
reconstructions )  . GPS referenced , seamlessly overlain , the 
hardware tools should allow real-time movement through 
both worlds simultaneously ( Illustration 100 )  . 
134 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 135 

Illustration 100 
Immersive technology 
providing simultaneous 
access to virtual worlds . 
Seeing things differently . 
Three views of the same 
place . Beacon Hill from 
Woodhenge .  [ From Exon 
et al . 2000 , reproduced 
courtesy of Vince Gaffney 
and the Institute of 
Archaeology and Antiquity , 
Birmingham University .  ] 
135 
135-150 section 4 . qxd 6 / 21 / 05 4 : 29 PM Page 136 

This objective requires the involvement of researchers 
working in the field of immersive and integrative computing , 
probably a collaborative team working in a university 
department . Initiative funding will be required . Medium to 
long term . 
Objective 25 : Create a social history 
archive of the twentieth-century excavations 
at Stonehenge 
The human side to the twentieth-century excavations at 
Stonehenge has rarely been approached , but in large part is 
still within reach . Key sources will be interviews with living 
archaeologists who have excavated at Stonehenge in any 
capacity ; private and public photographic and cine-film 
collections ; television and radio archives ; testimonies from 
friends and colleagues who have worked with previous 
excavators of the site , custodians and site staff , and 
perhaps visitors and local people who remember the work 
taking place . 
This objective requires the involvement of researchers 
experienced in collecting social history material and with 
access to means for copying and storing a variety of sourcetypes . Ideally , all source material will be transferred to 
digital media for ongoing curation and dissemination . 
Initiative funding will be required . Short to medium term . 