Artist uses AI to create stunning realistic portraits of historical figures
Is this artificial intelligence or a time machine ? 

Bas Uterwijk , an Amsterdam-based artist , is using AI to create extremely lifelike photographs of historical figures and monuments such as the Statue of Liberty , artist Vincent van Gogh , George Washington and Queen Elizabeth I . 

Using a program called Artbreeder , which is described as “ deep learning software ,  ” Uterwijk builds his photographs based on a compilation of portraits , reports the Daily Mail . The program pinpoints common facial features and photograph qualities to produce an image .  
 
 “ I try to guide the software to a credible outcome . I think of my work more as artistic interpretations than scientifically or historically accurate ,  ” the artist tells the outlet . On Instagram , he details the many variations that go into creating his work . 

So far , he ’ s created more than 50 of these images . 

Vincent van Gogh ( French , 1853–1890 )  , Self-Portrait , 1889 . An AI recreation by Bas Uterwijk . 
Vincent van Gogh ( left )  ,  “ Self-Portrait ,  ” 1889 , and an AI re-creation by Bas Uterwijk . 
Getty Images / Bas Uterwijk
It ’ s not all technology :  “ The software tends to drift to averages easily because of its nature , so for that last one , I sometimes need some extra tricks and methods to get what I want ,  ” Uterwijk says . His portraits need to stay true to the original person and what they looked like and also have expressions worth looking at . 


Some of his creations feature real people , such as Napoleon Bonaparte and Niccolò Machiavelli . Others are of important but made-up characters , such as Lady Liberty and the Girl with the Pearl Earring , a figure from a famous Johannes Vermeer painting . 

PREVIOUS
1
of
3
NEXT
A 1790 portrait of George Washington ( left ) with Bas Uterwijk ' s AI recreation . 
A 1790 portrait of George Washington ( left ) with Bas Uterwijk ' s AI re-creation . 
Getty Images / Bas Uterwijk
Jacques-Louis David ' s 1812 portrait of Napoleon Bonaparte ( left ) with Bas Uterwijk ' s AI recreation . 
Jacques-Louis David ' s 1812 portrait of Napoleon Bonaparte ( left ) with Bas Uterwijk ' s AI re-creation . 
Getty Images / Bas Uterwijk
Nicholas Hilliard ' s 1575 portrait of Queen Elizabeth 1 ( left ) with Bas Uterwijk ' s AI recreation . 
Nicholas Hilliard ' s 1575 portrait of Queen Elizabeth 1 ( left ) with Bas Uterwijk ' s AI re-creation . 
Getty Images / Bas Uterwijk 
 “ I work on many images at the same time , sometimes leaving them for weeks to pick them up later when I have new inspiration or have stumbled on additional source material ,  ” says Uterwijk . 

His next work of art will be a photograph of Anne Frank :  “ There are several known photographs of her — so I might make her older , at an age she never reached .  ” 