Preface 
In a letter to Thomas Manning in 1810 , Charles Lamb wrote :  ‘ Nothing puzzles me more
than time and space ; and yet nothing troubles me less , as I never think about them .  ’ All of
us working in the field of Quaternary science would , I suspect , tend to agree with the first
part of this statement but take issue over the second . I for one have always been fascinated
by time and , in particular , by the way in which we are able to assign ages to events in the
distant past . My family and friends have been amused and intrigued in equal measure by
me talking , with apparent confidence and authority , about the earth being formed 4 . 5 billion
years ago , or the present warm period within which we live lasting 11 500 yrs .  ‘ But how
can you be so sure ?  ’ is the usual question . One of my aims in writing this book is to show
them that there are indeed ways in which we can date the past and , moreover , that we can
do so with an ever-increasing sense of assurance . My principal purpose , however , is to
describe the various dating techniques that are routinely employed in Quaternary science
in a way that is comprehensible to both undergraduate students and interested lay-people
alike . I have therefore tried to avoid using mathematical formulae , although in the first
chapter I felt it necessary to cover some of the basics of chemistry in order to provide the
groundwork for what comes later . I have also orientated the book towards the practical
aspects of dating by basing it around specific examples . Hopefully , this approach will
appeal to students and others with a non-scientific background but , at the same time , will
not appear to those who are fortunate in possessing a stronger scientific pedigree to be
 ‘ dumbing down ’  . Above all , however , my aim is to encourage readers ( unlike Charles
Lamb ) to think a little more about the past and to recognise the importance of being able
to frame the momentous events of recent earth and human history within a reasonably
secure temporal framework . 
Throughout the book I have drawn on a previous volume that I wrote with John Lowe 
( Reconstructing Quaternary Environments , 1997 , Addison-Wesley-Longman , London )  . 
I make no apologies for this because I know that book has been , and continues to be , 
widely used at undergraduate and postgraduate levels in both Britain and abroad . I hope
that this new book on Quaternary Dating Methods will find an equally wide readership . 
John and I are about to embark on the third edition of Reconstructing Quaternary Environments ( due 2006 )  , and during the course of preparing that revision , I hope I will be
able to reciprocate and that some of the material contained in the following pages will
find its way into Lowe and Walker Mark III . The text also includes a large number of
references . Some might find that this disrupts the flow of the narrative , but I felt that it
fpref . fm Page xv Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

xvi Preface
was important not only to acknowledge the sources of material upon which I have drawn
but , equally importantly , to point the reader in the direction of this work so that those who
might be interested in taking matters further will be able to do so . 
It is customary in a Preface to express thanks to those who have assisted either directly
or indirectly in the production of the book , and I do not intend to depart from that
practice . Over the last 15 years or so , I have enjoyed the national and international collaboration , and friendship , of many colleagues , first through the North Atlantic Seaboard
Programme of IGCP-253 , and more recently through the INTIMATE ( Integration of
ice-core , marine and terrestrial records ) Programme of INQUA ( International Quaternary
Union )  . I am particularly appreciative of the time that I have spent at a number of different meetings with , amongst others , Hilary Birks , Sjoerd Bohncke , Svante Björck , Russell
Coope , Les Cwynar , Irka Hajdas , Jan Heinemeir , Wim Hoek , Konrad Hughen , Sigfus
Johnsen , Karen-Luise Knudsen , Nalan Koç , Thomas Litt , Jørgen Peder Steffensen , Chris
Turney , Bas van Geel and Barbara Wohlfarth . My work with the Natural Environmental
Research Council , formerly as a member and subsequently as chairman of the NERC
Radiocarbon Facilities Committee , and latterly as chairman of the NERC AMS ( Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry ) Strategy Group , has brought me into contact with colleagues at the
East Kilbride and Oxford Radiocarbon Dating Laboratories , notably Chris Bronk-Ramsay , 
Charlotte Bryant , Doug Harkness , Robert Hedges and Tony Fallick , whose company
I have enjoyed and from whom I have learned a great deal . I should also like to thank Lin
Kay and Chris Franklin at NERC for supporting me in my role as Committee Chairman . 
Finally , I am grateful to my colleagues in the Department of Archaeology and Anthropology , 
University of Wales , Lampeter , especially David Austin and John Crowther , for providing
such a congenial working environment over the past four years , and to the university
itself for allowing me a period of study leave during which much of the first draft of the
book was completed . 
In writing this book , I have constantly been aware of the fact that I am approaching the
material as a member of the user community . I am not an expert in the technical aspects
of dating , and hence I have prevailed upon colleagues who know far more about these
matters than I ever will to read what I have written and to show me where I have gone
wrong . I am deeply indebted to Tim Atkinson , Simon Blockley , Charlotte Bryant , Tony
Fallick , Rob Kemp , Olav Lian , Danny McCarroll , James Scourse , Mike Summerfield , 
Chris Turney and John Westgate for their careful scrutiny and constructive critical
appraisal of various sections of the text ; I simply could not have completed this book
without their assistance . It goes without saying , however , that any remaining errors are
my own . Several friends and colleagues have provided me with photographs , for which I
am most grateful , and Phil Gibbard and Richard Preece helped considerably in the compilation of Figure 1 . 4 . I should also like to thank Sally Wilkinson , Keily Larkins , Lynette James
and the staff in the production department of John Wiley . Last , and by no means least , 
I would like to express my gratitude to my wife , Gro-Mette , who has not only been a constant source of encouragement , but who has also read the draft text from cover to cover , 
and has provided many valuable inputs along the way . 
One name is missing from the above list . As colleagues within the Quaternary
community will know , for more than 30 years I have worked in collaboration with John
Lowe . We first met as postgraduate students in the University of Edinburgh and since
then we have produced more than 50 joint publications . I have no doubt whatsoever that
fpref . fm Page xvi Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

Preface xvii
John could have written this book and , I suspect , he might well have made a better fist of
it . Nevertheless , I hope he will find some of the material in the following pages of interest
and that he will enjoy reading it . Not only have John and I been close academic
colleagues , but we have also remained firm friends , and in acknowledgement of this
I would like to dedicate the book to him . 
Mike Walker
October , 2004
fpref . fm Page xvii Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

fpref . fm Page xviii Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
1 
Dating Methods and the Quaternary 
Whatever withdraws us from the power of our senses ; whatever makes the past , the distant or
the future , predominate over the present , advances us in the dignity of thinking beings . 
Samuel Johnson
1 . 1 Introduction 
The Quaternary is the most recent period of the geological record . Spanning the last
2 . 5 million years or so of geological time1 
and including the Pleistocene and Holocene
epochs , 2 
it is often considered to be synonymous with the ‘ Ice Age ’  . Indeed , for much of
the Quaternary , the earth ’ s land surface has been covered by greatly expanded ice sheets
and glaciers , and temperatures during these glacial periods were significantly lower than
those of the present . But the Quaternary has also seen episodes , albeit much shorter in
duration , of markedly warmer conditions , and in these interglacials the temperatures in
the mid- and high-latitude regions may have exceeded those of the present day . Indeed , rather
than being a period of unremitting cold , the hallmark of the Quaternary is the repeated
oscillation of the earth ’ s global climate system between glacial and interglacial states . 
Establishing the timing of these climatic changes , and of their effects on the earth ’ s
environment , is a key element in Quaternary research . Whether it is to date a particular
climatic episode , to estimate the rate of operation of past geological or geomorphological
processes , or to determine the age of an artefact or cultural assemblage , we need to be
able to establish a chronology of events . The aim of this book is to describe , evaluate
and exemplify the different dating techniques that are applicable within the field of
c01 . fm Page 1 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

2 Quaternary Dating Methods
Quaternary science . It is not , however , a dating manual . Rather , it is a book that is written
from the perspective of the user community as opposed to that of the laboratory expert . 
It is , above all , a book that lays emphasis on the practical side of Quaternary dating , for
the principal focus is on examples or case studies . To paraphrase the words of the actor
John Cleese , it is intended to show just what Quaternary dating can do for us ! 
In this chapter , we examine the development of ideas relating to geological time and , in
particular , to Quaternary dating . We then move on to consider the ways in which the
quality of a date can be evaluated , and to discuss some basic principles of radioactive
decay as these apply to Quaternary dating . Finally , we return to the Quaternary with a
brief overview of the Quaternary stratigraphic record , and of Quaternary nomenclature
and terminology . These sections provide important background information , and both a
chronological and stratigraphic context for the remainder of the book . 
1 . 2 The Development of Quaternary Dating 
Early approaches to dating the past were closely associated with attempts to establish the
age of the earth . Some of the oldest writings on this topic are to be found in the classical
literature where the leitmotif of much of the Greek writings is the concept of an infinite
time , equivalent in many ways to modern day requirements for steady-state theories of
the universe ( Tinkler , 1985 )  . This position contrasts markedly with that in post-Renaissance
Europe where biblical thinking placed the creation of the world around 6000 years ago , 
and when the end of the universe was predicted within a few hundred years . This restricted
chronology for earth history derives from the biblical researches of James Ussher , 
Archbishop of Armagh , who in 1654 published his considered conclusion , based on
Old Testament genealogical sources , that the earth was created on Sunday 23 October
4004 BC , with ‘ man and other living creatures ’ appearing on the following Friday . Another
momentous event in the Old Testament , the ‘ great flood ’  , occurred 1656 years after the
creation , between 2349 and 2348 BC . 
In his magisterial review of the history of earth science , Davies ( 1969 ) has observed
that although modern researchers have tended to scoff at Ussher ’ s chronology he was , in
fact , no fanatical fundamentalist but rather a brilliant and highly respected scholar of his
day . It is perhaps for this reason that his chronology had such a pervasive influence on
scientific thought , although it is perhaps less clear to modern geologists why it still forms
a cornerstone of contemporary creationist ‘ science ’  ! During the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries , however , with the development of uniformitarianist thinking in geology , 3 
the
pendulum began to swing once more towards longer timescales for the formation of the
earth and for the longevity of operation of geological processes , a view encapsulated by
James Hutton ’ s famous observation in his Theory of the Earth ( 1788 ) that ‘  .  .  . we find no
vestige of a beginning , no prospect of an end ’  . 
The difficulty was , of course , that pre-twentieth-century scientists had no bases for
determining the passage of geological time . One of the earliest attempts to tackle the
problem was William McClay ’ s work in 1790 on the retreat of the Niagara Falls escarpment , 
which led him to propose an age of 55 440 years for the earth ( Tinkler , 1985 )  . Others tried
a different tack . The nineteenth-century scientist John Joly , for example , calculated the
c01 . fm Page 2 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Dating Methods and the Quaternary 3
quantity of sodium salt in the world ’ s oceans , as well as the amount added every year
from rock erosion , and arrived at a figure of 100 million years for the age of the earth . 
Increasingly , however , came an awareness that even this extended time frame was simply
not long enough to account for the entire history of the earth and , moreover , for organic
evolution , a view that was underscored by the publication of Darwin ’ s seminal work Origin
of Species in 1859 . Further challenges to the Ussher timescale and to its successors came from
the field of archaeology , with noted antiquarians such as John Evans ( and his geological
colleague Joseph Prestwich ) arguing , on the basis of finds of ancient handaxes , for a
protracted period of human occupation extending into a period of antiquity ‘  .  .  .  . remote
beyond any of which we have hitherto found traces ’  ( Renfrew , 1973 )  . 
It was into this atmosphere of chronological uncertainty that Louis Agassiz introduced
his revolutionary idea of a ‘ Great Ice Period ’  , which arguably marks the birth of modern
Quaternary science . This notion , first propounded in 1837 , was initially received with a
degree of scepticism by the geological establishment , but the idea not only of a single
glaciation but , indeed , of multiple glaciations rapidly gained ground . By the beginning of
the twentieth century , most geologists were subscribing to the view that four major glacial
episodes had affected the landscapes of both Europe and North America , although the basis
for dating these events remained uncertain . An early attempt at establishing a glacial–
interglacial chronology was made by the German geologist Albrecht Penck , using the
depth of weathering and ‘ intensity of erosion ’ in the northern Alpine region of Europe to
estimate the duration of interglacial periods . On this basis , an age of 60 000 years was
assigned to the Last Interglacial and 240 000 years to the Penultimate Interglacial , the
duration of the Quaternary being estimated at 600 000 years ( Penck and Bruckner , 1909 )  . 
An alternative approach using the astronomical timescale based on observed variations in
the earth ’ s orbit and axis4 
again arrived at a similar figure , although if older glaciations
recorded in the Alpine region were included , the time span of the Quaternary was extended
to around 1 million years ( Zeuner , 1959 )  . This figure has since been widely quoted and , for
the first half of the twentieth century at least , was generally regarded as the best estimate
of age for the Quaternary . 
At about the time that the Quaternary glacial chronology was being worked out for the
European Alps , the first attempts were being made to develop a timescale for the last
deglaciation , using laminated or layered sediment sequences which were interpreted as
reflecting annual sedimentation cycles . These are known as varves , and are still employed
as a basis for Quaternary chronology at the present day ( section 5 . 3 )  . Some of the earliest
studies were made on the sediments in Swiss lakes and produced estimates of between
16 000 and 20 000 years since the last glacial maximum ( Zeuner , 1959 )  , results that are
not markedly different from those derived from more recent dating programmes . The
seminal work on varved sequences , however , was carried out in Scandinavia where Gerard
de Geer ( Figure 1 . 1 ) developed the world ’ s first high-resolution deglacial chronology in
relation to the wasting Fennoscandian ice sheet ( section 5 . 3 . 3 . 1 )  . This approach was
subsequently applied in North America to date glacial retreat along parts of the southern
margin of the last ( Laurentide ) ice sheet ( Antevs , 1931 )  . 
The early years of the twentieth century saw the development of another dating technique
which is still widely used in Quaternary science , namely dendrochronology or tree-ring
dating ( section 5 . 2 )  . Research on tree rings has a long history , and the relationship
between tree rings and climate ( a field of study known as dendroclimatology ) has
c01 . fm Page 3 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

4 Quaternary Dating Methods
intrigued scientists since the Middle Ages . Indeed , some of the earliest writings on this
subject can be found in the papers of Leonardo da Vinci ( Stallings , 1937 )  . The basics of
modern dendrochronology , however , were formulated by the American astronomer
Andrew Douglass , who was the first to link simple dendrochronological principles to
historical research and to climatology ( Schweingruber , 1988 )  . Together with Edmund
Schulmann , he founded the world-famous Laboratory for Tree-Ring Research at the
University of Arizona in 1937 . In Europe , it was not until the end of the 1930s that
dendrochronology began to gain a foothold , largely through the work of the German
Figure 1 . 1 Gerard de Geer measuring varves at Beckomberga , Stockholm , in 1931 . Varve
chronology was the first dating technique to provide a realistic estimate of Quaternary time 
( photo : Ebba Hult de Geer , courtesy of Lars Brunnberg and Stefan Wastegård ) 
c01 . fm Page 4 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Dating Methods and the Quaternary 5
botanist , Bruno Huber . His research laid the foundation for the modern school of German
dendrochronology which has remained at the forefront of tree-ring research in Europe to
the present day . 
The most significant advance in Quaternary chronology , however , came during and
immediately after the Second World War , with the discovery that the decay of certain
radioactive elements could form a basis for dating . Although measurements had been
made more than 30 years earlier on radioactive minerals of supposedly Pleistocene age 
( Holmes , 1915 )  , it was the pioneering work of Willard Libby and his colleagues that led
to the development of radiocarbon dating , and to the establishment of the world ’ s first
radiocarbon dating laboratory at the University of Chicago in 1948 . During the 1950s and
1960s , other radiometric methods were developed that built on technological advances 
( increasingly sophisticated instrumentation ) and an increasing understanding of the nuclear
decay process . These included uranium-series and potassium–argon dating ( Chapter 3 )  , 
while a growing appreciation of the effects on minerals and other materials of exposure to
radiation led to the development of another family of techniques which includes thermoluminescence , fission track and electron spin resonance dating ( Chapter 4 )  . In the late
1960s and 1970s , advances in molecular biology enabled post-mortem changes in protein
structures to be used as a basis for dating ( amino acid geochronology )  , while remarkable
developments in coring technology led to the recovery of long-core sequences from ocean
sediments and from polar ice sheets , out of which came the first marine and ice-core
chronologies . The last two decades of the twentieth century have been characterised by
a series of technological innovations that led not only to a further expansion in the range
of Quaternary dating techniques , but also to significant improvements in analytical
precision . A major advance was the development of accelerator mass spectrometry 
( AMS )  , which not only revolutionised radiocarbon dating ( Chapter 2 )  , but also made
possible the technique of cosmogenic nuclide dating ( section 3 . 4 )  . The last decade has
also witnessed the creation of the high-resolution chronologies from the GRIP and GISP2
Greenland ice cores , and from the Vostok and EPICA cores in Antarctica ( section 5 . 5 )  . 
These various developments and innovations mean that Quaternary scientists now have
at their disposal a portfolio of dating methods that could not have been dreamed of only a
generation ago , and which are capable of dating events on timescales ranging from single
years to millions of years . The year 2004 sees the 350th anniversary of the publication of
the second edition of Ussher ’ s ground-breaking volume on the age of the earth . How he
would have reconciled the recent advances in Quaternary dating technology with his
6000-year estimate for the age of the earth is difficult to imagine ! 
1 . 3 Precision and Accuracy in Dating 
Before going further , it is important to say something about how we can judge the quality
of an age determination . Two principal criteria reflect the quality of a date , namely
accuracy and precision , and these apply not only to dates on Quaternary events , but to
all age determinations made within the earth , environmental and archaeological sciences . 
For dating practitioners and for interpreting dates , it is important to understand the
meaning and significance of these terms . Accuracy refers to the degree of correspondence
c01 . fm Page 5 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

6 Quaternary Dating Methods
between the true age of a sample and that obtained by the dating process . In other
words , it refers to the degree of bias in an age measurement . Precision relates to the
statistical uncertainty that is associated with any physical or chemical analysis that is
used as a basis for determining age . As we shall see , all dating methods have their own
distinctive set of problems , and hence each age measurement will have an element of
uncertainty associated with it . These uncertainties tend to be expressed in statistical
terms and provide us with an indication of the level of precision of each age determination 
( Chapter 2 )  . 
An example of the distinction between accuracy and precision in the context of a dated
sequence is shown in Figure 1 . 2 . In sample A , there is close agreement in terms of
mean age between the four dated samples , and the standard errors ( indicated by the
range bars ) are small ; however , the dates are 2000–2500 years younger than the ‘ true
age ’  . These dates are therefore precise , but inaccurate . In sample B , the reverse obtains ; 
the dates cluster around the true age but have wide error bars . Hence they are accurate
but imprecise . In sample C , however , the dates are of similar age and have narrow error
bars . These age determinations are both accurate and precise , which is the optimal
situation in dating . 





 


C . Accurate 
and 
precise
A . Precise 
but 
inaccurate
B . Accurate 
but 
imprecise
5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 Years B . P .  
 ' True ' 
age of
sample
Figure 1 . 2 Accuracy and precision in a dated sequence ( modified after Lowe and Walker , 
1997 )  ; see text for details 
c01 . fm Page 6 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Dating Methods and the Quaternary 7
1 . 4 Atomic Structure , Radioactivity and Radiometric Dating 
Radiometric dating methods form a significant component of the Quaternary scientist ’ s
dating portfolio . Indeed , half of the chapters in this book that deal specifically with dating
methods are concerned with radiometric dating . All radiometric techniques are based on
the fact that certain naturally occurring elements are unstable and undergo spontaneous
changes in their structure and organisation in order to achieve more stable atomic forms . 
This process , known as radioactive decay , is time-dependent , and if the rate of decay
for a given element can be determined , then the ages of the host rocks and fossils can be
established . 
In order to understand the basics of radiometric dating , it is necessary to know something
about atomic structure and the radioactive process . Matter is composed of minute particles
known as atoms , the nuclei of which contain positively charged particles ( protons )  , and
particles with no electrical charge ( neutrons )  , which together make up most of the mass
of an atom . Third elements are electrons , which are tiny particles of negative charge and
negligible mass that spin around the nucleus . Collectively , protons , neutrons and electrons
are referred to as elementary or sub-atomic particles , and for many years were considered
to be the fundamental building blocks of matter . With the development of large particle
accelerators however , machines that are capable of accelerating samples to such high
speeds that matter breaks down into its constituent parts , dozens of new sub-atomic particles have been discovered and current research suggests that atomic matter is made up of
elementary particles from two families , quarks and leptons . Our understanding of
electrons ( which are members of the lepton family of particles ) and their behaviour has
also changed . At one time it was believed that electrons orbited the nucleus in shells 
( or orbitals )  , similar to the way in which the planets orbit the sun , and that in each of these
orbits they had certain energy . However , the situation now appears to be more complex , 
as modern physics has shown that it is not possible to determine both the location and
the velocity of a sub-atomic particle . 5 
More recent work on atomic structure therefore
envisages electrons with a particular energy existing in volumes of space around the
nucleus , even though their exact location cannot be established . These volumes are
known as atomic orbitals . The build-up of electrons in atomic orbitals allows scientists
to explain many of the physical and chemical properties of elements , and lies at the heart
of our modern understanding of chemistry . 
When an atom gains or loses electrons , it acquires a net electrical charge , and such
atoms are known as ions . The electrical charge can be positive or negative ; a positive ion
is referred to as a cation and a negative ion as an anion . The nature of the electrical
charge is based on the number of protons minus the number of electrons , and is often
referred to as the valence . Hence , an element with eight protons and eight electrons has
a net electrical charge of 0 . If it gains two electrons , it has a negative electrical charge 
( valence = 2− 
) and it becomes an anion . If it loses two electrons , it develops a positive
charge ( valence = 2 +  
) and becomes a cation . Ionisation , which is the process whereby
electrons are removed ( usually ) or added ( occasionally ) to atoms , is an important element
in radiation ( see below )  . 
The atoms of each chemical element have a specific atomic number and atomic mass
number . The former refers to the number of protons contained in the nucleus of an atom , 
while the latter is the number of protons plus neutrons . In other words , the mass number
c01 . fm Page 7 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

8 Quaternary Dating Methods
is the total number of particles ( nucleons ) in the nucleus . The atomic number is usually
written in subscript on the left-hand side of the symbol for the chemical element 
( e . g . oxygen – 8O ; uranium – 92U )  , while the atomic mass number is shown in superscript 
( e . g . 16O ; 238U )  . In some elements , although the number of protons in the nucleus remains
the same , the number of neutrons may vary . Elements that possess the same number of
protons but different numbers of neutrons are referred to as isotopes . The number of
electrons is constant for isotopes of each element , and hence they have the same chemical
properties , but the isotopes differ in mass , and this will be reflected in change in the
atomic mass number . Examples include carbon ( 12C , 13C , 14C ) and oxygen ( 16O , 17O , 18O )  . 
Individual isotopes of an element are referred to as nuclides . Most of these are stable ; in
other words the binding forces created by the electrical charges are sufficient to keep the
atomic particles together . In some cases , however , where there are too many or too few
neutrons in the nucleus , for example , the nuclides are unstable and this results in a spontaneous emission of particles or energy to achieve a stable state . This is the process of radiation 
( or radioactive ‘ decay ’  )  , and such isotopes are known as radioactive nuclides . 
Unstable nuclei can rid themselves of excess energy in a variety of ways , but the three
most common forms are alpha , beta and gamma decay . In alpha ( α ) decay , a nucleus
emits an alpha particle consisting of two protons and two neutrons , which is a nucleus of
helium . Nuclides that emit alpha particles lose both mass and positive charge . The atomic
mass number changes to reflect this , and the result is that one chemical element can be
created by the decay of others . In beta ( β ) decay , a different kind of particle is ejected –
an electron . The emission of a negatively charged electron does not alter mass , hence
there is no change in atomic mass number . There is , however , a change in atomic number
because the reason for the ejection of the electron is that as the nucleus decays , a neutron
transmutes into a proton , and the nucleus must rid itself of some energy and increase its
electrical charge . The emission of an electron , with its negative charge and small amount
of excess energy , enables this to be achieved . The third common form of radioactivity is
gamma ( γ ) decay . Here , the nucleus does not emit a particle , but rather a highly energetic
form of electromagnetic radiation . Gamma radiation does not change the number of
protons and neutrons in the nucleus , but it does reduce the energy of the nucleus . Gamma
rays are not important in most forms of radiometric dating ( with the exception of some
short-lived isotopes : Chapter 3 )  , but they do contribute to the build-up of luminescent
properties in minerals ( Chapter 4 )  . In addition , the cosmic rays from deep space that
constantly bombard the earth ’ s upper atmosphere , and which initiate the chemical reaction
that leads to the formation of radiocarbon ( Chapter 2 ) and other cosmogenic isotopes 
( Chapter 3 )  , are largely composed of gamma radiation . 
An atom that undergoes radioactive decay is termed a parent nuclide and the decay
product is often referred to as a daughter nuclide . Some parent–daughter transformations
are accomplished in a single stage , a process known as simple decay . Others involve
a more complex reaction in which the nuclide with the highest atomic number decays to a
stable form through the production of a series of intermediate nuclides , each of which is
unstable . This is known as chain decay and occurs , for example , in uranium series 
( section 3 . 3 )  . The intermediate nuclides that are formed during the course of decay are
therefore both the products ( or daughters ) of previous nuclear transformations and the
parents in subsequent radioactive decay . Such nuclides are referred to as supported . 
Where the decay process involves a nuclide that has not , in itself , been created by the
c01 . fm Page 8 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Dating Methods and the Quaternary 9
decay process , or where that nuclide has been separated from earlier nuclides in the
chain through the operation of physical , chemical or biological processes , this is known
as unsupported decay . The distinction between supported and unsupported decay
is considered further in the context of 210Pb ( lead-210 ) dating ( section 3 . 5 . 1 )  . 
Radioactive decay processes are governed by atomic constants . The number of transformations per unit of time is proportional to the number of atoms present in the sample
and for each decay pathway there is a decay constant . This represents the probability
that an atom will decay in a given period of time . Although the radioactive decay of an
individual atom is an irregular ( stochastic ) process , in a large sample of atoms it is possible
to establish , within certain statistical limits , the rate at which overall distintegration
proceeds . In all radioactive nuclides , the decay is not linear but exponential ( e . g . Figure 2 . 1 ) 
and is usually considered in terms of the half-life , i . e . the length of time that is required to
reduce a given quantity of a parent nuclide to one half . For example , if 1 gm of a parent
nuclide is left to decay , after t½ only 0 . 5gm of that parent will remain . It will then take the
same period of time to reduce that 0 . 5 gm to 0 . 25 gm , and to reduce the 0 . 25 gm to
0 . 125gm , and so on . The half-life concept is fundamental to all forms of radiometric dating . 
1 . 5 The Quaternary : Stratigraphic Framework and Terminology 
As we saw above , the Quaternary is conventionally subdivided into glacial ( cold ) and
interglacial ( temperate ) stages , with further subdivisions into stadial ( cool ) and interstadial ( warm ) episodes . The distinction between glacials and stadials on the one hand , and
interglacials and interstadials on the other , is often blurred , but glacials are generally considered to be cold periods of extended duration ( spanning tens of thousands of years ) during which temperatures in the mid- and high-latitude regions were low enough to
promote extensive glaciation . Stadials are cold episodes of lesser duration ( perhaps
10 000 years or less ) when cold conditions obtained and when short-lived glacial readvances occurred . Interglacials , on the other hand , were warm periods when temperatures
in the mid- and high latitudes were comparable with , or may even have exceeded , those of
the present , and whose duration may have been 10000 years or more . Interstadials , by
contrast , were short-lived ( typically less than 5000 years ) warmer episodes within a
glacial stage , during which temperatures did not reach those of the present day . This type
of categorisation , which is based on inferred climatic characteristics , is known as climatostratigraphy ( Lowe and Walker , 1997 )  . 
Evidence for former glacial and interglacial conditions ( as well as stadial and interstadial
environments ) has long been recognised in the terrestrial stratigraphic record . Former
cold episodes are represented by glacial deposits , by periglacial sediments and structures , 
and by biological evidence ( such as pollen or vertebrate remains ) which are indicative of
a cold-climate régime . Interglacial and interstadial phases are reflected primarily in the
fossil record ( pollen , plant macrofossils , fossil insect remains , etc .  )  , or in biogenic
sediments that have accumulated in lakes or ponds during a period of warmer climatic
conditions . However , because of the effects of erosion , especially glacial erosion , the
Quaternary terrestrial stratigraphic record is highly fragmented and , apart from some
unusual contexts such as deep lakes in areas that have escaped the direct effects of glaciation , 
c01 . fm Page 9 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

10 Quaternary Dating Methods
long and continuous sediment records are rarely preserved . During the later twentieth
century , therefore , Quaternary scientists turned to the deep oceans of the world , where
sedimentation has been taking place continuously over hundreds of thousands of years . 
Indeed , many ocean sediment records extend in an uninterrupted fashion back through the
Quaternary and into the preceding Tertiary period . One of the great technological breakthroughs of the twentieth century was the development of coring equipment mounted on
specially designed ships ( Figure 1 . 3 ) which enabled complete sediment cores to be
obtained from the deep ocean floor , sometimes from water depths in excess of 3 km ! 
What these cores revealed was a remarkable long-term record of oceanographic and , 
by implication , climatic change . This is reflected in the oxygen isotope ‘ signal ’  ( or trace ) 
in marine microfossils contained within the ocean floor sediments . The variations in the
ratio between two isotopes of oxygen , the more common and ‘ lighter ’ oxygen-16 ( 16O ) 
and the rarer ‘ heavier ’ oxygen-18 ( 18O )  , are indications of the changing isotopic composition of ocean waters between glacial and interglacial stages . As the balance between the
two oxygen isotopes in sea water is largely controlled by fluctuations in land ice volume , 6
downcore variations in the oxygen isotope ratio ( δ
18O ) can be read as a record of glacial / 
interglacial climatic oscillations , working on the principle that ice sheets and glaciers
would have been greatly expanded during glacial times but much less extensive during
interglacials ( Shackleton and Opdyke , 1973 )  . The sequence can therefore be divided into
a series of isotopic stages ( marine oxygen isotope or MOI stages ) and these are numbered
from the top down , interglacial ( temperate ) stages being assigned odd numbers , while
even numbers denote glacial ( cold ) stages . The record shows that over the course of the
Figure 1 . 3 The Joides Resolution , a specially commissioned ocean-going drilling ship for
coring deep-sea sediments ( photo Bill Austin ) 
c01 . fm Page 10 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Dating Methods and the Quaternary 11
past 800 000 years or so , there have been around ten interglacial and ten glacial stages , 
while over the course of the entire Quaternary , back to 2 . 5 million years or so , more than
100 isotopic stages have been identified ( Shackleton et al .  , 1990 ; Figure 1 . 4 , left )  . This is
many more temperate and cold stages than has been recognised in terrestrial sequences , 
and hence the deep-ocean isotope signal provides a unique proxy record7 
of global climate
change . It also constitutes an independent climatostratigraphic scheme against which
terrestrial sequences can be compared . This approach is exemplified in a number of case
studies discussed in the following pages , while the use of oxygen isotope stratigraphy
as a basis for dating Quaternary events is considered in Chapter 7 . 
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
1 . 1
1 . 2
1 . 3
1 . 4
1 . 5
1 . 6
1 . 7
1 . 8
1 . 9
2 . 0
2 . 1
2 . 2
2 . 3
2 . 4
2 . 5
2 . 6
MARINE ISOTOPE RECORD NORTHERN HEMISPHERE STAGES
Age
million
yrs
BP
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
106MOI stages
MOI stages
Composite of cores
V19–30 , ODP-677
and ODP-846
5 4 δΟocean
18
Termination I
Termination II
Termination IV
Termination V
5a
5e
7a
7e
9a
9e
11
15
103
NORTHWEST EUROPE
HOLOCENE
Weichselian
EEMIAN
Warthe / Drenthe
SCHONINGEN
RHEINSDORF
Fuhne
HOLSTEINIAN
Elsterian
INTERGLACIAL IV
INTERGLACIAL III
INTERGLACIAL II
INTERGLACIAL I
Glacial C
Glacial B
Glacial A
LATE QUATERNARY MIDDLE EARLY
PLIOCENE
Pre-Illinoian K
Pre-Illinoian J
Pre-Illinoian I
Pre-Illinoian H
Pre-Illinoian G
Pre-Illinoian F
Pre-Illinoian E
Pre-Illinoian D
Pre-Illinoian C
Pre-Illinoian B
Pre-Illinoian A
SANGAMONIAN
Wisconsinan
HOLOCENE HOLOCENE
Valdaian
MIKULINIAN
Moscovian
ODINTSOVIAN
Dnieprian
ROMNYAN
Pronyan
LIKHVINIAN
Okian
MUCHKAPIAN
Donian
ILYNIAN
Pokrovian
PETROPAVLOVIAN
BRITISH ISLES EUROPEAN RUSSIA NORTH AMERICA
FLANDRIAN
Devensian
IPSWICHIAN
Tolucheevkian / 
Tolucheevka
KHAPROVIAN / KHAPRY
VERKHODIAN / 
VERKHODON
CENTRAL WALTONIAN NOVORONEZH
LUDHAMIAN
Thurnian
BRAMMERTONIAN / 
ANTIAN
Pre-Ludhamian
Pre-Pastonian / 
Baventian
PASTONIAN
Beestonian
Cromerian
HOXNIAN
Anglian
Wolstonian
Dorst
Linge
BAVEL
LEERDAM
Menapian
WAALIAN
Eburonian
C5–6
C1-3
B
A
C4c
Tiglian
Praetiglian
REUVERIAN C
EOPLEISTOCENE NEOPLEISTOCENE
63
19
Bavelian Cromerian complex Saalian
Krinitsian / 
Krinitsa
Figure 1 . 4 The MOI record based on a composite of deep-ocean cores ( V19–30 ; ODP-677
and ODP-846 )  ( left ) and the Quaternary stratigraphy of the northern hemisphere set against
this record ( right )  . The marine isotope signal shows the oxygen isotope stages back to 2 . 6
million years BP . In the correlation table , temperate ( interglacial ) stages are shown in upper
case , while cold ( glacial ) stages are shown in lower case . Complexes which include both
temperate and cold stages are in italics ( based on Gibbard et al .  , 2004 ) 
c01 . fm Page 11 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

12 Quaternary Dating Methods
The Quaternary terrestrial stratigraphic sequence in different areas of the northern
hemisphere , and possible correlatives with the MOI record , is shown on the right-hand
side of Figure 1 . 4 . Broadly speaking , the Quaternary can be divided into Early , Middle
and Late periods . The Late Quaternary , which includes the present interglacial , last cold
stage and last interglacial ( ca . 0–125 000 years ago )  , is readily correlated between the
various regions , and this warm–cold–warm sequence can be equated with the MOI
stratigraphy ( MOI stages 1–5 )  . Prior to that , however , the various regional records are
less easily correlated . During the Middle Quaternary , which encompasses the period
from ca . 125 000 to 780 000 years ago , a number of glacial and interglacial episodes are
reflected in the various terrestrial stratigraphic records , but several of these have no formal
designation . Moreover , some designated warm and cold periods appear to contain both
warm and cold stages ( often several )  , while there are clearly gaps or hiatuses in the stratigraphic sequences . As a result , correlation not only between each of the regional
sequences but also between these and the MOI ‘ template ’ becomes increasingly uncertain . 
These problems are even more acute during the Early Quaternary ( prior to ca . 780 000
years ago ) where the number of designated stages is even fewer , and both regional correlations and links with the MOI sequence become increasingly speculative . In many ways , 
Figure 1 . 4 exemplifies one of the principal difficulties in Quaternary science , namely the
lack of a universal dating technique that is applicable to the entire Quaternary time range
and to all stratigraphic contexts . The figure is , nevertheless , a useful aide-memoir , and the
reader will find it helpful to refer back to it when working through some of the case studies
later in the book . 
One part of the Quaternary record where there is a broad measure of agreement and
where , moreover , there is also closer dating control is the climatic oscillation that
occurred at the end of the Last Cold Stage ( ca . 15 000 and 11 500 years ago ) and which is
most clearly reflected in proxy climate records from around the North Atlantic region . 
This episode is referred to as the Weichselian Lateglacial in northern Europe and the
Devensian Lateglacial in Britain ( Figure 1 . 5 , right )  . It is characterised by rapid warming
around 14 800 years ago ( the Bølling-Allerød Interstadial in Europe ; Lateglacial or
Windermere Interstadial in Britain )  , a significant cooling ( Younger Dryas or Loch
Lomond Stadial ) around 12 900 years ago , and finally an abrupt climatic amelioration at
the onset of the present ( Holocene ) interglacial at ca . 11 500 years ago . In the Greenland 
( GRIP ) ice core ( Chapter 5 )  , this climatic oscillation is reflected in a series of clearly
defined ‘ events ’ in the oxygen isotope record ( GS-2 ; GI-1 ; GS-1 : Figure 1 . 5 , left )  . Greenland Interstadial 1 is further divided into a series of sub-events , with GI-1a , GI-1c and
GI-1e representing warmer intervals , and GI-1b and GI-1d reflecting cooler episodes ( Björck
et al .  , 1998 ; Walker et al .  , 1999 )  . Whereas the timescale for terrestrial sequences from
Britain and northern Europe is based on calibrated radiocarbon years ( section 2 . 6 )  , the
Greenland ( GRIP ) record is in ice-core years ( section 5 . 5 )  . Again , the reader may find it
useful to cross-reference some of the later case studies with Figure 1 . 5 . 
1 . 6 The Scope and Content of the Book 
In the following chapters , the various dating techniques that are available to Quaternary
scientists ( Figure 1 . 6 ) are introduced , explained and evaluated . The last element is
c01 . fm Page 12 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Dating Methods and the Quaternary 13
especially important because it is important to understand not only how each method works , 
but also where and why errors are likely to occur . Some of these may arise from the
nature of the sample ; others from analytical limitations . Whatever the cause , these will
impact on the resultant age determinations . Each section concludes with a number of
examples or case studies . These have been carefully selected to show how the different
techniques can be employed in Quaternary science and to give an indication of the range
of applications of each method . 
Chapters 2–5 deal with techniques that enable ages to be determined in years before the
present ( years BP )  . In other words , they allow estimates of age to be obtained . Chapters 2–4
describe radiometric dating techniques , where age is determined from measurements
either of radioactive decay of some unstable chemical elements ( Chapters 2 and 3 )  , or of
the effects of radioactive decay on the crystal structure of certain minerals or fossils 
( Chapter 4 )  . Chapter 5 reviews a group of methods based on the regular accumulation of
Age
Ice-core
yrs BP
GREENLAND ICE CORE
GRIP ss08c
δ
18O record GRIP events
NORTHWEST
EUROPE
BRITISH
ISLES
Indicative
14C age
yrs BP
Age
Cal . 14C
yrs BP
11 500
12 000
12 500
13000
13 500
14 000
14 500
15 000
15 500
–42 –40 –38 –36 %
% SMOW
Holocene Holocene Flandrian
Greenland
Stadial 1 
[ GS-1 ] 
Younger
Dryas
Stadial
Loch
Lomond
Stadial
–10 050
–10 225
–10 475
–11 000
–11 550
–12 025
–12 425
–12 700
–13 100
–11 500
–12 000
–12 500
–13 000
–13 500
–14 000
–14 500
–15 000
–15 500
GI-1a
GI-1b
GI-1c
GI-1d
GI-1e
Greenland
Stadial 2 
[ GS-2 ] Pleniglacial Dimlington
Stadial
Bolling
Interstadial
Greenland Interstadial 1 
[ GI-1 ] 
Weichselian Lateglacial
Allerod
Interstadial
Devensian Lateglacial
Lateglacial
or
Windermere
Interstadial Older Dryas Stadial
Figure 1 . 5 The δ
18O record from the GRIP Greenland ice core showing the Lateglacial
event stratigraphy ( left )  , and the stratigraphic subdivision of the Lateglacial in northwest
Europe and the British Isles . The isotopic record is based on the GRIP ss08c chronology , 
and the colder stadial episodes are indicated by dark shading . The radiocarbon ages
should be regarded as indicative ages only ( partly after Lowe et al .  , 2001 ) 
c01 . fm Page 13 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

RADIOMETRIC DATING
ANNUAL INCREMENTS
RELATIVE DATING
AGE EQUIVALENCE
10 100 1000 10 , 000 100 , 000 1 million 10 million
Years B . P . 
Lead 210
Radiocarbon
Cosmogenic nuclides
Uranium series
Potassium argon / Argon argon
Caesium 137
Luminescence
Electron spin resonance
Fission track
Dendrochronology
Varve chronology
Lichenometry
Annual layers in ice
Speleothems
Corals / Molluscs
Rock weathering
Obsidian hydration
Pedogenesis
Chemical dating of bone
Amino-acid diagenesis
Oxygen isotope stratigraphy
Tephrochronology
Palaeomagnetism
Palaeosols
Figure 1 . 6 The effective dating ranges of the different techniques discussed in this book
c01 . fm Page 14 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Dating Methods and the Quaternary 15
sediment or biological material through time , and which form annually banded records . 
All of the techniques that enable estimates of age to be made have sometimes been
referred to as absolute dating methods . This term has not been used here ; indeed it has
been deliberately avoided because it implies a level of accuracy and precision that can
seldom , if ever , be achieved in reality . As we saw above , and as will be amplified in the
following discussions , where age estimates are being obtained , errors are unavoidable
and hence there will inevitably be an element of uncertainty associated with each age
determination . There is , therefore , nothing ‘ absolute ’ about a date , and it should not be
referred to as such . 
In Chapters 6 and 7 , two further groups of dating techniques are considered . The first
involves the grouping of fossils or sedimentary units which are then ranked in relative
order of antiquity ; hence , these are known as relative dating methods . Some are based
on the principles of stratigraphy where relative age can be determined by the position of
stratigraphic units in a geological sequence ; others use the degree of degradation or
chemical alteration ( both of which may be time-dependent ) on rock surfaces , in soils or
in fossils , to establish relative order of age . Chapter 7 considers methods that enable
age equivalence to be determined , based on the presence of contemporaneous horizons
in separate and often quite different stratigraphic sequences . With respect to both relative
dating and age-equivalence techniques , where the various stratigraphic units or fossil
materials can be dated by one of the age-estimate methods described in Chapters 2–5 , it
may prove possible to fix the relative or age-equivalent chronologies in time . In other
words , they can be calibrated to an independently derived timescale . 
Notes 
1 . The duration of the Quaternary is still a matter for debate , with some authorities arguing for
a ‘ shorter ’ timescale of around 1 . 6–1 . 8 million years , while others subscribe to the view that a
longer timescale of 2 . 5–2 . 6 million years is more appropriate . There is , perhaps , a majority in
favour of the longer chronology and this interpretation has been followed here . 
2 . The Pleistocene epoch ended around 11 500 years ago and was succeeded by the Holocene , the
warm period in which we live . As the present temperate period is simply the most recent of a
number of temperate episodes that form part of a long-term climatic cycle , the last 11 500 years
can be seen as part of the Pleistocene ( West , 1977 )  . Hence , the terms ‘ Quaternary ’ and ‘ Pleistocene ’ 
are often used interchangeably . 
3 . Uniformitarian reasoning , as initially developed by the Scottish geologist James Hutton in the
later eighteenth century , emphasises the continuity of geological processes through time . Hence
contemporary processes ( modern analogues ) can be used as a basis for interpreting past events . 
Uniformitarianism is often described by the dictum ‘ the present is the key to the past ’  . 
4 . The Astronomical Theory of Climate Change is based on the assumption that surface temperatures
of the earth vary in response to regular and predictable changes in the earth ’ s orbit and axis . The
three principal components are the precession of the equinoxes ( apparent movement of the
seasons around the sun ) with a periodicity of ca . 21 000 years , the obliquity of the ecliptic 
( variations in the tilt of the earth ’ s axis ) with a periodicity of ca . 41 000 years , and the eccentricity
of the orbit ( changes in the shape of the earth ’ s orbit ) with a periodicity of ca . 96 000 years . 
Collectively these govern the amount of heat received by the earth and the distribution of this
heat around the globe . First developed in its modern form by the Scottish scientist James Croll in
c01 . fm Page 15 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

16 Quaternary Dating Methods
the nineteenth century , the theory was subsequently elaborated by the Serbian geophysicist Milutin
Milankovitch in the 1930s . The radiation balance curves that he produced can be calibrated to
the orbital parameters and used to provide an astronomical timescale for glacial–interglacial
cycles ( Chapter 5 )  . Further explanation of the astronomical theory can be found in standard
Quaternary texts , such as those by Lowe and Walker ( 1997 )  , Roberts ( 1998 )  , Williams etal .  ( 1998 )  , 
Wilson et al .  ( 2000 ) and Bell and Walker ( 2005 )  . 
5 . A major discovery in physics during the early twentieth century was that sub-atomic particles
sometimes behave as if they are waves , a concept that lies at the heart of the science of quantum
physics . One consequence is that it is impossible to measure both the position of a sub-atomic
particle and its velocity , an idea that was first proposed by the German physicist Werner Heisenberg
in his Uncertainty Principle . This indeterminacy in the sub-atomic world can be seen very
clearly whenever a single atomic event can be observed , such as in radioactivity . Although quantum
physics is a highly complex field , there are a number of accessible texts that deal with this
subject or that include sections on it . Ones that I have found particularly informative ( and enjoyable !  ) 
are by Gribbin ( 1984 )  , Close et al .  ( 1987 )  , Barrow ( 1988 )  , Gribbin ( 1995 )  , Penrose ( 1999 )  , Rees 
( 2000 ) and , of course , Bryson ( 2003 )  . 
6 . During evaporation from the free ocean surface , a fractionation ( or separation ) occurs so that
more of the lighter oxygen isotope , 16O , is drawn into the atmosphere than the heavier isotope , 18O . In the cold stages of Quaternary , therefore , large amounts of the lighter isotope would have
been transported poleward by moisture-bearing winds and locked into the greatly expanded ice
sheets . As a consequence , ocean water would have been relatively ‘ enriched ’ in the heavier
isotope 18O . The reverse would obtain during interglacial stages for , with reduced land ice cover , 
more 16O would have been returned to the oceans where water would have become relatively
 ‘ depleted ’ in 18O . Accordingly , the δ
18O trace provides a record of changing volumes of land ice , 
and hence of glacial / interglacial climatic fluctuations . 
7 . A ‘ proxy climatic record ’ is one based on an indirect measure of climate . In other words it is based
on inferential evidence ( pollen , plant macrofossils , etc .  )  , as opposed to direct evidence obtained
using a thermometer or rain gauge . 
c01 . fm Page 16 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 21 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
2 
Radiometric Dating 1 : 
Radiocarbon Dating 
Life exists in the universe only because the carbon atom possesses certain exceptional
properties . 
Sir James Jeans
2 . 1 Introduction 
Radiocarbon dating was one of the first radiometric techniques to be developed and , despite
the fact that it is applicable to only a relatively short span of Quaternary time ( 50 000 years
or so ; see below )  , it is perhaps the most widely used of all the radiometric techniques . It
owes its origin to a remarkable American chemistry professor , Willard Libby , who , in the
years immediately following the end of the Second World War , was investigating the
possibility that radiocarbon might exist in biological materials . Along with a group of
colleagues , Libby was able to demonstrate that radiocarbon could be detected in samples
from the Baltimore sewage works , and from these seemingly unprepossessing beginnings , 
a technique was born that was to revolutionise our view of Late Quaternary time . Not only
is the carbon atom the building block of life , therefore ( see above )  , it also provides us
with a means of dating life . The first radiocarbon measurements were published in 1949 , 
and since then hundreds of thousands of dates have been produced by more than 100 laboratories all over the world . The story of the development of radiocarbon can be found
in Libby ’ s book Radiocarbon Dating ( 1952 ; 2nd edition 1955 )  , and he was awarded
c02 . fm Page 17 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

18 Quaternary Dating Methods
the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1960 . Good overviews of radiocarbon dating can be
found in the volumes by Taylor ( 1987 )  , Bowman ( 1990 ) and Taylor et al .  ( 1992 )  , and there
are shorter accounts in , inter alia , Aitken ( 1990 )  , Lowe and Walker ( 1997 ) and Taylor 
( 1997 ; 2001 )  . The journal Radiocarbon , along with its website and associated links , is
a valuable source of information on recent developments in radiocarbon dating and on
applications of the technique . 
2 . 2 Basic Principles 
Radiocarbon ( 14C ) is one of three isotopes of carbon , the others being 12C and 13C . By far
the most abundant of these is 12C which comprises around 98 . 9% of all naturally occurring
carbon . 13C forms around 1 . 1% and 14C one part in 1010% . In other words , only about one
in a million million atoms of carbon is 14C . Both 12C and 13C are stable isotopes , but 14C
is not and it ‘ decays ’ to a stable form of nitrogen , 14N , through the emission of beta ( β ) 
particles . One β particle is released from the nucleus for every atom of 14C that decays . It
is this instability , or radioactivity , which gives us the name ‘ radiocarbon ’  . 
Atoms of 14C are formed in the upper atmosphere through the interaction between cosmic
ray neutrons , which reach the earth ’ s atmosphere from deep space , and nitrogen . This
involves neutron capture by the nitrogen ( 14N ) atom , and the loss of a proton , to create
14C . The 14C atoms produced by this process combine with oxygen to form a particular
form of carbon dioxide ( 14CO2 ) which mixes with the non-radiocarbon containing molecules of CO2 . In this way , 14C becomes part of the global carbon cycle and is assimilated
by plants through the photosynthetic process , and by animals through the ingestion of
plant tissue . The majority of 14C ( more than 95% ) is absorbed into the oceans as dissolved
carbonate , which means that organisms that live in sea water ( corals , molluscs , etc .  ) will
also take up 14C during the course of their life cycle . Although the 14C in the terrestrial
biosphere and in the oceans is constantly decaying , it is continually replenished from the
atmosphere . Hence the amount of 14C that is stored in plant and animal tissue and in the
world ’ s oceans , the global carbon reservoir , remains approximately constant through
time . In effect , a position has been reached where the carbon that is used to build plant
and animal tissue is in isotopic equilibrium with the atmosphere ; in other words the levels
of 14C activity in plants and animals are the same as that in the atmosphere . The 14C reservoir
can therefore be likened to a car with a drip-feed to the fuel tank ; the car will use fuel as
the engine runs , but as the tank is being constantly topped-up , the fuel will remain at more
or less the same level . 
Once an organism dies , however , it becomes isolated from the 14C source , no further
replenishment of 14C can take place , and the ‘ radiocarbon clock ’ runs down by radioactive
decay , which occurs at a constant rate . Hence , by measuring the amount of 14C that
remains in a sample of fossil material ( the residual 14C content ) and comparing this to
modern 14C in standard material , an age can be inferred for the death of the organism . 
In order to be able to do this , however , we need to know the rate at which 14C decays . 
Experimental results have shown that the decay rate of 14C is 1% every 83 years . This
might imply that after 8300 years , all residual activity in a sample will have ceased . However , as with all radioactive isotopes , the decay curve for 14C is not linear but exponential
c02 . fm Page 18 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 19 
( Figure 2 . 1 )  , and this means that materials significantly older than this can still be dated . 
The half-life of a 14C atom is 5730 years , 1 
and under normal circumstances , the limit of
measurement of 14C activity ( i . e . decay rate ) is eight half-lives . This translates into an
upper age limit of around 45 000 years ( but see following sections )  . Samples older than
this are usually described as being of ‘ infinite age ’  , and are expressed , for example , as 
> 45 000 years . 
2 . 3 Radiocarbon Measurement 
Radiocarbon dates can be obtained on a range of biogenic materials . These include , inter
alia , wood , peat , organic lake sediment , plant remains , charcoal , shell and coral . More
problematic are bone and soil , while radiocarbon dates have also been obtained on more
unconventional materials , such as cloth , metalwork or fossil pigment . Two approaches
are employed to measure residual 14C activity in samples of these materials relative
to modern standards : beta counting , which involves the detection and counting of β
emissions from 14C atoms over a period of time , working on the principle that the
rate of emissions will reflect the residual level of 14C activity within the sample , and
accelerator mass spectrometry ( AMS )  , which employs particle accelerators as mass
spectrometers to count the relative number of 14C atoms in a sample , as opposed to the
decay products . 
Figure 2 . 1 The decay curve for radiocarbon is exponential , not linear . This means that the
percentage decrease in number of atoms in a given unit of time is constant . Hence , after
each half-life the number of atoms remaining is halved . If there are A0 atoms of radiocarbon
at the beginning of the decay process , then after one half-life there will be A0 / 2 atoms
remaining ; after two half-lives , there will be A0 / 4 , after three , A0 / 8 , and so on ( after Bowman , 
1990 )  . Reproduced by permission of The British Museum Press 
c02 . fm Page 19 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

20 Quaternary Dating Methods
2 . 3 . 1 Beta Counting 
Beta counting can be carried out in two ways . In gas proportional counting , the sample
is converted to a gas ( carbon dioxide , ethylene or methane ) and injected into a counting
chamber where each β emission is detected by a charged wire that runs down the centre
of the chamber . In liquid scintillation counting , the sample is converted to benzene to
which a ‘ scintillant ’  ( usually a phosphoric substance ) is added , and each β particle emission
stimulates a pulse of light which can be counted photoelectrically . In the early days of
radiocarbon dating , laboratories employed gas proportional counting , but the majority of
radiocarbon facilities today now use liquid scintillation counting . This is because when
converted to benzene , the majority of the sample is carbon , whereas in gas counting , the
carbon dioxide is mostly oxygen . Hence significantly more sample material is required
for gas proportional than for liquid scintillation counting . In order to ensure comparability
between dates , laboratories compare sample activity to a modern reference standard , 
which is the modern activity of NBS ( National Bureau of Standards ) oxalic acid held by
the American Bureau of Standards . Radiocarbon dates are always measured with respect
to this standard and are expressed in years BP ( before present )  , where ‘ present ’ is the standard
year AD 1950 ( van der Plicht , 2002 )  . 
In beta counting , it is important to bear in mind that age is not the quantity that is being
measured ; rather it is the 14C activity of the sample that is interpreted as indicating ‘ age ’  , 
and there will always be an element of uncertainty in determining this activity partly
because of limitations in laboratory procedures , and partly because of the effects of the
randomness of radioactive decay on the counting statistics . The former is difficult to
estimate , but the latter can be quantified . Because radiocarbon dating is based on repeated
measurements , the distribution of results is usually described by a normal ( or Gaussian ) 
probability function , and hence the resultant age is always expressed as a mean determination with a plus or minus value of one standard deviation around the mean . The fact
that this is a statistical measure is not always appreciated . Hence a radiocarbon date of
5000 ± 50 years ( 1σ error ) does not mean that the true age of the sample lies between 4900
and 5100 14C years . What it means is that there is a 68% probability ( 1 standard deviation : 
1σ ) that the age lies between those two values . There is still a one in three chance that
the age could lie outside that range . It is for this reason that users of radiocarbon dates
are advised to think in terms of 95% probability ( 2 standard deviations : 2σ )  . In the above
example , therefore , we would say there is a 95% chance that the true age of the sample
lies somewhere between 4800 and 5200 14C years . Even then , there is a 5% chance that
the true age could lie beyond this range . 
2 . 3 . 2 Accelerator Mass Spectrometry 
In the 1980s , a significant breakthrough was made in radiocarbon dating with the
employment of particle accelerators as mass spectrometers ( Figure 2 . 2 )  . Mass spectrometers
are widely used to detect atoms of particular elements on the basis of differences in
atomic weights . Conventional mass spectrometers , however , cannot discriminate
between 14C and other molecules of similar weights , such as 14N . However , by accelerating particles to very high speeds , the small 14C signal can be separated from that of
other isotopes , hence the term accelerator mass spectrometry ( often abbreviated to
c02 . fm Page 20 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 21
AMS )  . It is important to emphasise , however , that it is not the absolute number of 14C
atoms that is being measured ; the abundance of 14C atoms is so small that it would be
extremely difficult to measure total amounts . Rather , AMS determines the isotope
ratio of 14C relative to that of the stable isotopes of carbon ( 13C or 12C )  , and the age is
determined by comparing this ratio with that of a standard of known 14C content . This
is often referred to as isotope ratio mass spectrometry . The most commonly used
system , which involves two separate phases of acceleration , is a tandem accelerator 
( Figure 2 . 3 )  . Samples are converted to graphite ( or a CO2 source ) and mounted on a metal
disc ( Figure 2 . 4 )  . Caesium ions ( Cs +  
) are then fired at this ‘ target ’ and the negatively
ionised carbon atoms ( C− ) produced are accelerated towards the positive terminal 
( Figure 2 . 3 )  . During passage through the ‘ stripper ’  , four electrons are lost from the C− 
ions 
( five in some AMS systems )  , and they emerge with a triple positive charge ( C3 +  
, or C4 + 
if five electrons are stripped )  . Repulsion from the positive terminal leads to a second
acceleration of the carbon ions through focussing magnets , where deflection occurs
according to mass , and the signal of the stable isotope 13C ( and sometimes 12C ) can be
measured using Faraday cups , the 14C signal being collected by ion detectors ( Figure 2 . 3 )  . 
Radiocarbon ages can be obtained by comparing the 14C to 13C or 12C ratios of the
sample material with those for targets in the same set that have been made up from
Figure 2 . 2 The 5-Mv National Electrostatics Corporation Accelerator Mass Spectrometer at
the Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre , East Kilbride , Scotland , UK . The
accelerator itself is on the left of the photograph , while the ion source ( Figure 2 . 4 ) is in the
screened area to the right . See also Figure 2 . 3 ( photo : Sheng Xu ) 
c02 . fm Page 21 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

22 Quaternary Dating Methods
material of known modern age , usually NBS oxalic acid . The error term that accompanies
all AMS dates reflects , as in conventional dating , statistical uncertainties relating to the
14C decay curve , random and systematic errors that occur during the measurement
process , as well as uncertainties that arise in measuring the oxalic acid standards and in
quantifying the natural background 14C . 
Focussing
magnet
Focussing
device
2-MV tandem accelerator
Power
supply
Stripper
Sample
Focussing
devices
Injection
magnet
Caesium
ions
C3 + 
12C 13 14 C C
C–
C–
Ion detector
Faraday collectors
Figure 2 . 3 Schematic diagram of a tandem accelerator for the detection and counting
of 14C atoms . For explanation , see text ( after Bowman , 1990 )  . Reproduced by permission of
The British Museum Press
Figure 2 . 4 The exposed sample target wheel ( ion source ) of the AMS in Figure 2 . 2 . The
wheel holds 134 graphite samples , but not all of these will be of fossil material as standards
of known age are interspersed at regular intervals ( photo : Sheng Xu ) 
c02 . fm Page 22 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 23
The advantages of AMS over beta counting lie in the small sample size required for
AMS dating and in the speed and effectiveness with which samples can be processed . 
Beta counting typically requires several grams of material ( typically 1–2 g of carbon ) 
and it can take a number of days ( or even weeks ) to count a sample . By contrast , AMS
laboratories routinely analyse samples containing 1 mg of organic carbon or less . This
means , for example , that a radiocarbon date can be obtained from minute quantities
of material , such as a single seed or leaf , or even from pollen grains ( Mensing and
Southon , 1999 ; Vandergroes and Prior , 2003 ) or fragments of insects ( Hodgins et al .  , 
2001 ; Walker et al .  , 2001 )  . The measurement process is relatively rapid and can be
completed in a matter of hours rather than days . Moreover , depending on the size of
the target wheel ( Figure 2 . 4 )  , upwards of 50 samples can typically be measured during
a single run , which is a much more efficient procedure than in beta counting . The disadvantages of AMS are capital cost ( the cost of establishing a new AMS facility
could be upwards of £3 m at 2004 prices )  , the cost of each date ( 75–100% more than
a radiometric date ) and , until recently , analytical precision . For some time , AMS laboratories were unable to match the levels of precision in beta counting , where the error
estimate is typically around 1% , i . e . ±50 years at 5500 and ±80 years at 12 000 . In
recent years , however , counting statistics have improved and many AMS facilities
are now more or less comparable to radiometric laboratories in terms of precision . 
However , neither type of facility can match the performance of the ‘ high-precision ’ 
radiometric laboratories , such as Belfast , Groningen or Seattle , where dates can be
produced with standard errors of 20 years or less , although in order to achieve this
level of analytical precision , large amounts of material ( 5–20 g carbon ) and longer
counting times are required . 
2 . 3 . 3 Extending the Radiocarbon Timescale 
A number of attempts have been made to extend the radiocarbon timescale beyond the
conventional limit of eight half-lives . The problem is that in very old samples , residual
14C activity is so low that impossibly long counting times are needed in order to obtain
a meaningful estimate of age . One approach to this problem involves the enhancement of
the ratio of 14C to 12C using controlled isotopic fractionation2 
 ( section 2 . 4 . 2 .  ) before
measurement , a technique known as isotopic enrichment . In the radiocarbon laboratory
in Seattle , for example , one of the laboratories where this method was pioneered , thermal
diffusion has been employed to increase 14C activity in a sample by a factor of 6–7 , and
this has enabled finite dates of up to 75 000 years to be obtained ( Stuiver et al .  , 1978 )  . 
However , the process requires very large samples of material and lengthy preparation and
counting times ( months rather than days or weeks )  . Another approach to extending the
radiocarbon timescale is to use large-volume , high-precision counters such as those at the
Groningen laboratory in the Netherlands in which very old samples ( up to ten half-lives ) 
can be measured . Finite 14C ages in the 50 000–60 000 year range have been obtained by
this facility ( Behre and van der Plicht , 1992 )  , but again very large samples and extended
counting times are needed . More recently , a technique has been developed for the dating
of old charcoal samples which involves more stringent pretreatments ( the ‘ ABOX pretreatment ’  ) and innovations in target preparation for AMS dating (  ‘ stepped combustion ’  ) in order
to remove contaminants . Again , the result has been finite 14C ages in the 50 000–60 000
year range ( Bird et al .  , 2003 )  . 
c02 . fm Page 23 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

24 Quaternary Dating Methods
2 . 3 . 4 Laboratory Intercomparisons 
In order to ensure comparability between different laboratories , the International Radiocarbon
Community organises inter-laboratory comparisons . These involve the preparation and
distribution of typical sample materials ( peat , wood , bone , etc .  ) to different radiocarbon
laboratories and which , ideally , will have been dated by independent means , such as
dendrochronology . These intercomparison programmes are an essential component of the
quality assurance process in radiocarbon dating , for they give confidence to radiocarbon
users that laboratories worldwide are producing measurements that are reliable and in
accordance with good practice . The most recent of these exercises , FIRI [ the fourth international radiocarbon intercomparison ( Boaretto et al .  , 2002 ; Scott , 2003 )  ]  , showed an
encouragingly broad measure of agreement between radiocarbon measurements made in
different laboratories on a wide range of sample materials . Equally importantly , it also
demonstrated no statistically significant difference between measurements made by
radiometric or AMS techniques . 
2 . 4 Sources of Error in Radiocarbon Dating 
In order to translate a measurement of 14C activity in a sample of fossil material into
a meaningful calendar age at a reasonable level of precision , five major assumptions have
to be made : 
1 . The 14C / 12C ratio in each part of the global carbon reservoir ( atmosphere , biosphere , 
freshwater , marine water ) has remained essentially constant over time . 
2 . Complete and rapid mixing of 14C occurs throughout these reservoirs on a global basis . 
3 . The ratios between the different carbon isotopes ( e . g . 13C / 12C ) in samples have not
been altered , other than by 14C decay prior to or since the death of an organism . 
4 . The half-life of 14C is accurately known with a reasonable level of precision . 
5 . Natural levels of 14C can be measured to appropriate levels of accuracy and precision 
( Taylor , 2001 )  . 
Of these , there is a reasonable degree of confidence amongst the radiocarbon community
that the half-life of 14C has been accurately determined , and that natural levels of 14C can
be established . Questions remain , however , about the remaining three assumptions , and
these lead to uncertainties ( errors ) in radiocarbon dating . Some of the major sources of
error are considered in this section . 
2 . 4 . 1 Contamination 
Contamination refers to the addition of younger or older carbon to the sample material
and , if unquantified , will result in dates that are aberrant . Contamination can occur prior
to field sampling . In a peat or soil profile downward penetration of roots or of younger
humic acids can introduce younger materials into older horizons , while in a pond or lake , 
bioturbation caused by organisms on the lake bed can lead to disturbance of the sediment
sequence and the downward movement of younger sediments . The relatively high activity
of younger carbon by comparison with older fossil material means that even small amounts
c02 . fm Page 24 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 25
of modern contaminant can produce major errors in radiocarbon dates , and the effects
will increase with the age of the sample . For example , the addition of 1% modern carbon
to a 17 000-year-old sample will reduce the age by 600 years , for a 34000-year-old sample
the same percentage contamination will lead to an error of 4000 years , while if the sample
is infinitely old ( i . e . beyond the conventional dating range of eight half-lives )  , the result
will be an ‘ apparent age ’ of 38 000 years ( Aitken , 1990 )  . Contamination can also occur
through the incorporation of older carbon residues . This is especially problematical in the
dating of lake sediments ( section 2 . 5 . 1 ) where older organic carbon washed into the lake
from the catchment slopes or carbon from local bedrock can result in an ageing effect in
radiocarbon dates from lake muds . The addition of 1% old carbon will increase the age of
a modern sample by around 80 years . 
Contamination can also occur during field sampling , and may even occur in the laboratory , for example due to fungal growth during sample storage ( Wohlfarth et al .  , 1998a )  , or
through modern contamination by dust , skin , etc . Radiocarbon laboratories employ physical
or chemical pretreatment procedures to remove some of these contaminants . Samples are
examined for the presence of rootlets and other obvious signs of extraneous material ; they
are then sieved and treated with hot acid to dissolve older carbonates and with alkali
solutions to remove younger humic acids that may coat the samples . However , if the
contaminant has the same chemical composition as the sample , selective separation of the
contaminant may prove to be impossible . Hence , stringent as modern laboratory procedures
are , they cannot guard against all aspects of contamination and this therefore remains
a potential source of error in many radiocarbon dates . 
2 . 4 . 2 Isotopic Fractionation 
We have already seen that carbon occurs in three isotopic forms , 12C , 13C and 14C . 
Although these are chemically indistinguishable , in any biological pathway there will
be a tendency for the lighter isotope 12C to be preferentially taken up . By the same
token , 13C will be taken up in preference to 14C . In photosynthesis , for example , there is
a greater uptake of 12C , and hence there will be an enrichment in 12C and a relative
depletion in 14C . This means that a growing plant would be expected to have a lower
14C activity than the contemporary atmosphere . Hence , when fossil plant remains are
dated , the radiocarbon dates will appear to be older and , since uptake also varies
according to species , different parts of the biosphere will appear to have different radiocarbon ages ( Bowman , 1990 )  . The reverse may obtain when marine organisms are
being dated . In ocean water there is a preferential absorption of the heavier isotope 14C
and a commensurate relative depletion in 12C . Ocean water will , therefore , be relatively
enriched in 14C , and organisms that take up 14C from the ocean water during their
life cycle ( molluscs , corals ) will have a higher 14C activity ( leading to a younger
14C age )  , although this may , to some extent , be offset by the marine reservoir effect 
( section 2 . 4 . 3 )  . 
Radiocarbon laboratories correct for the effects of isotopic fraction by working on the
principle that the heavier isotope 14C is twice as enriched as 13C . Because both 12C and
13C are stable isotopes and can be measured directly , the 13C / 12C ratio in a sub-sample of
fossil material is determined by mass spectrometry , and this ratio is then compared to the
13C / 12C ratio of a standard PDB limestone ( belemnite carbonate from the Cretaceous
c02 . fm Page 25 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

26 Quaternary Dating Methods
Peedee Formation in South Carolina )  . The deviation of the 13C / 12C ratio in the fossil sample
from that standard ( a measure referred to as δ13C ) is calculated as follows : 
The δ13C value , which is expressed in ‰ ( meaning parts per thousand or ‘ permil ’  )  , therefore
provides an accurate measure of the extent of isotopic fractionation reflected in the fossil
material . Most terrestrial samples have negative δ13C values , but because different photosynthetic pathways exist in plants , different levels of fractionation occur ( Table 2 . 1 )  . It is
general practice , however , to ‘ normalise ’ these values to a figure of −25‰ , which is the
mean isotopic composition of wood . Accordingly , if a sub-sample of dated material
yields a δ13C value of −25‰ , no correction is made . If a value of −30‰ is obtained , this
implies a 5‰ depletion in the 13C / 12C ratio , which indicates a 10‰ depletion in the 14C / 12C
ratio . In this case , the measured 14C activity would be increased by 10‰ , which equates
to ca . 83 14C years ( Harkness , 1979 )  . 
2 . 4 . 3 Marine Reservoir Effects 
Exchange reactions between the atmosphere and the ocean surface means that CO2 , and
hence 14C , becomes incorporated into sea water in the form of dissolved carbonate . Once
the surface water sinks , however , 14C in intermediate and deep water decays without
replenishment from the surface and the result is that sea water will have an apparent
age . The ageing effect varies , from ca . 30 years or less in surface water of parts of the
northern Indian Ocean ( Dutta et al .  , 2001 ) to around 400 years in the North Atlantic ( Bard
et al .  , 1991 )  , and almost 600 years in areas of the equatorial East Pacific ( Shackleton
et al .  , 1988 )  . In the deep oceans , however , where residence times are much longer , the
age of sea water may be measurable in thousands of years . Hence , radiocarbon dates on
organisms that live in the oceans and which take in dissolved carbonate to build their
δ
13C = C13 C12 (  ) ⁄
C13 C12 (  ) ⁄ PDB
----------------------------------- – 1000 1 ×
Table 2 . 1 Approximate δ
13C values for various materials . 
The ranges on these data are typically± 2or 3‰ , but greater 
variability is possible . Each per mil deviation from −25‰ 
represents ca . 16 years ( from Bowman , 1990 , with minor 
modifications by the author )  
* For direct or indirect C3 consumers . 
Material δ13C value ( ‰ ) 
Wood , peat and many C3 plants −26
Bone collagen * −19
Freshwater plants ( very variable ) −16
Arid zone plants ( C4 plants ) −13
Marine plants −15
Atmospheric CO2 −8
Marine carbonates −0
c02 . fm Page 26 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 27
skeletal structures ( such as foraminifers , 3 
molluscs , etc .  ) will have to be corrected for the
age of sea water . For example , measurements on present-day molluscs from around the
British Isles show that coastal water has an apparent age of 405± 40 years BP , and hence
radiocarbon dates on fossil marine molluscs from British contexts have tended to be corrected by that value ( e . g . Peacock , 1996 )  . 
The global variations in the age of sea water referred to above arise largely because of
differing patterns of ocean water movement – surface currents , thermohaline circulation , 4
upwelling , etc . However , these changes are not only variable in space ; they also vary in
time . This poses a serious difficulty because it means that the present-day age of sea
water may not necessarily represent an appropriate correction factor for fossil material
from a particular locality . For example , data from the North Atlantic indicate that at times
during the transition from the last cold stage to the present interglacial the apparent age
of surface water may have varied by up to 1900 14C years ( section 2 . 7 . 1 . 5 )  , while in
the Norwegian Sea the reservoir age may have been around 1000 ( ±250 ) 14C years
throughout that time period ( Björck et al .  , 2003 )  . These age values are significantly
higher than those indicated by dates on modern marine molluscs , which suggests that
finding the appropriate correction factor for marine radiocarbon dates may be a much
more difficult proposition than has been imagined hitherto . This is a problem that has yet
to be fully resolved . 
2 . 4 . 4 Long-Term Variations in 14C Production 
Long-term variation in 14C production is acknowledged to be one of the major problems
in radiocarbon dating , for it is now apparent that one of the fundamental assumptions
underlying the technique , namely that atmospheric 14C levels have not varied significantly over time , can no longer be sustained . More than 30 years ago , scientists working
on tree-ring chronologies found significant discrepancies between the age of wood
based on dendrochronological dating ( section 5 . 1 ) and that based on radiocarbon , with
the radiocarbon ages invariably being younger than the dendrochronological dates 
( Renfrew , 1973 )  . The cause of this discrepancy was attributed to variations in atmospheric 14C activity . Moreover , comparison between dendrochronological and radiocarbon
dating series showed that atmospheric 14C activity appeared to have fluctuated over time 
( the so-called ‘ de Vries ’ effect5 
)  , not randomly but in a quasi-periodic manner through a
series of interlocked cycles ranging in duration from ca . 208 to 2300 years ( Sonnett and
Finney , 1990 )  . The record of long-term 14C variations is also characterised by ‘ plateaux ’ 
of more or less constant 14C age , for example at ca . 10 400 , 10 000 and 9600 14C years BP 
( Figure 2 . 5 )  , each of these plateaux reflecting a period of reduced atmospheric 14C activity . 
On a longer timescale , extremely large variations in atmospheric 14C concentration have
been detected beyond 25 000 years BP ( Beck et al .  , 2001 ; Hughen et al .  , 2004 )  , and these
are proving particularly problematical for the dating of events in the range of 30 000–
50 000 14C years BP , such as the appearance of modern humans in Europe ( Richards and
Beck , 2001 )  . 
The causes of these long- and short-term variations in atmospheric 14C remain to established , but a number of factors appear to be involved . A major influence may well be
modulation of the cosmic ray flux by changes in the earth ’ s geomagnetic field or by
variations in the intensity of solar activity ( Stuiver et al .  , 1991 )  . A reduction in magnetic
c02 . fm Page 27 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

28 Quaternary Dating Methods
field intensity could weaken the earth ’ s geomagnetic shield and increase the number of
cosmic rays entering the atmosphere which would result in a commensurate increase in
14C production ( Mazeaud et al .  , 1992 )  . Similarly , a reduction in solar activity , particularly
in the strength of the solar wind , 6 
would serve to enable more cosmic rays to enter the
atmosphere and again would lead to an increase in 14C production ( Van Geel et al .  , 2003 )  . 
An alternative hypothesis involves changes in patterns of ocean circulation , particularly
changes in ventilation7 
and deep-water formation . 8 
These could give rise to an increase 
( or decrease ) in the release of oceanic CO2 ( with relatively low 14C content ) into the
atmosphere and this would lead to a reduction ( or increase ) in atmospheric 14CO2 levels 
( Goslar et al .  , 1995 )  . 
In addition to natural variations , atmospheric 14C levels have been affected by human
activity . Over the past 250 years or so , the burning of fossil fuels has liberated large quantities
of 12C into the atmosphere ( Houghton et al .  , 2001 ) which have diluted 14C levels , while
over the course of the last 50 years , this industrial effect has to some extent been offset
by the detonation of thermonuclear devices which effectively doubled atmospheric 14C
concentrations in the 1960s . Partly for these reasons , and also because of recent natural
14C variations , the young end of the radiocarbon timescale is generally taken to be around
300 years ago ( Taylor , 2001 )  . 
11000
10 000
9000
12 500 12 000 11500 11000 10 500
Calendar years BP
Radiocarbon years BP
P
P
P
Figure 2 . 5 Radiocarbon versus calendar ages for the period 9000–11 000 14C years BP . The
curve is based on radiocarbon-dated samples from lakes , corals , marine sediments and tree-ring
series , each of which has also been dated independently in order to obtain a direct comparison
between radiocarbon and calendar ages . Note the clearly defined radiocarbon ‘ plateaux ’ at
ca . 10 400 , 10 000 and 9600 14C years BP . Radiocarbon dates which fall on these plateaux
will have calendar age ranges of up to several hundred years ( after Goslar et al .  , 2000 )  . 
Reprinted from Nature . Copyright 2000 Macmillan Magazines Limited 
c02 . fm Page 28 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 29
Irrespective of causal factors , these long- and short-term variations in atmospheric 14C
concentration have profound effects for radiocarbon dating , for they mean that unless
some sort of correction is made , radiocarbon time will bear little resemblance to calendar
time . For example , comparisons between radiocarbon dates and dendrochronological
dates suggest that a radiocarbon date of 5000 years corresponds to a calendar age of 5800
years . For older dates , the divergence between radiocarbon and calendar age is much
larger . Comparisons between AMS 14C and uranium-series dates ( section 3 . 3 ) on fossil
corals , for example , indicate that radiocarbon dates are around 3000 years younger than
 ‘ true ’ ages at 15 000 14C years BP , and around 4000 years younger at 20 000 14C years BP 
( Stuiver et al .  , 1998 )  . It is for this reason that it is important to refer to radiocarbon dates
in terms of ‘ 14C years BP ’  , to make it clear that it is ‘ radiocarbon time ’ and not ‘ actual
time ’ or ‘ calendar time ’ that is being referred to . However , there are now ways in which
we can begin to convert radiocarbon to calendar years ( radiocarbon calibration ) and
these are discussed in section 2 . 6 . 
2 . 5 Some Problematic Dating Materials 
As noted above , radiocarbon dating can be undertaken on a range of biogenic materials . 
Some of these , such as wood , plant macrofossils , charcoal and peat , are relatively straightforward dating media and can , in most instances , be relied upon to generate a meaningful
radiocarbon age determination . Other materials , however , are more difficult to deal with , 
and present both procedural and interpretational problems for the radiocarbon practitioner . 
Some of these are considered in this section . 
2 . 5 . 1 Lake Sediments 
Organic lake sediments are widely used as a medium for radiocarbon dating , but obtaining
a reliable date from these deposits is problematical . Lake sediments are extremely
susceptible to contamination by older carbon residues and this leads to a dilution of the
14C concentration and dates that are older than the actual date of sediment deposition . 
This mineral carbon error may arise either through the inwashing of older organic
carbon material from slopes around the lake catchment , or from erosion and subsequent
incorporation into the lake sediment of even older carbon , such as coal or graphite , from
local bedrock . In formerly glaciated areas , such older carbon may have been brought
into the area by the passage of glacier ice ( Walker et al .  , 2001 )  . Lake catchments containing geologically old carbonate ( e . g . limestone ) can be a source of infinitely old , 
14C-depleted , carbon for lake or pond water . This dilutes the 14C concentration of the
water and is reflected in plants that photosynthesise sub-aquatically , in aquatic algae , 
and in animals that feed on these plants and also on each other . Hence , where the
remains of these organisms occur in lake sediments , there will also be a dilution in 14C
levels . This is termed the hard-water effect because of the often associated presence
of calcium ions , and can add up to 1200 years to the apparent age of limnic material 
( Peglar et al .  , 1989 )  . One way around this problem is to use terrestrial material
from such sediments ( such as leaves and fruits ) as these will not be influenced by the
hard-water effect . 
c02 . fm Page 29 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

30 Quaternary Dating Methods
The often complex biogeochemistry of lake sediments leads to further difficulties in
radiocarbon dating . For example , significant age differences have been discovered
between different biogeochemical components of lake sediments , such as humic acid
fractions , humin ( alkali insoluble ) fractions , lipids , chlorite treatment residues , etc .  , from
the same stratigraphic horizon ( Lowe et al .  , 1988 )  . Moreover , often significant differences
have been found between radiocarbon ages on macrofossil cellulose and the sediments
containing those plant macrofossils , with the macrofossils frequently providing younger
radiocarbon ages than the host sediments ( Peteet et al .  , 1990 ; Walker et al .  , 2001 ; 2003 )  . 
An additional problem that may occur in the dating of lake sediments is that the 14C / 12C
ratio in lake water may be lower than that in the atmosphere because exchange at the
lake surface is relatively slow and hence lake water may have a reduced 14C activity by
comparison with the atmosphere . Seepage into lakes of groundwater containing dissolved
carbonates further complicates this reservoir effect ( Olsson , 1986 )  . Although standard
correction factors have been applied ( e . g . 300–400 years for Swedish lakes )  , as is the case
with the marine reservoir discussed earlier ( section 2 . 4 . 3 )  , it now seems that there may
have been significant temporal changes in freshwater reservoir ages , due principally to
changes over time in the lake volume / surface area ratio , and also water depth . Indeed , 
variations of almost 1000 years have been detected in reservoir ages of central and eastern
European lakes over the course of the Holocene ( Geyh et al .  , 1998 )  . 
2 . 5 . 2 Shell 
Shells are composed almost entirely of calcium carbonate and interpretation of radiocarbon
dates from this material is not straightforward . Terrestrial molluscs ( land snails ) may
ingest older carbonates ( limestone or soil carbonates ) during their lifetime and this older
material can be built into the shell . The result is that shell carbonate is deficient in 14C
relative to modern levels , and therefore radiocarbon dates would be anomalously old . 
Consequently , it is necessary to correct radiocarbon ages of fossil land snails for this
anomaly . This can be done by comparing the 14C activity of shell carbonate of modern
snails of the same species ( preferably from the same region as the fossils ) with contemporary
14C activity of the atmosphere , or as recorded in plant carbon ( Goodfriend , 1987 )  . A further
problem is that fossil land snails often have secondary ( pedogenic ) carbonates deposited
on them and , in some cases , recrystallisation can occur , which would result in anomalously
young ages . It is therefore necessary to check for the presence of calcite in the shells
using X-ray diffraction ( XRD )  , since the original land snail shell material is always
aragonitic ( a different form of calcite )  , whereas secondary carbonate , the contaminant , is
usually calcitic ( Goodfriend , 1992 )  . Routine laboratory preparation of shells for 14C analysis
involves removal of the outer 20% ( by weight ) of the shell by acid hydrolysis to obtain
the inner material for dating . 
Similar problems arise in the radiocarbon dating of marine molluscs . Again , the
accumulation of solutional carbonate or recrystallisation can occur , but as this exchange
usually affects the outer layers more than the inner layers , by comparing dates from the
two portions of the shell , it is usually possible to determine whether or not this form of
contamination has taken place ( Peacock and Harkness , 1990 )  . The development of
AMS dating , particularly the ability to date very small fragments of shell , makes this
process very much easier . A more intractable problem in the dating of marine molluscs , 
c02 . fm Page 30 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 31
however , is the determination of the marine reservoir effect which now appears to vary
not only spatially but over time ( section 2 . 4 . 3 )  . 
2 . 5 . 3 Bone 
Bone consists of two elements , an organic fraction that is contained within the shafts of
long bones which comprises cell tissues and a fibrous protein called collagen , and the
bone mineral material , the principal component of which is a phosphate of calcium , 
hydroxyapatite . In theory , both of these elements can be dated , but because of the likelihood
of carbon exchange after death between the bone mineral material and the depositional
environment , it is usually only the proteinaceous fraction that is used in radiocarbon
dating . Where biochemical purification procedures are employed , accurate 14C estimates
can be obtained on bone samples retaining significant amounts of bone collagen ( Taylor , 
1992 )  . The problem with dating collagen , however , is that this material degrades over
time and so only very small quantities might be left in older bone materials , and these too
may have been contaminated following burial . With the development of AMS dating , it
has proved possible to obtain age determinations on individual amino acids ( section 6 . 6 ) 
within the collagen to check for consistency in dates and hence for contamination ( Bowman , 
1990 )  . However , where bones are seriously depleted in protein content , i . e . they contain
less than 5% of the original amount – which is often the case with older bone materials –
there is a strong likelihood that these will yield radiocarbon ages that are anomalous 
( Hedges and Law , 1989 )  . In an attempt to overcome this problem , numerous studies have
been carried out on other non-collagen organic compounds in bone to see if consistent
radiocarbon dates can be obtained , but the results have not so far been promising ( Taylor , 
2001 )  . More encouraging , however , is recent work on cremated bone which suggests
that while collagen does not survive burning , reliable radiocarbon ages might be obtained
from the structural carbonate in the mineral fraction of bone ( Lantin et al .  , 2001 )  . Equally
promising has been recent dating of human bodies from European peat bogs (  ‘ bog bodies ’  ) 
where AMS 14C dating , preceded by careful sample selection and pretreatment , yielded
age determinations on bone collagen that were consistent with dates on other materials , 
such as skin , hair , textile , leather and wood ( van der Plicht et al .  , 2004 )  . 
2 . 5 . 4 Soil 
Although all soils contain carbon and can therefore , in theory , be dated by radiocarbon , 
the dynamic nature of the soil system means that because they receive organic matter
over a protracted time period , any radiocarbon date on a soil will largely be a measure
of the mean residence time of the various organic fractions within the soil . Because of
the continuous input of organic material into soils , measured radiocarbon ages of soil
organic matter or its fractions are generally younger than the true ages of soils ( Wang
et al .  , 1996 )  . Further complications arise from the circulation of humic acids , root penetration and earthworm and other biological activity . All of this makes soil one of the
most difficult of all materials to date using the radiocarbon technique ( Matthews , 1985 )  . 
However , buried soils ( palaeosols ) are important components of the Quaternary stratigraphic record , and a considerable amount of effort has been expended on the development of methods for obtaining coherent radiocarbon dates from such contexts
c02 . fm Page 31 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

32 Quaternary Dating Methods 
( Scharpenseel and Becker-Heidemann , 1992 )  . Indeed , meaningful radiocarbon ages have
been derived from buried palaeosols by comparing dates from different organic fractions 
( Matthews , 1991 )  , by using other materials in soils such as charcoal ( Goh and Molloy , 
1979 )  , by modelling the measured 14C content of soil organic matter ( Wang et al .  , 1996 )  , 
or by checking radiocarbon dates from soils against results obtained using other dating
methods ( Dalsgaard and Odgaard , 2001 )  . 
2 . 6 Calibration of the Radiocarbon Timescale 
2 . 6 . 1 Dendrochronological Calibration 
Ever since the discovery of a discrepancy between radiocarbon and dendrochronological
ages , the international radiocarbon community has been searching for a reliable basis for
converting radiocarbon years into ‘ actual ’ or ‘ calendar ’ years . Thus far , the major effort has
been directed towards dendrochronological records , as these enable a direct comparison to
be made between the ages of wood as determined by counting annual tree rings ( Chapter 5 ) 
and radiocarbon dates obtained from individual wood increments . Very high resolution radiocarbon measurements have been carried out mainly on samples of oak from Germany and
Ireland , and on bristlecone pine ( Pinus longaeva )  ( Figure 5 . 3 ) and Douglas fir ( Pseudotsuga ) 
from the United States . This has been an international collaborative programme with
laboratories in Belfast , Groningen , Heidelberg , Pretoria , Seattle and Tucson undertaking
high-precision conventional radiocarbon dating (  < 20 years ) and careful cross-checking
of tree-ring series , and the result is a continuous calibration curve extending back to
10 279 years BP ( Stuiver et al .  , 1998 )  . Scientists in Germany have linked a chronology of
German pine trees to this curve which extends the dendrochronologically based radiocarbon
calibration to 12 179 years BP ( Kromer and Spurk , 1998 )  . These long dendrochronological
series are discussed further in section 5 . 3 . 
2 . 6 . 2 The INTCAL Calibration 
The most recent radiocarbon calibration curve , INTCAL98 ( Stuiver et al .  , 1998 )  , is based
principally on the dendrochronological records described above . Beyond the limit of
continuous dendrochronological series , calibration is based on matched uranium-series 
( U-series : section 3 . 3 ) and radiocarbon dates on fossil corals , coupled with radiocarbon-dated
organic material from laminated ( i . e annually accumulating ) marine sediments in the
Cariaco Basin , Venezuela ( Figure 5 . 13A )  . These two forms of evidence have extended
the INTCAL98 calibration to 15 585 years BP ( Figure 2 . 6 )  . However , problems arising
from past variations in the marine reservoir ( section 2 . 4 . 3 ) and also possible errors in the
counting of laminated sediments mean that this part of the calibration curve is less secure
than that based on tree-ring records . Although the INTCAL98 calibration officially
extends to 24 000 calendar years BP , the resolution of the last 8400 years of the curve is so
low ( only eight pairs of U-series and radiocarbon-dated samples ) that it cannot , at present , 
be considered as a true ‘ calibration curve ’  ( van der Plicht , 2002 )  . 
Despite the uncertainties associated with the older part of the age range ( ca . 15600–24000
cal . years BP )  , the international radiocarbon community has recommended that INTCAL98
c02 . fm Page 32 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 33
be used as the basis for calibration for the time being ( Stuiver and van der Plicht , 1998 )  . 
The curve is decadal , in other words it has a resolution of 10 cal . years . The most recent 
( 2004 ) calibration program based on INTCAL98 ( CALIB 4 . 4 ) can be downloaded from
the Internet , and is available in both PC and Macintosh formats . Ages obtained using
CALIB 4 . 4 are always expressed in terms of ‘ cal . years BP ’  ( or AD / BC )  . However , in
applying calibration to radiocarbon dates , two points must be borne in mind . First , we
have already seen that radiocarbon dates are expressed in terms of probabilities , and
that it is important to think not in terms of 1σ ( 68% probability )  , but rather of 2σ 
( 95 . 4% probability ) when making an interpretation based on a particular age estimate . 
There is , however , also an element of uncertainty in the calibration program arising , for
example , from errors in tree-ring counting or in the measurement of U-series in
coral samples . This means that when dates are generated using CALIB 4 . 4 , they are
invariably expressed as a range , rather than as a single age value in order to reflect
these uncertainties . Second , the perturbations in the calibration curve , which reflect the
natural variations in long-term 14C activity ( see above )  , can result in radiocarbon
dates having more than one calendar ( or calibrated ) age . In Figure 2 . 7 , for example , 
which shows part of the calibration curve for the Mid-Holocene , a 14C date of
4500 ± 50 years BP corresponds to seven separate points on the calibration curve with
a calibrated age range of 5050–5275 years BP . When the 2σ confidence interval on the
radiocarbon date is taken into account , the calibrated age range could lie anywhere
between ca . 4950 and 5350 years BP . This is before any of the errors in the calibration
program are taken into account ! Calibration , therefore , although valuable in giving an
approximation of ‘ true ’ age , is still a relatively imprecise tool and must be treated
accordingly . 
14 000 10 000 6000 2000 20000
cal . BC / AD
dendrochronology
U-series corals 
& marine varves
14 000
10 000
6000
2000
0
14C ( BP ) 
INTCAL98
Figure 2 . 6 The INTCAL calibration curve back to ca . 15 600 cal . BP . The right-hand section
of the curve is based on a comparison between dendrochronological and radiocarbon ages
on wood samples , while the left-hand part is based on paired radiocarbon and U-series
dates on corals , and radiocarbon-dated marine varves ( after van der Plicht , 2002 )  . Reproduced by permission of Stichting Netherlands Journal of Geosciences 
c02 . fm Page 33 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

34 Quaternary Dating Methods
2 . 6 . 3 Extending the Radiocarbon Calibration Curve 
Extending the radiocarbon calibration curve beyond the current limits of INCAL98 is
a major aim of the radiocarbon community . Variations in atmospheric 14C ( expressed as
∆14C ) back to 40 000 years and beyond have been demonstrated , inter alia , by comparisons between radiocarbon dates and independently dated laminated ( annual ) sediment
sequences ( section 5 . 3 . 3 . 4 )  , and by paired radiocarbon and U-series dates on speleothem
carbonate9 
 ( Beck et al .  , 2001 )  . Figure 2 . 8 shows the relationship between U-series and
14C ages from a speleothem from the Bahamas over the period 11 000–45 000 years . It
should be emphasised , however , that this is not a ‘ calibration curve ’ in the strict sense
as it cannot be used to correct radiocarbon dates . Nevertheless , it can be regarded as a
comparison curve , in other words it can be used to compare radiocarbon and U-series
dates in order to gain an impression of the extent of divergence between the two dating
series ( Richards and Beck , 2001 )  . 
A different approach to this problem has recently been described by Hughen et al .  
( 2004 )  . They generated a record of long-term atmospheric 14C activity back to 50 000
years ago , based on the correlation between 14C dates on marine sediments from the Cariaco
Basin , Venezuela , and the annual-layer timescale of the Greenland GISP2 ice core
5500
5300
5100
4900
4700
4500
4300
4100
14C BP
cal . BP
cal . BC
6100 5700 5300 4900
3951 3551 3151
cal . 
range
For
4500 14C year
BP
Figure 2 . 7 Part of the INTCAL98 calibration curve for the Mid-Holocene . Note that a 14C
age of 4500 years BP corresponds to a calibrated age range of 5050–5275 years ( Stuiver etal .  , 
1998 , Figure A14 )  . Reprinted by permission of Radiocarbon 
c02 . fm Page 34 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 35 
( Chapter 5 )  . This correlation is underpinned by proxy climatic data , and by independent
radiometric dating of climatic events linked to GISP2 . The curve ( Figure 2 . 9 ) shows
prominent 14C plateaux at ca . 33 000 , 28 000 , 24 000 and 13 300 years 14C years BP , and
there is an abrupt shift at 42 000–40 000 cal . years BP in which nearly 7000 14C years
elapsed in only 2000 cal . years . Prior to that there is a general trend of decreasing calendar-14C
age offset from 40 000 to 15 000 cal . years BP . Although there are slight age offsets
between this curve and those based on lake sediments and carbonates ( Figure 2 . 8 )  , the
overall 14C structures are remarkably similar , suggesting that an accurate reconstruction
of long-term atmospheric radiocarbon activity , and hence a secure basis for long-term
radiocarbon calibration , may eventually be achievable . 
2 . 6 . 4 Bayesian Analysis and Radiocarbon Calibration 
One way in which radiocarbon calibration might be improved is to use a form of statistics
known as Bayesian analysis . 
10 Bayesian probability differs from classical statistics in
that concepts of uncertainty , probability and subjectivity are all interrelated . In particular , 
prior knowledge and assumptions are expressed explicitly in the calculation of probability , as opposed to being applied before statistical manipulation . The use of Bayesian
analysis allows such prior information to be incorporated into the radiocarbon calibration
process . 
40
40
30
30
20
20
10
10
230Th age ( ka ) 
14C age ( kyr BP ) 
SPELEOTHEM
GB-89-24-1
equiline
5 ka offset
10 ka offset
Figure 2 . 8 Radiocarbon ‘ comparison ’ curve showing replicate 14C and 230Th ages on a
Bahamas speleothem for the period 10 000–45 000 14C years BP . This shows an offset
between 14C and U-series dates of ca . 5000 years around 20 000 14C years BP . Beyond
30 000 14C years BP , the offset increases to a maximum at ca . 36 000 14C years BP where 14C years may be 8000 years younger than U-series years ( after Richards and Beck , 2001 , 
Figure 1 )  . Reproduced by permission of David Richards and Antiquity Publications Ltd
c02 . fm Page 35 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

36 Quaternary Dating Methods
This approach can be most usefully applied to the dating of sedimentary sequences
where the aim is to generate an age–depth model for the profile . Such sequences tend to
be marked by a degree of scatter in the radiocarbon dates , often with inversions in age–depth
relationships , and developing a coherent timescale may be difficult ( e . g . Walker et al .  , 
2003 )  . Here the prior information that is incorporated into the analysis is ( i ) stratigraphic
context and ( ii ) succession , working on the principle that in a body of stratified sediment
the age should increase with depth . Radiocarbon calibration programmes such as OxCal 
( Bronk Ramsay , 1995 ) employ a Bayesian statistical framework , and these enable probability distributions to be calculated for each date in a sequence . At each level in the profile , 
two probability calibrated age distributions can be generated , one constrained by knowledge
on age–depth relationships ( posterior distribution ) and one unconstrained by such knowledge 
( prior distribution )  . A strong compatibility between the two distributions will give greater
credence to the calibrated age obtained . Where the two diverge significantly , the dates
may be rejected as being aberrant , in other words they are out of stratigraphic order . In
this way , a chronology can be constructed for a sedimentary sequence that has a more
secure statistical basis than one in which radiocarbon dates alone , either in calibrated or in
uncalibrated form , have been employed . 
50000
40 000
30 000
20 000
10 000
10 000 20 000 30000 40000 50000
Calendar / GISP2 age ( year BP ) 
A
14C age ( year BP ) 
Figure 2 . 9 Radiocarbon dates from the Cariaco Basin , Venezuela , plotted against the
Greenland GISP2 timescale for the time period 12 000–50 000 cal . years BP . The initial part
of the curve ( up to 12 000 cal . years BP ) is the tree-ring record , while the squares show
paired 14C / U-series dates . Note the abrupt shift in 14C age at 40 000–42 000 14C years BP 
( after Hughen et al .  , 2004 )  . Reprinted from Science
c02 . fm Page 36 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 37
Bayesian statistical methods are being increasingly widely used in the analysis of
Quaternary dating series , and further details can be found in Bronk Ramsay ( 1998 )  , Buck etal .  
( 1996 ; 2003 )  , Buck ( 2001 ) and Blockley et al .  ( 2004 )  . 
2 . 6 . 5 Wiggle-Match Dating 
One way to circumvent the problems caused by fluctuations in the radiocarbon curve
is to use wiggle-match dating . This is a technique which , paradoxically perhaps , 
takes advantage of the short-term fluctuations in the radiocarbon calibration curve and
which can , in certain circumstances , provide more accurate chronologies than can be
obtained through the calibration of individual radiocarbon dates . The simplest example
involves the use of tree rings . Here , high-precision radiocarbon dating is carried out on
individual rings whose age differences are known precisely and the resulting curve of
dendro-age plotted against radiocarbon age can be fitted ( wiggle-matched ) to the
shape of the radiocarbon calibration curve . A good example of this approach is the
radiocarbon dating of the Kaharoa Tephra11 in New Zealand ( Figure 7 . 4 )  . Wiggle-matching
dating has also been applied to peat sequences , although here only the radiocarbon age
of individual horizons is known , and the independent ( i . e . non-radiocarbon-based ) 
timescale has to be derived by making assumptions about the rate of peat accumulation ( Blaauw et al .  , 2003 ; 2004 )  . The technique of wiggle-matching is best used over
a short section of the calibration curve where , in some cases , it may prove possible to
match the dated section to within a few years on the calendar timescale ( e . g . Hogg
et al .  , 2003 )  . Various statistical approaches to wiggle-matching have been developed , 
some again including Bayesian analysis ( Christen and Litton , 1995 )  , and these can generate
dating ranges that are even tighter than the combined errors in the original radiocarbon
measurements . The result is a higher level of overall dating precision ( Bronk Ramsay
et al .  , 2001 )  . Computer programs are now available for curve fitting , and these are
available via the Internet . They include Cal25 ( van der Plicht , 1993 ) and OxCal which
can perform both radiocarbon calibration and automatic wiggle-matches ( Bronk Ramsay , 
1995 ; 1998 )  . 
2 . 7 Applications of Radiocarbon Dating 
2 . 7 . 1 Radiocarbon Dating : Some Routine Applications 
Although radiocarbon dating is really only applicable to the last 45 000 years or so of
Quaternary time , the fact that 14C occurs in a number of different organic materials
means that the technique has applications across a wide spectrum of the earth , environmental and archaeological sciences . The majority of samples that are dated on a day-to-day
basis in radiocarbon laboratories are of plant macrofossils ( including charred remains )  , 
charcoal , peat , organic lake mud , marine microfauna and microflora and , perhaps to a
lesser extent , shell and bone . Here we discuss examples of the use of these different
dating media to show how radiocarbon chronologies can be developed in order to
provide answers to a range of archaeological , palaeoenvironmental or palaeoecological
questions . 
c02 . fm Page 37 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

38 Quaternary Dating Methods
2 . 7 . 1 . 1 Dating of plant macrofossils : Lateglacial cereal cultivation in the valley of the
Euphrates . Plant macrofossils have long been used in radiocarbon dating . This is because
they are well preserved in a range of depositional contexts ( peats , lake sediments , buried
soils , etc .  ) and although it is possible for them to be reworked , for example , by fluvial or
colluvial activity , they tend to retain their sample integrity and , unlike many other organic
materials , are seldom affected by contamination . With the advent of AMS dating , it has
proved possible to date individual fruits or seeds , or very small fragments of leaf . Plant
macrofossils provide valuable data on local vegetation cover , on land-use change and
farming activity , and on patterns of climatic and environmental change ( Lowe and Walker , 
1997 )  . Moreover , they are frequently preserved as charred or carbonised remains on
archaeological sites where they can provide evidence on plant domestication and cultivation 
( Jones and Colledge , 2001 )  . 
In this context , Hillman et al .  ( 2001 ) describe the results of an AMS dating programme
on charred cereal grains from the prehistoric ( Epipalaeolithic ) settlement site of Abu
Hureyra in the Euphrates Valley , Syria , about 130 km east of the present-day city of
Aleppo ( Figure 2 . 10A )  . The first settlement there , Abu Hureyra 1 , was occupied from
ca . 11 500–10 000 14C years BP , and may have had a population of 100–200 people . 
Abundant plant remains recovered from the site show that the inhabitants were initially
hunter-gatherers who lived on a range of wild food plants . From shortly before ca . 11 000
14C years BP , however , there are signs of cultivation , first of wild cereals , and subsequently
of domestic types . The evidence for domesticates is in the form of charred grains of rye 
( Secale cereale )  , which are readily distinguishable from their wild counterparts on the
basis of size ( Figure 2 . 10B )  . Of the five domestic-type rye grains that were AMS-dated , 
three gave Epipalaeolithic dates that matched other dates from the levels in which they
were found , namely 11140±100 , 10930±120 and 10610±100 14C years BP . These findings
are of considerable significance for our understanding of the origins of agriculture for , 
hitherto , the earliest archaeological finds of domestic cereals in southwestern Asia have
involved wheat and barley and date from around the beginning of the Holocene , i . e . 
11 000–12 000 cal . years BP . The Abu Hureyra evidence suggests , however , that systematic
cultivation of cereals began before the end of the Pleistocene , by at least 13 000 cal . years
BP , and that rye was amongst the first crops . The evidence also suggests that the settlers at
Abu Hureyra began cultivating crops in response to a steep decline in wild plants that had
served as staple foods for the previous four centuries , and which may have resulted from
an increase in aridity . If this is the case , then the primary trigger for plant domestication
in the Near East may have been climate change . 
2 . 7 . 1 . 2 Dating of charcoal : a Holocene palaeoenvironmental record from western Germany . 
Charcoal is preserved in a wide range of deposits , including lake sediments , peats , palaeosols and cave sediments , and it is often found in archaeological contexts where it can
provide useful ecological and cultural information ( Mellars and Dark , 1998 )  . In lake
sediments and peats , it has proved to be especially valuable as an indicator of past fire
regimes , reflecting the influence of both climate ( increased incidence of fire under
drought conditions : Brunelle and Anderson , 2003 ) and human activities ( Huber and
Markgraf , 2003 )  . 
Charcoal is also valuable as a dating medium , however , and this is especially the case
where it is found in contexts that otherwise would be difficult to date by radiocarbon . One
c02 . fm Page 38 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

ABU HUREYRA
DAMASCUS
ALEPPO
AMMAN
BAGHDAD
Euphrates
Tigris
kilometres 300 0 
( A )  ( B )  
( b )  
( a ) 
1
2
TS1
TS2
1mm
Netiv Hac
Figure 2 . 10 A . The location of Abu Hureyra in the Euphrates Valley , Syria ; B . Examples of charred remains of rye grains from the Epipalaeolithic
levels at the site :  ( a ) a typical grain of wild rye which predates the earliest level of cultivation ;  ( b ) a typical grain of domestic-type rye which is
significantly larger than its wild counterpart . The latter comes from a sightly higher level than the wild specimen ( a ) and has been AMS radiocarbon dated to 10 930 ± 120 BP ( after Hillman et al .  , 2001 )  . Reproduced by permission of Arnold Publishers
c02 . fm Page 39 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

40 Quaternary Dating Methods
example is the Holocene palaeoenvironmental record obtained from fossil molluscs at
Kloster Mühle , western Germany ( Meyrick , 2003 )  . The difficulty at this site is that the
molluscs are contained within a tufa , 12 and any attempt to date either the molluscs themselves
or the carbonaceous tufa would be confounded by the likelihood of errors in the dates
arising from the incorporation of older carbon residues ( sections 2 . 4 . 1 and 2 . 5 . 1 )  . Fortunately , 
however , charcoal fragments have become incorporated into the tufa in sufficient quantities
for AMS radiocarbon dating . Six age determinations were obtained from the sequence
which provided a chronology for the environmental reconstruction based on the molluscan
faunas ( Figure 2 . 11 )  . The base of the sequence , dated at 9720 ± 75 14C years BP , shows
that the Early Holocene was characterised by moist , open ground fauna , which was followed
by an aquatic phase bracketed by statistically indistinguishable dates of 9530 ± 60 and
500
400
300
200
100
cm
Depth
0 50 100
%
1 23 45
KM-1
KM-2
KM-3
KM-4
KM-5
Local mollusc
zones
–9720 ± 75
–9530 ± 60
–8425 ± 80
–9695 ± 75
–4384 ± 105
–7405 ± 50
Radiocarbon
dates
Figure 2 . 11 Summary diagram of the ecological classifications of the molluscan fauna
from Kloster Mühle , Germany : 1 . open ground ; 2 . shade demanding ; 3 . catholic ( no clear
environmental affinities )  ; 4 . marsh ; 5 . aquatic . Note how the aquatic taxa are dominant in
zones KM-1 to KM-3 , while the upper parts of the record are increasingly dominated by
shade-demanding taxa , reflecting the spread of deciduous woodland ( after Meyrick , 2003 )  . 
Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
c02 . fm Page 40 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 41
9695 ± 75 14C years BP . This , in turn , was succeeded by a woodland phase , with optimum
deciduous forest conditions established by 7405 ± 50 14C years BP . The radiocarbon date
from the uppermost horizon ( 4384 ± 105 14C years BP ) is almost certainly too young . This
is probably because only a small amount of charcoal was available from this horizon 
( 0 . 1 mg of carbon compared with 1 . 0–4 . 3 mg in the other five samples )  , and hence background contamination could not be accurately quantified for this very small sample . 
2 . 7 . 1 . 3 Dating of peat : a Holocene palaeoclimatic record from northern England . Peat
bogs are rich archives of palaeoenvironmental information . Fossil pollen preserved
within the peat provides a record of local and regional vegetational change , while plant
macrofossils ( wood fragments , leaves , fruits , seeds , etc .  ) indicate the nature of former
vegetation communities growing on the mire surface and in the immediate hinterland of
the site . By using this type of evidence , inferences can be made about long-term ecological
processes within the mire and its hinterland ( Charman , 2003 )  . Some of these will reflect
the activities of human groups ( woodland clearance , agricultural practices )  , while others
will have resulted from climate change . The latter may be reflected in changes in the
abundance of pollen of different plants , but climate is also reflected in other lines of
fossil evidence , such as plant macrofossils or testate amoebae , 13 which indicate past variations in mire surface wetness . Where such changes can be detected in ombrotrophic
mires ( mires that are entirely rain-fed )  , it is possible to reconstruct a climatic record of
past precipitation ( Barber et al .  , 1994 ; Chambers et al .  , 1997 ; Langdon et al .  , 2003 )  . In
the majority of cases , such records typically rely on radiocarbon dating as the basis for
a chronology . 
At Walton Moss , an ombrotrophic peatland complex in Cumbria , northern England , 
Hughes et al .  ( 2000 ) developed a high-resolution record of Holocene palaeoprecipitation changes based on variations in plant macrofossil content within the peat profile . 
Calibrated radiocarbon dates from the Walton Moss profile , and also from the adjacent
site of Bolton Fell Moss ( Figure 2 . 12A )  , provided the basis for a temporal reconstruction
of mire surface wetness changes from the Early Holocene to the present day . This
revealed a series of clearly defined wet-shifts , each reflecting episodes of higher
precipitation , from ca . 7800 onwards ( Figure 2 . 12B )  . These climatic changes do not
appear to be random ; rather there is a cyclic trend with a periodicity of around 1100
years . Interestingly , a similar cyclicity has been detected in North Atlantic and in
Greenland ice-core records , suggesting a powerful climatic forcing mechanism during
the course of the Holocene that was affecting not just the British Isles but the North
Atlantic region as a whole . 
2 . 7 . 1 . 4 Dating of organic lake mud : a multi-proxy palaeoenvironmental record from
Lake Rutundu , East Africa . Lakes are natural sediment traps and analysis of the sedimentary
record in lake basins allows inferences to be made about environmental changes that have
taken place around the lake catchment . Perhaps the most widely used palaeoecological
indicator in lake sediment sequences is fossil pollen , and many of the pollen diagrams
that have been published over the years have been based on samples from lake sites . More
recently , however , pollen records have been integrated with other data from lake sediment
cores , these ‘ multi-proxy ’ studies providing a more detailed palaeoenvironmental reconstruction than would be possible using pollen evidence alone ( Jones et al .  , 2002 ; Walker
et al .  , 2003 )  . 
c02 . fm Page 41 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

42 Quaternary Dating Methods 
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 2 . 12 ( A ) Location of Walton Moss and Bolton Fell Moss , northern England .  ( B ) 
Reconstructed mire surface wetness changes at Walton Moss . Increased wetness ( and , by
implication , higher levels of precipitation ) is reflected in the higher values of DCA 
( detrended correspondence analysis ) shown on the y-axis . DCA is a standard mulitivariate
statistical technique which is used here to analyse the variation in plant macrofossil components
throughout the peat profile and to relate them to particular controlling factors ( such as surface
wetness )  . Note the marked wet-shifts at ca . 7800 , ca . 5300 , 4410–3990 , ca . 3500 , 3170–2860 , 
2320–2040 , ca . 1750 , ca . 1450 , ca . 300 and ca . 100 cal . years BP ( modified after Hughes
et al .  , 2000 )  . Reproduced by permission of Arnold Publishers
c02 . fm Page 42 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 43
An example of such an approach is the study by Wooller et al .  ( 2003 ) of Lake Rutundu
which is located at around 3078 m on the northeast slope of Mount Kenya , East Africa . 
Thirteen AMS radiocarbon dates were obtained from the lake sediments , the oldest of
which is 22 300 ± 250 BP ( ca . 26 282 cal . years BP )  . These directly dated records therefore
cover the last glacial–interglacial transition and the whole of the Holocene . The extrapolated
basal age is 38 300 cal . years BP , indicating that the lower part of the sequence predates
the Last Glacial Maximum in the northern hemisphere . A pollen sequence was obtained
from the core ( Figure 2 . 13 ) along with data on grass cuticles , 14 stable carbon isotopes and
other plant biomarkers . 15 The evidence indicates that prior to ca . 25 000 cal . years BP , an
open vegetation subject to disturbance by fire existed in the area , although bushed grassland
and dry montane forest were also present . The most fire-disturbed and open vegetation
surrounding Lake Rutundu developed between 25 000 and 13 400 cal . years BP , however , 
when the local vegetation was one of either bushed grassland or open grassland , with a low
canopy cover . From 13 400 cal . years BP there has been a gradual trend towards woody
shrubland and open woodland culminating in the landscape of woody , sub-alpine shrubs
and grasses that surrounds Lake Rutundu at the present day . The data also show that while
grasses have been the major constituent of the vegetation over the past 38000 years , the
proportion of plants using the C4 photosynthetic pathway16 was greater during the Late
Pleistocene than in the Holocene . 
2 . 7 . 1 . 5 Dating of marine micropalaeontological records : an example of a problem from
the North Atlantic . As noted in Chapter 1 , one of the major advances in Quaternary science
during the course of the twentieth century was the development of a technology which
enabled long and complete cores of sediment to be recovered from the deep ocean floors . 
With the advent of AMS radiocarbon dating , which required only very small amounts of
sample material , a chronology for the upper parts of these core sequences could be
obtained on the basis of AMS dates from marine microfauna , most notably foraminifers . 
Over the past 20 years or so , a very large number of research papers have been published
on palaeoceanography ( changes in surface water temperatures and salinity , changes in
deepwater formation , 8 
changes in both surface and deepwater circulation , etc .  ) that
employ timescales based on AMS radiocarbon dates ( e . g . Andrews et al .  , 1996 )  . 
However , while radiocarbon dating has been widely used to derive calendar ages for
marine sediments , it rests on the assumption that the ‘ apparent age ’ of surface water ( in
other words , the age of surface water relative to the atmosphere ) has remained constant
over time . There is now a growing body of evidence to show that this is not the case 
( Bard et al .  , 1994 ; Austin et al .  , 1995 ) and that , often during periods of rapid climatic and
oceanographical change , significant variations can occur in the extent of the marine
reservoir effect ( section 2 . 4 . 3 )  . An elegant demonstration of the spatial and temporal
variability in the marine reservoir during the last glacial–interglacial transition is provided
by Waelbroeck et al .  ( 2001 )  . A record of changes in sea-surface temperature was obtained
from planktonic foraminifers in three cores from the North Atlantic between 38°N and 55°N , 
and these fossils also provided material for AMS radiocarbon dating . In Figure 2 . 14 , 
the sea-surface temperature curves are compared with the oxygen isotope signal from the
GRIP Greenland ice core , in which the isotopically more positive values (  ‘ peaks ’  ) in
the δ18O trace reflect warmer conditions and more negative values (  ‘ troughs ’  ) indicate
colder episodes . It is apparent in Figure 2 . 14 that the first sharp increase in sea-surface
temperature leads the first temperature rise in Greenland by 1940 ± 750 cal . years at 55°N
c02 . fm Page 43 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Figure 2 . 13 Radiocarbon dates , lithostratigraphic record and percentage pollen diagram ( selected taxa only ) from Lake Rutundu , Mt Kenya . 
Note the dominance of grass pollen ( Poaceae ) throughout the record , and the increase in pollen of shrubby taxa ( Clifortia , Ericaceae ) in zone
R1c ( post ca . 13 570 cal . years BP )  . Note also how tree pollen ( notably Podocarpus ) is initially abundant ( R1a )  , declines in R1b , and then
increases steadily towards the present . The pollen record for open-habitat herbs ( Artemisia , Compositae )  , however , shows the opposite trend 
( after Wooller et al .  , 2003 )  . Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
c02 . fm Page 44 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 45 
( core NA 87-22 ) and by 1230 ± 600 cal . years at 42°N ( core CH 69-09 )  . The second
abrupt increase in sea-surface temperature leads the temperature rise reflected in the ice
by 820 ± 430 cal . years at 55°N and by 1001 ± 340 cal . years at 42°N . By contrast , in the
most southerly record from 38°N ( core SU 81-18 )  , the sea-surface temperature signal
coincides very closely with air temperature variations in Greenland . As it is inconceivable
that the northern parts of the Atlantic would experience deglacial warming before more
southerly areas , the only explanation can be that a marine reservoir factor has affected the
dates from the central and northern cores , resulting in an ageing effect of around 1900 14C
years at around 15 000 BP , and ca . 800 14C years at ca . 11 500 BP . Clearly , these findings
have far-reaching implications for the radiocarbon dating of marine records , particularly
during periods of rapid oceanographical change . 
2 . 7 . 1 . 6 Dating of marine shell : a Holocene aeolianite from Mexico . Although shells can
be problematic dating media ( section 2 . 5 . 2 )  , careful selection of shell material and the
0 5 10 15 20 25
–34
–36
–38
–40
–42
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
0 5 10 15 20 25
Calendar age ( Kyr BP ) 
GRIP
55° N ( NA 87-22 ) 
42° N ( CH 69-09 ) 
38° N ( SU 81-18 ) 
CH 69-09 ( °C ) 
17
15
13
11
9
7
5
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
NA 87-22 ( °C ) SU 81-18 ( °C ) 
δ18O ( % SMOW ) 
Figure 2 . 14 Surface temperature records from three cores from the North Atlantic , NA 87-22 
( 55°N )  , CH 69-09 ( 42°N )  , SU 81-18 ( 38°N )  , compared with the GRIP δ
18O record . The y-axes
for the ocean cores show sea-surface temperatures ( °C ) and the x-axis is in cal . years BP . The
grey stripes indicate the large lead times between NA 87-22 ( the most northerly of the three
cores ) sea-surface temperature and inferred GRIP air temperatures at around 15 000 and
11 500 cal . years BP ( after Waelbroeck et al .  , 2001 )  . Reprinted from Nature . Copyright 2001
MacMillan Magazines Limited
c02 . fm Page 45 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

46 Quaternary Dating Methods
application of stringent laboratory procedures , typically involving the dating of both inner
and outer parts of shell fragments , can produce reliable radiocarbon age determinations . 
This is important because marine shell material can provide dates that are important in
a range of contexts , including glacial and deglacial chronologies ( England , 1999 )  , relative
land- and sea-level change ( Ingólfsson et al .  , 1995 )  , studies of marine palaeo-environments 
( Peacock , 1999 )  , and reconstructions of the environmental history of coastal zones 
( Christiansen et al .  , 2002 )  . In addition , coastal areas have always been attractive to human
groups , and hence marine shells from midden sites , which are frequently encountered
around the coasts of northwest Europe , can yield radiocarbon dates that are of considerable
interest to archaeologists ( Miracle , 2002 )  . 
Radiocarbon dates obtained by McLaren and Gardner ( 2000 ) on marine shells in an
aeolianite ( cemented sand dunes ) on the Yucutan Peninsula , Mexico ( Figure 2 . 15A )  , 
illustrate both the physical and human dimensions in the dating of marine molluscs . The
shells were obtained from four different horizons within the aeolianite and gave ages
ranging from 4082±50 cal . years BP to 2460± 45 cal . years BP ( Figure 2 . 15B )  . The lowermost
date , which was obtained from a shell within a small lens of beach material cut into the 
( A ) STUDY
AREA
Gulf of
Mexico
MEXICO
GUATEMALA
HONDURAS
EL SALVADOR
BELIZE
Yucatan
Peninsula
Merida
Cancun
Cozumel
Thickness 
( in metres ) 
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0 
( B ) 
Midden : 
Dark grey sandy soil
Rich in shells , pottery , fish bones and
coral fragments
Cross-bedded dune sands – cemented
Single Strombus gigas shell
Single Strombus gigas shell in a small lens of
beach material washed up onto sand dunes
Thin shell layer containing whole shells of
Glycymeris = midden ? 
Cross-bedded dune sands – cemented
D
C
B
A
Figure 2 . 15 ( A ) The Yucutan Peninsula , Mexico .  ( B ) Generalised lithostratigraphic section
through the aeolianite showing the relative positions of the dated shells ( after McLaren and
Gardner , 2000 )  . Reproduced by permission of Arnold Publishers
c02 . fm Page 46 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 47
sand dune probably under storm conditions , suggests that sea level was close to its
present height around 4000 cal years BP . This , in turn , implies that the sand dunes began
to form during the later stages of the Holocene marine transgression . The layer of shells at
around 2 . 9 m within the aeolianite , and dated to 4082 ± 50 cal . years BP , is believed to be
a midden , and suggests human occupation of the northeastern Yucutan coastal plain as
long ago as 4000 years BP . Sample C , dated to 3571± 45 cal . years BP ( inner date )  , may
also have been discarded by humans . The youngest dates ( D ) come from a clearly defined
midden , rich in shells , pottery fish bones and coral fragments , on top of the dune sands . 
The dates , of around 2500 cal . years BP , provide a minimum age for completion of sand-dune
formation and again further evidence of human occupation at that time . 
2 . 7 . 1 . 7 Dating of bone : the earliest humans in the Americas . One of the great problems
in New World archaeology concerns the timing of the peopling of the Americas . The general
view is that this event took place late in the Pleistocene following the wastage of the great
Laurentide and Cordilleran ice sheets which , hitherto , had acted as a barrier to migrating
peoples who had crossed the Bering Straits from eastern Asia . Retreat of glacier ice from
the western prairies and from the coastal regions of western Canada enabled human
groups to move southwards for the first time . The chronology of this southward migration
rests largely on radiocarbon dates , but these have often proved to be contentious , and
a vigorous debate has ensued between those arguing for an early human colonisation of
the Americas ( pre-12 000 14C years BP ) and those who would see the well-documented
terminal Pleistocene ‘ Clovis culture ’  ( ca . 11 500 14C years BP ) as representing the first
securely attested human presence ( Taylor , 2000 ; Marshall , 2001 )  . 
A curious aspect of this debate is that , despite the very large number of radiocarbon
dates that have been obtained on contexts associated with human activity , there are
relatively few directly dated Palaeo-Americans . Moreover , of the skeletal material that
has been dated , none has yielded a radiocarbon age in excess of the known age of the
Clovis period ( Taylor , 2001 )  . The radiocarbon dating of four early human specimens
from Mexico is therefore of significance in the context of these previous findings . 
Gonzalez et al .  ( 2003 ) obtained AMS radiocarbon dates on five specimens that had been
collected from palaeoindian localities around the Basin of Mexico ( Figure 2 . 16 )  . Four of
the specimens yielded sufficient bone collagen (  > 10 mg g−1 
) for dating purposes , the two
oldest dates being 10 755 ± 75 14C years BP ( Peñon III ) and 10 200 ± 65 14C years BP 
( Tlapacoya 1 )  . These dates are highly significant in the discussion of the peopling of
the New World , partly because they increase the number of directly ( and apparently
reliably ) dated individuals , but also because they fill a geographical gap ( central America ) 
in terms of human occupation of the Americas at the end of the Pleistocene . They also pose
a question , for the skulls indicate that a long- and narrow-headed ( dolicocephalic ) people of
non-Mongolian affinity were present in Mexico around 12000 cal . years BP . Where these
people came from and how they arrived in the Basin of Mexico remain to be established . 
2 . 7 . 2 Radiocarbon Dating of Other Materials 
In the previous section we have considered radiocarbon dating of what might be termed
the more ‘ conventional ’ materials . In other words , we have dealt with some of the more
typical dating applications that are routinely carried out in radiocarbon laboratories
c02 . fm Page 47 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

48 Quaternary Dating Methods
throughout the world . However , radiocarbon is proving to be a much more versatile
technique than has traditionally been envisaged , for with the advent of AMS , it is proving
possible to obtain radiocarbon dates on materials , some of which only 20 years or so ago
would have been considered unsuitable for radiocarbon dating . Examples of these more
specialised and , in some cases , experimental approaches to the use of radiocarbon are
considered in the following sections . 
2 . 7 . 2 . 1 Dating of textiles : the ‘ Shroud of Turin ’  . This was perhaps one of the most striking demonstrations of the value of AMS dating , and was one of the earliest archaeological
applications of the technique . The Shroud of Turin is a ca . 4-m piece of linen cloth which
is housed in the Cathedral of St John the Baptist in Turin , Italy . It bears the shadowy image
of the front and back of a man who appears to have been scourged and crucified , and is
alleged to have been the ‘ True Burial Sheet of Christ ’  . In October 1987 , offers to date the
Shroud were made by three AMS laboratories ( Arizona , Oxford and Zurich ) and were
accepted by the Archbishop of Turin , acting on instructions from the Holy See , the owner
of the Shroud . The British Museum was invited to help in the certification of the samples
and in the statistical analysis of the results . A thin strip ( 10 × 70 mm2 
) was cut from the
Shroud and three samples , each 50 mg in weight , were prepared from the strip and were
dated alongside three control samples . The results ( Table 2 . 2 ) were remarkably consistent
and produced a weighted mean age of 689 ± 16 14C years BP and a calibrated age of AD
a : Penon III
10 755 ± 75
d : San Vicente Chicoloapan
4410 ± 50
e : Tepexpan
2290
b : Tlapacoya I
10 200 ± 65
c : Texcal
7480 ± 55
Figure 2 . 16 Radiocarbon-dated Mexican Palaeo-Americans . The age determination for
Tepexpan is shown without confidence limits , for chemical analyses suggest that molecular
contamination with preservatives has taken place which has resulted in an anomalously
young age ( Gonzalez et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c02 . fm Page 48 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 49
1260–1390 ( 95% confidence )  . This suggests that the flax from which the linen was
woven was probably growing during the late thirteenth or fourteenth centuries , which
matches the date ( AD 1353 ) when the Shroud was first historically documented ( Damon
et al .  , 1989 )  . Since the publication of these dates , questions have been raised about their
authenticity because of possible contamination of the Shroud by , for example , bacteria 
( Gove et al .  , 1997 )  , or as a consequence of fire-induced chemical modifications ( scorching ) 
which could have resulted in a change in 14C activity in portions of the Shroud leading to
an aberrantly young radiocarbon age ( Kouznetzov et al .  , 1996 )  . However , experiments
designed to test the ways in which the latter , in particular , could have operated indicate
that if scorching had indeed occurred , it would have been unlikely to have influenced the
14C activity of cellulose-like materials such as the linen of the Shroud of Turin ( Jull et al .  , 
1996 ; Long , 1998 ; Hedges et al .  , 1998a )  . 
2 . 7 . 2 . 2 Dating of old documents : the Vinland Map . One of the great advantages of AMS , 
as exemplified by the dating of the Shroud of Turin , is that radiocarbon dates can be
obtained on culturally valuable objects using only a very small amount ( 1 mg or less ) of
material . The damage to the object or artefact is therefore minimal . Another example of the
dating of such materials is the application of AMS to ancient documents , an approach that
has yielded historically coherent ages from , inter alia , the famous Dead Sea Scrolls ( Jull
et al .  , 1995 ) and medieval Japanese documents ( Oda and Nakamura , 1998 )  . 
A further instance is the radiocarbon dating of the Vinland Map ( Figure 2 . 17 )  . This
apparently old map , drawn on parchment , is housed in the Rare Book and Manuscript
Library at Yale University . In the northwest Atlantic Ocean it shows ‘ the Island of Vinland ’  , 
discovered by the Norse seafarers Bjarni and Lief and colleagues . If authentic , it is the
first known cartographic representation of North America and its date is important in
establishing the history of European knowledge of the lands bordering the western North
Atlantic . Some scholars have strongly argued the map ’ s authenticity and have associated
it with the Council of Basle ( AD 1431–1449 )  , in other words dating the map to at least
half a century before Columbus ’ s voyage . Others , however , are convinced that the map is
Table 2 . 2 Radiocarbon dates on the Shroud of Turin . Each laboratory split the samples and 
subjected these to different pretreatment procedures . The calibrated age range for the 
sample , at 95% level of confidence , is AD 1262–1384 ( after Damon et al .  , 1989 ) 
Laboratory Sample dates Mean age Overall mean age Calibrated age range ( AD ) 
Arizona 591 ± 30 
646 ± 31 690 ± 35 
606 ± 41 
701 ± 33 
Oxford 795 ± 65 68% , 1273–1288 
730 ± 45 750 ± 30 691 ± 31 95% , 1262–1312 
745 ± 55 1353–1384
Zurich 733 ± 61 
722 ± 56 
635 ± 57 676 ± 24 
639 ± 45 
679 ± 51 
c02 . fm Page 49 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

50 Quaternary Dating Methods
Figure 2 . 17 The Vinland Map ( after Donahue et al .  , 2002 )  . Reproduced by permission of
Radiocarbon 
c02 . fm Page 50 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 51
a clever forgery and may even date from the twentieth century . A fragment of parchment
from the map was radiocarbon dated in the University of Arizona NSF AMS Facility 
( Donahue etal .  , 2002 )  . Five individual measurements were made which yielded a weighted
average of 467 ± 27 14C years BP . This gives a calibrated age range ( at 95% probability ) of
AD 1411–1468 . The one-sigma calibrated calendrical date range is 1434 ± 11 years . 
Clearly , the AMS date only determines the age of the parchment of the Vinland map and
it cannot provide a conclusive date for the production of the map itself ( Ambers and Bowman , 
2002 )  , although it is an important contribution to the ongoing debate on the authenticity
of the map . In this context , it may be significant that the AMS 14C age determination
coincides very well indeed with the dates for the Council of Basle , with which the map
has been associated . 
2 . 7 . 2 . 3 Dating of lime mortar : medieval churches in Finland . Dating of buildings has
traditionally relied on the dating of wood , either by radiocarbon dating or by dendrochronology . Such evidence , however , will not necessarily date the initial construction of
an old building , for repeated rebuilding and replacement of timber because of rot or fire
will lead to younger ages , while in other cases the use of older timbers will often result in
ages that predate building construction . For this reason , attempts have been made to date
lime mortar . During the production of building lime , limestone is heated to liberate CO2
and produce quicklime ( calcium oxide : CaO )  . This is then slaked with water to form
calcium hydroxide ( Ca ( OH ) 2 ) or building lime which , in turn , is mixed with sand and
water to form mortar . On exposure to air , the lime mortar hardens by taking up atmospheric
CO2 ( and hence also 14C ) to form carbonate ( CaCO3 )  . Accordingly , the 14C content of a
mortar sample can give an indication of the time that has elapsed since the mortar hardened , 
and hence the age of the construction of the building . Dating of lime mortar was shown
to be feasible more than 20 years ago ( Folk and Valastro , 1976 ; Van Strydonck etal .  , 1983 )  , 
but the advent of AMS radiocarbon dating , especially the requirement for very small quantities
of sample material , along with more refined laboratory protocols and pretreatment procedures 
( Heinemeier et al .  , 1997 ; Sonninen and Jungner , 2001 )  , has resulted in significant developments in this area of radiocarbon dating . 
A successful application of this approach has been in the dating of medieval stone
churches on the Åland Islands , Finland ( Heinemeier et al .  , 1997 )  . In this area , there is
a particular need for mortar dating because of the lack of written sources or of suitable
material for other scientific dating techniques . Multiple dates were obtained on lime mortar
from three different church buildings : Hammarlund ( 18 samples )  , Eckerö ( 8 samples ) and
Saltvik ( 4 samples )  . The weighted mean radiocarbon ages from the three churches were
686 ± 20 , 718 ± 25 and 710 ± 30 BP , respectively . Calibration of the weighted mean ages
suggests that the churches were constructed either late in the thirteenth or during the
course of the fourteenth centuries , with the most probable date being just before AD 1300 . 
2 . 7 . 2 . 4 Dating of hair : radiocarbon dates and DNA from individual animal hairs . Both
human and animal hair have the potential to become an important source of information
about human and animal palaeobiology , palaeoecology and palaeoanthropology . Biochemically , hair is characterised by the protein keratin . This material is extremely durable
in the natural environment and it survives over very long periods of time in archaeological , 
palaeontological and palaeoecological sites ( Bonnichsen etal .  , 2001 )  . Moreover , its chemical
properties make it more resistant to the various processes that complicate the radiocarbon
c02 . fm Page 51 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

52 Quaternary Dating Methods
dating of bone ( section 2 . 5 . 3 )  . Although samples of human hair ( from an Egyptian
predynastic site ) were dated at an early stage in the development of radiocarbon ( Libby , 
1955 )  , the limitations imposed by sample size meant that it was only with the introduction
of AMS that the dating of human and animal hair became a realistic proposition ( Taylor
et al .  , 1995 )  . 
One area where this advance in dating may be especially significant is in the study of
ancient DNA ( Brown , 2001 )  . Genetic data from archaeological specimens are having
a growing influence on archaeology and there is an increasing collaboration between
archaeologists , palaeoecologists and molecular biologists . In this respect , hair from
archaeological sites may be an important but hitherto overlooked data source which
may be amenable to molecular analysis . Thus far , DNA identification from hair has
largely been restricted to modern samples , but Bonnichsen et al .  ( 2001 ) have described
a study of a Palaeo-American occupation level in a cave site in Nevada , USA , in which
mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) 17 could be extracted from animal hair from a fossil specimen of bighorn sheep ( Ovis canadensis )  . Three samples of hair from the skin were
AMS-dated and these produced remarkably consistent ages of 9830 ± 210 , 9820 ± 300
and 9900 ± 90 BP . Moreover , the dates are in excellent agreement with five radiocarbon
dates on hearths associated with the occupation layer , which range from 9940 ± 160 to
11 140 ± 200 BP . This is the first time that ancient DNA has been obtained from hair of
this antiquity , and it opens up new possibilities for addressing a range of biological
questions in prehistory . Bonnichsen et al .  ’ s conclusion is that ‘  .  .  . hair could become
a “ golden fleece ” for prehistoric archaeologists and evolutionary biologists , allowing
us to address old questions in new ways ’  . 
2 . 7 . 2 . 5 Dating of iron artefacts : the Himeji nail and the Damascus sword . Radiocarbon
dates can be obtained from iron artefacts provided that the source of carbon in the steelmaking process was charcoal from freshly cut young wood . Other carbon sources , such as
coal , coke or old wood , are depleted in 14C and will cause artefacts to appear too old 
( Cook et al .  , 2001 )  . The possibility of using iron as a medium for radiocarbon dating has
been known for some time ( van der Merwe , 1969 )  , but again it has been the development
of AMS that has given added impetus to research into the radiocarbon dating of iron 
( Cresswell , 1991 ; 1992 )  . Indeed , recent experimental work suggests that reliable dates
may also be obtained from rusty iron , opening up the possibility of dating iron artefacts
from waterlogged terrestrial sites or from shipwrecks ( Cook et al .  , 2003 )  . 
A considerable amount of work has been undertaken to improve laboratory methods
for extracting carbon from ancient iron , and Cook etal .  ( 2001 ) describe the results of such
research in relation to the dating of two iron artefacts , a nail from the medieval Japanese
castle of Himeji believed to date to around AD 1600 , and a sword made originally in India
but exported to Damascus and considered to date from ca . AD 1650 . The results , using
a new carbon extraction method , show that the nail was made between AD 1550 and 1640 
( 39 . 7% confidence ) while the sword was manufactured between AD 1640 and 1670 ( 71%
confidence )  . These experimental results are encouraging and indicate that as laboratory
protocols become more refined , increasingly reliable dates may be obtained from iron
artefacts . 
2 . 7 . 2 . 6 Dating of pottery : the earliest pottery in Japan . Ancient pottery will contain a
number of carbonaceous residues . Some of these will be from older carbon incorporated
c02 . fm Page 52 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 53
into the clay prior to firing , while others will be from younger materials that have been
absorbed onto the surface of the pottery following burial . However , where there is an
organic-rich coating on old pottery fragments ( potsherds )  , for example from fuel or from
food residues , this can also provide a reasonably reliable sample for AMS radiocarbon
dating ( Hedges et al .  , 1992 ; Stott et al .  , 2001 )  . 
Nakamura et al .  ( 2001 ) report the results of a dating programme on charred adhesions
on five potsherds from the Odai Yamamoto 1 site at the northern end of the main island , 
Honshu , in Japan . The site was first discovered in the 1970s and has since yielded stone
artefacts , arrowheads and a number of potsherds characteristic of the Jomon culture of the
Late Palaeolithic . Many of the potsherds were coated in carbonaceous material believed
to derive from boiling food . Samples from five of the potsherds were extracted for AMS
dating , and the ages ranged from 12 680 to 13 780 14C years BP . The average age was
13 070 ± 440 BP , and the calibrated age range was 15 710–16 540 cal . years BP . These
dates are consistent with dates on other charcoal from the site , and also with dates from
sites with ancient pottery in the Russian Far East . The Jomon culture , with the first use
of pottery in Japan , was previously considered to have begun in the Holocene . If these
dates are correct , they suggest that this cultural phase may have begun several thousand
years earlier . 
2 . 7 . 2 . 7 Dating of rock art : Palaeolithic cave paintings in Spain and France . Since the
advent of AMS , a considerable amount of attention has been directed towards the
dating of rock art , including cave paintings , paintings and engravings in rockshelter
sites , and pictographs and petroglyphs on exposed rock surfaces , particularly in desert
regions . In the case of the last named , the aim has been to obtain a minimum age for the
rock engravings by isolating and dating organic carbon residues associated with desert
varnish , a naturally occurring coating that develops on rocks in arid regions . However , 
XLIV
13 570 ± 190
13 130 ± 120
14 410 ± 200
XXXVI
13 940 ± 170
14 800 ± 150
14 710 ± 200
XXXIII
14 330 ± 190
14 820 ± 130
14 250 ± 180
Figure 2 . 18 Dated images from the Altamira painted ceiling ( after Valladas et al .  , 2001 )  . 
The locations of the three dated bison are indicated along with the dates obtained on purified
charcoals and humic fraction ( in italics )  . Reproduced by permission of Radiocarbon
c02 . fm Page 53 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

54 Quaternary Dating Methods
the complex processes involved in desert varnish and organic carbon accumulation
mean that the dating results have often proved to be controversial ( Beck et al .  , 1998 ; 
Dragovich , 2000 )  . In other contexts , by contrast , realistic radiocarbon age determinations have been obtained through careful chemical separation of carbon residues
from patinas and crusts overlying the rock paintings ( Hedges et al .  , 1998b ; Watchman
et al .  , 2001 )  . 
In some cave sites attention has focussed on charcoal drawings and Valladas etal .  ( 2001 ) 
have obtained radiocarbon dates on nine bison drawings from three caves ( Covaciella , 
Altamira and El Castillo ) in the Cantabrian region of northern Spain ( Figure 2 . 18 )  . In all , 
27 dates were obtained , all of which fell between 13 000 and 14 500 14C years BP . 
Charcoal residues from rock paintings were also dated at two caves in France , Cosquer
near Marseilles and Chauvet in the Ardeche region of the southeastern Massif Central . 
The 24 dates for the paintings in the Cosquet cave indicate 2 distinct phases of cave painting
activity , one around 28 000 14C years BP and a later one around 19 000 14C years BP . The
Chauvet paintings , of bison and woolly rhinoceros , yielded five dates between 32 000 and
31 000 14C years BP , which are the oldest radiocarbon age determinations so far obtained
for European cave paintings . Although they lie beyond the limit of the INTCAL98
calibration , an estimated calendar age based on the ‘ comparison curve ’ provided by the
Bahamas speleothem record ( Figure 2 . 18 ) would date the paintings to around 38 000
years BP ( Bard , 2001 )  . 
Notes 
1 . Libby ’ s early work indicated that the half-life of 14C was 5568±30 years and the early radiocarbon
dates were all calculated on the basis of this estimate of half-life . Subsequently , however , the
half-life of 14C has been recalculated at 5730 ± 40 years ( Godwin , 1962 )  . However , many dates
were published using the old half-life , and hence in order to avoid confusion , it is convention to
base all radiocarbon dates on the half-life value of 5570 ± 30 years ( Mook , 1986 )  . Strictly speaking , 
to obtain an accurate estimate of radiocarbon age , all dates should be multiplied by 1 . 03 . 
2 . Fractionation is the selective separation of chemical elements or isotopes during the operation
of physical , chemical or biological processes , for example during evaporation , condensation , 
transpiration or metabolism . 
3 . Foraminifers are small , single-celled organisms that possess a hard calcareous shell that is often
distinctively coiled to resemble that of a gastropod . They are found in a range of marine contexts
from estuarine situations to the abyssal depths of the oceans , and are especially valuable as
palaeoceanographic and palaeoclimatic indicators . 
4 . Thermohaline circulation is the movement of ocean water that occur because of differences in
temperature and salinity ( density )  . Such circulation is a major factor in the transfer of heat from
low to high latitudes , and past changes in patterns of thermohaline circulation are considered to
be major forcing factors in Quaternary climate change ( Lowe and Walker , 1997 )  . 
5 . Named after Henrik de Vries whose important paper published in 1958 first drew attention to
this phenomenon . 
6 . The solar wind is not a ‘ wind ’ in the strict sense of the word . Rather it is a stream of charged
particles ( protons and electrons ) emitted by the sun . 
7 . Ventilation is part of the thermohaline circulation in the oceans ( Footnote 4 ) and refers to that
component of the circulatory system by which oxygenated surface water are moved downwards
into the deeper parts of the oceans . 
c02 . fm Page 54 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Radiocarbon Dating 55
8 . Deepwater , as the name implies , is a water mass with specific temperature and salinity characteristics , which forms in the depths of the oceans . 
9 . Speleothem is the collective term for the reprecipitated carbonates that are found in caves in
limestone regions . These can occur in a variety of forms of dripstone , the best known of which
are stalagmites and stalactites , or flowstone . 
10 . Bayesian analysis derives from the work of the eighteenth-century mathematician , Thomas Bayes . 
His ‘ Theorem ’ has three components : the likelihood , which is the probability of observing
a particular data value , given the values of a set of unknown parameters ( i . e . the relationship
between what we want to learn about and the data we collect )  ; the prior , which is the probability
of observing specified values of the unknown parameters before we observe the data ( i . e . what
we knew before the latest data were collected )  ; and the posterior , which is a combination of the
information contained in the data , the likelihood and the prior ( i . e . the probability we attach to
specific values of the unknown parameters after observing the data )  . In Bayes Theorem , the
posterior is then proportional to the likelihood multiplied by the prior , and this provides us with
a probabilistic framework within which to make interpretations about the posterior ( Buck , 2001 )  . 
In other words , Bayes Theorem aims to ascribe probabilities to hypotheses or theories in the
light of particular specified lines of evidence ( see also Chalmers , 1999 )  . 
11 . Tephra is volcanic ash ( Chapter 7 )  . 
12 . Tufa is calcium carbonate precipitated from calcium carbonate-saturated spring water in limestone regions . It often forms a calcareous crust around lake margins , stream edges or springs , 
and frequently contains inclusions of plant macrofossils . 
13 . Testate amoebae ( or rhizopods ) are microscopic unicellular protozoans that live in freshwater . 
Fossils are well preserved in Sphagnum-rich peats ( Charman et al .  , 2000 )  . 
14 . A cuticle is the thin wax layer that forms on the outer walls of plant cells that are exposed to the
air . Being waxy , these may preserve well in certain depositional contexts , such as lake sediments . 
Grass cuticle analysis can be an important adjunct to pollen analysis , for whereas grass pollen is
very difficult to identify below species level , particular grass types may be identifiable from
their cuticles . 
15 . Plant biomarkers that can be obtained from the lipids ( fats or fat-like compounds ) found in
lake sediments include n-alkanes , n-alkanols and n-alkanoic acids . 
16 . In plants , there are two photosynthetic pathways : C3 and C4 . In general , C4 plants photosynthesise
more efficiently than C3 plants and are capable of more rapid growth ; indeed , they use only
around half the water per unit increase in dry weight . C4 plants are therefore well adapted to
arid climates where they are typically found at the present day . 
17 . Mitochondria are small cytoplasmic particles within living cells and are intimately associated
with processes of respiration . 
c02 . fm Page 55 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

c02 . fm Page 56 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 22 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
3 
Radiometric Dating 2 : Dating Using 
Long-Lived and Short-Lived 
Radioactive Isotopes 
They ( Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy ) discovered that radioactive elements decayed
into other elements – that one day you had an atom of uranium , say , and the next day you
had an atom of lead . This was truly extraordinary . It was alchemy pure and simple ; no-one
had ever imagined that such a thing could happen naturally and spontaneously . 
Bill Bryson
3 . 1 Introduction 
In this chapter we move on to consider other radioactive isotopes that form a basis for
dating . Some of these have long half-lives , enabling episodes in deep Quaternary time to
be dated ; others , possessing much shorter half-lives , can be used for dating only very
recent events . Argon-isotope dating is a technique that can provide ages of volcanic
rocks across the entire Quaternary time range . Uranium-series dating , which is mostly
applied to carbonate materials such as speleothems and corals , has a shorter time span of
a few hundred thousand years . Also applicable over time ranges of many thousands of
years is cosmogenic nuclide dating , a method that is based on the progressive accumulation of cosmic-ray radionuclides on exposed rock surfaces . All of these techniques
involve radioactive nuclides with relatively long half-lives . By contrast , lead-210 ( 210Pb )  , 
c03 . fm Page 57 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

58 Quaternary Dating Methods
caesium-137 ( 137Cs ) and silicon-32 ( 32Si ) are nuclides with very much shorter halflives , and these can be used for dating sediments over timescales that are measurable in
tens of years . 
3 . 2 Argon-Isotope Dating 
Two approaches are employed in argon-isotope dating . Potassium–argon dating is based
on the decay of the radioactive isotope of potassium , potassium-40 ( 40K )  , to the relatively
unreactive argon isotope 40Ar which is a gas . The technique was developed in the 1960s
and has been used largely to date igneous rocks . Indeed , because of the very long half-life
of 40K ( 1250 million years )  , it is possible to obtain ages for some of the oldest rocks on
earth . In terms of Quaternary applications , however , the 40K / 40Ar technique is appropriate
only for the dating of volcanic rocks that are older than ca . 100 000 years . This is because
the lack of precision in younger dates , where standard errors may be of the order of
±100% , means that such age determinations have little practical value . A variant of the
method , developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s , involves the measurement of the
ratios between two argon isotopes , 40Ar and 39Ar , the latter being generated in the rock
sample by neutron irradiation in the laboratory . Argon–argon dating has been particularly
significant for Quaternary science , as the greater level of analytical precision that is
associated with the 40Ar / 39Ar method means that much younger samples can be dated , 
and meaningful ages of 10 000 years or less can be routinely obtained . Useful reviews of
potassium–argon and argon–argon dating can be found in Aitken ( 1990 ) and Richards and
Smart ( 1991 )  , while a more in-depth account of the 40Ar / 39Ar is provided by McDougall
and Harrison ( 1999 )  . 
3 . 2 . 1 Principles of Potassium–Argon Dating 
Potassium is one of the most abundant elements on earth and is found in a range of minerals , 
including micas , clay minerals and evaporites . It is a major element in minerals of
volcanic origin , most notably the feldspars such as sanidine . 1 
It exists in three isotopic
forms , the most common of which , 39K , comprises 92 . 23% of all naturally occurring
potassium , while 41K comprises 6 . 73% . Both of these are stable isotopes . The rarest of the
three isotopes , 40K ( 0 . 00118% )  , is radioactive and decays via a branched decay scheme to
form two daughter nuclides , 40Ca and the inert gas 40Ar , both of which are stable . Despite
the fact that most 40K ( almost 90% ) decays to 40Ca , the 40K → 40Ca decay pathway
cannot be used as a means of dating . This is because 40Ca is the most commonly occurring
stable isotope of calcium and hence the very small amounts that would be generated
through the decay of 40K will result in only a minimal , and therefore effectively
unmeasurable , increase in its abundance ( Richards and Smart , 1991 )  . The 40Ar content of
a sample can be determined , however , and it is this decay pathway that constitutes the
basis for dating . 
The principles underlying 40K / 40Ar dating are relatively straightforward . When in a
molten state , volcanic rocks such as lavas or the crystal components of volcanic ashes
will release any 40Ar that is generated by the decay of 40K . Once the rocks or minerals
begin to cool , however , argon can no longer escape and is trapped within the mineral
c03 . fm Page 58 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 59
crystal lattices where its abundance increases over time . In the laboratory , the 40Ar
concentrations in rock samples can be determined by heating them to the melting point in
a furnace . This releases the gas which can be measured in a mass spectrometer . A second
sample is used to determine 40K content using an atomic absorption spectrophotometer or
a flame photometer . The ratio between 40K and radiogenic 40Ar then gives an indication
of the time that has elapsed since the volcanic event occurred . 
3 . 2 . 2 Principles of Argon–Argon Dating 
One of the problems with conventional potassium–argon dating is that measurements
have to be made on separate aliquots ( equal proportions of the sample ) and this can result
in erroneous ages where the sample material is heterogeneous ( in basalts , for example )  . 
A way around this difficulty was the development of the argon–argon dating method
wherein measurements are made on a single sample . Here , the 40Ar content is measured
directly as before , but the 40K concentration is measured indirectly by using the known
proportions between the potassium and argon isotopes . Sample grains are placed in a nuclear
reactor and irradiated . This converts a portion of the stable 39K isotopes to another form
of argon , 39Ar . As 39Ar abundance is proportional to that of the stable isotope 39K which
is , in turn , proportional to 40K ( see above )  , the 40Ar / 40K ratio in the samples can be
inferred from a single mass spectrometric measurement ( McDougall and Harrison , 1999 )  . 
In order to determine the argon content accurately , the rock samples are heated in a
stepwise manner from room temperature to the melting point of the crystal (  > 1500 °C for
sanidine )  . Both of the argon isotopes , 40Ar and 39Ar , are driven off and an age determination
is made for each step . For a well-behaved sample , the age stays the same for all steps of
gas release and a plateau is obtained which gives the date of the sample ( Figure 3 . 1a )  . 
The absence of a well-defined plateau provides a warning that the sample may be unreliable 
( see below )  . One reason why this might occur is that older feldspar grains ( xenocrysts2 
) 
with a different K–Ar concentration may have become incorporated into the dated sample . 
This difficulty can be circumvented by hand-picking the grains , but this is a laborious and
not always reliable approach . A more recently developed alternative is to target single
mineral crystals of the order of 1 mg or less and to use a high-powered laser to drive
off the argon for measurement using a super-sensitive mass spectrometer . This is
known as single-crystal laser fusion ( SLCF ) 40Ar / 
39Ar dating and has led to a significant
improvement in both the accuracy and the precision of argon–argon age estimates 
( Wintle , 1996 )  . 
3 . 2 . 3 Some Assumptions and Problems Associated with Potassium–Argon 
and Argon–Argon Dating 
There are two fundamental assumptions that underlie potassium–argon dating . The first
is one that is common to all radiometric dating techniques , namely that the system remains
closed following the volcanic event . In other words , there has been no loss of argon
following crystallisation . Loss of argon could occur if the mineral sample has been
weathered or if there has been a further episode of reheating ; in both cases an underestimate
of age will be obtained . However , petrographic examination may reveal evidence of
weathering , while the presence of secondary minerals , such as xenocrysts , will tend to
c03 . fm Page 59 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

60 Quaternary Dating Methods
indicate that recrystallisation has occurred . A further way in which possible argon loss
can be detected is to compare age estimates derived from the whole rock and mineral
fractions to determine whether or not they are concordant . This approach can also be used
to establish whether older mineral fractions have been incorporated into the rocks , a
relatively common phenomenon in volcanic material and which , if undetected , can lead
to an overestimate of age ( Richards and Smart , 1991 )  . Overestimate of age can also arise
if there is excess argon present in the sample , in other words previously accumulated gas
that has failed to escape while the rock was molten . Figure 3 . 1b shows the age spectra
that could result from these various effects . One possible cause for the lower age estimate
indicated by the initial plateau at around 290 000 years is that mineral alteration during
weathering or secondary reheating occurred during burial thereby allowing the release of
less firmly held argon , which has resulted in an aberrantly low age estimate . The true age is
likely to be given by the final hearing step , in other words ca . 800 000 years . Alternatively , 
it could be that the younger date is correct and that the higher ages obtained during the later
heating steps are due to excess argon . In that case , the date of 290 000 years is probably
correct ( Aitken , 1990 )  . 
A second important assumption is that all the 40Ar in the sample has been derived
from the decay of 40K . However , 40Ar is also a constituent of the atmosphere and hence a
proportion of this atmospheric 40Ar ( as opposed to radiogenic 40Ar ) will be present in
all minerals . It will also contaminate samples in the laboratory via the measuring apparatus . 
However , atmospheric 40Ar is always accompanied by 36Ar and as the latter will be
800
600
400
200
0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0
Fraction of argon released 
( a )  
( b ) 
Age ( thousands of years ) 
Figure 3 . 1 Age spectra obtained using the argon–argon dating technique . The argon is
released in steps by heating the sample to successively higher temperatures , and an age
determination is made on each portion released . The less firmly held argon is released in
the early steps . In ( a ) a clear plateau is evident which gives confidence in the age estimate 
( ca . 220 000 years BP ) of the sample . Sample ( b )  , however , is more problematical ( see text
for discussion )  . The samples are from two basalt flows in Israel between which there was
a palaeosol containing Upper Acheulean artefacts ( after Aitken , 1990 )  . Reproduced by
permission of Pearson Education Ltd 
c03 . fm Page 60 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 61
present in a sample only as a result of atmospheric contamination , measurement of
36Ar will enable a correction to be made for the presence of atmospheric 40Ar , using the
known ratio of 40Ar / 36Ar in the contemporary atmosphere ( 296 : 1 )  . Matters are more
complicated in argon–argon dating because 36Ar is produced from calcium when the
sample is exposed in the nuclear reactor . In that case , the correction for the presence of
atmospheric argon involves the measurement of another non-naturally occurring argon
isotope , 37Ar , which is also produced from calcium ( Aitken , 1990 )  . 
The measurement of 36Ar in argon–argon dating also enables the isochron technique
to be employed to determine the age of a sample using 40Ar as the reference isotope 
( McDougall and Harrison , 1999 )  . The latter is usually the most abundant of the stable
argon isotopes and can therefore be measured very precisely . During successive heating
steps , the ratios between36Ar / 40Ar and 39Ar / 40Ar are determined , and these are plotted on
a graph ( Figure 3 . 2 )  . The result will be a series of data points that range from pure atmospheric
argon to pure radiogenic argon . A regression line through these data points forms an
isochron , and the point at which the isochron intercepts with the x-axis ( where the
36Ar / 40Ar ratio is equal to 0 ) enables the age of the sample to be determined from
the 39Ar / 40Ar ratio at the intercept point ( Figure 3 . 2 )  . 
3 . 2 . 4 Some Applications of Potassium–Argon and Argon–Argon Dating 
The principal contributions of the potassium–argon and argon–argon techniques in
Quaternary research have been in the dating of lavas and other volcanic materials
0 1 23 456
39Ar / 40Ar
36Ar / 40Ar
0 . 004
0 . 003
0 . 002
0 . 001
0
Atmospheric argon
Isochron
Proportional
to age
Figure 3 . 2 Schematic illustration of an isochron plot . The two intercepts correspond to the
pure trapped ( y-axis ) and pure radiogenic ( x-axis ) components of the sample ( after McDougall
and Harrison , 1999 )  . Reproduced by permission of Oxford University Press
c03 . fm Page 61 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

62 Quaternary Dating Methods
associated with early hominid finds , especially in Africa ( Deacon and Deacon , 1999 )  ; 
in the development of glacial chronologies by dating tephras interbedded with glacial
deposits , for example in the Yukon ( Westgate et al .  , 2001 ) and Patagonia ( Singer et al .  , 
2004 )  ; in the dating of volcanic events , such as the great ‘ super-eruption ’ of Mt Toba in
Sumatra around 74 000 years ( section 4 . 3 . 3 . 4 )  ; and in the provision of a chronology for
the palaeomagnetic timescale , which is discussed in Chapter 7 . Some of these , and also
other applications of the technique , are considered in the following section . 
3 . 2 . 4 . 1 Potassium–argon and argon–argon dating of the dispersal of Early Pleistocene 
hominids . There is now a general acceptance that the earliest hominids evolved in
Africa ( Strauss and Bar-Yosef , 2001 )  . However , the identity of the first hominid species to disperse out of Africa and the timing of this dispersal remain controversial . 
The long-held view , which was the received wisdom until at least the early 1990s , 
that hominids remained in Africa until around 1 million years ago has been challenged
by a series of recent archaeological discoveries ( Mithen and Reed , 2002 )  . Perhaps
the most significant of these have been in the Republic of Georgia and on the island
of Java which appear to shift the date of early dispersal back by more than half a
million years . 
In Georgia , archaeological investigations at the site of Dmanisi , approximately 85 km
southwest of Tbilisi , revealed the presence of two partial Early Pleistocene hominid crania 
( Gabunia et al .  , 2000 )  . These fossils are comparable in size and morphology with Homo
ergaster ( also known as Homo erectus ) from Kenya . Potassium–argon and argon–argon
dating of basalt immediately underlying the fossil-bearing sediment produced maximum
ages for the fossil assemblages of between 1 . 8 and 2 . 0 million years , results that are
corroborated by palaeomagnetic dating ( Chapter 7 ) which suggests an age of around
1 . 7 million years for the hominid fossils . In Java , potassium–argon and argon–argon ages
of between 1 . 8 and 1 . 9 million years have been obtained on hominid fossils ( including
skull and mandible ) believed to be early Homo erectus ( Swisher et al .  , 1994 )  . Although
there has been some discussion about the provenance and reliability of the dating of these
specimens ( Langbroek and Roebroeks , 2000 ; Huffman , 2001 )  , subsequent 40Ar / 39Ar dating , 
again supported by palaeomagnetic evidence , appears to confirm a maximum age for
early hominids in Java of around 1 . 7 million years ( Sémah et al .  , 2000 )  . These dated sites , 
in association with evidence from China , and the Jordan Valley ( Figure 3 . 3 )  , show that
Homo ergaster / habilis spread northwards and eastwards out of Africa as early as 1 . 5 million
years ago , and that this migration preceded the spread of hominids into Europe , possibly
by as much as a million years . 
3 . 2 . 4 . 2 40Ar / 39Ar dating of anatomically modern Homo sapiens from Ethiopia . There
are two broad groups of theories about the origins of Homo sapiens . Some researchers
continue to support the view that anatomically modern humans developed in geographically widespread areas throughout the course of the Pleistocene . This ‘ multi-regional ’ 
hypothesis has , in large measure , been replaced by the ‘ out of Africa ’ model which
argues that , as with the earlier forms of hominid discussed in the previous section , 
modern humans originated in Africa and subsequently spread outwards from there . 
However , there are still considerable differences of opinion over the mode of modern
human evolution ; for example , whether it proceeded gradually or in ‘ fits and starts ’  
( punctuated evolution )  , and from precisely which region modern humans originated
c03 . fm Page 62 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 63 
( Stringer , 2003 )  . A key question concerns the timing of the evolutional and dispersal
events , for thus far there has been a lack of securely dated African hominid fossils
between 100 000 and 300 000 years . 
In the context of this ongoing debate , the recent discovery of anatomically modern
human fossils , in association with artefacts and fossils , at Herto , Middle Awash , Ethiopia , 
is of considerable importance ( Clark et al .  , 2003 ; White et al .  , 2003 )  . The fossil crania 
( Figure 3 . 4 ) display characteristics suggesting that they are morphologically and chronologically intermediate between archaic African fossils and later anatomically modern
Late Pleistocene humans . Significantly , 40Ar / 39Ar dating provides a precise age for the
fossils . The sandstone unit in which the artefacts and fossils were found also contains
embedded pumice and obsidian ( Chapter 6 ) clasts , and these yielded argon–argon ages of
163 000 ± 3000 , 162 000 ± 3000 and 160 000 ± 2000 years . Immediately to the south of the
hominid site , a comparable suite of fossiliferous deposits is overlain by a tuff3 
which can
be correlated with a tuff from the Konso region of southern Ethiopia where a laser fusion
40Ar / 39Ar age of 154 000±7000 years has been obtained . The Herto hominids are therefore
precisely dated to between ca . 160 000 and 154 000 years , which makes them the oldest
definite record of what we currently consider to be modern Homo sapiens . Their anatomy
and antiquity provide strong evidence for the hypothesis that modern humans emerged
from Africa and , moreover , that East Africa in particular may have been the cradle for
modern human evolution . 
Figure 3 . 3 Dmanisi , Georgia , Java and other key localities for hominid dispersal into Eurasia 
( after Mithen and Reed , 2002 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c03 . fm Page 63 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

64 Quaternary Dating Methods
Figure 3 . 4 Adult cranium ( BOU-VP-16 / 1 ) from Herto , Ethiopia , dated by 40Ar / 39Ar to
between 160000 and 154000 years BP ( photo : David Brill )  . Reprinted from Nature . Copyright
2003 Macmillan Magazines Limited 
c03 . fm Page 64 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 65
3 . 2 . 4 . 3 40Ar / 39Ar dating of historical materials : the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79 . One
of the principal benefits to Quaternary science of the development of the 40Ar / 39Ar
technique is the potential it offers for the dating of relatively recent material . As noted
earlier , single-crystal dating is the preferred procedure because it avoids problems arising
from possible effects of xenocrystic contamination , but single crystals are often too small
to yield reliably measurable quantities of radiogenic argon in samples of Late Holocene
Age . In some circumstances , however , large crystals are available and meaningful ages
can be obtained , even on samples from the historical period . 
This approach has been applied to volcanic ejecta from the eruption of Vesuvius , 
which has been documented in the writings of Pliny the Younger . The volcano erupted on
24 August 1979 and buried Pompeii , Herculaneum and other neighbouring towns and
cities under a layer of ash and pumice . Renne et al .  ( 1997 ) obtained a large pumice clast
from the recently excavated Villa of Poppea in Pompeii ( Figure 3 . 5 )  , which contained
large phenocrysts of sanidine up to 8 mm in diameter . Twelve samples were irradiated , 
analysed by incremental heating , and an isochron age of 1925 ± 94 years was obtained . 
This is in excellent agreement with the Gregorian calendar-based age ( 1918 cal . years
ago ) of the eruption . Although excess argon ( see above ) was present in the sample , this
could be detected by careful laboratory analysis of the sanidine and corrected for . This
example shows that a sample less than 2000 years old can be dated with better than
5% precision , and validates the 40Ar / 39Ar technique as a reliable geochronometer into the
Late Holocene . 
Figure 3 . 5 The recently excavated Villa of Poppea , Pompeii . Remnants of the ash and
pumice from the AD 79 eruption of Vesuvius can be seen in the section to the right of the
villa ( photo : Barry Burnham ) 
c03 . fm Page 65 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

66 Quaternary Dating Methods
3 . 2 . 4 . 4 40Ar / 39Ar dating and geological provenancing of a stone axe from Stonehenge , 
England . An unusual application of argon–argon dating is described by Kelley et al .  
( 1994 ) in relation to the discovery of a stone axe at Stonehenge in southern England . 
A fragment of the axe , which had been fashioned from rhyolitic tuff , was 40Ar / 39Ar-dated
and 11 analyses produced an isochron age value of 341 ± 5 million years , in other words
within the Lower Carboniferous period of the Upper Palaeozoic . On the basis of petrological
analysis , the source of the rhyolitic material was thought to be Pembrokeshire , South
Wales ( Roe , 1990 )  , which is also believed to be the origin of the doleritic ‘ bluestones ’ 
that form the inner circle of Stonehenge . However , argon–argon dating shows that the
stone axe is younger than the volcanic rocks of South Wales , which are Precambrian and
Lower Palaeozoic ( Ordovician and Silurian ) in age ( i . e .  > 395 million years )  , and hence it
cannot have come from that area . Trace element analysis of the Stonehenge axe indicates
an affinity with rhyolitic tuffs in the north of Britain , possibly in the Midland Valley of
Scotland . This , in turn , raises questions as to how this implement reached Salisbury Plain
in the south of England . Glacial transport is a possibility , although the glaciation of
Salisbury Plain is a controversial topic and the balance of evidence suggests it to have
been unlikely ( Scourse , 1997 )  . Alternatively , human agency could have been involved , 
which raises interesting questions about trade routes and exchange . In either event , argon–
argon dating has resulted in the provenancing of a potentially important archaeological
artefact which would otherwise have been ascribed a different , and entirely erroneous , 
source area . 
3 . 3 Uranium-Series Dating 
After radiocarbon , uranium-series ( U-series ) dating has probably been the most widely
employed radiometric dating technique in Quaternary science . The method was
developed in the years following the Second World War and was initially applied to the
dating of deep-ocean sediments , but since the 1960s it has been routinely used for the dating
of both marine and terrestrial carbonates . As with radiocarbon , significant advances came
in the 1980s through the application of mass spectrometry , and further refinements over
the last ten years ( see below ) have led to further improvements in both precision and
accuracy . The technique is based on two naturally occurring uranium isotopes , 238U and
235U , both of which decay to stable forms of lead ( 206Pb and 207Pb , respectively ) through
complex decay chains involving the creation of intermediate (  ‘ daughter ’  ) nuclides , each
with very different half-lives ( Figure 3 . 6 )  . Of the two , 238U is far more abundant , the
activity ratio between the 238U / 235U being 21 . 7 : 1 ( Schwarcz , 1989 )  , which means that the
analysis of the 235U decay chain is correspondingly more difficult . A third decay series is
headed by an isotope of thorium , 232Th , but the daughter isotopes have such short half-lives
that this decay chain cannot be used as a basis for dating . However , 232Th is valuable in
U-series dating as it can be used to correct for the presence of detrital contamination in
sample material ( section 3 . 3 . 2 )  . In the two uranium decay chains , the 230Th / 234U , 231Pa / 235U , 
234U / 238U daughter / parent combinations are used in Quaternary dating . 4 
In addition , the
231Pa / 230Th ratio can also be used to generate an estimate of age . General overviews of the
method are provided by Schwarcz ( 1989 )  , Smart ( 1991a ) and Latham ( 2001 )  , while more
c03 . fm Page 66 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 67
in-depth accounts and reviews of many applications can be found in Ivanovich and
Harmon ( 1995 ) and Bourdon et al .  ( 2003a )  . 
3 . 3 . 1 Principles of U-Series Dating 
As can be seen in Figure 3 . 6 , the half-lives of the parent isotopes at the head of the dating
series , 238U and 235U , are significantly longer than any of their daughters , which means
that the number of parent atoms remains essentially constant for several half-lives of the
daughters . If a uranium mineral is left undisturbed for several million years , the activity
of each of the daughter isotopes will come to be equal to that of the parent uranium isotope , 
as measured in numbers of disintegrations per unit time per unit weight of rock . In other
230Th
7 . 52 ×104
Years
226Ra
1 . 60 ×103
Years
206Pb
Stable
207Pb
Stable
208Pb
Stable
232Th
1 . 39 × 1010
Years
228Th
1 . 91
Years
238U Series 235U Series 232Th Series
238U
4 . 49 × 109
Years
231Pa
3 . 43 × 104
Years
234U
2 . 48 × 105
Years
235U
7 . 13 × 108
Years
234Pa
1 . 18 m
234Th
24 . 1 d
222Rn
3 . 83 d
227Th
18 . 2 d
231Th
25 . 6 h
228Ac
6 . 13 h
227Ac
22
Years
228Ra
5 . 75
Years
Figure 3 . 6 The chain decay pathways and half-lives of 238U , 235U and 232Th . The longer-lived
isotopes are outlined by boxes , and the daughter / parent combinations used in Quaternary
dating by double boxes . The vertical arrows indicate alpha decays , the diagonal arrows beta
decays , and the dotted lines show incomplete series ( d = days ; m = months )  ( after Smart , 
1991a )  . Reproduced by permission of the Quaternary Research Association 
c03 . fm Page 67 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

68 Quaternary Dating Methods
words , if the system remains closed , a state of secular equilibrium will have been
reached . However , if the system is not closed and daughter isotopes can escape , then
there will be a break in the decay chain and a state of disequilibrium will exist between
the nuclides above and below the break . In natural systems , disequilibrium between the
longer-lived isotopes in the decay chain can arise in a number of different ways . For
example , radon gas may be lost from the system by diffusion through rocks where the
matrices are porous , while chemical differences between the various elements in the series
can result in separation during weathering , transport and deposition in the hydrosphere . 
Once isotope migration ceases , however , and the system becomes closed again ( e . g . where
minerals are precipitated from solution , such as in cave speleothem )  , there is a slow
return to equilibrium conditions , and it is this process that forms the basis for estimating
age ( Smart , 1991a )  . Insofar as determination of age rests on the interruption of the decay
chain and the selective removal of some decay products , the technique is frequently
referred to as uranium-series disequilibrium dating . 
There are two ways in which disequilibrium in the U-series decay chain can be used to
infer age , and both depend on the process of fractionation , in other words a selective
separation of the decay products . These are known as the daughter deficient ( DD ) and the
daughter excess ( DE ) methods . In the case of the former , the daughter nuclide is initially
absent but increases with time until equilibrium is achieved , the most important DD
technique being based on the measurement of 230Th / 234U ratios . This works on the principle
that as uranium is soluble , whereas the daughter products ( such as 230Th ) are not , organisms
that build a shell by secreting carbonate from ocean water , such as corals and molluscs , 
will take up dissolved uranium and this will be incorporated into the skeletal structure . 
There will , however , be little or no uptake of thorium . Hence , age of the fossil sample can
be inferred by the extent to which the daughter , 230Th , has grown back towards equilibrium
with the parent 234U . The same principle applies in the dating of other carbonate materials , 
such as speleothems and travertines , where the age of precipitation of carbonate can be
determined by measuring the extent to which the decay product , 230Th , has reappeared in
the carbonate matrix . In the 235U decay series , protactinium is also insoluble , and hence
the 231Pa / 235U ratio can similarly be used as an indicator of age . 
In the DE methods , the daughter isotope is present in excess of the concentration at
secular equilibrium before decaying over time . The initial disequilibrium state will have
been caused either by preferential leaching of the parent isotope or by precipitation of the
daughter . For example , the decay of uranium in a water column will result in the precipitation of the daughter nuclides 230Th and 231Pa which will accumulate on the floors of
lakes or on the sea bed . The uranium , meanwhile , remains in solution . As a consequence , 
accumulating sediments will contain 230Th and 231Pa , but will be deficient in uranium . 
Hence the age of lake or ocean floor sediments can be determined by measuring the
extent to which 230Th or 231Pa has decayed down the profile . 
Because many of the key isotopes in the decay chain decay through the emission of
alpha particles , the conventional approach to the estimation of U-series ages has been by
alpha spectrometry following chemical extraction of uranium and thorium from the sample
material . Each U–Th measurement counting usually takes a few days , and hence analysis
is often carried out in batches ( Latham , 2001 )  . However , samples must contain a sufficient
amount of uranium ( typically more than 0 . 1 ppm )  . Moreover , because isotopic occurrence
is being detected indirectly on the basis of the decay products ( as in radiometric 14C
c03 . fm Page 68 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 69
dating )  , and because nuclear decay is a random process , an element of uncertainty will
be associated with each age determination . U-series ages are therefore accompanied
by a one standard deviation value which measures the precision of the age estimate . 
As this value reflects uncertainties in decay counting , the greater the number of
counts , the lower will be the error value . Smart ( 1991a )  , for example , has noted that
10 000 counts are needed to give a 1σ error of ±1% for each isotope . More generally , 
the precision of U-series dates obtained using alpha spectrometry tends to be between
±5% and 10% . 
The introduction of mass-spectrometric analysis in the 1980s , in which individual atoms
as opposed to the less frequent alpha particles are counted , enabled much higher levels of
analytical precision to be achieved , often on relatively small samples ( milligrams rather
than grams of sample ) of material . As a consequence , meaningful ages could now be
obtained on samples of 50–100 years , while the upper end of the dating range was
extended to beyond 500 000 years . The improvements in counting statistics meant , for
example , that a 2σ error of ±1000 could be routinely obtained on samples of last interglacial
age ( 125 000 BP )  . One particularly valuable application of these developments was the
paired U-series and 14C dating of fossil corals which forms the basis for calibrating the
radiocarbon timescale beyond 12 000 years BP ( section 2 . 6 )  . During the 1980s , thermal
ionisation mass spectrometry ( TIMS ) became the standard measurement method 
( section 3 . 3 . 3 . 3 )  , while more recent developments have seen the increasing application of
multi-collector inductively coupled-plasma mass spectrometers ( ICP-MS )  ( Goldstein
and Stirling , 2003 )  . The U-series technique is applicable over time ranges from a few
hundred up to about 350 000 years using alpha-particle spectrometry , and up to about
500 000 years by mass spectrometry . 
3 . 3 . 2 Some Problems Associated with U-Series Dating 
Apart from possible sources of error arising from sampling and laboratory measurement , 
there are two principal potential problems associated with U-series dating . First , it must
be assumed that there has been no loss or gain of nuclides since deposition : in other
words , the parent to daughter ratio is solely a function of the radioactive decay process . 
Several materials that can be dated by U-series , however , show evidence of departure
from such closed-system behaviour ( Table 3 . 1 )  . Dating of such materials necessitates the
use of correction factors which , in turn , requires a detailed knowledge of the processes
that give rise to the isotope disequilibrium . A particularly problematic material is bone , 
for it is well known that bone can continue to take up uranium after deposition or burial , 
and scientists can never be certain when a given sample of bone acquired its uranium . 
However , because bone ( both human and animal ) is such an important and relatively
common fossil material , strenuous efforts have been made to resolve the problem of
open-system behaviour in buried bone ( e . g . Millard and Hedges , 1995 ; 1996 ; Pike et al .  , 
2002 )  . These have involved the development of uptake models to try to describe how
and when the uranium was absorbed into the bone . Such models , however , often require
calibration by independent dating methods ( such as electron spin resonance : section 4 . 3 )  , 
and even then uranium loss cannot be modelled , while the possibility of a delay in uranium
uptake after burial of the bones cannot be tested ( Latham , 2001 )  . Open-system behaviour
is not confined to bone , however , for other materials , such as molluscs , may incorporate
c03 . fm Page 69 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

70 Quaternary Dating Methods
uranium into carbonate shells after their death ( McLaren and Rowe , 1996 )  , while some
calcitic deposits ( such as travertines5 
) may have been partly recrystallised after deposition . 
In the case of the latter , however , such open-system activity may be detectable by careful
petrographic analysis of the calcite prior to dating ( Schwarcz , 1989 )  . 
A second potential source of error relates to the assumption that the daughter isotopes
in the measured sample are entirely radiogenic in origin . In other words , it is assumed that
the 230Th content of a sample of speleothem , for example , was 0 at the time of crystal
formation , and hence the measured 234U / 230Th activity ratio is a reflection purely of the
reappearance of 230Th through radioactive decay . However , it is not uncommon for
carbonate materials to be contaminated by detrital materials ( such as aeolian dust , or
water-transported silts and clays ) that already contain daughter nuclides . Such contamination
can lead to U-series ages that are older than the true age of the sample . However , detritus
may also carry 234U and 238U and , if uncorrected for , will result in ages that are younger
than the true sample age . Fortunately , the effects of detrital contamination can be
corrected for by measuring the activity of 232Th that is present in the sample but which
plays no part in the decay chain of uranium . This isotope is present in detritus , but not in
pure calcite , and hence the 232Th / 230Th ratio can be used to correct for detrital addition of
230Th . This is normally done using the isochron technique , in which multiple-sample
leaching analyses are undertaken and the activity ratios of the different isotopes in each of
the samples are plotted against each other ( Schwarcz and Latham , 1989 )  . This will show
the extent to which detrital contamination has influenced the 230Th / 234U and 234U / 238U
ratios , the isotopic ratios from which ages are calculated ( Figure 3 . 7 )  . The correction for
the former ratio can be found by plotting 230Th / 232Th versus 234U / 232U , while the latter
ratio can be corrected by plotting 234U / 232Th against 238U / 232Th . These corrected ratios , 
which are reflected in the gradients of the lines on the isochron plots , are then inserted
into the normal age equation to calculate the age of the sample . 
Table 3 . 1 Reliability / unreliability of uranium-series dates for terrestrial materials arising 
from deviations from closed-system behaviour and contamination by 230Th and 234U from 
detrital material ( after Smart , 1991a ) 
Reliability Material Closed system ? Contaminated ? 
Reliable Unaltered coral Closed Clean 
Clean speleothem Clean 
Volcanic rocks – 
Dirty speleothem Contaminated 
Possibly reliable Ferruginous concretions Possibly closed Contaminated 
Tufa Contaminated 
Mollusc shells Contaminated 
Phosphates Contaminated 
Generally unreliable Diagenetically altered corals Open Clean 
Bone ?  
Evaporites Contaminated 
Caliche Contaminated 
Stromatolites Contaminated 
Peat and wood ? 
c03 . fm Page 70 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 71
3 . 3 . 3 Some Applications of U-Series Dating 
U-series dating has been applied to a wide range of carbonate materials in a variety of
different contexts . It has been used to derive chronologies of sea-level change , particularly
relating to interglacial high-stands of the sea , through the dating of corals ( see following
section ) and molluscs ( Jedoui et al .  , 2003 )  , and also sediments from submarine carbonate
platforms ( Henderson and Slowey , 2000 )  . It has been extensively employed in the dating
of speleothem ( section 3 . 3 . 3 . 3 )  , while U-series dates have also been obtained on a range
of carbonate materials , including ferricretes6 
 ( Augustinus et al .  , 1997 ) and travertines 
( Eikenberg et al .  , 2001 )  . Tufa has also been dated by U-series ( e . g . Szabo et al .  , 1996 )  , 
although detrital Th contamination and open-system uranium loss make this a more
problematic dating material ( Garnett et al .  , 2004 )  . Other applications include the dating
of organic sediments that contain carbonate residues , such as peats ( Heijnis and van der
Plicht , 1992 ) and lake deposits ( Harle et al .  , 2002 )  , and the dating of teeth ( Esposito et al .  , 
2002 )  . More detailed examples are described in the following section . 
3 . 3 . 3 . 1 Dating the Last Interglacial high sea-level stand in Hawaii . One of the most
successful materials for the application of U-series dating is fossil coral . This is because
after death coral skeletons act as effectively closed systems until the coral dissolves or
changes to calcite . There is little or no inherited 230Th , and hence problems of detrital
contamination are minimised . Moreover , most corals contain sufficient uranium ( typically
2–3 ppm ) for the application of both the 230Th / 234U and 231Pa / 235U methods which enables
an independent check to be made on calculated ages ( Smart , 1991a )  . U-series dating of
fossil coral reef complexes has therefore been widely employed in studies of Late Quaternary
5 . 0
4 . 0
50 ka
3 . 0
2 . 0
1 . 0
0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 20 ka 100 ka
200 ka
300 ka
400 ka
600 ka
230Th / 234U activity ratio
234U / 238U activity ratio
Figure 3 . 7 Variation of 234U / 238U and 230Th / 234U activity ratios with time in a closed system
where there is no initial 230Th present . The near vertical lines are lines of contant age 
( isochrons )  , while the near horizontal lines show changes in nuclide activity with time for
different initial 234U / 238U activity ratios ( after Heijnis , 1995 ) 
c03 . fm Page 71 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

72 Quaternary Dating Methods
sea-level change , and has been used to gain an independent estimate of the duration of
interglacial periods ( Edwards et al .  , 2003 )  . 
One area where there is extensive evidence of interglacial sea-level high-stands is the
Hawaiian Islands in the Pacific Ocean ( Szabo et al .  , 1994 )  . On Oahu , to the northwest
of the main island of Hawaii ( Figure 3 . 8 )  , shorelines that formed during interglacial
high-stands of sea level have been raised by tectonic activity and now occur up to 13 m
above present-day sea level ( Muhs et al .  , 2002 )  . TIMS U-series dating of coral samples
produced ages of between ~134 000 and ~113 000 years , with the majority clustering
in the range of ~125 000–115 000 years . These results showed that not only were the
shorelines formed during the Last Interglacial , but that the Interglacial may have been
of significantly longer duration ( ~136 000 to ~115 000 years ) than hitherto considered . 
The conventional view of the duration of the Last Interglacial based , for example , on the
MOI record is that peak interglacial conditions lasted for ca . 10 000 years . These data
from Hawaii suggest that such conditions , when global ice volume was significantly
less than present ( and sea levels were commensurately higher )  , may have lasted very
much longer . 
3 . 3 . 3 . 2 Dating of early hominid remains from China . Many cave sites , especially in
limestone areas , contain well-preserved fossil bones . This is because mineral salts in solution that percolate through the sediments are deposited in the vacant pore spaces within
the bones , as a result of which the bone material becomes completely permineralised . 
However , because of the problem of post-mortem uptake of uranium by bone 
( section 3 . 3 . 2 )  , the age of vertebrate bone assemblages is often determined through the
dating of interbedded speleothem calcite which is more likely to act as a closed system
for U–Th isotopes . 
This latter approach was employed by Shen et al .  ( 2001 ) to obtain a chronology for
hominid remains discovered in the Zhoukoudian Cave , about 50 km southwest of Beijing , 
China . The assemblages include six fairly complete crania and other hominid fossils representing at least 40 individuals , 98 species of non-hominid mammalian fossils , and a
substantial quantity of stone artefacts . The Zhoukoudian hominid specimens , commonly
referred to as ‘ Peking Man ’  , have been widely recognised as representatives of Homo
erectus . Previous dating , using a variety of techniques , had placed the remains in the
range between 230 000 and 500 000 years . More recent U-series dating of flowstones
interbedded within the hominid-bearing horizons , however , indicates a much greater
antiquity for the assemblages . The age of the number 5 skull , the best-preserved of the
cranial finds , is closely constrained to between 400 000 and 500 000 years while hominid
remains from the underlying strata in the cave are at least 600000 , and may be greater than
800 000 years old . These U-series dates show that human occupation of the Zhoukoudian
cave site occurred much earlier and lasted for much longer ( more than half a million
years ) than previously thought . The redating of the Zhoukoudian site also has a bearing
on the ongoing debate on human evolution , for the new ages support the idea that Asian
Homo erectus and African H . heidelbergensis may represent different stages of human
evolution , the former predating the latter . This contrasts with the generally held belief
that the two hominid species were broadly contemporaneous . In addition , a much older
age assignment to the Zhoukoudian hominids means a greater interval of time
between H . erectus and H . sapiens in eastern Asia , making the former more suitable as an
c03 . fm Page 72 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Coral and shell-bearing 
Waimanalo Formation 
reef limestone
NORTHEAST
Sea level
North shore , east of Kaena Point : 
Tertiary
basalt
NORTH
Sea level
Eolian
sand
Basaltic
talus
Coral cobble
conglomerate
In situ
coral / algal
heads
Kanku Point : 
Alala Point
Eolianite
Modern beach
Sea level
Waimanalo
Formation
reef limestone with
in situ coral heads
Coral-bearing
conglomerate WEST
Kahe Point : 
Coral and shellbearing reef
limestone
Low-angle
beach deposits
METERS
METERS
METERS
METERS
HIGHWAY 93 NORTHEAST
0
5
0
5
10 
( Porites )  
[ from Szabo
et al .  , 1994 ] 
117 . 6 ± 1 . 9 ka
115 . 2 ± 0 . 9 ka
126 . 2 ± 0 . 7 ka 
( conglomerate
Pocillopora ) 
122 . 1 ± 0 . 9 ka 
( conglomerate
Porites ) 
117 . 9 ± 0 . 6 ka
119 . 3 ± 0 . 8 ka
126 . 2 ± 0 . 7 ka 
( all in situ Porites ) 
113 . 0 ± 0 . 7 ka
121 . 0 ± 1 . 3 ka 
( in situ Porites ) 
121 . 5 ± 0 . 6 ka
133 . 0 ± 0 . 8 ka 
( Porites ) 
119 . 4 ± 0 . 6 ka 
( Porities ) 
0
10
0 150
METERS
0
5
10
Tertiary
basalt 
?  
? 
Pacific
Ocean
Kauai
Molokai
Maui Oahu Niihau
Lanai
Hawaii
KILOMETERS
Alala Point
Kahuku Point
Mokapu Point
Honolulu
Kahe Point
Kaena Point
Kaena Point
State Park
0 100
0 15
KILOMETERS
Diamond Head
WAIANAE
OAHU
KOOLAU
RANGE
RANGE
158°10 ' 
21°40 ' 
21°30 ' 
21°20 ' 
158°00 ' 
Figure 3 . 8 The island of Oahu , Hawaii , and schematic cross-sections of some of the dated interglacial high sea-level locations ( after Muhs
et al .  , 2002 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c03 . fm Page 73 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

74 Quaternary Dating Methods
ancestral form than H . heidelbergensis , which has , hitherto , been widely considered to be
the direct ancestor of H . sapiens . 
3 . 3 . 3 . 3 Dating of a speleothem from northern Norway . Cave speleothems are very important
sources of palaeoclimatic data . Carbonate precipitation is strongly reduced or arrested
during cold episodes and increases to a maximum during warm intervals . In mid- and
high latitudes , therefore , speleothem development reflects the sequence of climatic
changes during a glacial–interglacial cycle . In addition , because the oxygen isotope composition of cave seepage water is strongly influenced by temperature , the δ18O signal in cave
speleothem carbonate can be used as a palaeothermometer , in other words to provide
a quantified record of past cave temperature changes ( Lowe and Walker , 1997 )  . Where
organic residues have been incorporated into the carbonate , such records can sometimes
be dated by AMS 14C . More frequently , however , U-series dating is used to provide a
timescale for climatic reconstructions from cave speleothems ( Frumkin etal .  , 1999 ; Williams
et al .  , 2004 )  . A good overview of U-series chronology and environmental applications of
speleothems can be found in by Richards and Dorale ( 2003 )  . 
With the development of TIMS U-series dating , it became possible to obtain precise age
determinations on very young speleothem carbonate , and hence to date speleothem-derived
climate records from the present interglacial . An example is provided by Lauritzen and
Lundberg ( 1999 ) from a cave site in northern Norway . There the δ18O record from a
stalagmite sample ( SG93 ) was calibrated against surface temperature and the resulting
palaeotemperature record was underpinned by 12 TIMS U-series ages which ranged
from 10 409 ± 21 to 253 ± 2 years . The average error over the 10 000-year time span was
22 years . There is a close correlation between the speleothem temperature trend and the
temperature record derived from the oxygen isotope signal in the Greenland GISP2 ice
core , particularly in the period between 8000 and 4000 years ago ( Figure 3 . 9A )  , while there is
also a close match between known ‘ historical events ’ and the speleothem temperature
reconstruction , especially for the period 2000–1000 years ago ( Figure 3 . 9B )  . This suggests
that not only is the temperature record from the speleothem reflecting hemispherical
climate trends , but that U-series dating provides a coherent timescale for the sequence . 
3 . 3 . 3 . 4 Dating of fluvial terraces in Wyoming , USA . The ages of coarsely clastic Quaternary deposits , such as fluvial terraces and alluvial fans , are difficult to obtain using
conventional dating methods . Organic materials are rare , especially in arid and semi-arid
areas , and hence radiocarbon can seldom be employed . Moreover , the relatively short
half-life of 14C means that even if organic residues are present , only relatively young
deposits can be dated using this technique . Luminescence dating ( sections 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 ) 
may be difficult to apply to such complex depositional materials , while cosmogenic
nuclide dating ( section 3 . 4 ) not only requires considerable analytical effort , but tends to
generate ages of relatively low precision when used on old alluvial deposits . 
One technique that can be employed , however , is U-series dating of pedogenic carbonate , 
the thin carbonate coatings or rinds that form on gravels and cobbles . Studies have shown
that these can develop as geochemically closed systems , and hence 230Th / U dating can be
applied to such materials ( Ludwig and Paces , 2002 )  . Sharp et al .  ( 2003 ) describe an
example of this approach in the dating of a fluvial terrace sequence in the Wind River Basin
of western Wyoming , USA ( Figure 3 . 10A )  . Samples were obtained from the undersides
of gravels ( Figure 3 . 10B ) in four terraces ( WR-1–WR-4 ) and dated by TIMS . The youngest
c03 . fm Page 74 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 75
terrace , WR-1 , was dated at 16 900 ± 900 years , which agrees well with cosmogenic ages
of between 16 000 and 23 000 years for the landform . This , in turn , suggests that the time
lag between deposition of the alluvial gravels and the formation of dateable clast rinds in
the WR-1 terrace is relatively short , apparently of the order of 2000–5000 years . The ages
for terraces WR-4 ( 167 000 ± 6400 years ) and WR-2 ( 55 000 ± 8600 years ) indicate a
mean incision rate of 0 . 26 ± 0 . 05 m per thousand years for the Wind River over the last 
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 3 . 9 ( A ) Temperature curves for the last 10 000 years from speleothem SG93 ( lower
curve ) and GISP2 ( upper curve )  .  ( B ) Temperature history from speleothem SG93 inferred for
the last 2000 years compared with known ‘ historical ’ events ( after Lauritzen and Lundberg , 
1999 )  . Reproduced by permission of Arnold Publishers 
c03 . fm Page 75 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

76 Quaternary Dating Methods
Absaroka Mts . 
Dubois
WR3 Lonore
WR3 Bull Lake North
WR3 Urbigkell
WR2 Bull Lake
Bull Lake
WR3 Kinnear Bridge
WR4 Reservoir
Riverton
WR2
Boysoil
Reservoir
Thermopolis
0
N
108°30 ' 
44°00 ' 
Dubois
WR1 East Fork
Dinwoody
Lakes
WR1 Lonore
W I N D R I V E R R A N G E
WR3 Lonore
0 20 km
N
WR3 Kinnear Bridge
Bull Lake
WR3 Bull Lake North
WR3 Urbigkelt
WR2 Bull Lake
WR4 Reservoir
Wind River
Riverton
Thermopolis
108°30 ' 
W I N D R I V E R R A N G E
20 km
Dinwoody
Lakes
44°00 '  
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 3 . 10 ( A ) The Wind River basin , western Wyoming , showing the sampling localities
for U-series dating .  ( B ) Soil developed on terrace WR-1 showing pedogenic carbonate rinds 
( light-coloured coatings ) on the bottom of the clasts ( after Sharp et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced
with permission of Elsevier 
c03 . fm Page 76 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 77
glacial cycle . Terrace WR-3 , which is U-series-dated at 150 000 ± 8300 years , is coeval
with the final maximum glacial advance of the penultimate Rocky Mountain ( Bull Lake ) 
glaciation , and is broadly synchronous with the penultimate global ice volume maximum
during MOI stage 6 . 
3 . 4 Cosmogenic Nuclide Dating 
We have seen in Chapter 2 how cosmic rays reaching the earth from space interact with
constituents of the earth ’ s atmosphere to create the radioactive nuclide 14C . Shortly after
Libby ’ s pioneering work in the use of radiocarbon as a basis for dating , a seminal paper
was published in the Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences which suggested that
radionuclides are also produced by the interaction of cosmic rays and rock minerals at the
earth ’ s surface , and that this process could have possible geological applications ( Davis
and Schaeffer , 1955 )  . It was not until the 1980s , however , with the development of
AMS , that the very low levels of cosmogenic nuclides formed in this way could be
measured , and the technique of cosmogenic nuclide ( CN ) dating , sometimes termed
terrestrial in situ cosmogenic nuclide ( TCN ) dating , began to be used as a routine
chronometric method . In Quaternary science , its principal application has been in the
determination of exposure ages of rock surfaces , but it has been employed more widely to
determine rates of operation of geomorphic processes and long-term landscape evolution . 
Reviews of the principles and technical details of CN dating in the earth sciences are
provided by Bierman ( 1994 )  , Cerling and Craig ( 1994 )  , Kurz and Brook ( 1994 ) and
Gosse and Phillips ( 2001 )  . Stuart ( 2001 ) considers the potential of the technique for
archaeology , while geomorphological applications are reviewed by Cockburn and
Summerfield ( 2004 )  . 
3 . 4 . 1 Principles of Cosmogenic Nuclide ( CN ) Dating 
The basic principles underlying dating using cosmogenic nuclides7 
are relatively
straightforward . High-energy cosmic rays entering the atmosphere collide with nuclei
triggering a cascade of high-energy neutrons ( and a smaller component of muons ) that
bathe the earth ’ s surface . The collision between these neutrons and muons and target
nuclei within certain minerals leads to the breaking apart of those nuclei into fragments ( a
process known as spallation ) and the creation of new nuclides . The concentration of
these accumulated nuclides within surficial rocks is therefore directly related to the
time that the surface has been exposed to cosmic-ray activity . The greater the time that
has elapsed since exposure , the greater will be the abundance of cosmogenic nuclides in
rock-surface samples . By measuring the latter , an estimate can be made of the former . 
In essence , therefore , this aspect of CN dating is a type of surface exposure dating
discussed in Chapter 6 . However , the methods considered in that chapter only allow
surfaces to be ranked in terms of relative order of age . Using CN dating , by contrast , a
specific age can be assigned to the time of surface exposure . 
In the above application , CN dating is being used to date specific exposure ‘ events ’  , 
but the technique can also be employed in other contents . One example is the determination of ‘ incremental changes ’ that take place at the earth ’ s surface , in other words changes
c03 . fm Page 77 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

78 Quaternary Dating Methods
that result from the progressive stripping away of small increments of material by the
various processes of weathering and erosion ( Cockburn and Summerfield , 2004 )  . Quantifying denudation rates using surface concentrations of cosmogenic nuclides works on the
principle that denudation involves bringing to the surface rock that was previously buried . 
In a steadily eroding rock outcrop , the cosmogenic nuclide concentration approaches
saturation ( or secular equilibrium ) as a result of constant production on the one hand and
losses by denudation as well as radioactive decay ( in the case of radionuclides ) on the
other . Where enough time has elapsed following exposure for erosion to have removed
a sufficient thickness of rock ( typically 1–2 m )  , a measured surface concentration of
cosmosgenic nuclides can be accurately modelled in terms of a constant denudation rate
representing an integrated rate for the minimum period of time required to reach secular
equilibrium . This model is commonly referred to as the ‘ steady-state erosion model ’ and
has been used to estimate site-specific denudation rates in a wide range of locations and
geomorphic settings ( Cockburn and Summerfield , 2004 )  . 
Where a rock surface has been selected for dating , rock samples are removed either
from the bedrock itself or from boulders lying on the surface of the overlying deposits , by
chiselling off a 1–2 cm thick layer of rock . The samples should ideally be taken from
horizontal or near-horizontal surfaces and , most importantly , from surfaces that show no
obvious signs of weathering or erosion ( see below )  . In this way samples containing
representative cosmogenic nuclide concentrations can be obtained . 
A number of cosmogenic nuclides are now commonly used as a basis for dating ( Table 3 . 2 )  . 
Of these , the two ‘ noble gases ’ helium-3 ( 3
He ) and neon-21 ( 21Ne ) are stable and can be
measured using a mass spectrometer ( Niedermann , 2002 )  . The remainder , beryllium-10 
( 
10Be )  , carbon-14 ( 14C )  , aluminium-26 ( 26Al ) and chlorine-36 ( 36Cl )  , are radioactive
and decay to daughter isotopes over time . They are also more difficult to detect and are
measured using AMS . Each of these isotopes has a different half-life ( Table 3 . 2 ) which
means that they are applicable over very different time ranges . For the dating of young
Table 3 . 2 Some cosmogenic nuclides used for exposure dating ( after Kurz and Brook , 1994 ) 
Isotope Half-Life 
( years ) 
Measurement method Procedural comments Approximate 
age range 
3
He Stable Mass Spectrometry Diffusive loss ? high 
production rate ; lowest 
detection limit ; inherited He 
1 ka to ca . 3 Ma 
10Be 1 . 5 × 106 AMS Atmospheric contamination 3 ka to 4 Ma 
26Al 7 . 16 × 105 AMS 27Al interference ( must use 
Al-poor minerals ) 
5 ka to 2 Ma 
36Cl 3 . 08 × 105 
AMS No mineral separates ; 
composition-dependent 
( produced by spallation and 
slow neutrons ) 
5 ka to 1 Ma 
21Ne Stable Mass spectrometry Inherited neon ; useful for old 
samples 
7 ka to 10 Ma (  ?  ) 
14C 5730 AMS Shortest half-life ; atmospheric 
14C contamination 
1 ka to 18 ka
c03 . fm Page 78 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 79
surfaces ( less than ~5000 years in age ) current technology means that 3
He , 14C and 36Cl
are the most appropriate nuclides to employ , whereas the last two would not be suitable
for the dating of older Quaternary materials . The nature of the sample material will also
vary . 14C , 10Be and 26Cl , for example , are measured on pure quartz samples , whereas 36Cl
analyses are generally undertaken on whole rock samples . Cosmogenic 3
He and 21Ne
abundances are usually determined on a particular mineral type , such as olivine or garnet 
( Stuart , 2001 )  . 
It is also worth noting that cosmogenic nuclides are present in glacier ice . These are
produced not at the earth ’ s surface , but rather in the atmosphere by cosmic-ray spallation
reactions ( as in the case of 14C ) and they are subsequently incorporated into the ice
through precipitation processes . Because of the long half-life of these cosmogenic
nuclides ( Table 3 . 2 )  , they cannot be used to assign ages to ice less than 100 000 years old , 
but much older ice can be dated . For example , a 36Cl age of ~760 000 years was obtained
from near-bottom ice in the Guliya ice cap on the Qinghai–Tibetan Plateau ( Thompson
et al .  , 1997 )  . Cosmogenic nuclides can also be used to synchronise ice-core records . 
Changing atmospheric concentrations of cosmogenic nuclides will be reflected in downcore
variations in those nuclides in the ice . As the atmospheric changes are global in terms of
their effects , the cosmogenic nuclide ‘ signal ’ may be used as a basis for correlation
between ice-core records from different regions of the world . A good example is the
marked peak in 10Be and 36Cl concentrations at ~40 000 years , which has been detected in
both Greenland and Antarctic ice cores , and which can be used to link the ice-core
records from the northern and southern polar regions ( Yiou et al .  , 1997 )  . 
3 . 4 . 2 Sources of Error in CN Dating 
As with radiocarbon dating , a number of assumptions underlie CN dating , and several of
these constitute a potential source of error . First , it is assumed that the surface that is
being dated has not inherited cosmogenic isotopes from previous exposure events . In
other words , the ‘ exposure clock ’ has been effectively zeroed . Prior exposure , for
example in glacial or fluvial sediments , can never be completely excluded and can only
be corrected for by replicate measurements . Second , there has to be an assumption that
the surface has not been eroded or weathered since the time of initial exposure . To some
extent , this can be checked by careful field sampling , but it remains a source of uncertainty
in certain contexts , for example in the dating of glacial moraines where erosion of the
moraine surface and exhumation of fresh boulders can lead to serious underestimates of
moraine age ( Putkonen and Swanson , 2003 )  . Underestimates of age may also be made if
the dated surface has been shielded from cosmic radiation , either by snow cover or by
soils and / or sediments ( Benson et al .  , 2004 )  . Third , the surface must have acted as a
closed system since exposure , so there has been no loss of nuclides or contamination by
others . Fourth , it must be assumed that the surface selected for dating has been exposed
for a sufficient length of time for a measurable quantity of the cosmogenic nuclides
to have accumulated or , in the case of radioactive nuclides , for a short enough time for
the concentration of radioactive nuclides not to have reached equilibrium , which is
normally about five half-lives ( Stuart , 2001 )  . 
It is also essential that the production rates of cosmogenic nuclides on rock surfaces
can be established with a reasonable degree of accuracy . This is a vital component of
c03 . fm Page 79 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

80 Quaternary Dating Methods
CN dating , but obtaining a reliable estimate of production rates may not be straightforward
as these are known to vary with altitude , latitude , depth below the ground surface , and
degree of shielding from cosmic rays ( e . g . Stone , 2000 )  . In addition , past changes in
cosmic-ray flux have to be built into the calculations . In practice , therefore , determining an
absolute surface exposure age requires scaling-calibration data for the latitude and altitude of the sample in question ( Dunai , 2000 )  , and such data may not be easy to obtain . 
Finally , problems may be caused by the natural presence of non-cosmogenic nuclides in
rocks . For example , 36Cl may be produced in terrestrial rocks by neutron activation of
35Cl resulting from the decay of uranium and thorium isotopes ( Zreda and Phillips , 
1994 )  . In addition , cosmogenic nuclides may be present that have not been generated by
spallation reactions in the rock , but rather have been adsorbed from the atmosphere . In
both cases , those nuclides that have not been generated in situ from cosmic-ray bombardment have to be identified and corrected for . 
All of the above generate uncertainties in exposure ages which , at present , are in the
range of 10–20% , although advances in our understanding of the factors contributing to
cosmogenic nuclide production rates mean that the total uncertainty in exposure ages is
continually improving ( Gosse and Phillips , 2001 )  . In addition , however , there are analytical
errors arising from AMS measurements . For 10Be , 14C , 26Cl and 36Cl determinations , this is
usually less than 7% , but for 3
He and 21Ne this is typically better than ±3% ( Stuart , 2001 )  . 
3 . 4 . 3 Some Applications of CN Dating 
CN dating has developed rapidly over the past ten years with eight AMS laboratories
routinely measuring 10Be and 26Al and four producing measurements of 36Cl ( Cockburn
and Summerfield , 2004 )  . The applications of the technique have been extremely varied , 
and it has been used to date such diverse phenomena as glacial advances , volcanic activity , 
meteorite impacts , seismic events , erosional histories and patterns of large-scale landform
evolution ( Gosse and Phillips , 2001 )  . Depending on the surface preservation and exposure
history , CN dating has an effective range from the Pliocene to the Late Holocene . Four
applications relating specifically to the surface exposure dating of Quaternary events are
considered in the following sections . 
3 . 4 . 3 . 1 Cosmogenic dating of two Late Pleistocene glacial advances in Alaska . Some of
the earliest applications of CN dating were in the field of glacial geology , where
cosmogenic isotopes were used to determine surface exposure ages of moraines formed
during successive phases of glacier advance and retreat ( e . g . Phillips et al .  , 1990 )  . This
approach has continued to be used as a basis for glacial chronologies ( e . g . Phillips et al .  , 
2000 ; Owen et al .  , 2003 ; Kelly et al .  , 2004 )  , as well as in the dating of periglacial features 
( Barrows et al .  , 2004 )  . An example is described by Briner et al .  ( 2001 ) from the southwestern part of the Ahklun Mountains , Alaska , where two glacial advances , the Arolik
Lake and the Klat Creek glaciations , are delimited by well-preserved moraines and
associated features ( Figure 3 . 11 )  . Previous research in the area had tentatively assigned
these to Early and Late Wisconsinan ( Figure 1 . 4 ) glacial stages , respectively . Thirtytwo cosmogenic 36Cl exposure ages were obtained on boulders from one Arolik Lake
moraine and six Klat Creek moraines . Four moraine boulders on the Arolik Lake
moraine have a mean surface exposure age of 60 300 ± 3200 years , which confirms this
c03 . fm Page 80 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Figure 3 . 11 The Ahklun Mountains , southwestern Alaska , showing the extent of the Arolik Lake ( Early Wisconsinan ?  ) and Klak Creek ( Late
Wisconsinan ?  ) glacial advances . Sample sites for cosmogenic nuclide dating are indicated by numbers . The weighted mean 36Cl exposure ages
for the moraines are shown on the right ( after Briner et al .  , 2001 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c03 . fm Page 81 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

82 Quaternary Dating Methods
ice advance as being of Early Wisconsinan in age . A moraine deposited by an ice-cap
glacier during the hypothesised Late Wisconsinan advance has a mean surface exposure
age of 19 600 ± 1400 years ( Site 4 , Figure 3 . 11 )  , while five moraines deposited by alpine
glaciers have mean surface exposure ages ranging from 30 000 to 17 000 years , again
confirming a Late Wisconsinan Age for this glacial phase . These results show that , in
contrast with many other areas , the most extensive Late Pleistocene glaciation in this part
of Alaska occurred during the earlier , rather than in the later , part of the Wisconsinan 
( Last ) Cold Stage . 
3 . 4 . 3 . 2 Cosmogenic dating of the Salpausselkä I formation in Finland . As the
Fennoscandian ice sheet wasted at the end of the Last ( Late Weichselian ) Cold Stage , a
large lake ( the Baltic Ice Lake ) was impounded between the northward and westward
retreating ice margin and the land areas to the south . In many areas , readvances of the ice
margin into this lake during overall deglaciation led to the formation of morainic ridges
of glacial , glaciofluvial and glaciolacustrine materials . Some of the most spectacular are
the Salpausselkä ice-marginal formations of southern Finland which comprise two
sub-parallel ridges that can be traced over a distance of ca . 600 km . The timing of the
readvance that created the Salpausselkä formations has been an important question in
studies of the overall pattern of deglaciation in the Baltic region , and the currently
accepted age based on varve chronology ( section 5 . 3 ) ranges between 11 680 and 11 430
years BP , although a recent revision to the varve chronology would place the timeframe
for deposition of Salpausselkä I in the period 12 700–11 700 years ago . This suggests that
the readvance occurred during the Younger Dryas Stadial ( Figure 1 . 5 )  . In an attempt to
test this hypothesis , Tschudi et al .  ( 2000 ) obtained 10Be measurements on boulders on the
surface of the Salpausselkä I moraine to the west of Lahti , Finland ( Figure 3 . 12 )  . These
gave four minimum surface exposure ages ranging from 11 050 ± 910 to 11 930 ± 950
years , producing an error-weighted mean age of 11 420 ± 470 years . Correcting for
erosion on the surface boulders ( estimated to be 5mm / kyr )  , this generated a surface exposure
age of 11 610 ± 470 years , an age estimate that accords very closely with the varve
chronology and confirms the view that Salpausselkä I was formed by a readvance of the
ice margin during the Younger Dryas cold stage . 
3 . 4 . 3 . 3 Cosmogenic dating of Holocene landsliding , The Storr , Isle of Skye , Scotland . Major
Holocene rock slope failures are a common feature of many parts of the Scottish Highlands , but precise dating of these events has often proved difficult and the causes of slope
failure remain equally uncertain . In an attempt to determine the age of one of the most
famous examples of slope failure in Scotland , The Storr on the Trotternish escarpment of
the east coast of the Isle of Skye , Ballantyne et al .  ( 1998a ) obtained 36Cl ages on rock
samples from two separate landslide blocks near the upstanding pinnacle known as the
 ‘ Old Man of Storr ’  ( Figure 3 . 13 )  . Separate exposure ages of 6300 ± 700 and 6600 ± 800
years gave an overall age estimate of 6500 ± 500 years for rock slope failure at the site . 
This date is consistent with AMS radiocarbon dates on buried soil horizons on the summit
plateau of The Storr . These contain particles that have been weathered from the headwall
of the landslide and blown upwards to be trapped by vegetation at the scarp crest . The
radiocarbon dates place the onset of aeolian accumulation after 7200–6900 cal . years BP
but before 5600–5300 cal . years BP , thereby bracketing the surface exposure age of ca . 
6500 years BP . The dates are also consistent with relative dating evidence which indicates
that most rock slope failures in the Scottish Highlands occurred during the Early
c03 . fm Page 82 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 83
Figure 3 . 12 The Salpausselkä I moraine formation in the Lahti area , southern Finland , 
showing the locations of 10Be measurements ( after Tschudi et al .  , 2000 )  . Reproduced by
permission of Taylor & Francis AS , www . tandf . no / boreas 
Figure 3 . 13 The upper part of the Storr landslide , Isle of Skye , Scotland , showing the ‘ Old
Man of Storr ’  ( centre ) and other pinnacles and landslide blocks . The sampling sites for 36Cl
exposure dating were located on rock ridges near the centre of the slipped mass , immediately to
the left and right of the Old Man of Storr ( photo : Colin Ballantyne ) 
c03 . fm Page 83 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

84 Quaternary Dating Methods
Holocene , several thousand years after the disappearance of the last ice sheet . This , in
turn , suggests that a glacial or periglacial cause is unlikely , but rather that progressive
joint extension and shearing of rock bridges may have resulted in slope failure , although
slope instability related to regional seismic activity cannot be completely excluded . 
3 . 4 . 3 . 4 Cosmogenic dating of alluvial deposits , Ajo Mountains , southern Arizona , USA . 
A characteristic feature of the landscape of the southwestern United States is the
piedmont slope . This typically comprises an upper erosional zone connected with the
mountain front , a middle zone of transition , and a lower zone of aggradation that includes
alluvial fans . Landforms of the piedmont slope and their associated surfaces developed
during an interval of relatively constant conditions , but environmental changes associated , 
for example , with tectonics , climate and base-level changes create a new generation of
landforms and surfaces . Establishing chronologies for these surfaces has usually
relied on relative dating methods , such as degree of soil development and associated soil
development indices ( Chapter 6 )  , but these have not always proved satisfactory . 
Liu etal .  ( 1996 ) describe an alternative approach using 36Cl dating of boulders on alluvial
fan surfaces in the Ajo Mountain region of southern Arizona . Previous work had identified
two alluvial fan units ( Qf1 and Qf2 )  , two fluvial terrace units ( Qt1 and Qt2 )  , and active
fan channels ( Qfc ) within the study area ( Figure 3 . 14A )  , and a combination of geomorphic
and soil-stratigraphic evidence suggested that Qt2 is the youngest surface , Qt1 the oldest , 
and the terraces Qt1 and Qt2 are of intermediate age . In order to test this hypothesis , 
samples for 36Cl dating were taken from boulders and cobbles on the surfaces of the
alluvial units , and organic material was also recovered from the terrace sediments for 14C
dating to provide a check on the 36Cl dates . The results of 36Cl dating confirmed the relative
chronology outlined above , but the marked difference in age between 14C and 36Cl dates 
( the latter being significantly older )  , and the considerable spread in 36Cl exposure ages on
each of the surfaces , suggested that repeated cycles of erosion and deposition have resulted
in an inherited 36Cl signal in many of the dated samples . The effects of erosion may also
have influenced the apparent 36Cl ages of some samples . These problems were corrected
for by using the apparent 36Cl age of a modern debris flow and channel deposits , and an
alluvial history was reconstructed for the area ( Figure 3 . 14B )  . The oldest preserved alluvial
fan surface apparently stabilised at least 440 000 years ago , but it may have been reactivated between 330000 and 230000 years BP . Incision of Qf1 and deposition of Qf2 sediment
apparently dates to between 180 000 and 100 000 years BP . Both alluvial fan surfaces
seem to have experienced at least minor modifications between 60 000 and 30 000 years
followed by incision and deposition of the older terrace sediments ( Qt1 ) around 18 000
years . Finally , the channels were incised again and the younger terrace sediment ( Qt2 ) was
deposited as a shallow fill in the channels around ca . 2500 years ( based on 14C dating )  . The
36Cl data clearly show that these surfaces experienced extremely complex histories during
the Mid- and Late Quaternary , more so than had been evident in previous investigations . 
3 . 5 Dating Using Short-Lived Isotopes 
Two isotopes with very short half-lives , 210Pb ( 22 . 26 years ) and 137Cs ( 30 years )  , have
been used to date very recent sediment sequences spanning , at most , the last two or three
c03 . fm Page 84 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 85
centuries . These techniques have , in the main , been applied to the dating of lake sediments , 
but other depositional contexts have also been dated ( Appleby and Oldfield , 1992 )  . 
Attempts have also been made to use a third short-lived isotope , 32Si , and if technical
difficulties relating to counting can be overcome ( see below )  , this could also prove to be a
valuable dating tool for the last millennium . 
3 . 5 . 1 Lead-210 ( 210Pb ) 
The method of 210Pb dating was developed in the 1960s and has since been used primarily
in the dating of lake sediments within the time range of 1–150 years . It is based on the
A NE Sketch of A-A ' Cross-section A ' 
Qf2 Qf2 Qf2
Qf1
Qfc
Qt2
Qt1
Qf2
uncorrected
corrected
Channel
Qf2 , Qf1
Qf2 , Qf1
Qf1
Qf1
Qf2
0 100 200 300 400 500
Mean Cl – 36 Age ( ×1000 year )  
( B )  
( A ) 
Geomorphic Units
Figure 3 . 14 ( A ) Cross-section through the major surfaces in the Ajo Mountain region , 
southern Arizona . Qf1 and Qf2 represent alluvial fan surfaces and Qt1 and Qt2 represent
terraces .  ( B ) Mean cosmogenic 36Cl ages for the different geomorphic units in A . The open
squares represent uncorrected ages ; the filled squares , the ages of the terraces corrected for
inherited 36Cl alone ; and the black bars , the age ranges given by correcting for inherited 36Cl
and erosion ( after Liu et al .  , 1996 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c03 . fm Page 85 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

86 Quaternary Dating Methods
escape of radon gas from the earth into the atmosphere . Radon ( 222Rn ) is part of the
uranium-series decay chain ( section 3 . 3 . 1 ) and decays via a series of daughter isotopes to
210Pb . This unstable isotope , with a half-life of 22 . 26± 0 . 22 years , is removed from the
atmosphere by precipitation and becomes embedded in sediments where it subsequently
decays to a stable form of lead ( 206Pb )  . By measuring the ratio of 210Pb to 206Pb in a sequence
of lake sediment , the period of time since the lead was deposited can be determined and
thus the rate of sediment accumulation can be established ( Olsson , 1986 )  . 
In 210Pb dating , two models are used for age calculations . The first assumes a constant
initial concentration ( CIC ) of unsupported 210Pb per unit dry weight of sediment at each
depth in the profile , irrespective of whether or not any variations may have occurred in
the rate of sediment accumulation . Hence , in undisturbed cores of sediment , unsupported
210Pb concentrations should decline monotonically with depth . The problem with this
model is that variations in sediment accumulation rate will influence unsupported 210Pb
concentrations ; accelerated sediment accumulation , for example , will dilute 210Pb values
and lead to an underestimate of age . For this reason , most applications of 210Pb dating
employ the constant rate of supply ( CRS ) model which assumes that the unsupported
210Pb flux has been constant over the course of the past 150 years or so , and hence there
has been a constant rate of supply of unsupported lead to the sediments ( Oldfield et al .  , 
1978 ; Appleby etal .  , 1979 )  . A useful overview of 210Pb dating as applied to sedimentation
studies is provided by Appleby and Oldfield ( 1992 )  . 
3 . 5 . 2 Caesium-137 ( 137Cs ) 
A number of radioactive isotopes were produced as a result of the nuclear weapons testing
programmes that followed the Second World War . Perhaps the most widely recognised
has been 137Cs ( half-life of 30 years )  , which showed the first pronounced atmospheric
increase in the northern hemisphere in 1954 , and a clear maximum in 1963 , after which
atmospheric concentrations declined significantly with successive nuclear test-ban treaties . 
The 1963 maximum in atmospheric 137Cs is reflected in lake sediment sequences , and
forms a distinctive time-stratigraphic marker horizon ( Olsson , 1986 )  . Other artificially
generated radioactive isotopes , such as plutonium ( 239 + 240Pu : half-lives of 2 . 4 × 104 
years
and 6 . 5 × 103 
years , respectively ) and americium ( 241Am : half-life of 432 . 7 years )  , show
similar 1963 maxima , and have also been used to date recent sediment sequences ( see
below )  . In Europe , the 137Cs peak due to the Chernobyl fallout ( 1986 ) is larger than the
weapons peak , but the latter is global whereas the Chernobyl signal is regional . 
3 . 5 . 3 Silicon-32 ( 32Si ) 
32Si is produced in the atmosphere through cosmic-ray interactions , and is transported
rapidly to the earth ’ s surface by precipitation . It accumulates in lake and marine sediments , 
and in snow , and therefore constitutes a dating method not only for sediments but also for
glacier ice . The half-life of 32Si is around 140 years ( Morgenstern et al .  , 1996 )  , although
studies based on varved sediment sequences suggest a slightly longer half-life of 178 ± 10
years ( Nijampurkar et al .  , 1998 )  . 32Si dating is applicable over a timescale of 30–1000
years , which means that it bridges the time gap between the present and the younger end
of the 14C range . In addition to providing a chronology for natural processes , therefore , 
c03 . fm Page 86 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 87
the technique is of particular interest to archaeologists in dating events over the course of
the last millennium , notably the Medieval Climatic Optimum , the Little Ice Age between
AD 1650 and 1850 , and the impact of human colonisation and industrialisation during the
last 150 years ( Morgenstern et al .  , 2001 )  . 
3 . 5 . 4 Some Problems in Using Short-Lived Isotopes 
One of the main problems with 210Pb dating is that most sediments contain minerals that
incorporate small amounts of uranium or uranium daughter isotopes , and hence there is
a continuous supply of 210Pb throughout the sediment column . It is therefore necessary to
determine the amount of this ‘ supported ’ 210Pb , and then subtract it from the total 210Pb , 
in order to find the atmospherically generated 210Pb ( the ‘ unsupported ’ lead ) that forms
the basis for dating . The amount of ‘ supported ’ lead in the dated sediment column can be
determined by measuring the lead content at levels older than 150 years ( working on the
assumption that all the 210Pb in those sediments will be ‘ supported ’  , as all the ‘ unsupported ’ 
lead will have decayed ) and then applying that value as a correction factor to the levels
younger than 150 years . This , however , may not be straightforward , and may be complicated by a number of factors , including disequilibrium between radium and lead in the
sediments , which means that the amount of supported 210Pb may vary with depth . Further
problems can arise as a result of agricultural activity around a lake catchment , leading to
the inwashing of clays and other mineral particles and hence lower 210Pb concentrations
per gram of sediment , while organic matter in lakes may retain lead and prevent release
into the sediments , also resulting in lower 210Pb , values ( Olsson , 1986 )  . Bioturbation and
reworking of lake sediments are further processes that can lead to problems in the use not
only of 210Pb , but of other short-lived isotopes . Particular difficulties are encountered in
the use of these isotopes in the dating of peats ( Oldfield et al .  , 1995 )  . These arise , inter
alia , from erosion and sediment loss in the upper parts of peat profiles , and the downwash
of 210Pb in those parts of the profile above the water table . As a result , 210Pb of peats tends
to require corroboration by independent methods ( Appleby et al .  , 1997 )  . 
The principal problems with 32Si dating relate to the detection of 32Si due to its
extremely low natural specific activity and the vast excess of stable silicon ( i . e . low 32Si / 
Si ratio )  . This means that in the dating of sediments , very selective radiochemical purification
procedures are required . Measurement of natural 32Si is carried out using either beta
radiation ( radiometry ) or AMS , although the latter approach has so far been applicable
only to samples of rain , snow and ice , for in limnic and marine sediments where biogenic
silica ( diatoms and radiolaria8 
) constitute the dating media , the 32Si / Si ratio is below the
detection limit for AMS ( Morgerstern et al .  , 2000 ; 2001 )  . 
3 . 5 . 5 Some Dating Applications Using Short-Lived Isotopes 
As noted above , 210Pb , 137Cs and the other short-lived radioactive isotopes have been
most widely employed in the dating of recent lake sediments , particularly where the history
of human impact on lake catchments and ecosystems is under investigation ( Varvas and
Punning , 1993 ; Oldfield et al .  , 2003 )  . Notwithstanding the problems noted above , 210Pb
has also been used , along with other techniques , in the dating of recent peat sequences 
( Roos-Barraclough et al .  , 2004 ; Hendon and Charman , 2004 )  , ice cores ( Stauffer , 1989 ) 
c03 . fm Page 87 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

88 Quaternary Dating Methods
and marine sediments ( Jensen et al .  , 2004 ; van der Kaars and van den Bergh , 2004 )  , while
137Cs has been employed , inter alia , in investigations of ground retreat on mining spoil
heaps ( Higgitt etal .  , 1994 )  , and in the assessment of rates of soil erosion on archaeological
sites ( Davidson et al .  , 1998 )  . Although less widely applied , 32Si has been used in the
dating of glacier ice ( Clausen , 1973 ; Nijampurkar and Rao , 1992 )  , and in the dating of
recent lacustrine and marine sequences ( Nijampurkar et al .  , 1998 ; Suckow et al .  , 2001 )  . 
Three examples are considered below . 
3 . 5 . 5 . 1 Dating a record of human impact in a lake sequence in northern England . The
various physical , chemical and biological properties of lake sediment records provide evidence of changes that have taken place not only within the lake ecosystem , but also on the
slopes around the catchment ( Lowe and Walker , 1997 )  . One aspect of lake sediment analysis
is that it can provide a valuable record of human impact on the landscape in the vicinity of
the lake . Oldfield et al .  ( 2003 ) describe such a study in which the history of human activity
around Gormire Lake in northern England was obtained from a range of data including
pollen analysis ( to reconstruct vegetation )  , mineral magnetic measurements ( to infer
erosional episodes ) and organic biogeochemical analyses ( to detect lake ecosystem
changes )  . AMS radiocarbon dating proved problematical because of the influence of
older carbon residues in the bulk sediment samples ( section 2 . 5 . 1 )  , but the upper part of
the core could be dated by 210Pb and 137Cs . These two approaches produced a coherent
chronology for the top 20–25 cm of the sequence ( Figure 3 . 15 ) and formed the basis for
correlation between two cores ( A and B ) from the lake . The rate of sedimentation that
could be estimated from these 210Pb records enabled deeper horizons to be dated by
extrapolation , where additional ‘ pinning points ’ for the chronology were obtained from
known variations in atmospheric stable Pb concentrations resulting from the smelting of
lead . The results showed two distinct phases of deforestation and catchment erosion : 
the first dating from the Iron Age / Romano British period ( ca . 200 BC to ca . AD 600 )  , and
the second from the time of Medieval monastic activity ( ca . AD 1200 ) and which continued to the nineteenth century . 
3 . 5 . 5 . 2 Dating a 500-year lake sediment / temperature record from Baffin Island , Canada . 
Laminated sediments have been widely used as a basis for dating ( section 5 . 3 )  . They
consist of distinctive layers or laminae that are often annually deposited , in which case
they are referred to as varves . The thickness of the varves is related to sediment input into
the lake basin . At Soper Lake , Baffin Island , Hughen et al .  ( 2000 ) used this relationship
to reconstruct past temperatures , working on the basis of previous studies which have
shown that in Arctic areas , run-off , suspended sediment concentration in lake water , and
resulting varve thickness , varies as a function of temperature during the snow or glacier
melt season . The sediments in the lake comprised alternating bands of light and dark sediments , and the latter were believed to represent deposition during the snowmelt season . 
In order to test the hypothesis that each light / dark couplet did indeed represent an annual
cycle of deposition , 210Pb dating was applied to a laminated lake sediment sequence . This
showed a close agreement between 210Pb and varve age ( Figure 3 . 16A )  , thereby confirming
that the varves are indeed annually deposited sediments . As a further check , 239 + 240Pu
measurements were made and these showed a prominent peak corresponding to varve dates
of 1962–1964 , in excellent agreement with the known atmospheric 239 + 240Pu concentration
c03 . fm Page 88 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 89
1963
137Cs Date
CIC 210Pb Dates
CRS 210Pb Dates
CRS Sedimentation Rates
Core A
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Depth ( cm ) 
0 . 25
0 . 20
0 . 15
0 . 10
0 . 05
0 . 00
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180
Sed rate ( gcm–2y–1 ) 
137Cs Date
CIC 210Pb Dates
CRS 210Pb Dates
CRS Sedimentation Rates
Core B
Depth ( cm ) 
0 . 25
0 . 20
0 . 15
0 . 10
0 . 05
0 . 00
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180
Sed rate ( gcm–2y–1 ) 
1963
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Age
Figure 3 . 15 Age–depth profiles for two cores from Gormire Lake , northern England , based
on 210Pb chronologies . Note the 137Cs date of 1963 which acts as a check on the 210Pb timescale 
( after Oldfield et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced by permission of Arnold Publishers 
c03 . fm Page 89 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

90 Quaternary Dating Methods
maximum in 1963 ( section 3 . 5 . 2 )  . Having established the annual nature of the recent
varved sequence using these two short-lived isotopes , Hughen et al .  ( 2000 ) were able to
calibrate varve thickness for each year against twentieth-century temperature data from
a nearby recording station , and then use these data to extrapolate back through the
sequence to reconstruct a temperature record for the past 500 years ( Figure 3 . 16B )  . 
Figure 3 . 16 ( A ) 210Pb ages plotted against varve age in the upper part of the sequence
from Soper Lake , Baffin Island .  ( B ) The average June temperature record from Soper Lake
constructed from variations in dark laminae thickness ( after Hughen etal .  , 2000 )  . Reproduced
by permission of Arnold Publishers 
c03 . fm Page 90 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Dating Using Long-Lived and Short-Lived Radioactive Isotopes 91
3 . 5 . 5 . 3 32Si dating of marine sediments from Bangladesh . As noted above , 32Si has been
used to date marine sediment records and Morgenstern et al .  ( 2001 ) describe the
results of such a study from the Bangladesh continental shelf . There , an investigation
of the sediment budget near the mouth of the Ganges–Brahmaputra River system
employed 32Si to provide a chronology of the deeper part of the submarine delta
foreset beds that lay beyond the dating range of other short-lived isotopes such as
210Pb and 137Cs . Although the studied core represents extremely difficult analytical
conditions for 32Si dating , there was good agreement between 32Si and 210Pb dates for
the past 50 years , and a coherent age depth profile was obtained for the past 400 years 
( Figure 3 . 17 )  . This shows a mean sedimentation rate of 0 . 7 ± 0 . 2 cm year−1 
for the
period from 50 to several hundred years BP , and 3 . 1 ± 0 . 8 cm year−1 
for the past 50 years . 
The fourfold increase in rate of sedimentation over the last 50 years may reflect
increased sediment loads in the rivers due to increasing human colonisation of the two
drainage basins . 
3 . 1 ± 0 . 8 cm / y
0 . 70 ± 0 . 20 cm / y
0 200 400 600 800
age ( years ) 
0
2
4
6
8
depth ( m ) 
lead-210 fit ( csr ) 
silicon-32
Figure 3 . 17 32Si depth profile for a sediment core from the Bangladesh continental shelf . 
The sedimentation rates for the part of the core older than 50 years ( solid line ) are derived
from the 32Si data , while the dotted line between 0 and 50 years is based on 210Pb dating 
( after Morgenstern et al .  , 2001 )  . Reproduced by permission of Radiocarbon
c03 . fm Page 91 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

92 Quaternary Dating Methods
Notes 
1 . Feldspars are a rock-forming group of crystalline minerals , white or pink in colour , and consisting of aluminosilicates of potassium , sodium , calcium and barium . Sanidine is a member of the
alkali feldspar group and is the name given to high-temperature potassium feldspar or
potassium–sodium feldspar . 
2 . Xenocrysts are crystals in an igneous rock that have not formed in the place in which they are
now found . In other words , they have been introduced into the melted magma from some extraneous source . 
3 . Tuff is a volcanic material that has been consolidated ( welded ) to form a rock . 
4 . The recommended half-lives for the three isotopes used in U-series dating are 234U –
245250±490 years ; 230Th – 75690±230 years ; 231Pa – 32760±220 years ( Bourdon etal .  , 2003b )  . 
5 . Travertine is a form of calcareous tufa deposited by certain hot springs in volcanic regions . 
6 . Ferricrete is an iron-pan or near-surface zone of iron oxide concentration that develops in tropical
or arid regions through weathering and soil formation . 
7 . The term cosmogenic is used throughout this discussion to refer to any nuclide that is produced
by cosmic-ray particles . 
8 . Diatoms are microscopic ( 5 µm–2 mm ) unicellular algae , which secrete a silicious shell or frustule , and which are found in both freshwater and marine environments . Radiolaria are marine
amoebic protozoans ( 100 µm and 2000 µm in diameter ) which secrete elaborate skeletons also
composed largely of amorphous ( opaline ) silica . 
c03 . fm Page 92 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 44 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
4 
Radiometric Dating 3 : Radiation 
Exposure Dating 
Footprints on the sands of time 
Henry Wadworth Longfellow
4 . 1 Introduction 
In this group of dating methods , a chronology is obtained by measuring the cumulative
effect of nuclear radiation on the crystal structure of minerals or fossils , hence the term
Radiation Exposure Dating . Four techniques are considered , three of which derive age
estimates by freeing and counting electrons that have become lodged at structural defects
or impurities ( electron traps ) within crystal lattices following exposure to radiation , while
the fourth measures the amount of damage caused to irradiated crystal structures and
glass , and uses this as a basis for determining age . All work on the same principle , namely
that the larger the number of trapped electrons or amount of crystal damage , the longer
has been the time of exposure to radiation , and hence the greater the age of the host material . 
Electrons can be freed from traps by heating ( Thermoluminescence ) or by exposure to a
light source ( Optically Stimulated Luminescence or Optical Dating )  . Together these
two techniques are known as Luminescence Dating . A third approach to trapped electron
measurement involves the use of a magnetic field to ‘ excite ’ and detect the electrons , and
this is termed Electron Spin Resonance Dating . Because all three methods use the
number of free electrons ( or charged particles ) trapped within a crystal lattice as a basis
c04 . fm Page 93 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

94 Quaternary Dating Methods
for inferring age , these are collectively referred to as techniques of Trapped Charge
Dating ( Grün , 2001 )  . In the fourth method , the degree of radiation-induced damage will
be reflected in the number of ‘ damage tracks ’ or ‘ trails ’ within a crystal structure , and this
forms the basis for the method of Fission Track Dating . These techniques can provide
ages on a wide variety of materials ranging from rocks , grains of sediment or speleothem
calcite , to tooth enamel , flint artefacts and pottery . 
4 . 2 Luminescence Dating 
Luminescence dating works on the principle that materials containing naturally occurring
radioactive isotopes , such as uranium , thorium or potassium-40 , or which lie in close
proximity to other material containing these radioactive elements ( in buried contexts , for
example )  , are subject to low levels of radiation . In mineral crystals , this leads to ionisation
of the atoms in the host material and freed electrons may become trapped in structural
defects or ‘ holes ’ in the mineral crystal lattice . These electrons can be released in the
laboratory by heating under controlled conditions , and where the trapped charges recombine
at luminescence centres in the crystal ( a special type of structural defect or impurity )  , 
an emission of light occurs that is proportional in intensity to the number of trapped
electrons . This emission of light is known as thermoluminescence ( TL ) and is the basis
of thermoluminescence dating . Alternatively , the electrons can be released from traps by
shining a beam of light onto the sample , and again the luminescent signal is a reflection of
the number of electrons trapped within the crystal lattice . This is optically stimulated
luminescence ( OSL )  , and hence the technique is generally referred to as optically stimulated
luminescence dating , although the abbreviated term optical dating , first introduced in
the seminal paper by Huntley et al .  ( 1985 )  , is also used . 
There are many kinds of electron trap . All can be emptied by exposure to sufficient
heat , but only some are sensitive to light . TL dating was initially developed for quartz1 
and
feldspar grains but , in principle , other minerals may also be used . In the environment , the
 ‘ luminescence clock ’ can be reset by heating , for example the firing of pottery effectively
zeroes the clock within the minerals of interest . In the case of sediments , the clock is
zeroed by exposure to heat from a campfire or forest fire , or from exposure to sunlight , a
process often referred to as ‘ bleaching ’  . In both instances , most of the electron traps are
effectively emptied , but then progressively filled when the sediment is buried ( Figure 4 . 1 )  . 
The ‘ natural luminescence signal ’ therefore provides an indication of the time that has
elapsed since firing ( in pottery , for example ) or , in the case of a body of sediment , since
burial and removal from sunlight . In volcanic rocks , of course , zeroing of the ‘ electron
clock ’ will be an inevitable consequence of both heat and mineral formation ( recrystallisation )  . Further details on luminescence dating can be found in Aitken ( 1985 ; 1998 )  , 
Grün ( 2001 )  , Lian and Huntley ( 2001 ) and Duller ( 2004 )  , and in recent conference
proceedings ( Grün and Wintle , 2001 ; 2003 )  . 
4 . 2 . 1 Thermoluminescence ( TL ) 
TL was the earlier of the luminescence techniques to be developed and was originally
applied to the dating of fired pottery or other forms of baked sediment , notably brick and tile . 
c04 . fm Page 94 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 95
Since then , however , it has been used to date a wide range of media , including other fired
materials , such as burnt flint artefacts , burnt stones and volcanic products , as well as unburnt
samples of , for example , cave speleothem carbonate , and sediments such as loess , 2 
glacial
lake deposits and sediments from the deep ocean floor ( Aitken , 1985 ; Berger , 1988 ; 1995 )  . 
The intensity of TL released by heating a piece of pottery or sample of sediment is
proportional to the quantity of natural radiation that has been absorbed by particular minerals
since the time of firing , or the last exposure to sunlight . TL measurements are carried out
on a sample of mineral material , usually a separated quartz or feldspar fraction . This is
heated to temperatures in excess of 500 °C , and as light ( photons ) is emitted from the
luminescence centres , the photons are converted to electric pulses using a photomultiplier
tube , an instrument that is a very sensitive detector of light . The light emission ( TL intensity ) 
is then plotted against the heating temperature to produce a glow curve , in which the
peaks are reflective of the thermal lifetimes of the various electron trap populations in the
sample . Of particular interest to the dating specialist are the traps with long thermal
lifetimes ( so-called ‘ deep traps ’  ) because electrons within them will remain there over
long periods of geological time . The ‘ natural ’ TL signal is compared with the ‘ artificial ’ 
signals obtained from portions of the sample to which known doses of radiation have been
administered from a calibrated laboratory radioisotope source . This allows an evaluation
of the equivalent dose ( DE )  , which is a measure of the amount of radiation that would be
Saturation Level
Laboratory 
Measurement
Formation or
Deposition
Natural
Signal
Age of the sample
Initial
Signal
Zeroing
Luminescence Signal Intensity
Figure 4 . 1 The principle of luminescence dating as applied to a body of sediment . Exposure
to daylight , during erosion , transport or deposition ,  ‘ bleaches ’ the sample and effectively
removes any latent luminescent signal acquired at some time in the past . Over time the
latent signal builds up again as a result of weak natural radiation . The laboratory measurement
therefore provides an indication of the time that has elapsed since the last bleaching event 
( after Aitken , 1998 )  . By permission of Oxford University Press 
c04 . fm Page 95 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

96 Quaternary Dating Methods
needed to generate a TL signal equal to that which the sample has acquired subsequent to
the most recent firing ( zeroing ) event or exposure to sunlight . The DE is sometimes
referred to as the palaeodose , although this usage is not strictly correct as it is a ‘ palaeodose
equivalent ’ that is actually being determined . 
Variations of two approaches are employed to determine the DE : the additive-dose
method and the regeneration method . In the former , a number of nearly equal portions
of the sample ( aliquots ) are divided into groups ; one is reserved for measurement of the
natural TL signal only ( N in Figure 4 . 2A )  , while the others are given various doses of laboratory radiation , generating more trapped electrons and increasing the TL signal . In the
simplest case , all the sample aliquots are heated (  ‘ preheated ’  ) together to empty electrons
from thermally unstable traps that have been filled during laboratory irradiation ( leaving
only electrons in thermally stable traps )  , and then all the aliquots are measured together
and the luminescence intensity is plotted against laboratory radiation dose ; this forms the
sample ’ s dose response . The DE is determined from the intercept of the fitted line with the
dose axis ( Figure 4 . 2A )  . This total bleach method is only valid for cases where the sample
has been heated or exposed to sunlight for a long duration ( Singhvi et al .  , 1982 )  . In most
cases , however , some electrons will remain in hard-to-bleach traps , and here a second
dose–response curve is needed . This is formed from the TL measured in aliquots that
have also been given a brief , and spectrally restricted , exposure to light in the laboratory . 
The second curve is used to correct for the presence of electrons in the hard-to-bleach
traps ( the partial bleach method of Wintle and Huntley , 1980 )  , the DE being determined
at the point where the two dose–response curves intersect above the dose axis ( Berger , 
1988 ; Lian and Huntley , 2001 )  . 
In the regeneration method , in the simplest case , all except the natural aliquots are
zeroed by heating and then given laboratory doses of radiation . The DE by regeneration is
obtained by interpolation , in other words a direct comparison is made of the natural TL
with the TL resulting from laboratory irradiation ( Figure 4 . 2B )  . In most cases , however , 
the regeneration curve is compared with an additive-dose curve , and the additive-dose
curve is shifted along the dose axis until it is in alignment with the regeneration curve , the
magnitude of the shift being proportional to the DE . This technique is often referred to as
the Australian slide method ( Huntley et al .  , 1993a ; Prescott et al .  , 1993 ; Lian and Huntley , 
2001 )  . The advantage of the regeneration method over the additive-dose method is that no
extrapolation is involved , and so uncertainties that might arise from non-linearity in the
dose–response curves , for example , are reduced . The principal disadvantage is that if there is a
change in sensitivity ( TL per unit dose ) between measurement of the natural and regenerated
TL signals , the palaeodose estimate will be in error ( Huntley et al .  , 1993a ; Lian and
Huntley , 2001 )  . 
4 . 2 . 2 Optically Stimulated Luminescence ( OSL ) 
Although TL continues to be used in luminescence dating , recent developments in this
field have been mainly associated with optical dating . Many of the principles of TL dating
underlie OSL dating , but the major difference is that during measurement the trapped
electrons are released by light rather than by heat . The idea that visible light could be used
to stimulate electrons , and that this approach could be used to establish the time of deposition of sediments , was first demonstrated 20 years ago ( Huntley et al .  , 1985 )  . In that
c04 . fm Page 96 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 97
study , a beam of green light from an argon ion laser was employed , but light sources
other than lasers have subsequently been used , including filtered halogen lamps and highpowered light-emitting diodes ( LEDs )  . A further development has been the employment
of infrared stimulated luminescence ( IRSL )  , although this approach can be applied
0 50 100 150
Laboratory dose ( Gy ) 
DE
NLuminescence
–100 –50 0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Laboratory dose ( Gy ) 
Laboratory irradiation
Natural
radiation
Natural intensity
DE
Luminescence 
( B )  
( A )  
[ N ] 
Figure 4 . 2 ( A ) Additive method of palaeodose evaluation . After measurement of natural TL
intensity using different aliquots , samples are irradiated in the laboratory , the triangles representing
values for increasing levels of irradiation . Fitting the data points to an exponential function
enables a value for equivalent dose ( DE ) to be obtained by extrapolation . The irradiation
dose rate is in grays ( Gy )  ( after Grün , 2001 )  . Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd .  ( B ) Regenerative method of palaeodose evaluation . The natural TL of the sample 
( N ) is compared to the TL signal from aliquots which have been bleached to low levels and
then progressively irradiated . The equivalent dose ( DE ) can then be read off from the plotted
curve . Note that for OSL dating , the dose response can be constructed using multiple aliquots
or by using a single aliquot ( after Aitken , 1998 )  . By permission of Oxford University Press 
c04 . fm Page 97 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

98 Quaternary Dating Methods
only to feldspar grains , as electron traps in quartz are insensitive to infrared ( IR ) stimulation 
( Hütt et al .  , 1988 )  . For feldspars , IRSL has a number of advantages over the use of green
light , including the fact that it tends to generate a stronger luminescence signal , electron
traps sampled by IRSL are more effectively bleached at deposition than luminescence
from traps stimulated by green light , while adequate stimulation power can be provided
by an array of LEDs , which are both cheap and convenient ( Aitken , 1998 )  . For quartz , 
expensive lasers and unreliable halogen lamps have now been largely replaced by highpowered blue-green LEDs . 
Determining DE using optical dating is similar to that for TL dating , but there is one
notable difference , for in OSL dating there is no way of selecting only thermally stable
traps during laboratory measurement . To circumvent this problem , sample aliquots are
heated after laboratory irradiation , but before the final measurement . This ‘ preheat ’ is
designed to empty thermally unstable traps that have been filled during irradiation . 
Unfortunately , the preheat also leads to the transfer of some electrons from thermally
unstable traps to the thermally stable light-sensitive traps that are to be used for dating . 
However , when the additive-dose method is used , this thermal transfer can be corrected for by
constructing a second dose–response curve from aliquots that have been given various
laboratory doses and then a long bleach ( Huntley et al .  , 1993b )  . The DE is proportional to
the point where the two dose–response curves intersect over the dose axis . It should be
noted , however , that this thermal-transfer correction method used for optical dating is
very different from the partial bleach method used in TL dating , which also employs
two dose–response curves . 
In order to arrive at an estimate of age using either TL or OSL , one further parameter
has to be determined ; this is the environmental dose rate ( or annual dose )  , and it is a
measure of the radiation dose per unit of time absorbed by the mineral of interest since
the zeroing of the luminescence clock by firing or by exposure to sunlight . The dose rate
is calculated from an analysis of the radioactive elements in both the sample and its surroundings : these are referred to as the internal dose rate and the external dose rate . These
are determined using the measured concentrations of radioactive elements ( uranium , 
thorium , potassium-40 ) within the sample and its surroundings , which are , in turn , converted
into dose rates using standard conversion factors and formulae . The determination of the
total radiation dose that is absorbed by a sample is more difficult , as the sample , if buried , 
will not only have been affected by alpha , beta and gamma radiation from the surrounding
sediments , but will also have been influenced by cosmic rays . The intensity of cosmic rays
depends on the sample depth below the ground surface and can be estimated using the
formula of Prescott and Hutton ( 1994 )  . A further complication is that water and organic
matter , if present in the sediment matrix , absorb radiation differently from mineral
sediment , and these have to be accounted for in the dose-rate calculations ( Lian etal .  , 1995 )  . 
In practice , both field measurements using gamma-ray spectrometer or a TL dosimeter , 
and laboratory elemental analysis of sediment samples to determine the concentration of
radioactive elements , are necessary in order to obtain a measure of external dose rate . 
Overall , this will usually be measured with a precision of around 5% ( Grün , 2001 )  . 
Once the dose rate has been established , then TL / OSL age can be calculated from the
following : 
TL / OSL age = equivalent dose
dose rate -------------------------------------
c04 . fm Page 98 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 99
The increasing use of OSL in the dating of sediments has stimulated a range of methodological developments in recent years . These include the single aliquot regeneration ( SAR ) 
method , which employs repeated measurements on a single sample , rather than using
multiple aliquots from a sample as in TL , to determine the DE ( Wintle and Murray , 2000 )  . 
Not only does this avoid the problems of differing intrinsic luminescence sensitivity ( arising , 
for example , from grain-to-grain variations between aliquots from a single sample )  , but it
also means that smaller samples of material can be dated . Another significant advance has
been the ability to obtain OSL measurements from single grains of quartz or feldspar 
( e . g . Roberts et al .  , 1998 ; 1999 )  . Progress towards dating single aliquots of feldspar has
also been made , although devising an adequate correction for sensitivity of change
remains a problem ( e . g . Wallinga etal .  , 2000 )  , as also does the effect of anomalous fading 
( section 4 . 2 . 3 )  . The ability to date single grains is important because it makes it possible
to determine whether all of the grains in a sample of sediment have the same apparent
luminescence age ( Duller , 2004 )  . Grains within a sample may have different apparent
ages , either because some of them were not exposed to daylight for a sufficient period of
time at deposition to reset their luminescence signal ( see below )  , or because the sediments
have been disturbed and older material incorporated into younger horizons or vice versa 
( e . g . Bateman et al .  , 2003 ; Jacobs et al .  , 2003a )  . 
Despite the fact that OSL is a relatively recent development in luminescence dating , it
has effectively replaced TL in the dating of sediments . There are a number of reasons for
this . In OSL dating only the most light-sensitive electron traps are sampled , and this
allows samples to be dated that have been exposed to only a few seconds of direct
sunlight . Residual signals are usually much smaller for OSL dating than for TL dating , 
and this permits younger samples to be dated . Moreover , because OSL samples do not have
to be heated to high temperatures , the apparatus can be made much simpler ( Lian and
Huntley , 2001 )  . 
4 . 2 . 3 Sources of Error in Luminescence Dating
Some of the problems associated with luminescence dating have already been touched
upon . A number of potential difficulties centre on the zeroing of the luminescence
clock . We have already noted that in most TL measurements there may be a residual TL
component which , if undetected and / or unaccounted for , will influence the calculation of
DE and generate an aberrant age . Although this is not a problem in the majority of cases
where OSL is employed , the younger the sample , the more stringent the zeroing requirement and , as Aitken ( 1998 ) has noted ,  ‘ there are depositional contexts in which “ absolute
zero ” is an unattainable ideal ’  . The depositional environment may also create difficulties , 
particularly in water-lain deposits where there may be considerable grain-to-grain variability
in the extent of bleaching . Reworking of sediments and intermittent exposure to sunlight
are further possible sources of error in luminescence dating of sediments . Variations in
luminescence signal may also be found between individual mineral grains ; in feldspar
samples , for example , bleaching is less rapid than in quartz , sometimes by a factor of
about 10 . Some samples may contain large amounts of residual OSL , and while a few
minutes of exposure to bright sunlight may be sufficient to reduce this to an acceptably
low level , under lower light intensities ( cloudy conditions ) the zeroing process would be
markedly less effective . Further problems may arise through the leakage of electrons
from thermally stable electron traps , a problem that affects both TL and OSL of feldspars
c04 . fm Page 99 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

100 Quaternary Dating Methods 
( but not quartz )  , and is usually referred to as anomalous fading ( Aitken , 1998 ; Huntley
and Lamothe , 2001 )  , through disequilibrium in the uranium decay chain ( Chapter 3 ) and
variations in past water content of sediments , the latter being often very difficult to assess 
( Wintle , 1991 )  . Additional sources of error include systematic errors in the calibration of
laboratory radiation sources , possible light contamination during field sampling , and the
accurate determination of the environmental dose rate ( section 4 . 2 . 2 )  . 
4 . 2 . 4 Some Applications of Luminescence Dating 
The age range of luminescence dating varies , at its lower end , with the sensitivity of the
sample material and the efficiency of the zeroing process . At the upper end of the dating
range , a point is reached at which an additional radiation dose results in no further
increase in the luminescence being measured ( saturation )  , and this along with the stability 
( thermal lifetime ) of the TL / OSL signal and the magnitude of the environmental dose
rate appear to be the principal constraints on age . Recent work on very young sediments
has shown that in depositional contexts where quartz grains have been very well zeroed
prior to deposition and burial , it is possible to obtain OSL dates within the last 200–300
years that are entirely consistent with well-attested dates from historical sources ( e . g . 
Bannerjee et al .  , 2001 ; section 4 . 2 . 4 . 5 )  . TL ages of around 100 years have also been
obtained from fired pottery ( Aitken , 1985 )  . At the upper end of the range , luminescence
dating of feldspars has tended to be limited to around 100 000–150 000 years , due largely
to the problems of anomalous fading ( see above )  , although recent studies using far-red
IRSL may enable this age range to be extended ( Lai et al .  , 2003 )  . Quartz , on the other
hand , does not suffer from anomalous fading , but the luminescence emitted usually saturates at much lower doses than does the luminescence from feldspar . Nevertheless , quartz
may also have a current upper age range similar to that of feldspar . Luminescence ages
older than 150 000 years have been obtained on other materials , however . For example , 
TL dating of burnt flint has yielded ages > 300 000 years ( Mercier et al .  , 1995 )  . In the
following section , we consider eight different applications of luminescence dating across
these various age ranges , four involving TL dating of different types of material , and four
describing OSL dating of sediments , again involving different materials and contexts . 
Other illustrative examples are described by Roberts ( 1997 ) and Aitken ( 1998 )  . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 1 TL dating of Early Iron Age iron smelting in Ghana . The Iron Age , which is believed
to have been initiated in Armenia in the fourth millennium BP , spread to Cyprus and
Greece by 3200 BP , and by various routes to West Africa by the third millenium BP . There
the majority of the early iron-working sites stretch from Senegal to Chad and from the
Sahel to the rainforests where the earliest phase of iron working dates from between 600
BC and AD 600 . 
In Ghana , evidence for early iron working comes from only a few sites , and at most of
these dating is problematical , although the vast majority of Iron Age occurrences in
Ghana appear to post-date 1000 BP . Godfrey-Smith and Casey ( 2003 )  , however , provide TL
evidence that confirms an Early Iron Age date for iron working in northern Ghana . At the
Birimi site , in the far north of the country , TL dating was carried out on quartz grains
extracted from the walls of three iron smelters ( Figure 4 . 3 )  , two of which yielded statistically indistinguishable ages of 1080± 70 and 1090 ± 60 years , while the third provided an
c04 . fm Page 100 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 101
earlier age estimate of 1600±100 years . All are significantly older than the sole radiocarbon
date of 460 ± 90 years ( 550–330 cal . years BP ) obtained on a furnace in the northern
region of Ghana . The TL ages point to the existence of a full-blown smelting technology
in northern Ghana during the Early Iron Age , between 1600 and 1080 years ago . This
time period predates any previous ages for iron smelting in this part of Ghana , and shows
that the technology flourished in the northern region of the country several centuries earlier
than previously suspected . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 2 TL and AMS radiocarbon dating of pottery from the Russian Far East . Some of the
oldest pottery in the world is found in eastern Asia . In Chapter 2 , AMS radiocarbon dating
of carbonaceous residues in pottery was considered and an example was provided of the
Figure 4 . 3 Smelter 1 at Birimi , northern Ghana . Dashed white curves follow the outside
of the visible wall remnants . The sample for TL dating was taken from above the left end
of the lower curve . A hammer and African hoe are shown for scale ( after Godfrey-Smith and
Casey , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 101 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

102 Quaternary Dating Methods
use of this approach to date the earliest pottery in Japan ( section 2 . 7 . 2 . 6 )  . Kuzmin et al .  
( 2001 ) describe a similar study of a very Early Neolithic site at Gasya in the lower Amur
Valley in the far east of Russia , where samples of pottery containing organic materials and
associated charcoal fragments were AMS-radiocarbon-dated . In this case , however , TL
dates were also obtained on the pottery fragments to provide an independent check on the
radiocarbon age determinations . Five radiocarbon dates span the time interval from ca . 
10 000 to 13 000 cal . years BP , while the TL age range ( three dates ) is from 8590 to 13 460
years ( Figure 4 . 4 )  . Because of uncertainties relating to the external dose rate ( section
4 . 2 . 2 )  , the errors on the TL dates are of the order of 1500 years compared with ~100
years for the radiocarbon dates . Nevertheless , the TL and radiocarbon dates do correspond well , the TL results confirming the reliability of the AMS radiocarbon dates . With
ages in excess of 8500–10 000 years , the data indicate that this Early Neolithic pottery is
among the oldest in the world , and it is possible that the Russian Far East may represent
an independent centre of ancient pottery production within eastern Asia . Further
work is now needed in order to determine how this early Russian pottery compares in
terms of age with other examples from the Far East , such as the Jomon pottery from Japan 
( 10 085–12 700 years BP ) or the earliest Chinese pottery from south of the Yangtse River 
( 13 700–14 600 years BP )  . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 3 TL dating of burnt flint from a cave site in France . Burnt flint and burnt stones
have been a popular medium for TL dating as both of these are often found in archaeological
Figure 4 . 4 AMS radiocarbon and TL dates from the Gasya site in the lower Amur Valley , 
Russian Far East . Note the broad measure of agreement between the AMS dates on organic
residues from pottery and TL dates from pottery sherds . The timescale is in calibrated years
BP ( after Kuzmin et al .  , 2001 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 102 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 103
contexts , especially in cave sites . The TL method is particularly useful for dating Middle
Palaeolithic sites whose ages lie beyond the range of radiocarbon dating , and the
technique has provided age estimates for a number of important Mousterian3 
sites in
Europe and the Near East . One example is Combe-Capelle in the Couzer Valley , a tributary
of the Dordogne in southwest France ( Valladas et al .  , 2003a )  . Successive excavations
have yielded a rich stone tool industry , but dating had proved to be problematic , the most
recent estimates based on geological evidence and correlation with the marine isotope
record suggesting that the formation of the principal Mousterian deposits date prior to
MOI stage 6 and were most likely emplaced during MOI stage 8 or even stage 10 ( Chapter 1 )  . 
However , TL dating of burnt flint suggests that these dates are significant overestimates
of the age of the deposits . Seven flint samples were dated and the ages range from
ca . 37 000 to ca . 57 000 years , but six of these fall within the 50 000–60 000 age bracket 
( Table 4 . 1 )  . The mean age of 51 800 ± 3000 indicates that the fires in which the flints were
burnt belong to the early part of MOI stage 3 . This age estimate is in good agreement with
evidence from other sites in southwest France , many of which show evidence of Mousterian
industries that post-date the last ( Eemian ) interglacial . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 4 TL dating of the first humans in South America . In Chapter 2 , the question of early
human colonisation of the Americas was raised in the context of radiocarbon dating of
skulls from a site in Mexico ( section 2 . 7 . 1 . 7 )  . We noted there that the most widely
accepted model for human colonisation of the Americas is one that envisages migration
across the Bering Land Bridge and then southwards through the present-day United
States after the wastage of the last ice sheets some time after ca . 12 000 years ago . 
Increasingly , however , sites are being discovered with dates older than 12 000 years BP
and which pose a challenge to this model ( Marshall , 2001 ; Fiedel , 2002 ; Dillehay , 2003 )  . 
The evidence from South America has proved to be especially enigmatic , with the Monte
Verde site in Chile in particular possibly pointing to human occupation prior to 30 000
years BP ( Dillehay , 1997 )  . However , this interpretation has not been widely accepted by
American archaeologists . In the context of this debate , the TL dates reported by Watanabe
et al .  ( 2003 ) are of some interest . In the Toca da Bastiana rockshelter site in the Serra da
Capivara National Park , Piaui , northeastern Brazil , layers of calcite have formed over
ancient rockwall cave paintings , and samples of this material were subjected to both TL
and ESR ( Electron Spin Resonance ) dating ( section 4 . 3 )  . The results were consistent , the
Table 4 . 1 TL age estimates for burnt flint specimens 
from Combe-Capelle Bas , southwestern France 
Sample TL age ( years BP ) 
CC10 57 400 ± 4200 
CC9 55 600 ± 4400 
CC6 48 200 ± 3300 
CC7 48 900 ± 3800 
CC8 56 900 ± 7800 
CC3 52 900 ± 4600 
CC2 36 600 ± 2700 
Weighted mean of samples 1–6 51 800 ± 3000 
c04 . fm Page 103 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

104 Quaternary Dating Methods
TL analysis producing an age estimate of 35 900 ± ~1550 years and ESR generating a date
of 35 350 ± ~5000 years . If these dates are correct , they indicate that the people who
painted the rockwalls did so prior to ca . 36 000 BP and an early human presence in South
America would be confirmed . Radiocarbon dates of up to 48 500 years BP have been
obtained on charcoal from other rock shelters in the area , while TL age estimates on burnt
quartz pebbles range from 30 000 to more than 100 000 years ago ( Valladas et al .  , 2003b )  . 
While neither case has independent evidence for the burning being associated with
human activity , when taken in conjunction with the dates on the rock paintings , these data
do pose further questions about the validity of the currently accepted model for the initial
peopling of the Americas . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 5 OSL dating of young coastal dunes in the northern Netherlands . Although OSL is
now widely used as a means of dating sediments , relatively few studies have been carried
out to test the accuracy of the technique for deposits younger than a few hundred years . 
One which has is the work of Ballarini et al .  ( 2003 ) on coastal dune from the southwest
coast of the island of Texel in the Netherlands ( Figure 4 . 5 )  , where the ages of the dune
ridges are known from historical sources . Samples of quartz from the dunes were
OSL-dated using the SAR procedure ( section 4 . 2 . 2 )  . The youngest of these yielded ages
of less than 10 years , showing that the OSL signal of the quartz grains is very well zeroed
prior to deposition and burial . OSL ages on five samples taken from a 250-year-old dune
ridge ( samples TX02-28 to 32 : Figure 4 . 5 ) are statistically indistinguishable and
accord perfectly with the date from historical sources . Overall , 17 out of the 20 OSL ages
are in excellent agreement with the well-established independent age controls . This
study highlights the potential of using quartz OSL dating as a chronometric tool for reconstructing recent coastal evolution , and for providing geomorphological data that are
important for coastal management . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 6 OSL dating of dune sands from Blombos Cave , South Africa : single and multiple 
grain data . Blombos Cave is one of a number of cave sites along the southern coast
of Africa ( Figure 4 . 6A ) that have been found to contain evidence of Middle Stone
Age occupation in the form of finely worked bifacial points , a range of bone tools and , 
more recently , shell beads ( Henshilwood et al .  , 2001 ; 2004 )  . It is located 300 km to the
east of Cape Town and is currently ca . 100 m from the shore and ca . 35 m above sea level . 
A large Quaternary sand dune , which is banked against the coastal cliffs , also extends
into the cave where it forms a continuous , archaeologically sterile layer that separates the
Later Stone Age deposits from the artefact-rich Middle Stone Age deposits beneath 
( Figure 4 . 6B )  . The aeolian nature of the sand makes it a good candidate for optical dating , 
and this is important because the stratigraphical position of the sand means that such a date
would provide a minimum age for the Middle Stone Age deposits . Jacobs et al .  ( 2003a , b ) 
carried out both single- and multiple-grain dating on three samples from the dune
sand . The ages obtained on the basis of single-grain measurements were 67 300 ± 3800 , 
65 600 ± 2800 and 68 300 ± 3000 years . These values are ca . 4% less than the age determinations obtained using the conventional multiple-grain methods ( 69 200 ± 3900 , 
69 600 ± 3500 and 70 900 ± 2800 years ) but , given the relatively large errors , the dates are
in good agreement . Collectively , the data confirm the antiquity of the artefacts found in
the Middle Stone Age deposits , and suggest a minimum age of 65 000–70 000 years ago . 
These dates have subsequently been broadly confirmed by OSL dating of quartz grains
c04 . fm Page 104 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

North
Sea dune and beach
15
17
16
18
4
6
1
2
28
29
19
31 30
32
23
13
11
8
9
7
Wadden Sea
2 km
farmland
N
100 km France Belgium
Germany
52° N
54° N
United
Kingdom
North Sea 0°
Texel
Netherlands 8° E
Sample
Nos
OSL aged 
( years ) 
OSL aged 
( AD ) 
Independent age range 
( AD ) 
1
2
4
6
7
8
9
11
13
15
16
17
18
19
23
28
29
30
31
32
248 ± 11
220 ± 12
145 ± 9
163 ± 10
6 ± 2
7 . 4 ± 1 . 3
17 ± 3
25 ± 2
62 ± 4
13 ± 2
19 ± 1
36 ± 3
26 . 2 ± 1 . 4
160 ± 9
73 ± 23
264 ± 18
240 ± 14
253 ± 14
266 ± 12
267 ± 15
1738–1749
1774–1795
1855–1863
1795–1838
1996–2002
1996–2002
1976–1989
1963–1996
1896–1930
1976–1989
1962–1980
1942–1960
1925–1939
1855–1863
2001–2002
1738–1749
1738–1749
1738–1749
1738–1749
1738–1749
1754 ± 11
1782 ± 12
1857 ± 9
1996 ± 2
1839 ± 10
1995 ± 1
1985 ± 3
1977 ± 2
1940 ± 4
1989 ± 2
1983 ± 1
1966 ± 3
1976 ± 1
1842 ± 9
1929 ± 23
1738 ± 18
1762 ± 14
1736 ± 12
1749 ± 14
1735 ± 15
Figure 4 . 5 The southwestern coast of the island of Texel , the Netherlands , showing the locations of samples for OSL dating . The results of OSL
dating compared with ages of the dunes based on historical sources are listed on the right ( after Ballarini et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced with
permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 105 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

106 Quaternary Dating Methods
0 100 km
Cape Town
Die Kelders 1
18° 26°
34°
INDIAN OCEAN
Blombos Cave
Klasies River
enlarged
SOUTH
AFRICA 
( A ) 
Later Stone
Age
Dune sand
Middle Stone
Age 
( B ) 
Figure 4 . 6 ( A ) The location of Blombos Cave and other important Middle Stone Age
cave sites in South Africa .  ( B ) The stratigraphic sequence in Blombos cave showing dune
sand overlying the Middle Stone Age deposits ( after Jacobs et al .  , 2003b )  . Reproduced with
permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 106 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 107 
( 75 600 ± 3400 years ) and TL dating of burnt flint ( 77 600 ± 6000 years ) from the Middle
Stone Age levels that yielded the shell bead ornaments ( Henshilwood et al .  , 2004 )  . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 7 OSL dating of fluvial deposits in the lower Mississippi Valley , USA . Although OSL
has been most widely employed in the dating of aeolian sediments , it has also been successfully employed to date other sedimentary materials , such as coarse-grained fluvial deposits 
( Fuchs and Lang , 2001 )  , river alluvium ( Lian and Brooks , 2004 )  , colluvial sediments 
( Fuchs et al .  , 2004 ) and glacial deposits ( Spencer and Owen , 2004 )  . These may be difficult
to date by radiocarbon because they are often devoid of organic material , because organic
materials that are present may have been reworked , or because the sedimentary sequences
under investigation lie beyond the range of the radiocarbon method . 
One area where OSL dating has been used to develop a chronology of river channel
changes is the northern lower Mississippi Valley immediately south of the confluence
with the Ohio River ( Rittenour et al .  , 2003 )  . Geomorphological mapping had identified
three cross-cutting channel belts , from highest ( oldest ) to youngest ( lowest ) designated
Pve , Pv 2 and PV 1 ( Figure 4 . 7 )  . Samples of quartz from the fluvial sands on each of these
Figure 4 . 7 The northern part of the lower Mississippi Valley showing the confluence of the
Ohio and Mississippi Rivers , the three channel belts ( Pve , PV 2 and PV 1 ) in light shading , and a
schematic cross-section through the channel belts . Also shown are the locations of the sample
sites for optical dating ( after Rittenour et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 107 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

108 Quaternary Dating Methods
three surfaces were analysed using the SAR method which produced optical ages of
19700–17800 ( Pve : three samples )  , 16100–15000 ( Pv 2 : four samples ) and 12500–12100 
( Pv 1 : four samples ) years , respectively . These results are entirely consistent with the
relative ages of the channel belts suggested by geomorphic relationships , and confirm
that the sequences formed during the Late Pleistocene under conditions of high meltwater
discharge from the wasting Laurentide Ice Sheet to the north . These optical ages provide
the first detailed chronology of fluvial changes in this part of central USA and are the first
step towards developing a chronology of river channel changes for the entire lower
Mississippi Valley . 
4 . 2 . 4 . 8 OSL dating of marine deposits in Denmark . Optical dating can also be applied
to marine sand , and Murray and Funder ( 2003 ) describe an experimental study to show
that this can produce reliable results . At Gammelmarke , on the coast of Jutland , Denmark , 
deposits dating from the last ( Eemian ) interglacial are exposed . These consist of marine
sands and clays , rich in the shells of marine molluscs ( Cyprina , Mytilus and Tapes or
Paphia )  , and which accumulated during the marine transgression and subsequent high
sea-level stand of the interglacial . The marine sequence overlies till of the penultimate
glaciation and is , in turn , overlain by glaciofluvial sands and till deposited by the
Weichselian ice sheet ( Figure 4 . 8A )  . On the basis of correlations with sites elsewhere , 
the body of sediment between OSL samples 4 and 18 on Figure 4 . 8A was deposited
between 125 000 and 132 000 years ago . IRSL dating of 25 samples , using SAR protocols
and based on large aliquots of ~5000 grains , generated a series of age estimates , 22 of
Log number
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Expected age range
Average age = 119 ± 2 ka 
( σ = 10 ka ; n = 22 ) 
Apparent age , ka
Frequency
Till
Till ? 
Sand
Tapes sand
Transition 
( clay to sand ) 
Cyprina clay
Sand
OSL 1
OSL 2
OSL 3
OSL 4
OSL 15
OSL 17
OSL 18
OSL 25
OSL 10
MH
5
10
15
20
Metres above sea level 
( B )  
( A ) 
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Anodonta clay and sand
MH – Mytilus horizon
Figure 4 . 8 ( A ) The cliff section at Gammelmarke , southern Jutland , Denmark , showing
the sequence of deposits that accumulated during the Eemian marine transgression , and the
location of the OSL samples .  ( B ) The distribution of those OSL ages considered to be reliable
in relation to the expected age range of the Gammelmarke marine deposits ( after Murray
and Funder , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 108 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 109
which were considered to be reliable ( Figure 4 . 8B )  . These suggest an average age for
the deposit of 119 000 ± 2000 years but , if systematic uncertainties arising from
the calculation of environmental dose rate and other factors are taken into account , the
overall uncertainty increases to ~6000 years . This means that the OSL age is very close
to the expected age for the deposit . Moreover , the OSL evidence suggests that the
marine transgression took place at 121 000 ± 7000 years ago , again an estimate that is
close to that of 132 000–128 000 years based on independent evidence . These results
confirm the view that reliable age estimates can be obtained from quartz-rich marine
sands using OSL dating . 
4 . 3 Electron Spin Resonance Dating 
Electron spin resonance ( ESR ) spectroscopy was initially outlined in the 1930s ( Gorter , 
1936 ; Gorter and Kronig , 1936 ) and was used to investigate the magnetic defects in
crystalline and amorphous materials . It was first successfully employed as a Quaternary
dating technique by Ikeya ( 1975 ) who showed that it could be used to determine the age
of speleothem calcite , but since then its applications have expanded to include the dating
particularly of tooth enamel , as well as a range of other media including coral , molluscs , 
quartz-bearing rocks and sediments , and burnt flint ( Rink , 1997 )  . ESR Dating , sometimes referred to as Electron Paramagnetic Dating ( EPR )  , has a greater time range than
most of the other Quaternary dating methods described in this book , extending from a few
thousand years to about 2 million years in the case of tooth enamel . In general , the most
important applications lie in the time range between 40 000 and 200 000 years , although a
number of valuable age estimates of up to 500 000 years have also been obtained . Useful
reviews of ESR dating are provided by Rink ( 1997 )  , Grün ( 1997 ; 2001 ) and Blackwell 
( 2001a )  , while various examples of the applications of the method are described in the
papers in recent conference proceedings ( Grün and Wintle , 2001 ; 2003 )  . 
4 . 3 . 1 Principles of ESR Dating 
The basic principles of ESR dating are very similar to those for luminescence in that it is
based on measurements of the trapped electrons in crystal lattices of rocks , sediments or
other materials . In this case , however , the electrons are not released by heat or by light . 
Rather their abundance is estimated on the basis of their paramagnetic properties . 
The sample is placed in a strong , steady magnetic field and exposed to high-frequency
electromagnetic radiation . The magnetic field is slowly changed and at a certain frequency
the electrons ( or spins ) become ‘ excited ’ and resonate . The strength of this resonance signal
can be determined using an ESR spectrometer . When the electrons are in resonance , 
electromagnetic power is absorbed in direct proportion to the number of electrons present , 
and hence the greater the number of electrons , the greater the absorption ( Aitken , 1990 )  . 
The latter is a reflection of the time that has elapsed since the onset of electron trapping , 
and hence is a measure of age . 
As in luminescence dating , it is necessary to establish the sensitivity of the sample to
radiation , and again the additive-dose method ( Figure 4 . 2 ) is widely used to determine the
palaeodose or equivalent dose . Recall that this is a measure of the amount of radiation
c04 . fm Page 109 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

110 Quaternary Dating Methods
that would be needed to generate an ESR signal equal to that which the sample has
acquired subsequent to the most recent zeroing event . In addition , an estimate has to be
made of the dose rate ( or annual dose )  , and which is a measure of radiation dose per unit
of time since the zeroing of the electron clock . Again , this involves an estimate of both
the internal and the external dose rates ( section 4 . 2 . 2 )  . Once these parameters have been
determined , the age of a sample can be obtained , as in luminescence dating , by dividing
the value for equivalent dose ( DE ) by the dose rate . One important difference between
ESR and luminescence dating , however , is that in ESR dating the electron traps are not
emptied as is the case in TL and OSL dating . This means that in ESR dating , replicate
measurements can be made on a single sample of material . 
4 . 3 . 2 Sources of Error in ESR Dating 
Many of the error sources that were considered in relation to luminescence dating 
( section 4 . 2 . 3 ) apply equally to ESR dating . These include non-zeroing of the electron
clock so that a residual ESR signal is retained in the sample material , leakage from
electron traps , and problems associated with depositional contexts ( reworking or materials ; 
effects of groundwater movements , etc .  )  . The last-named in particular poses difficulties
in the determination of the annual dose rate . Ideally , both the surrounding deposits and
the dated sample should form an unchanging and geochemically closed system with
regard to the relevant radioisotopes . In practice , however , this is seldom the case . Erosion
or deposition of relatively radioisotope-rich sediments surrounding the sample may result
in marked changes in the environmental radiation flux over time ( Smart , 1991b )  . Equally
problematic is the fact that a number of materials conventionally dated by ESR , including
teeth , bones and mollusc shells , show post-depositional uranium uptake which further
complicates dose-rate determinations . The process of uranium uptake cannot normally be
established , and models have to be employed to try to simulate this process ( Grün , 2001 )  . 
Hence , while there are good grounds for believing that many ESR dates are accurate ( in
that they give a reasonable approximation of the ‘ true ’ age of the sample )  , the precision
of ESR age estimates is often low , principally because of the uncertainties surrounding
calculation of palaeodose and annual dose rate . The numbers of measurements needed will
also vary with the nature of the sample , tooth enamel for example , requiring many more
parameters to be determined than speleothem calcite . In addition , precision will be affected by the strength of the ESR signal ; a weak signal , for instance , could result in a precision of no better than ±100% . Overall , ESR dating is a method that seldom provides
ages with quoted uncertainties of < 10% ( Rink , 1997 )  . 
4 . 3 . 3 Some Applications of ESR Dating 
As noted above , ESR is considerably more versatile than luminescence dating in that it can
date a much wider range of materials . It can also date materials of much greater antiquity . 
For example , ESR dates of ~463 000 and ~710 000 from glacial sediments on the margin
of the Tibetan Plateau provide evidence for a glacial advance in western China during
MOI stages 12 , and 16 or 18 , respectively ( Zhou et al .  , 2002 )  . In this section we consider
applications of ESR dating applied to four different media : tooth enamel , coral , mollusc
shell and quartz . 
c04 . fm Page 110 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 111
4 . 3 . 3 . 1 ESR dating of teeth from the Hoxnian Interglacial type locality , England . The
palaeolithic site at Hoxne , Suffolk , England , is one of the most important in the British
Quaternary sequence . The interglacial lake sediments at the site have provided a wealth
of palynological , mammalian and artefact data and it constitutes the type site for the
Hoxnian Interglacial ( Singer et al .  , 1993 ; Figure 1 . 4 )  . Dating of the site has proved problematical , however , for while a correlation with MOI stage 11 has been suggested on the basis
of biostratigraphic ( Schreve , 2001 ) and U-series dating evidence ( Rowe etal .  , 1999 )  , amino
acid data ( section 6 . 6 ) suggest an equivalence with MOI stage 9 ( Bowen et al .  , 1989 )  . 
Two teeth from the deposits believed to have been deposited towards the end of the
Hoxnian Interglacial were dated by ESR ( Grün and Schwarcz , 2000 )  . Four age determinations were made on one of the samples and two on the other . Calculations of ESR age
involved the use of two different models : an open-system U-series model that assumes a
continuous uranium uptake from the surrounding depositional environment since the
teeth were buried ( US-ESR model )  , and a closed-system model that assumes a short-term
uranium uptake event at the apparent U-series age ( CSUS-ESR model )  . The latter model
provides the maximum open system age . The results are shown in Figure 4 . 9 . The best
age estimate for the teeth can be derived from the weighted means of samples 145 and
293 : 404 000 + 33 000 / −42 000 years ( US-ESR ) and 437 000 ± 38 000 years ( CSUS-ESR )  . 
When these results are plotted against the MOI curve ( Figure 4 . 9 )  , it is clear that the
older age is unlikely to be correct as the CSUS-ESR estimate is centred on MOI stage
12 ( a glacial stage ) and overlaps with the previous interglacial , MOI stage 13 . Hence , 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
Age ( ka ) 
δ18O ( %° ) 
1
2 6
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
B
Sample Dose ( Gy ) US-ESR ( ka ) CSUS-ESR ( ka ) 
US-ESR
CSUS-ESR
145A1 545 ± 99 397 ± 184
145A2 500 ± 21 371 ± 114
145B1 496 ± 49 397 ± 66
145B2 457 ± 47 350 ± 52
293A 541 ± 26 451 ± 46
293B 524 ± 9 440 ± 35
356 115
209
336 65
127
373 55
75
331 46
51
425 52
59
417 41
43
±
±
±
±
±
±
Figure 4 . 9 ESR ages for the teeth from the Hoxnian Interglacial site , eastern England , and
plots of the weighted mean values against the MOI curve ( after Grün and Schwarcz , 2000 )  . 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 111 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

112 Quaternary Dating Methods
the younger of the two dates ( US-ESR ) is considered the more accurate and confirms
an MOI stage 11 equivalence for the Hoxnian Interglacial . 
4 . 3 . 3 . 2 ESR dating of mollusc shells from the Northern Caucasus and the earliest humans in 
eastern Europe . Although there are problems in the ESR dating of mollusc shells because of
open-system behaviour in relation to uranium uptake , results have been obtained that are
comparable with those based on other dating techniques ( Rink , 1997 )  . In the majority of cases , 
marine molluscs have been the preferred dating medium , but Molodkov ( 2001 ) describes
the results of an ESR dating programme using terrestrial molluscs . The samples were
obtained from stratified deposits in the Treugolnaya ( Triangular ) Cave in the northern
Caucasus that contains a long sequence of palaeontologically and archaeologically rich sediments . Eight samples of aragonite4 
shell of the terrestrial mollusc Monacha caucasicala 
( Lindh .  ) were taken from two horizons that contained Late Acheulian5 
stone artefacts 
( Figure 4 . 10 )  . The mean ESR age ( two dates ) of the upper layer was 393 000 ± 27 000
Oxygen isotope record
of core V28–238 
( Shackleton and Opdyke , 1973 ) 
583 ± 25 ka
393 ± 27 ka
1
3a
3b
4a
4a
5a
5b
5c
6
7a
7b 7b
4b
4c
8 4c
2 
( B ) P R
Oldowan Acheulian
Brunhes
Mousterian
kaBP
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
13
14
17
18
19
20
21
Matuyama
–0 . 5 –1 . 0 –1 . 5 –2 . 0 δ
18O ( %o ) 
0 . 5 m
Lower Acheulian stone industries
Lower Acheulian stone industries
Archaeologically sterile layer
B B
11
15
16
Γ
Figure 4 . 10 ESR ages of Treugolnaya Cave , northern Caucasus , culture-bearing horizons
and suggested correlation with the MOI record ( after Molodkov , 2001 )  . Reproduced with
permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 112 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 113
years and the mean for the lower horizon ( six dates ) was 583 000 ± 25 000 years . 
Independent biostratigraphic evidence from the cave deposits indicates that both horizons
are associated with warm interglacial conditions , and comparison with the MOI record
suggests correlations with MOI stages 11 and 15 , respectively ( Figure 4 . 10 )  . These age estimates are of considerable significance because , if correct , they imply that humans had
reached the Caucasus by the beginning of MOI stage 15 , which is much earlier than had
hitherto been believed . 
4 . 3 . 3 . 3 ESR dating of Holocene coral : an experimental approach . Coral has been widely
used as a medium for ESR dating , and well-preserved raised coral reef terraces up to
500 000–600 000 years in age have been dated by the ESR method ( e . g . Pirazzoli et al .  , 
1991 )  . However , problems relating to the determination of both the equivalent dose ( DE ) 
and the past and present radiation doses continue to impose limitations on the dating of fossil
coral , and especially of younger samples . However , new protocols for DE determination 
( e . g . Schellmann and Radtke , 2001 ) have enabled much more precise and accurate ages to
be obtained from aragonitic coral , even on samples of Holocene Age . 
As a test of the reliability of these new approaches , Radtke et al .  ( 2003 ) ESR-dated
samples of coral from the Netherlands Antilles that had been transported onshore by
tsunami or hurricane events from the living fringing reefs around the islands . Radiocarbon
dates were also obtained from the coral samples to provide an independent check on the
ESR age determinations . The ESR ages vary between 76 and 3601 years BP , and the
calibrated and marine-reservoir corrected radiocarbon dates range from 0 to 3644 years
BP ( Figure 4 . 11 )  . The mean age difference between ESR age and calibrated radiocarbon
age ( excluding one outlier shown on Figure 4 . 11 ) is 73 years , the ESR ages being on
average slightly older . The standard deviation of the difference is 250 years , indicating
that the two dating methods are compatible within the limits of the respective error margins of the two dating series . The results of this experimental programme show that ESR
not only has great potential for the dating of Pleistocene corals , but can also be applied to
much younger material that was formed only a few hundred years or , in some cases , only
decades ago . 
4 . 3 . 3 . 4 ESR dating of quartz : the Toba super-eruption . Many volcanic rocks contain quartz
crystals , and because the ESR clocks in the quartz are zeroed by the volcanic activity , 
ESR dating potentially offers an alternative to K–argon or argon–argon as a means of dating volcanic events . However , with very few exceptions , previous studies have shown a
high degree of internal inconsistency , and no widely accepted ESR dating protocol
has emerged ( Rink , 1997 )  . Nevertheless , Wild et al .  ( 1999 ) have shown that in the case of
Mt Toba , ESR ages on the most recent eruption are consistent with independent evidence
for the timing of that volcanic event . 
Covering an area of 30 000 km2 
, the Toba volcanic caldera in northern Sumatra , 
Indonesia , is the largest Quaternary caldera in the world . A number of eruptive events have
occurred over the past 1 . 2 million years , the most recent of which produced the Youngest
Toba Tuff . This ash flow , with an estimated volume of almost 3000 km3 
, reflects one of
the largest eruptions in geological history , and may have been the greatest single volcanic
cataclysm in the Quaternary ( Oppenheimer , 2002 )  . The tuff had previously been dated by
K–argon ( 73 500 ± 3000 and 74 900 ± 12 000 years ) and 40Ar / 39Ar ( weighted mean age of
74 000 ± 4000 years )  ( Chesner et al .  , 1991 )  . ESR dating of aluminium ( six samples ) and
c04 . fm Page 113 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

114 Quaternary Dating Methods
titanium ( also six samples ) centres within quartz phenocrysts6 
yielded ages ranging from
ca . 53 000 to ca . 104 000 years , with an overall average age of 81 000 ± 17 000 years . 
While there is a degree of scatter in the ESR dates , the mean age is in good agreement
with the previously obtained age for the Youngest Toba Tuff based on argon-isotope
dating . These results suggest , therefore , that accurate dating of volcanic events may
indeed be possible using ESR . 
4 . 4 Fission Track Dating 
The technique of fission track dating is based on the infrequent , but predictable , break-up
of the most abundant isotope of uranium , 238U , in a fission reaction . The process leads to
high-energy collisions between the fission fragments and neighbouring atoms and creates
damage tracks or trails in the enclosing crystal lattice . Precisely how this occurs is not
completely understood , but it seems that as two positively charged fission fragments are
driven apart , they strip electrons from atoms in the host lattice and , after passage of the
fission fragment , a zone of positively charged ions remain which mutually repel each
other . These are forced into the interstices of the crystal lattice thereby creating a damage
zone or latent fission track , which is typically between 10 and 20 µm in length and a few
0
0
1 . 000
2 . 000
3 . 000
4 . 000
5 . 000
1 . 000
2 . 000
3 . 000
4 . 000
5 . 000
14C cal . BP ( ∆R = –49 ) 
ESR ages ( years before 1950 ) 
n = 21
Figure 4 . 11 Comparison between radiocarbon and ESR ages obtained from coral samples
from the Netherlands Antilles . The close correspondence between the results from the two
dating methods suggests that ESR dating can provide a reliable basis for the dating of young
coral samples ( after Radtke et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c04 . fm Page 114 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 115
angstrom units7 
wide ( Hurford , 1991 )  . The number of tracks is a function of the original
uranium content of the sample material and time . The rate of spontaneous radioactive
fission decay of 238U is known , and hence the length of time during which fission tracks
have been forming in the host material can be determined by counting the number of
tracks that have been created . Fission track dating is particularly applicable to volcanic
extrusive rocks including basalts , tephras and tuffs where , as in TL , the fission track clock is
zeroed by the heating event . It has also been applied to volcanic glasses , such as obsidian
and pumice . Detailed accounts of fission track dating are provided by Hurford ( 1991 )  , 
Wagner and van den Haute ( 1992 )  , van den Haute and Corte ( 1998 ) and Wagner ( 1998 )  . 
4 . 4 . 1 Principles of Fission Track Dating 
The procedure of fission track dating involves the counting of spontaneous 238U fission
tracks under an optical microscope after the surface of the sample has been polished and
etched with a chemical etchant to enlarge the fission tracks . In order to use these data to
infer age , it is necessary to know the original uranium content of the sample . Clearly , this
cannot be determined by direct measurement , but it can be obtained indirectly by measuring
the amount of the less abundant uranium isotope , 235U , that is contained within the sample
material , exploiting the fact that thermal neutrons induce fission of 235U . After the 238U
fission tracks have been counted , therefore , the sample is irradiated with thermal neutrons
and fission in the atoms of 235U generates a new set of fission tracks . These ‘ induced ’ 
fission tracks are etched and counted , their number reflecting 235U abundance and neutron
fluence . As the latter is known , the former can be calculated . This , in turn , enables
the original 238U content of the sample to be determined based on the known 238U / 235U
ratios in volcanic rocks and other materials . 
Two techniques are employed to determine areal track density . In the population
method , the sample is divided into separate aliquots , the spontaneous fission tracks are
etched and counted in the first aliquot , while the second aliquot is irradiated and both the
spontaneous ( ρs ) and induced tracks ( ρi 
) are counted . The value of ρi 
is then determined
by ( ρs + ρi 
) − ρs . This assumes , of course , that the two aliquots have the same uranium
concentration , and hence the method is employed using apatites and glasses in which the
uranium concentration tends to be uniform . A variant of this approach is to heat the aliquot
used to measure ρs in order to remove the spontaneous tracks , and then irradiate that
aliquot to determine ρi 
. However , this is less satisfactory as the thermal treatment of the
sample will affect the etching characteristics of the material and introduce an error into
the value derived for ρi 
. In the external detector method , spontaneous tracks are counted
in the etched mineral , while the induced tracks are counted in an external detector of low
uranium muscovite ( mica ) held against the mineral during irradiation and subsequently
etched for counting . This means that both spontaneous and induced tracks are measured
in exactly matching areas from the same planar surface of an individual crystal and hence
uranium inhomogeneity , both within and between crystals ( as is found in zircon and
sphene , for example )  , is of negligible consequence ( Hurford , 1991 )  . 
In theory , any uranium-bearing material can be dated and the age range of the technique extends from a few hundred to many millions of years . In practice , however , factors
such as uranium content and abundance , grain size and degree of crystallinity , and track
retention place constraints on the applicability of the method . Initial uranium content is of
c04 . fm Page 115 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

116 Quaternary Dating Methods
paramount importance . For example , if an areal density of 10 tracks per square centimetre
is presupposed as a minimum , then the uranium content must be at least 1 µg g−1 
in order
to determine an age of 100 000 years with any degree of precision ( Wagner , 1998 )  . For
ages younger than this significantly higher initial uranium concentrations are needed . 
Zircon is by far the most widely used mineral , particularly in the younger age range , because
of its naturally high uranium content and also its widespread occurrence in volcanic rocks . 
4 . 4 . 2 Some Problems Associated with Fission Track Dating 
One of the major difficulties in fission track dating relates to the natural process of healing
or erasure of the fission tracks . This is known as fading ( or annealing ) and may arise as a
result of heating of the host material or through the spontaneous diffusion of ions . The
result is that the tracks become narrower and shorter over time until they eventually
disappear completely . Partial fading within a sample is reflected in a reduced number of
fission tracks and will lead to an underestimate of age . Not all materials show the same
tendency to anneal . The crystalline structure of zircon and titanite , for example , means
that in these minerals the fission tracks are relatively stable and fading is less of a problem . 
Apatite is much less stable , however , while in glasses the stability tends to decrease with
decreasing silica content . In some cases , however , it may be possible to identify the partially
faded fission tracks on the basis of their reduced size , and several experimentally
established correction procedures can be applied to counter this problem . The most
common is the plateau correction procedure . Here , the paired samples containing natural
and induced tracks are heated at progressively higher temperatures until the ratio of the
spontaneous track density in the natural sample to the induced track density in the irradiated
sample reaches a plateau level . This plateau value provides a corrected age for the sample . 
A variant on this method is the isothermal plateau fission track ( ITPFT ) technique in
which the paired samples are subjected to a single heat treatment until a pre-determined
temperature is achieved ( e . g . 150 °C ) and which is then sustained for a specified period 
( Westgate , 1989 )  . 
4 . 4 . 3 Some Applications of Fission Track Dating 
The fission track method is one of the most versatile of Quaternary dating methods in
terms of its potential age range . At one extreme it can provide dates on ancient tuffs with an
age of 1–2 million years , while at the other it can generate realistic ages on uranium-rich
glass manufactured in the nineteenth century ( Wagner , 1998 )  . However , it must be
acknowledged that for most materials measurable within hundreds of years , the low
levels of analytical precision mean that the age estimates are of limited value . In Quaternary
studies , the fission track method has been most widely ( and successfully ) employed in the
dating of tephras and other volcanic products , such as obsidian . Three examples of the
applications of fission track dating are considered in the following sections . 
4 . 4 . 3 . 1 Fission track dating of glacial events in Argentina . In the western United States
of America , and also in South America , fission track has been used to date ashes interbedded
with glacial deposits , thereby providing limiting ages on individual glacial events ( Espizua
c04 . fm Page 116 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 117
and Bigazzi , 1998 ; Colgan , 1999 )  . A good example is Espizua et al .  ’ s ( 2002 ) study of the
glacial history of the Rio Grande Valley in the lee of the Andes Mountains in western
Argentina . In that region , several glacial episodes have been distinguished on the
basis of glacial landforms ( moraines ) and drift sequences , at least two of which , the Seguro
and the Poti-Malal , are believed to predate the last glaciation in the area . Espizua and
co-workers describe a site in the Rio Grande Valley where the till is overlain by a tephra
layer which is , in turn , overlain by outwash from the Segura Glaciation . Fission track
dating of samples of glass from the tephra horizon yielded an age of 226 000 ± 25 000
years . This indicates that the overlying deposits from the Segura Glaciation equate with
MOI stage 6 ( ca . 127 000–186 000 years )  , while the Poti-Malal till must be at least as old
as MOI stage 8 ( pre-242 000 years )  , and could be even older – perhaps dating from the
Early-Middle Pleistocene . 
4 . 4 . 3 . 2 Fission track dating of a Middle Pleistocene fossiliferous sequence from central 
Italy . Marcolini etal .  ( 2003 ) describe a site in Tuscany , central Italy ( the Campani Quarry )  , 
where several palaeosols ( fossil soils ) believed to be of Middle Pleistocene age are
exposed in sequence ( Figure 4 . 12 )  . The uppermost of the palaeosols contains a rich
molluscan fauna and also an assemblage of small mammals , both of which are indicative
of a woodland environment and a relatively mild climate . This suggests that the palaeosol
formed during an interglacial period , but there are no indications in the faunal records as
to which interglacial this might be . Immediately above the palaeosol , however , is a tephra
horizon . Fission track dating on apatite grains from the Campani Tephra gave an age of
460 000 ± 50 000 years . The date is within one standard error of 40Ar / 39Ar ages of
403 000 ± 30 000 and 419 000 ± 20 000 years on a tuff from the Vico Volcano to the south , 
which has a glass composition identical to the Campani Tephra . This suggests that the
Campani Tephra is also associated with the Vico Volcano . On the basis of the fission track
and 40Ar / 39Ar ages , therefore , the underlying palaeosol with its interglacial faunal and
molluscan assemblages can be correlated with MOI stage 11 , i . e . between ca . 364 000 and
427 000 years ago ( Bassinot et al .  , 1994 )  . 
4 . 4 . 3 . 3 Dating of obsidian in the Andes , South America , and the sourcing of artefacts . 
Obsidian is a raw material of the lithic industry found in many archaeological sites of the
Andean countries . Determining the provenance of this material for sites located far from
volcanic centres would make an important contribution towards the understanding of
goods procurement and ancient trade routes and traditions in pre-Hispanic times . 
One way in which source can be established is on the basis of geochemical composition
of the glass . A second approach , as described by Dorighel et al .  ( 1998 )  , is to use fission
track dating of obsidian artefacts found in archaeological contexts . These authors
analysed 25 samples of obsidian collected from archaeological sites in Ecuador and
Colombia , the majority of which range in age from ca . 500 BC to AD 1500 . The dated
obsidian fragments are largely residues discarded after flaking , although some are small
flakes and blades . On the basis of fission track dating and geochemical analysis , it proved
possible to divide the artefacts into eight distinct groups , with ages ranging from
ca . 190 000 years for the youngest obsidian samples to more than 4 . 8 million years for the
oldest . Two sources could be determined from these data : the Sierra de Guamani and the
Rio Hondo obsidians ( Figure 4 . 13 )  . Interestingly , two of the coastal sites contained obsidian
c04 . fm Page 117 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

118 Quaternary Dating Methods
from the Sierra de Guanami , indicating transport of artefact source material from this
inland site to the coast . Although the other obsidian groups have yet to be related to
known source , the results of this work are considered to be very encouraging as , hitherto , 
little has been known about obsidian sources for artefacts from this region of South
America . There may , therefore , be considerable potential for fission track dating in this
particular field of archaeology . 
volcanic ash
level
gravel
sand
silty clay
sand and silt
sandy gravel
marine
Plio-Pleistocene 
sediments
0
1 m
non-marine
molluscs
small mammals 
= Campani Quarry 
palaeosols
0 . 046 ± 0 . 05 Ma
A–F
marine
Middle
Pliocene
lower upper
San Romano
Unit
LEGEND
F
A
B
C
D
E
Terrestrial Middle Pleistocene
S = sand
M = mud
G = gravel
MSG
Figure 4 . 12 The stratigraphic sequence in the Campani Quarry , Tuscany , central Italy , 
showing the sequence of palaeosols and the dated tephra layer overlying palaeosol F which
contains the interglacial faunal and molluscan assemblages ( after Marcolini et al .  , 2003 )  . 
Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
c04 . fm Page 118 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Radiation Exposure Dating 119
Notes 
1 . Quartz is a member of the silica group of minerals and is common in all kinds of rocks and
mineral veins . 
2 . Loess is fine-grained , wind-blown ( aeolian ) sediment with a grain size in the range of 2–64 µm . 
3 . Mousterian industries are usually associated with Neanderthals and typically date from the Last
Cold Stage . The industry is named after the type site at Le Moustier , Dordogne , southwest
France ( Wymer , 1982 )  . 
4 . Aragonite is a crystalline form of calcium carbonate which comprises the shell of most
molluscs , although after death some molluscan shells may invert to calcite . This poses problems
for ESR dating as calcite is more likely to display open-system behaviour in relation to uranium
uptake than is the case in the tighter crystal structure of aragonite . 
Figure 4 . 13 Location of archaeological sites and obsidian sources dated by fission tracks in
Colombia and Ecuador . The triangles show groups of sites in particular areas ( after Dorighel
et al .  , 1998 , Fig 1 )  . With kind permission of Kluwer Academic Publishers 
c04 . fm Page 119 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

120 Quaternary Dating Methods
5 . Acheulian industries are characteristic of the Lower Palaeolithic . The typical products are core
tools , such as handaxes and bifaces , which are made by flaking down a nodule of flint or other
fine-grained rock into the desired form . The term comes from the site at St Acheul near Amiens
in northern France where many discoveries of handaxes were made during the nineteenth century 
( Wymer , 1982 )  . 
6 . Phenocrysts are large crystals that are found set in a finer-grained groundmass in volcanic rocks . 
7 . An angstrom unit is a unit of length equal to 10−8 
cm . 
c04 . fm Page 120 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 24 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
5 
Dating Using Annually Banded 
Records 
A few more years shall roll , 
A few more seasons come .  .  .  .  . 
Horatius Bonar
5 . 1 Introduction 
This group of techniques is based on the annual addition of material to organic
tissue or to sequences of sediment . Perhaps the best known of these methods is
dendrochronology ( tree-ring dating )  , but varve chronology ( based on annual accumulations
of sediment in lakes or in the sea ) has also been widely employed . Less common , 
perhaps , is lichenometry which uses differences in lichen size to establish the age of
exposure of rock surfaces . In high-latitude and high-altitude regions , seasonal variations
in snowfall produce annual layers in glacier ice , and these too form a basis for dating . 
Other contexts where regular additions of material can be used for dating purposes are
cave sites , where speleothems ( stalagmites and stalactites , for example ) may show
evidence of annual banding , and marine environments , where short-term chronologies 
( known as sclerochronologies ) have been developed from annual growth bands in
corals and molluscs . This family of dating methods forms the subject matter for this
chapter . 
c05 . fm Page 121 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

122 Quaternary Dating Methods
5 . 2 Dendrochronology 
Dendrochronology is the technique which employs annual growth increments in the
trunks of trees as a basis for a chronology . In most softwood ( coniferous ) trees , new
water- and food-conducting cells are added to the outer perimeter of the trunk during the
spring and summer months , following an inactive growth period during the winter . 
The demand for water and food is greater during the spring growth season , and hence
these cells tend to be larger , whereas smaller cells with thicker walls develop later in
the summer and autumn . The result is a series of clearly defined ‘ lines ’ or tree rings , and
counting of these enables the age of the tree to be established . In hardwood ( deciduous ) 
trees , however , growth trends are more variable . Some display a marked contrast between
cells formed in spring and summer , with markedly larger vessels forming earlier in the
year . These are known as ring-porous types and include ash , elm and oak . In other
trees , however , such as alder , beech , birch and lime , there is little difference in pore size
between spring and summer growth increments . These are termed diffuse-porous
trees . The result is a considerable difference in the nature of tree rings between species , 
and as some do not display clearly defined annual increments , not all trees are suitable for tree-ring dating . The most widely employed in dendrochronology are oak 
( Quercus ) and certain coniferous species , mainly pine ( Pinus )  , but also Sequoia and
Douglas fir . 
Dendrochronology as a systematic dating technique was developed in the United
States , principally through the work of Andrew Douglass who established the world ’ s
first tree-ring laboratory at the University of Tucson , Arizona , in 1937 . Douglass and
his successors , notably Edmund Schulman and Hans Fritts , were responsible for the
development of the first long tree-ring records , and they also recognised the potential of
trees as archives of climatic information , a field of study known as dendroclimatology 
( Douglass , 1919 ; Schulman , 1956 ; Fritts , 1976 )  . In the 1960s and 1970s , dendrochronologists
from the Tree-Ring Laboratory in Tucson collaborated with radiocarbon scientists in
pioneering work on the calibration of the radiocarbon timescale ( Suess , 1970 ; Ferguson
and Graybill , 1983 ; section 2 . 6 )  . Their research primarily involved coniferous tree
species , and particularly the remarkably long-lived bristlecone pine ( section 5 . 2 . 3 )  . 
In Europe , dendrochronology has been a more recent development , but a number of
tree-ring laboratories have now been established , most notably at Belfast in northern
Ireland and in several universities ( e . g . Göttingen , Heidelberg , Hohenheim ) in Germany . 
In Ireland , the majority of dendrochronological work has been carried out on oak , 
while in Germany chronologies based on both oak and pine have been developed . 
Good overviews of both the principles and the applications of dendrochronology can
be found in Fritts ( 1976 )  , Baillie ( 1982 ; 1995 )  , Schweingruber ( 1996 ) and Briffa and
Matthews ( 2002 )  . 
5 . 2 . 1 Principles of Dendrochronology 
Dendrochronology can be applied to wood from a variety of contexts . The tree may be
standing or felled , it may form part of a building , or it may be buried on an archaeological
site or in a natural deposit such as peat . In some cases the wood may come from a
secondary context , such as a pile of timbers from a demolished building or from some
c05 . fm Page 122 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 123
drainage operation ( Baillie , 1995 )  . Standing trees are sampled using an increment
corer , a hollow metal tube which extracts small-diameter cylinders of wood from the
tree trunk . Dead or subfossil1 
wood can be cut so that the ring sequences are exposed
in section . In the laboratory , the wood samples are cleaned and mounted , and counting
is carried out visually on a moving stage under a microscope . Other approaches
involve the use of electronic measuring equipment ( Cook and Kariukistis , 1990 )  , or
X-ray densitrometry which determines annual variations in wood density ( Schweingruber , 
1988 )  . 
Because tree growth is closely dependent on climate , the width ( or wood density ) of
each annual ring will vary depending on whether climatic conditions in any one year have
been favourable for , or inimical to , tree growth . This means that within a given area , 
ring widths will vary in response to local or regional climatic changes . The result is a
characteristic ring-width pattern within which distinctive rings ( representing a particularly
good or bad growth year )  , or groups of rings , form markers and these can be used as
a basis for cross-matching or cross-dating between wood of overlapping age range 
( Figure 5 . 1 )  . As Baillie ( 1995 ) has observed , cross-dating is the art of dendrochronology , 
for it enables living trees to be linked to dead wood and those dead wood samples to be
matched with even older materials . In this way , the tree-ring record can be extended back
in time and a master chronology developed . Where dead wood is recovered from ancient
buildings , for example , or from peat bogs , counting of the tree rings enables a floating
chronology to be established , and this can be matched to the master chronologies using
the distinctive ring-width patterns . Hence , samples of wood of hitherto unknown date can
be assigned a precise calendar age . 
5 . 2 . 2 Problems Associated with Dendrochronology 
Because tree growth is more rapid in young trees , there tends to be a reduction in
ring width with age . This can pose problems in cross-dating because it is possible
for ring-width variations that reflect climatic or environmental factors to be masked by
ring-width variations due to age . A further problem is that tree-ring widths vary with the
height of the trunk , and there is no way of knowing in a piece of old or subfossil wood
precisely where on the trunk the sample originated . One way in which these difficulties
can be surmounted is by standardising the ring-width series to generate ring-width
indices ( Baillie , 1982 )  . A range of statistical techniques , including regression analysis 
( Figure 5 . 2 )  , is now available to generate such indices . 
Other problems are more difficult to resolve . In some localities for example , where
trees are growing in situations where there is little or no variation in climate , or where
climatic fluctuations may have been of such low amplitude that they impose minimal
levels of stress on the trees , there may be almost no variation in ring width through
time . Tree-ring sequences of this type are termed complacent series and are of little
value in dendrochronology , because marker rings or marker series of rings that form
the basis for cross-dating cannot be identified . It is for this reason that dendrochronology
is most readily applied to trees that grow or have previously grown in areas where
some degree of climatic stress ( low temperatures , shortage of moisture , etc .  ) generates
sensitive series of tree rings . In such situations , however , difficulties may also arise for
c05 . fm Page 123 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

124 Quaternary Dating Methods
if the stress is too extreme the tree may simply not produce a ring in a given year , or
may only produce new cellular material on a part of the trunk . In these cases , therefore , 
there may be missing or partial rings in the tree-ring series . On the other hand , where
the spring growth period is interrupted by , for example , severe late frosts , it is possible
for more than one set of cellular structures to develop in one year . These are referred
to as false rings or intra-annual growth bands , and may not be easy to recognise in
individual tree-ring series . The only way in which missing and false rings may be
identified and corrected for is by replication of such records through careful and
systematic cross-dating . 
LIVE TREE BARK
MATCHED RINGS
TRACED BACK TO 3100 BC
3675 BC
5000
BP
4000
BP
3000
BP
2000
BP
1000
BP
PRESENT
THIS TREE DIED
IN YEAR 1000
THIS LIVE TREE IS
AT LEAST 4600
YEARS OLD 
THE PITH DATE HERE INDICATES
THAT GROWTH STARTED
OVER 5640 YEARS AGO
THIS TREE WAS
3000 YEARS OLD
WHEN IT DIED
Figure 5 . 1 Cross-dating of tree rings . Distinctive ring-width patterns enable living trees
to be connected to dead wood , and dead wood to sub-fossil wood , thereby developing a
continuous chronology which may extend back over several thousand years after Johnson 
[ 1999 ] 
c05 . fm Page 124 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 125
5 . 2 . 3 Dendrochronological Series 
The early dendrochronological work of Douglass and Shulman referred to in section 5 . 2 was
based very largely on an extraordinary tree , the bristlecone pine . These trees grow throughout the southwestern United States , and thrive on dry and rocky sites at altitudes of up to
4000m . They are particularly adapted to arid environments , and in the White Mountains of
California , in the rain shadow of the Sierra Nevada , large numbers of twisted and stunted
bristlecone pines are found ( Figure 5 . 3 )  , the oldest of which is more than 4700 years old . 
This makes them the oldest living tree in the world . These long-lived trees grow under
particularly stressed conditions and form thin , highly sensitive tree-rings ( Figure 5 . 4 )  . This
combination of longevity and sensitivity produces a perfect record of past climatic variations 
( Johnson , 1999 )  . By cross-dating between living trees and dead wood , a continuous master
chronology has been developed that extends back to 8681 years BP ( Ferguson and Graybill , 
1983 )  . Other long tree-ring chronologies from North America include those on Sequoia , 
Douglas fir and pine . The longest of these , on foxtail pine ( Pinus balfouriana )  , goes back
to 3031 years , but may eventually be extended to 6000 years ( Scuderi , 1987 ; 1990 )  . 
A . Measured ring-width values
B . Ring-width indices
450 500 550 600 650 700
Age AD
0
0
1 . 0
1 . 0
2 . 0
2 . 0
cm
Figure 5 . 2 Standardisation of ring-width measurements to produce ring-width indices . In 
( A ) a regression line has been fitted to the measured ring widths and this provides an indication
of the general decline in ring width with age . The value for each year is then divided by the
value for that year obtained from the regression curve .  ( B ) This generates a series of ring-width
indices which have been corrected for any ageing effect , and hence the fluctuations in the
tree-ring curves reflect the influence of environmental factors only ( after Baillie , 1982 )  . 
Reproduced by permission of Croon Helm
c05 . fm Page 125 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

126 Quaternary Dating Methods
There are no trees in western Europe that have a lifespan that is equivalent to the
bristlecone pine , and hence long dendrochronological series have only been reconstructed
through the systematic cross-dating of subfossil wood samples with ring patterns of less
than 200 years . There are continuous records for England back to 6939 years ( Baillie and
Brown , 1988 ) and for Ireland back to 7429 years ( Brown and Baillie , 1992 )  . Both of these
Figure 5 . 3 Bristlecone pines growing in the White Mountains of California ( photo : Mike Walker ) 
c05 . fm Page 126 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 127
are based on oak ( Quercus robur and Q . petraea )  . In central Europe , subfossil remains
of oak and pine ( Pinus sylvestris ) found in the deposits of large rivers in southern and
eastern Germany have been used to build a continuous Holocene oak chronology back
to 10 430 years , while a pine chronology , linked to this oak chronology , extends the
dendrochronological record back to 11 919 years ( Spurk et al .  , 1998 ; Friedrich et al .  , 
1999 )  . In addition , a 1051-year-long ‘ floating pine chronology ’ has been developed for
the Lateglacial period , which covers the interval between ca . 11 350–12 300 years BP of
the radiocarbon timescale ( Friedrich et al .  , 2001 )  . It is anticipated that , in due course , this
chronology will be linked to the Holocene oak and pine chronology , and this would
then provide a continuous record extending back over 14 300 years . Long continuous
pine-based chronologies have also been obtained from northern Sweden ( Grudd et al .  , 
2002 )  , and northern Finland ( Eronen et al .  , 2002 )  , the latter extending back 7519 years . 
The most important repository for tree-ring data is the International Tree-Ring Data
Bank ( ITRDB ) which is housed at the World Data Center-A for Paleoclimatology at the
National Geophysical Data Center in Boulder , Colorado , USA . Founded in 1974 , the
ITRDB contains more than 3275 tree-ring chronologies from over 1500 sites worldwide , 
and makes its holdings freely available to all scientists working on dendrochronology or
related fields ( Grissino-Mayer and Fritts , 1997 )  . 
5 . 2 . 4 Applications of Dendrochronology 
Dendrochronology has been applied in a wide range of contexts . Because long and
continuous records can be generated , dendrochronology enables precise ages to be
Figure 5 . 4 A section through a fallen bristlecone pine showing the very narrow growth
rings ( photo : Mike Walker ) 
c05 . fm Page 127 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

128 Quaternary Dating Methods
determined for a range of Holocene events . These include , inter alia , volcanic eruptions , 
major shifts in climate , and the rise and fall of civilisations . The technique has proved
especially valuable in archaeology , allowing ages to be assigned to such diverse objects
as wooden buildings , prehistoric trackways buried beneath peats , and ships ’ timbers and
other maritime artefacts ( Baillie , 1995 )  . Tree rings contain a range of potential measures
of past climate ( McCarroll et al .  , 2003 )  , and dendroclimatology is providing new insights
into Holocene climate change which are not only important from the point of view of
historical climate reconstruction ( Briffa , 2000 )  , but the data constitute important baselines
for atmospheric scientists who are modelling past and future climatic behaviour ( Briffa
and Matthews , 2002 )  . Perhaps most important of all , however , has been the calibration of
the radiocarbon timescale by dendrochronology , which was discussed in section 2 . 6 . 1 . 
Some examples of these various applications of dendrochronology are considered in the
following sections . 
5 . 2 . 4 . 1 Dating a 2000-year temperature record for the northern hemisphere . Precisely
dated dendroclimatological records are now available for many parts of the world , and
Figure 5 . 5 shows a composite of several such curves from high-latitude regions in the
northern hemisphere ( Briffa , 2000 )  . The individual records upon which this composite is
based are from Mongolia , Siberia , the northern Urals , northern Sweden , northern North
America and the Canadian Rockies . The normalised composite curve provides an indication
of relative temperature changes ( a mixture of predominantly summer and some annual
signal ) at high latitudes , mostly between 60°N and 70°N , throughout the last 2000 years . 
This exclusively tree-ring-based ‘ Northern Chronology Average ’ shows a number of
clearly defined climatic phases and shifts , many of which have been identified in other
proxy climate records . These include the pronounced fall in temperature during the sixth
century AD and the subsequent period of cooler climate during the Dark Ages , significantly warmer conditions during the Medieval Warm Period from the tenth to the twelfth
centuries , the Little Ice Age cooling of the post-Medieval , and the marked temperature
rise that began in the nineteenth century and became even more pronounced during the
course of the twentieth century . 
5 . 2 . 4 . 2 Dating historical precipitation records . In addition to providing data on temperature change , tree-ring records can be used to infer past changes in precipitation and , 
Figure 5 . 5 Northern ‘ high-latitude ’ average temperature changes over the last 2000 years
based on dendrochronological data from a number of sites in northern Asia , northern Europe
and North America ( after Briffa , 2000 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c05 . fm Page 128 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 129
once again , these palaeoprecipitation reconstructions can be precisely dated using
dendrochronology . Watson and Luckman ( 2001 ) describe such a record from the
southern Canadian Rockies . Seven Douglas fir ( Pseudotsuga menziesii ) tree-ring
chronologies were developed from sites in Banff and Jasper National Parks , and from
near Cranbrook in British Columbia . By comparing measured ring-width variations
with temperature and precipitation records from nearby meteorological stations , a close
statistical relationship was established between tree growth ( as reflected in ring-width
changes ) and precipitation . It also proved possible to calibrate ring-width variation with
precipitation levels so that a quantitative estimate of past changes in precipitation could
be determined . Long-term trends in the three records are very similar to each other and
also to other reconstructions from adjacent areas . They show that regionally extensive
drier intervals extended over the southern Rockies through the AD 1700s ( especially in the
1760s and 1790s )  , the 1850s–1860s , the 1890s , and during the historically documented
drought of the 1920s–1940s . In the longest of the records , that from Banff ( Figure 5 . 6 )  , 
significantly drier intervals also occurred in ca . AD 1470–1510 , in the 1560s–1570s and the
1630s–1650s . These reconstructions indicate regionally coherent precipitation patterns
that fluctuate on decadal timescales and may be linked to changes in atmospheric circulation
patterns . 
5 . 2 . 4 . 3 Dating volcanic events . It has often been speculated that volcanic activity can
exert an influence on climate ( Lamb , 1995 )  . Initially it was thought that a reduction in
global temperature would result from the screening out of incoming solar radiation by
particles of volcanic dust , but it is now believed that the ejection into the atmosphere
during a volcanic eruption of large quantities of sulphur is likely to result in the creation
of a more effective and long-lasting radiation screen ( Bluth et al .  , 1993 )  . Indeed , recent
research suggests that sulphur volatiles from volcanic eruptions can lead to a cooling of
global climate by 0 . 2–0 . 3 °C for several years after the eruptive event ( Zielinski , 2000 )  . 
Such cooling may well be reflected in tree-ring data . In the 1970s , work on the bristlecone pine revealed the presence of tree rings that exhibited signs of frost damage , 
reflective of unusually severe winters , and the fact that these tended to coincide with the
Figure 5 . 6 Precipitation reconstruction for Banff , Alberta , Canada , for the period 1430–1994
based on dendroclimatological data . The mean precipitation for the period is indicated
by the horizontal line , while a 25-year filter ( smooth continuous line ) reflects the long-term
precipitation trend . A 2 standard error ( 2σ ) confidence interval ( shaded area ) on the annual
precipitation reconstructions is also shown ( after Watson and Luckman , 2001 )  . Reproduced
by permission of Arnold Publishers 
c05 . fm Page 129 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

130 Quaternary Dating Methods
known dates of volcanic events led to the suggestion that the trees were recording the
climatic effects of large-scale volcanic eruptions ( LaMarche , 1974 )  . More recent tree-ring
data from a range of northern hemisphere sites show a very close correlation with the GISP2
ice-core record ( section 5 . 5 ) for the last 600 years , the lowest tree-ring density values 
( reflecting colder conditions ) corresponding with episodes of explosive volcanism that are
clearly recorded in the ice core , and which are especially marked during several decades
of the 1600s and 1800s ( Briffa et al .  , 1998 )  . Similar relationships between tree-ring width
and volcanic episodes have been noted for earlier periods ( Baillie and Munroe , 1988 )  . 
A good example of the detection and dating of a particular volcanic eruption in treering series is the AD 536–545 event ( Baillie , 1995 )  . Tree-ring records from both Europe
and North America show a significant decrease in ring widths during this time period , 
which appears to coincide with a pronounced decline in temperature ( Figure 5 . 7 )  . There
is also a range of other proxy climatic and archaeological evidence for a climatic anomaly
at this time , and in the Dye-3 ice core a marked acidity layer ( indicating sulphuric acid
fallout from the atmosphere ) is dated at 540 ± 10 years BP . Although there have been
suggestions of other causal factors for this period of short-lived climatic deterioration 
( the effects of cometary impact , for example )  , the evidence points strongly towards a
massive volcanic eruption . The most likely candidates appear to be either Rabaul in
New Britain or White River in Alaska , both of which have been radiocarbon-dated to ca . 
AD 525–540 . In either case , the climatic consequences of this eruptive event are clearly
registered in northern hemisphere dendrochronological records . 
5 . 2 . 4 . 4 Dating archaeological evidence . Dendrochronology can be very useful in
archaeology because it enables events to be dated to a precision that may be unattainable
using conventional methods such as typology or even radiocarbon ( Brunning , 2000 )  . For
example , dendrochronological dating of the Sweet Track , a Neolithic trackway found
beneath buried peats on the Somerset Levels in southwest England , showed that the wood
used to construct the trackway was cut in winter 5757 years ago or spring 5756 years ago , 
and that the Post Track , a structure that ran on a course parallel to the Sweet Track , was
31–32 years older ( Hillam et al .  , 1990 )  . Dendrochronological dating has also been carried
out on boat timbers . British examples include the Iron Age Hasholme logboat ( timbers
felled or that died during the period 2272–2227 years ago ) from eastern England ( Hillam , 
1992 )  , and the Medieval wreck from Magor Pil in South Wales , whose timbers indicate
a construction date of AD 1233–1278 ( Nayling , 1995 )  . 
A good example of an archaeological application of dendrochronology is provided by
work on the Severn Estuary Levels in South Wales ( Hillam , 2000 )  . The Levels are an
area of reclaimed wetland and on these and in the immediate intertidal area there is evidence of human activity and occupation from Mesolithic times onwards ( Rippon , 1996 )  . 
Recent excavations near Goldcliff to the east of Cardiff ( Figure 7 . 15A ) have revealed the
presence of wooden trackways and a group of eight timber buildings ( Figure 5 . 8 ) 
believed to be of Iron Age date ( Bell et al .  , 2000 )  . Dendrochronological records were
obtained from the timbers of some of the buildings and trackways , and these were
matched against dated records from elsewhere in Britain . Cross-dating enabled ages to be
assigned to the timbers of three of the buildings and one of the trackways ( Table 5 . 1 )  , 
which not only confirmed an Iron Age date for the structures , but showed that human
activity may have continued into the Romano-British period . 
c05 . fm Page 130 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 131
0 . 2
0 . 0
–0 . 2
–0 . 4
–0 . 6
110
100
90
80
1250
1000
1 . 1
1 . 0
0 . 9
0 . 8
0 . 7
0 . 6
0 . 5
500 520 540 560 580 600
Date AD
Tree-Ring Indices Tree-Ring Indices Tree-Ring Indices Summer Temp . C . 
A
B
C
D
Figure 5 . 7 Dendrochronological records from western Europe and North America showing the
registration of the AD 536–545 event .  ( A ) Fennoscandian temperature record derived from tree-ring
data .  ( B ) European oak ring-width indices .  ( C ) American bristlecone pine ring widths .  ( D ) American
foxtail pine ring widths ( after Baillie , 1995 )  . Reproduced by permission of Batsford , London
c05 . fm Page 131 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

132 Quaternary Dating Methods
5 . 3 Varve Chronology 
A characteristic feature of many lake sediment sequences is the presence of regularly
laminated sediments consisting of thin , horizontally bedded layers of different structure
Figure 5 . 8 Goldcliff Building 1 , South Wales : the well-preserved corner of an Iron Age
rectangular building showing walls , flooring and internal subdivisions , possibly animal stalls . 
Split oak timbers forming the subdivisions are dendrochronologically dated 593–392 BC
scale 1 m ( photo : J . Parkhouse ) 
Table 5 . 1 The dating of timber structures at Goldcliff , South Wales , 
as indicated by dendrochronology ( after Hillam , 2000 ) 
Bronze Age 
Boat planks from Structure 1124
After 1017 BC
Iron Age 
Building 2 After 454 BC
Building 1 After 382 BC and possibly
before 342 BC
Trackway 1108 336–318 BC
Building 6 Spring 273 BC
Building 6 (  ?  ) repairs Spring 271 BC
c05 . fm Page 132 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 133
and texture . Often , these laminae are arranged in couplets with relatively coarse-grained
layers alternating with finer-grained bands . In other situations , the couplets may consist
of alternations between organic and inorganic laminae , or between sedimentary units rich
in diatoms or iron oxides and thin sedimentary bands that are relatively deficient in
these components . Such regular , or rhythmical , variations in sediment accumulation
reflect seasonal variations in sediment supply to , or in chemical or biogenic processes
within , the lake ecosystem . In many cases , the couplets will reflect the annual cycle
of deposition , in which case they are termed varves . 
2 
Because they are deposited
annually , varves form a basis for dating , for by counting varve sequences , time intervals
can be established and a ‘ floating ’ chronology ( section 5 . 2 . 1 ) developed . If varve series
can be dated by radiometric or other means ( by radiocarbon dating of included organic
materials , for example )  , then the floating varve chronology can be linked to the calendar
timescale . 
The potential of varves as a basis for dating was initially recognised by the Swedish
geologist Gerard de Geer ( Figure 1 . 1 ) who , in 1884 , made the first attempt to count and
correlate varve sequences in the Stockholm area of Sweden . His aim was to use the
varved sequences that had accumulated in front of the decaying Fennoscandian ice sheet
to establish a timescale for deglaciation ( section 5 . 3 . 3 . 1 )  . Varve chronology has
subsequently been applied in a range of other lacustrine contexts , and useful reviews 
( including applications ) of the method are provided by Saarnisto and Kahra ( 1992 )  , 
Kemp ( 1996 ) and Lamoreux ( 2001 )  . 
5 . 3 . 1 The Nature of Varved Sediments 
There are several types of varved sediment . Perhaps the best known are clastic varves3 
, 
which consist of alternations of coarse-grained layers ( sands and silts ) and finer-grained
bands ( silts and clays )  . Good examples of these are found in glaciolacustrine environments , 
in other words where sediments are accumulating in a lake in proximity to a glacier ice
margin ( Figure 5 . 9 )  . During the spring and summer months , when the lake is ice-free , 
sediment is discharged into the lake and forms the coarser layer of the varve couplet . 
In winter , when the lake is frozen , deposition results solely from the settling out of fine
silts and clays suspended in the water column which produces the finer component of the
varve couplet . In some situations , clastic-organic varves develop . These reflect an
annual cycle of erosion of mineral matter from the lake catchment and inwashing of
this material during spring floods , followed by the accumulation of particulate organic
material ( e . g . plants and algae ) in summer and autumn . The latter grades upwards into
a fine-grained organic layer that accumulates during the winter months when the lake
may be frozen ( Ojala and Tiljander , 2003 )  . In other lakes , purely organic varves may
form . Here the varve couplet consists of a thin dark brown layer which is reflective of
slow accumulation during the winter months , and a lighter-coloured organic horizon
which forms as a result of higher levels of internal productivity within the lake ecosystem during the warmer summer months ( Simola , 1992 )  . Seasonal variations in
precipitation of CaCO3 ( calcareous varves ) may contribute to this colour distinction
between the varve components , as also may summer blooms of aquatic organisms
such as algae , chrysophytes4 
and diatoms ( diatom-rich varves )  . In addition , seasonal
variations in iron oxide precipitation may lead to the formation of iron-rich varves 
( Renberg , 1981 )  . 
c05 . fm Page 133 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

134 Quaternary Dating Methods
Varves can also form in ocean sediments . In glaciomarine environments , for example , 
where glaciers are calving into the sea , fine-grained laminated deposits are relatively
common ( Ó Cofaigh and Dowdeswell , 2001 )  . These sometimes consist of couplets of
laminated muds and diamict5 
, the former reflecting meltwater discharge and subsequent
settling of suspended sediment during the summer months , while the diamicts are deposited
in winter when meltwater discharge is reduced and ice berg sedimentation dominates 
( Cowan et al .  , 1997 )  . These annual couplets can therefore be classified as glaciomarine
varves ( Cowan et al .  , 1997 )  . In deeper water , annual variations in ocean productivity
related , for example , to upwelling are reflected in laminated sediment sequences , where
Figure 5 . 9 Glaciolacustrine varves exposed in a section at Nummi-Pusula , southern
Finland . These varved sediments were deposited in the Baltic Ice Lake which formed during
the northward retreat of the last Fennoscandian Ice Sheet ( photo : Jari Väätäinen , Geological
Survey of Finland , GSF ) 
c05 . fm Page 134 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 135
lighter layers ( which are rich in microorganisms such as diatoms ) may be interbedded
with darker , diatom-poor horizons ( Hughen et al .  , 1996 )  . Together , these lighter and
darker layers represent annual cycles of deposition and can therefore be considered as
marine varves . Laminated sediments have also been found in some shallow-water
marine contexts , such as estuaries , where individual couplets of finer and coarser sediments
may reflect seasonal variations in sedimentation resulting , for example , from variations in
river discharge , storminess or sea-water temperature . Here too an annual signal may be
preserved within the sediment sequence ( Allen , 2004 )  . 
As was the case in De Geer ’ s time , counting of varved sediments can be carried out in
the field , but most contemporary varve counting is now undertaken in the laboratory
using either core samples or sediment monoliths taken from open sections . In the uppermost
parts of lake sequences where sediments may be loosely compacted , undisturbed samples may be difficult to obtain using conventional coring techniques . In these situations , a
specially adapted corer has been developed which allows the sediments to be frozen in
situ , thereby preserving the fine structural features in the core ( Saarnisto , 1986 )  . In the
laboratory varve couplets can often be identified by the eye , or with the aid of conventional
light microscopy . Increasingly , however , varve counting involves more sophisticated
approaches involving , for example , thin section analysis , scanning electron microscopy , 
photography and digital imaging techniques , and X-ray densitrometry ( Lindeberg and
Ringberg , 1999 ; Lotter and Lemcke , 1999 ; Ojala and Francus , 2002 )  . 
5 . 3 . 2 Sources of Error in Varve Chronologies 
In a number of respects , problems encountered in varve chronology resemble those in
dendrochronology . For example , in the same way that false rings can be produced in
trees , more than one set of laminae ( sub-laminations ) can develop within an annual
increment of lake sediment . This is especially likely in dimictic lakes6 
, where a grey
silt layer may mark either a spring or an autumn turnover , and organic bands may be
deposited during both summer and winter . Iron precipitates may add to this doubled
structure , with brown ferric hydroxides formed during spring and autumn turnover
periods and black sulphides forming during intervening stagnation episodes ( Simola , 
1992 )  . Sub-laminations may also form as a result of diurnal variations in sedimentation , 
coarser material being deposited by day and finer sediments at night ( Ringberg , 1984 )  , 
through episodic sedimentation from local wind-driven currents ( Catto , 1987 )  , or as a
result of high-rainfall events or two or more periods of snowmelt during the course of
a year ( Lamoureux et al .  , 2001 )  . Alternatively , varves can be disturbed by bioturbation on
the lake bed or , in some cases , may be removed entirely from lake floor sequences by
slumping or by erosion during flood events ( Leonard , 1986 )  . 
One way in which some of these problems can be addressed is by replication of varve
series in multiple cores from a lake sequence . As in dendrochronology , correlation 
( cross-dating ) between cores can be achieved using well-developed marker varves as
pinning points for the chronology . This may help to resolve difficulties arising from
sub-annual or missing varves . More problematical , however , are inter-site correlations 
( teleconnections ) because matching varve thicknesses is usually only possible over
limited geographical areas as local climatic and site-specific factors may result in quite
different varved sequences , even in adjacent regions ( Lowe and Walker , 1997 )  . 
c05 . fm Page 135 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

136 Quaternary Dating Methods
5 . 3 . 3 Applications of Varve Chronologies 
Varved or annually laminated sediment sequences are extremely valuable archives of
palaeoenvironmental information because they enable events to be dated with a high
degree of precision . In addition to providing a timescale for deglaciation , varve chronology
has been employed in studies of climate change , vegetation change and land-use histories . 
Varved sequences have also been used to calculate rates of sediment influx into lakes
and rates of erosion from their catchments , and they have also aided the monitoring of
processes in the modern environment , such as heavy metal pollution , eutrophication and
studies of the effects of ‘ acid rain ’  ( O ’ Sullivan , 1983 )  . In addition , varved sequences
form a basis for calibrating the radiocarbon timescale ( section 2 . 6 )  . Some of these
applications are considered in more detail in this section . 
5 . 3 . 3 . 1 Dating regional patterns of deglaciation in Scandinavia . Since the pioneering
work of De Geer ( 1912 )  , numerous studies of varves have been undertaken in eastern
Sweden and in other areas around the Baltic Sea . During the wastage of the great
Fennoscandian ice sheet , a large freshwater lake existed in what is now the Baltic Sea . 
The eastern and southeastern margins of the ice sheet terminated in the ‘ Baltic Ice Lake ’ 
and glaciolacustrine clastic varves formed in close proximity to the ice margins . As the
ice sheet wasted northwards and westwards additional varves were created , mainly as
deltaic sediments in estuaries of large rivers , and by counting the varves and linking
individual varve sequences , a ‘ master chronology ’ for deglaciation has been established . 
In De Geer ’ s chronology , the starting point for the timescale was a distinctive varve in the
Indalsälven Valley of north-central Sweden which he considered to reflect the sudden
input of large quantities of meltwater , and which he took to mark the transition from
glacial to postglacial conditions . De Geer termed this the ‘ zero ’ varve year , and older
varves were given negative numbers and younger varves positive numbers in relation to
this key varve horizon . 
De Geer ’ s master chronology has subsequently been repeatedly revised as more data
have become available ( e . g . Strömberg , 1994 ; Brunnberg , 1995 )  , while connection of the
upper part of the varve sequence to the present ( AD 1978 ) has enabled a calendrical age of
9238 BP to be assigned to the ‘ zero year ’  ( Cato , 1985 )  . The Swedish Time Scale forms a
more or less continuous record from ca . 13 300 varve years BP to the present , although
recent work suggests that there may be gaps in the sequence , with more than 800 varve
years missing from the postglacial chronology ( Wohlfarth et al .  , 1997 ; Andrén et al .  , 
1999 )  . This problem can be addressed by employing varve data in combination with other
lines of evidence , including pollen-stratigraphic records and calibrated radiocarbon dates
from varved clays ( Björck , 1999 ; Lundqvist and Wohlfarth , 2001 )  , and correlation with
independently dated records such as those from the Greenland ice cores ( Andrén et al .  , 
1999 )  . These approaches , which enable local varve chronologies to be developed for
particular areas , each of which can be linked to calendar time via other dating methods 
( Wohlfarth etal .  , 1998b )  , mean that clay varve chronology continues to form an important
basis for establishing patterns of regional deglaciation in those areas of Scandinavia
adjacent to the former Baltic Ice Lake ( Figure 5 . 10 )  . 
5 . 3 . 3 . 2 Dating prehistoric land-use changes . As noted above ( sections 2 . 7 . 1 . 4 , 3 . 5 . 5 . 2 )  , 
the depositional sequence on a lake bed contains a record of landscape changes that
c05 . fm Page 136 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 137
have occurred around the lake catchment . These will be reflected in the physical and
chemical composition of the sediments ( which provide evidence , for example , of episodes
of erosion slopes around the lake )  , and especially in the contained biological record , 
notably pollen and plant macrofossils , which reflect changes in vegetation cover and
in land use in the vicinity of the lake . Varve chronology has proved to be especially
valuable in providing a timescale for these local landscape changes . 
One such record is that from Lake Jues in the southern Harz Mountains of central
Germany ( Zolitschka et al .  , 2003 )  . The lake contains an annually laminated sediment
sequence which has been linked to calendar time by dendro-calibrated radiocarbon
dates ( Figure 5 . 11 ) and a detailed palynological record has been obtained from the
Norway
Sweden
Finland
The Baltic
NEW VARVED CLAY SITES
EARLIER INVESTIGATED
VARVED CLAY SITES
LAND AREAS
DURING THE DEGLACIATION
JÅRNLUNDEN
STENSVASSA
JÅRNLUNDEN
SONNEBO
BJÅRSJON
KRÅGEDAL
RÅVANTORPASJÔN
HARGSJON 1–4
GUMMETORPASJÔN
ADLER
SKOGS
SJÔN NEDRE
EMMAREN
SVARTELN
SVART
GÔL
ST . ÅLVIKEN / 
YXERN
NÅSSJÔN
LILLSJÔN
HORSEBERGASJÔN
TOREGÔL
ca . 13 800–14 200 0 10 km
BALTIC ICE LAKE 13 000 ( 2350 ) 
12 950 ( 2300 ) 
ST . BERGSJÔN
STORSJÔN
MJÔLSJÔN
47
46
45 NÅTVIN
TYNN
12 500 
( 1850 ) 
12 550 ( 1900 ) 
12 600 ( 1950 ) 
12 650 ( 2000 ) 
12 900 ( 2250 ) 
13 050 ( 2400 ) 
13 150 ( 2500 ) 
c . 13 500–13 700
13 100 ( 2450 ) 
12 850 ( 2200 ) 
12 800 ( 2150 ) 
12 750 ( 2100 ) 
12 700 ( 2050 ) 
1
2
3
4
5a
5
7
6
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
18
19
20
21
22
24
23
25 26
27
31 30
28
33
35 36
38
39
40 41
42b
42
43
44
37
34 29
17
16
15
10a
81
82 82a
83a
83
84 85
86 88 87
89
90
91
83b
LIMMERN
N
DILSJÔN
KAMIX
GLOTTERN
32
Figure 5 . 10 Ice recession lines for part of southeast Sweden based on a combination of
varve chronological and radiocarbon data . The dates are in calendar years BP , and the
figures in brackets refer to the local varve years ( after Wohlfarth etal .  , 1988b )  . Reproduced by
permission of Taylor & Francis AS , www . tandf . no / boreas 
c05 . fm Page 137 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

138 Quaternary Dating Methods
Figure 5 . 11 Lacustrine sediment record from Lake Jues , Harz Mountains , Germany . 
Episodes of agricultural activity are reflected in increases in cereal pollen , and in pollen of
Plantago lanceolata . The latter is an ‘ agricultural weed ’ and is often associated with
pastoralism . BA : Bronze Age ; IA : Iron Age ; RP : Roman period ; MP : Migration period ( after
Zolitschka et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier Age ( ka cal . BP ) dated levels ( 14C ) 
Climate Vegetation Colonization Fagus Cereal type Plantago lanc . Distance lake / settlement Human impact / Economy
Cultural phase
1 . 5
2 . 0
2 . 5
3 . 0
3 . 5
Subboreal
cool summers , mild winters
MP RP IA BA
far near far near far
Coppice forest
fields , pastures
fields
fields
fields
50% 0 1%
intensity of
human impact : 
very
weak
weak very
strong
strong
medium
clay layer
fields , pastures
soil erosion
Subatlanticum
TOC
oligo- / mesotrophic
mesotrophic
meso- / eutrophic
eutrophic
Sediment : laminated diatom gyttja , 
rich in fine detritus
laminated diatom gyttja , 
rich in fine detritus , 
with continuous sulphide
precipitation
0 5 % 0 0 5
Sediment Trophic level
decreasing continentality , increasing Atlantic climate
decreasing tendency for late frosts
c05 . fm Page 138 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 139
deposits . This shows evidence of vegetation change and human activity in the hinterland of the site from the Bronze Age ( around 3600 cal . years BP ) through to the end of
the Roman period . Human impact is evident from around 3350 cal . years BP , and during
the Bronze Age three settlement phases can be clearly distinguished , each associated
with an increase in agricultural activity . Woodland clearance for agricultural purposes
enabled beech trees to colonise the cleared areas , as reflected in the rise in the pollen
curve for Fagus between 3600 and 2950 cal . years BP . During the Iron Age , anthropogenic influence increased markedly with further deforestation leading to accelerated
soil erosion . This intensive phase of agricultural activity , which appears to have been
associated with a settlement in the vicinity of the lake , dates to between ca . 2500 and
2300 cal . years BP . Less intensive human impact is recorded during the later Iron Age
and in the Roman period . 
5 . 3 . 3 . 3 Dating long-term climatic and environmental changes . As well as providing
records of local catchment histories , lake sediment sequences contain evidence of changes
through time in the lacustrine ecosystem , which may reflect not only processes operating
around the lake catchment ( erosion , run-off , etc .  )  , but also broader-scale environmental
and climatic influences . In addition to biological proxies , such as pollen , climatic signals
may be detectable in biochemical records , for example in carbon and oxygen isotope
profiles ( Street-Perrott et al .  , 1997 ; Von Grafenstein et al .  , 1999 )  . These data are often
available at high levels of resolution and over relatively long time periods , and varve
chronology can be used to develop a high-precision timescale for such records . 
Lücke et al .  ( 2003 ) describe a composite varve-dated 11 . 4-m-long sediment sequence
from Lake Holzmaar in the Eifel region of western Germany , which extends back over
14 000 years , and from which a detailed carbon isotope record has been obtained 
( Figure 5 . 12 )  . Variations in δ13C values reflect changes in the lake ecosystem ( dissolved
CO2 , nutrient availability , light , climate , water temperature , etc .  ) and constitute a proxy
for environmental and climatic change . The mean time resolution for the isotope
sequence is 14 years . The record shows clear evidence of a number of major ecosystem
Figure 5 . 12 The Lateglacial and Holocene carbon isotope record ( δ
13C ) from Lake Holzmaar , 
western Germany . The shaded areas indicate distinctive periods in the isotopic record , 
while the arrows mark significant changes in δ
13C ( after Lücke et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced with
permission of Elsevier 
c05 . fm Page 139 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

140 Quaternary Dating Methods
reorganisations , the major changes at around 14 200 , 9600 , 5500 and 2700 varve years
being interpreted as reflecting major changes in climatic regime . The steady rise in δ13C
values during the Mid-Holocene is taken to represent a continuous climatic amelioration , 
reaching an optimum around 6500 varve years BP . Marked fluctuations in δ13C over the
past 2700 years appear to reflect human-induced changes in the lake catchment , relating
either to deforestation , reforestation or run-off changes . Interestingly , a number of the
major Holocene shifts in δ13C correspond in time with major reorganisations in climate
detected in other proxy data ( e . g . Bond et al .  , 1997 )  , suggesting that the Holzmaar lacustrine
record reflects climatic forcing at the hemispherical scale . 
5 . 3 . 3 . 4 Varve sequences and the radiocarbon timescale . We have already seen how
dendrochronology can be employed in the calibration of the radiocarbon timescale 
( section 2 . 6 . 1 )  . However , as described above , continuous dendrochronological series
currently only extend back to ca . 11 900 years BP , and hence alternative bases for calibration
have to be found for the timescale prior to that date . Some of these were discussed in
Chapter 2 , where it was noted that one approach is to use varve chronology . Two varved
sequences are considered here . 
The INTCAL98 radiocarbon calibration ( section 2 . 6 . 2 ) incorporates a varve series , 
namely the radiocarbon-dated marine varve sequence from the Cariaco Basin , Venezuela . 
There , the lighter layers in the varves , which contain large numbers of planktonic
microfossils ( mainly diatoms )  , reflect increased productivity over the basin during the
winter–spring upwelling season , while the darker laminae are dominated by terrestrial
material and are an indicator of run-off from the northern South American continent
during the late summer–autumn rainy season ( Hughen et al .  , 1996 )  . Radiocarbon dates
from individual varves were obtained on species of planktonic foraminifers , and the
 ‘ floating ’ varved sequence was anchored to the calendar timescale by ‘ wiggle-matching ’  
( section 2 . 6 . 5 ) the radiocarbon age versus calendar age variations to the tree-ring data 
( Hughen et al .  , 1998 )  . The calibration based on the Cariaco varve series ( Figure 5 . 13A ) 
covers the period from ca . 9000 to 14 500 cal . years BP . 
An even longer radiocarbon calibration may be possible using the varve series from
Lake Suigetsu in Japan ( Kitagawa and van der Plicht , 1998 ; 2000 )  . In that lake a
sequence of sediments consisting of dark-coloured clays interbedded with lighter layers , 
the latter reflecting spring season diatom growth , extend to a depth of more than 75 m . 
The sequence from 10 . 42 to 30 . 45 m was scanned using digital image analysis and 29 100
varves were identified . More than 300 AMS radiocarbon dates on plant macrofossils have
been obtained from the profile . The absolute age of the Lake Suigetsu floating varve
chronology was determined by wiggle-matching 22 radiocarbon determinations from the
younger part of the sequence with the German oak radiocarbon calibration curve . On the
basis of this match , the Lake Suigetsu timescale covers the absolute age range from 8830
to 37 930 cal . years BP ( Figure 5 . 13B )  . The accumulated counting error in the older part
of the Lake Suigetsu varve chronology is estimated at 2000 cal . years , which means that
the series cannot yet be regarded as a reliable calibration curve ( van der Plicht , 2002 )  . 
However , further refinement and revision of the chronology may , in due course , reduce
the extent of the error . If so , then the Lake Suigetsu varve record could form the basis for
a high-resolution calibration that potentially spans the complete radiocarbon-dating range 
( see also section 2 . 6 . 3 )  . 
c05 . fm Page 140 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 141
5 . 4 Lichenometry 
Lichens are composite plants consisting of algae and fungi . The association between
the two is generally considered to be symbiotic in that both the fungus and the alga
derived mutual benefits from the association . The alga furnishes food for the fungus
13000
12500
12000
11500
11000
10500
10000
9500
9000
13000
12500
12000
11500
11000
10500
10000
9500
9000
10000 11000 12000 13000 14000 15000
Calendar age ( yr BP ) 
14C age ( yr BP ) 
14C age ( yr BP ) 
Holocene Younger
Dryas
Bölling
Alleröd
Cariaco Basin PL07-56PC
Cariaco Basin PL07-39PC
German pine
14C ( ka BP ) 40
30
20
10
10 20 30 40
cal . BP ( ka ) 
Lake Suigetsu 2000
Figure 5 . 13 Radiocarbon calibration curves from two varved sequences :  ( A ) Radiocarbon
versus calendar ages for the period 9000–15 000 cal . years BP based on evidence from
the Cariaco Basin , Venezuela : solid line is German pine data ( after Hughen et al .  , 1998 ) 
Reproduced by permission of Radiocarbon ( B ) Radiocarbon versus calendar ages for
the period 8830–37390 cal . years BP based on data from Lake Suigetsu , Japan ( van der Plicht , 
2002 )  . Reproduced by permission of Netherlands Journal of Geosciences
c05 . fm Page 141 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

142 Quaternary Dating Methods
which , in turn , supplies moisture and shelter for the alga . The body of a lichen is
termed a thallus , and in some the alga and fungus are uniformly distributed through it . 
In others , the thallus is internally differentiated into zones with the green algae sandwiched between the fungal elements . Lichens can be divided into three broad groups
based on the shape of the vegetative body : the fruiticose type consisting of small
tubules and branches , the foliose type which have a leaf-like plant body , and the
flattened crustose type . The last named are the most common members of the lichen
family , and grow extensively on hard surfaces , including rock outcrops , boulders , tree
bark , poles , buildings and gravestones . It is the crustose lichen types that are used in
lichenometry . 
5 . 4 . 1 Principles of Lichenometric Dating 
That lichens could be used as basis for dating was first suggested by the Austrian scientist
Roland Beschel in a paper published in 1950 . Lichens are rapid colonisers of bare
surfaces and , once established , there is a progressive increase in size of the thallus by
slow marginal growth . Hence , the larger the thallus ( in terms of its diameter )  , the older
the lichen , and the greater the time that has elapsed since colonisation . Where a surface
has been exposed to lichen colonisation ( following glacier retreat , for example )  , provided
that ( a ) the growth rates of the lichens are known , and ( b ) no significant time interval has
elapsed between surface exposure ( in this case deglaciation ) and lichen colonisation , an
estimate can be made for the timing of substrate exposure by measuring the size of the
lichen thalli on that surface . It was on the basis of these two key principles that Beschel
developed the technique of lichenometry ( Beschel , 1973 )  . 
Some lichen species ( such as Rhizocarpum geographicum ) are relatively long-lived . 
Indeed , under the cold dry conditions of western Greenland , certain crustose lichens may
live for 4500 years or more . This is an extreme example , however , and in the majority of
cases , lichenometry as an absolute dating tool has a useful range of less than 500 years 
( Matthews , 1992 )  . Once a substrate is colonised , the general growth of a lichen proceeds
in three phases :  ( 1 ) a rapid growth phase during which growth occurs at a logarithmic
rate ;  ( 2 ) a linear growth phase during which growth is nearly uniform ; and ( 3 ) a slow
growth phase where lichen growth gradually declines until death ( O ’ Neal and Schoenenberger , 2003 )  . By measuring lichen thallus diameters ( usually the largest lichen ) on
surfaces of known age , lichen growth rates can be established and used to construct a
growth curve showing the relationship between lichen size and age ( Figure 5 . 14 )  . 
Surfaces of known age ( referred to as fixed points ) might include humanly constructed
features such as building walls or gravestones , or natural features such as rock surfaces
whose ages might be inferred from old photographs or historical records . Once the
growth curve has been developed , surfaces of unknown age can be dated by relating
lichen diameters on those surfaces to the growth-rate curve , thereby deriving a
calendar age . 
5 . 4 . 2 Problems Associated with Lichenometric Dating 
Not all lichens are suitable for lichenometry and only those that have a pattern of gradual
and progressive growth can be employed . Moreover , growth curve must be based on
c05 . fm Page 142 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 143
single lichen types as differences in predicted ages have been found where different
lichen datasets have been employed ( Bickerton and Matthews , 1992 )  . In addition , because
the growth rate and the duration of the different growth phases described above are
influenced by a range of local and regional environmental factors , such as air temperature , day length and snow cover ( Benedict , 1990 )  , lichenometric dating is effectively
area-specific . Growth-rate curves that have been developed for one region will not
necessarily be applicable elsewhere . Field sampling and lichen measurement are not
always straightforward , and considerable effort may be required in order to ensure
reproducibility of results within any one region ( Innes , 1985 )  . Moreover , in some
remote areas , such as the mountains of Greenland or Norway , there may be no documentary or other evidence for establishing the fixed points on the lichen growth curves 
( Winkler et al .  , 2003 )  . Above all , there is the fundamental assumption that there has
been no significant time interval between surface exposure and lichen colonisation . 
This , of course , can never be proven and must always remain a source of uncertainty in
lichenometrical dating . 
5 . 4 . 3 Lichenometry and Late Holocene Environments 
The above caveats notwithstanding , there is no doubt that lichenometry has proved to be
a useful technique for dating relatively recent events . While it is perhaps best known as
a basis for establishing rates and patterns of deglaciation , particularly following the
Little Ice Age glacier maximum in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , lichenometry
150
100
50
0
1950 1900 1850 1800 1750
Moraine date AD
Lichen size in millimetres
log ( y + 144 )  = 2⋅141 + 0⋅0036 x
Figure 5 . 14 Lichenometric growth curve based on the five largest lichens per moraine on
four moraine ridges of known age at Nigardsbreen , western Norway ( after Bickerton and
Matthews , 1993 )  . Using this curve , a moraine of previously unknown age with a largest
lichen size of 100 mm would date to ca . AD 1810 . Reproduced by permission of John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd 
c05 . fm Page 143 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

144 Quaternary Dating Methods
has also been used in a number of other palaeoenvironmental contexts . Some examples of
these are discussed in the following sections . 
5 . 4 . 3 . 1 Dating post-Little Ice Age glacier recession in Norway . Jostedalsbreen is a plateau
ice cap in the mountains of western Norway with a surface area of 487 km2 
, and is the
largest single ice mass in northern Europe . It formed during the Mid-Holocene and
reached its maximal extent during the Little Ice Age in the mid-eighteenth century . 
The glacier variations of Jostedalsbreen have been more intensively studied than any
other ice body in Scandinavia , particularly the pattern of retreat from the Little Ice Age
maximum , where the principal chronological technique employed has been lichenometry 
( Matthews , 1994 )  . 
Detailed lichenometrical investigations at Nigardsbreen , a major outlet glacier on the
eastern flanks of Jostedalsbreen , have generated a growth curve ( Figure 5 . 14 ) that can be
used as a basis for lichenometric dating of recessional moraines left by other receding
glaciers ( Bickerton and Matthews , 1993 )  . One such glacier is Bergsetbreen which has
retreated by ca . 4 km from its maximum downvalley position in the eighteenth century . 
At least 14 separate moraines were formed by short-lived readvances during this overall
retreat phase ( Figure 5 . 15 )  . Three of these moraines , L , M and N , can be precisely dated
to 1937 , 1931 and 1910 , respectively , on the basis of observation and measurement , 
and the predicted ages for these moraines from the lichenometrical data are in excellent
agreement with the independent historical dates ( ±4 years )  . Moreover , the predicted
lichenometrical date for moraine H is consistent with the position of the glacier in 1851 as
observed by J . D . Forbes ( 1853 )  . The dating of the older moraines ( A–D ) is less secure , 
largely because of a shortage of suitable sites for lichen growth . Of these , moraine B with
a predicted age of 1779 , appears the most reliably dated , although it is possible that it
could have formed slightly earlier , between 1755 and 1762 . Establishing a detailed
chronology for deglaciation is not only important for understanding glacier behaviour
and rates of operation of glacial geomorphic processes , but it is also important in other
investigations , such as studies of plant colonisation of recently deglaciated terrain 
( Matthews , 1992 )  . 
5 . 4 . 3 . 2 Dating rock glaciers and Little Ice Age moraines in the Sierra Nevada , western
USA . One of the problems with the glacial geomorphological evidence described above
is that it relates only to the last phase of glacier activity within an area , as glacier readvances destroy any moraines that have formed during an earlier glacial phase . In the case
of Jostedalsbreen , therefore , it is much more difficult to reconstruct the history of glaciation from landform evidence prior to the Little Ice Age maximum . An example of where
this can be achieved , however , and where the chronology of Little Ice Age and earlier
glacier activity can be constrained by lichenometry , is provided by Konrad and Clark 
( 1998 ) in their investigation of rock glacier and glacial moraine evidence in the Sierra
Nevada , western USA . 
Rock glaciers are accumulations of rocky debris that are lobate in shape , contain varying
amounts of interstitial ice and , in form and position , resemble true glaciers . Some , which
have small relatively clean ice field at their heads , are effectively debris-covered glaciers , 
and are referred to as glacigenic rock glaciers . Such landforms are common throughout
the Sierra Nevada ( Clark et al .  , 1994 )  . In the upper Owens Valley ( Figure 5 . 16 )  , active
glacigenic rock glaciers occur in close proximity to true glaciers with clearly defined
c05 . fm Page 144 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 145
Figure 5 . 15 The Bergsetbreen moraine-ridge sequence . The approximate position of the
glacier front as described by J . D . Forbes ( 1853 ) when he visited the area in 1851 is shown by 
( -o- )  . The historical dates for the moraines are also shown as are the lichen-measurement
plots which were used for dating purposes (  +  )  . The individual moraine ridges are lettered and
the inferred ages for these , based on lichenometrical measurements , are shown in brackets 
( after Bickerton and Matthews , 1993 )  . Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
c05 . fm Page 145 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

146 Quaternary Dating Methods
moraine ridges . There is , however , a marked contrast in lichen size between those on the
glacier moraine ridges ( 30–45 mm diameter ) and those on one of the large rock glaciers 
( 78–105 mm diameter )  . Lichen growth curves indicate that the moraines formed during
the Little Ice Age between ca . 100 and 430 years ago , whereas the rock glacier predates
the onset of the Little Ice Age at ca . 700 years ago . Indeed , on the basis of lichen size
measurements elsewhere in the Sierra Nevada , it is possible that the large lichens on the
rock glacier are in excess of 1000 years in age . The fact that no pre-Little Ice Age
moraines are found below the present-day glaciers indicates that this glacial episode must
have been less extensive than that which occurred during the subsequent Little Ice Age . 
5 . 4 . 3 . 3 Dating Late Holocene rockfall activity on a Norwegian talus slope . Obtaining
long-term records of rapid mass movement such as rockfall is difficult , for rates of
rockfall are likely to be influenced by variations in climate , particularly by the frequency
and intensity of cold intervals when frost-weathering is likely to be enhanced . This means
that extrapolations of rockfall activity based on present measurements and observations
may be misleading . Talus accumulation surfaces and debris-strewn hillslopes are essentially
diachronous , with episodic rockfall activity leading to the deposition of boulders at different
times . However , if the age–frequency distribution of the surface boulders can be established , 
then it may be possible to reconstruct a history of spatial and temporal patterns of
rockfall onto these surfaces . One way in which this can be achieved is by means of
lichenometry . 
Figure 5 . 16 Glaciers and rock glaciers dated by lichenometry in the Sierra Nevada , western
United States ( after Konrad and Clark , 1998 )  . Reproduced by permission of INSTAAR 
c05 . fm Page 146 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 147
An example of this approach is described by McCarroll et al .  ( 1998 ) for a talus
slope in Jotunheimen , western Norway , where an accumulation of boulders has
formed in an approximately triangular shape beneath a 100-m-high cliff . The largest
lichen was measured at 28 different sites across the talus slope , with 100 boulders
being measured at each site . Sites with similar lichen-size frequency distributions
were then grouped together and used to interpret the spatial and temporal patterns of
rockfall supply . Absolute ages were obtained by relating lichen size to a growth curve
based on a sequence of dated moraine ridges downvalley from the snout of the nearby
Storbreen glacier . Simulation modelling was carried out in order to reconstruct
possible temporal patterns of debris supply to different parts of the talus slope . The
results suggest that the normal rate of rockfall during the Late Holocene would lead to
the burial of about 4% of the talus surface every 25 years . Rates of rockfall supply
during the eighteenth century , the coldest part of the Little Ice Age , are estimated
to have been almost five times the normal Holocene rate . The predicted increase in
rockfall activity during the Little Ice Age is in good agreement with historical records , 
and it coincides with the maximum Late Holocene advance of most Norwegian mountain
glaciers . 
5 . 4 . 3 . 4 Dating archaeological features on raised shorelines in northern Sweden . At
the last glacial maximum , the Fennoscandian ice sheet was centred over the Gulf of
Bothnia in the northern Baltic Sea ( Siegert , 2001 )  . As the ice sheet decayed , isostatic
recovery7 
began and this process is continuing at the present day . Tide-gauge records and
detailed survey show that the current rate of uplift in the northern Baltic is in excess of
7 mm year−1 
, although modelling results suggest that the uplift rate may be as high as
9 mm year−1 
 ( Fjeldskaar et al .  , 2000 )  . This means that the coastline of the Gulf of Bothnia
has risen by 10 m or more since Viking times ! 
The process of uplift is reflected in a series of raised rock shorelines that form a
staircase around parts of the present-day coast . Numerous archaeological sites , dating
from the Late Iron Age through to the Medieval periods ( ca . 1500–500 years ago )  , as well
as more recent historical sites have been found on these shorelines . Most occur on rocky
islands and shores and consist of boulder and cobble constructions . As such they are
difficult to date using conventional means , but they may be dated by means of lichenometry . 
Broadbent and Bergqvist ( 1986 ) measured lichen diameters on a number of raised
shorelines and developed a lichen growth curve for the period ca . 200–1400 years using
ages inferred from shoreline displacement rates to provide the fixed points for the lichen
growth curve . The shore date gives a maximum age for a surface , whereas the lichen date
provides a minimum age for a particular feature . The combination thus frames a given
archaeological feature between an upper and a lower time limit . Application of this
approach to a series of small rocky cairns , which had at one time supported posts for
drying fishnets , produced a lichen-based date for the cairns of AD 1660 . The elevation
above sea level of these features is 3 . 8 m which , on the shoreline elevation curve , provides
a maximum date of AD 1545 . This suggests that the first net-drying posts stood about 1 m
above the contemporary mean sea level , something that can still be observed in the northern
Gulf of Bothnia at the present day . Moreover , historical records show that this type of net
system first appeared in the region in the seventeenth century , which is fully in accord
with the results of lichenometric dating . 
c05 . fm Page 147 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

148 Quaternary Dating Methods
5 . 5 Annual Layers in Glacier Ice 
Alongside deep-ocean coring , one of the other great achievements in Quaternary science
during the course of the twentieth century was the development of a technology for
drilling through the great ice sheets of the world and recovering cores of glacier ice 
( Figure 5 . 17A )  . The first deep ice cores were obtained from Camp Century in Greenland 
( 1966 ) and since then drilling has been carried out at a number of sites in Greenland and
Antarctica , as well as on smaller ice caps on Devon Island in the Canadian Arctic , and on
low-latitude ice caps in Tibet and South America ( Thompson , 2000 )  . Perhaps the most
important of these drilling programmes , in terms of scientific data that have been
generated and methodological refinements in coring technology , were two cores obtained
from the summit of the Greenland Ice Sheet in the early 1990s : the Greenland Ice Core 
( A ) 
Figure 5 . 17 ( A ) An ice core from NorthGRIP , Greenland , being split lengthways using a
horizontal band saw prior to sampling .  ( B ) An automatic line-scanner used to determine the
stratigraphy of the ice core . It employs a dark field indirect light source to detect cloudy
bands in the ice ( reflecting impurities ) as the camera moves along the core .  ( C ) A 1 . 65m section
of the NorthGRIP core from a depth of 1837 m ( ca . 25 000 years ago ) showing the visual
stratigraphy revealed by the line scanner . Clear ice shows up black , whereas the cloudy
bands , which contain relatively large quantities of impurities , in particular micrometre-sized
dust particles from dry areas in eastern Asia , appear white . The visual stratigraphy is essentially
a seasonal signal . This record shows how well the stratigraphy in an ice core can be
preserved , even at depths approaching 2km ( photos : Jørgen-Peder Steffensen , Sigfus , Johnsen
and Anders Svensson ) 
c05 . fm Page 148 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 149
Project ( GRIP ) co-ordinated through the European Science Foundation , which reached bedrock at 3029m in 1992 , and the American-led Greenland Ice Sheet Project ( GISP2 )  , located
only 30 km away to the west of GRIP and which hit bedrock at a depth of 3053 m in 1993 
( Hammer etal .  , 1997 )  . These two cores spanned more than 100000 years of Late Quaternary
time . More recently , a new Greenland site has been drilled by a European team , NorthGRIP 
( NGRIP )  . This reached bedrock at a depth of 3085 m in July 2003 , and the record extends
back to the last interglacial at ca . 123000 years ( North Greenland Ice Core Project Members , 
2004 )  . Important coring sites in Antarctica are at Vostok Station , a Russian–French collaboration drilled during the 1980s and which contains a record of ice accumulation going
back more than 400 000 years ( Petit et al .  , 1999 )  , and the new European Project for Ice
Coring in Antarctica ( EPICA ) at Concordia Station , Dome C . The latter , which involves
more than ten European countries , promises to be the most exciting ice-core drilling yet
undertaken , as the record already extends back to 740 000 years , and it is possible that , in
due course , it may reach almost 1 million years ( EPICA Community Members , 2004 )  . 
5 . 5 . 1 Ice-Core Chronologies 
Because glacier ice accumulates in a sequence of annual increments , it is possible to
establish a chronology based on the visible stratigraphy and other properties of glacier
Figure 5 . 17 ( Continued )  
( C )  ( B ) 
c05 . fm Page 149 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

150 Quaternary Dating Methods
ice . In the upper levels of polar ice sheets , for example , the annual additions of snow to
the ice mass are revealed in clearly defined layers , and in an ice core these can be counted
and a chronology established for the depth of the core ( Alley etal .  , 1997a )  . Other constituents
of the ice , such as seasonal variations in stable isotope content , in major chemical
elements or in electrical conductivity8 
, can also help to identify annual layers within the
ice . Such a ‘ multi-parameter ’ continuous count approach was used to establish a chronology
for the GISP2 ice core down to a depth of 2800 m where the ice was dated at 110 000
years BP ( Meese et al .  , 1997 )  . Recent developments using digital scanners , computers and
large storage media ( Svensson et al .  , 2005 ) enable the visual stratigraphy of ice cores to
be determined with remarkable clarity ( Figure 5 . 17B and C )  . 
At deeper levels , deformation within the ice means that the annual layers become more
diffuse and consequently may be more difficult to recognise . This problem is exacerbated
at low accumulation sites where the seasonal layers or seasonally varying tracers tend to
be smoothed by diffusion during the process of conversion of snow to ice ( firnification )  . 
In these circumstances , recourse has to be made to other methods . One technique is to use
ice-flow models based on a knowledge of ice dynamics in order to derive age estimates . 
This approach has been employed to develop a timescale for the deeper sections of the
GRIP ice core from Greenland , and for the EPICA and Vostok cores from Antarctica . 
Other means of dating include the tuning of proxy-climate records obtained from the ice
cores , for example atmospheric trace gases such as methane ( section 5 . 5 . 3 )  , to variations
in the earth ’ s orbital parameters ( Chapter 1 : Note 4 ) which have an independent
chronology based on astronomical calculations ( Ruddiman and Raymo , 2003 )  . Indeed , an
orbitally tuned MOI curve has been employed to develop an age–depth model for the
EPICA core ( EPICA Community Members , 2004 )  . An alternative approach is to
correlate the isotopically defined events in the ice cores with independently dated 
( by 14C or 230 / 234U ) events in marine cores or speleothem records , and then to ‘ calibrate ’ 
the ice-core timescale using these age measurements . This method has recently been
used to ‘ calibrate ’ the Greenland timescale based on the GRIP and GISP2 ice cores 
( Shackleton et al .  , 2004 )  . 
5 . 5 . 2 Errors in Ice-Core Chronologies 
Errors in ice-core chronologies arise from imperfections in the ice-core record , from
variations in core quality , or from human error in interpreting the ice-core sequence . In
terms of the nature of the record , it is possible that layers of snow will be disturbed by
wind scouring and , in some instances , snowfall from individual years may be removed
entirely leaving gaps in the ice-core stratigraphy . This is especially problematic where
annual snowfall has always been low ( parts of Antarctica , for example )  , or where the
core records date from times in the past where colder temperatures have resulted in
reduced snowfall , such periods often being associated with increased wind strength . 
A further complication arises from deformation within the ice which causes folding and
possible loss of stratigraphic continuity ( Alley et al .  , 1997b )  . At the base of both the
GRIP and GISP2 cores , for example , there is clear evidence of severe structural disturbance in the lower 200–300 m , and this has almost certainly resulted in discontinuities
or breaks in the stratigraphic sequence ( Meese et al .  , 1997 )  . Chronological problems
may also arise as a result of incomplete core recovery , in which case interpolations
c05 . fm Page 150 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 151
have to be made based on annual layers above and below the missing levels . Such
interpolations must inevitably have some associated errors . Counting of visible layers
within the ice is normally carried out by teams of scientists , and while they are highly
experienced in ice-core research , there will inevitably be a ‘ personal factor ’ in the
interpretation of ice layers as annual or sub-annual horizons ( Alley et al .  , 1997a )  . 
Although replicate counts are the norm and intercomparisons between different parameters ensure that the highest possible levels of agreement are obtained , some degree of
error cannot be avoided . These various factors mean that ice-core chronologies can
never be regarded as absolute , and all contain an element of uncertainty . In the GISP2
timescale , errors associated with multi-parameter layer counting are of the order of
1–2% back to 12 000 years , ±2% back to ca . 40 000 years , ±5% at ca . 45 000 years and
up to 10% at ca . 55 000 years . The estimated error at 110 000 years is of the order of
20% ( Meese et al .  , 1997 )  . In the EPICA core , where the chronology is based largely on
ice-flow modelling , the timescale has an estimated error of ±10 years for the period
0–700 years , of up to ±200 years back to 10 000 years , and of up to ±2000 years back to
41 000 years ( Schwander et al .  , 2001 )  . In the deeper part of the core , the preliminary
timescale suggests an error of ±10000 years at 807000 years , and when this is extended to the
base of the core ( 960000 years )  , the error is estimated to be of the order of ±20000 years 
( EPICA Community Members , 2004 )  . In the 400 000-year Vostok record , Petit et al .  
( 1999 ) conclude that the error associated with the timescale is always better than 15 000
years , better than 10 000 years over most of the record , and better than 5000 years for
the last 110 000 years . 
5 . 5 . 3 Ice Cores and the Quaternary Palaeoenvironmental Record 
Glacier ice has proved to be an archive of palaeoenvironmental information of enormous
significance to Quaternary scientists . It contains , inter alia , a record of changes in
atmospheric trace gases ( such as carbon dioxide and methane ) that become trapped in
tiny bubbles within the ice ; of past variations in atmospheric particulate matter , such
as soot , dust or volcanic ash ; of variations in stable isotopes ( particularly isotopes of
oxygen )  ; and of a range of other trace substances ( Oeschger and Langway , 1989 )  . These
various lines of evidence can be used to reconstruct changes in atmospheric circulation , 
former temperature and precipitation regimes , histories of volcanic activity , and human
impact on the global climate system ( Alley , 2000a ; Mayewski and White , 2002 )  . 
Some examples of the types of environmental record that can be obtained from ice cores , 
and which demonstrate the value of ice-core chronologies , are considered in the
following sections . 
5 . 5 . 3 . 1 Dating climatic instability as revealed in the Greenland ice cores . One of the
most remarkable discoveries to have emerged from the study of polar ice cores relates
to the instability of past climate . Until the 1990s , the prevailing view had been that
during the 100 000 years or so prior to the Holocene , the North Atlantic region had
experienced a climatic regime of unremitting cold ( glacial conditions ) interrupted only
occasionally by short-lived interstadial episodes . Data from the Greenland ice cores , 
however , show that this is far too simplified a view of climatic history , for between
20 000 and 115 000 years ago , no fewer than 25 major climatic fluctuations appear to
c05 . fm Page 151 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

152 Quaternary Dating Methods
have occurred at regular or quasi-regular intervals , and with an amplitude of up to
15 °C ( Johnsen et al .  , 2001 ; North Greenland Ice Core Project members , 2004 )  . These
climatic reconstructions , based on changes in oxygen isotope ratios in the ice ( δ18O )  , 
are at a remarkably high degree of resolution and the records are underpinned by
timescales based on ice-layer counting and on other parameters ( Figure 5 . 18A )  . The
evidence suggests that changes in climate were cyclic , with each cycle lasting between
500 and 2000 years . Moreover , there is structure in the data , in that climate warming
was very rapid , and in some cases may have been completed within 50 years , whereas
the subsequent cooling trend was a more gradual process ( Figure 5 . 18B )  . These major
climatic fluctuations , which appear to reflect a combination of feedback mechanisms
involving ice-sheet fluctuations , oceanographic changes and atmospheric circulation
variations , are known as Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles , after the Danish glaciologist
Willi Dansgaard and his Swiss colleague Hans Oeschger , two of the pioneers of ice-core
science . 
5 . 5 . 3 . 2 Dating rapid climate change : the end of the Younger Dryas in Greenland . The
discovery of the Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles not only challenged the conventional view of
general climatic stability during the Last Cold Stage , it also demonstrated that climatic
change could occur extremely rapidly . Received geological wisdom has it that climatic
–30
–35
–40
–45
–50
–55
–32
–36
–40
–44
Temperature [ °C ] 
0
30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46
20 40 60 80 100
Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles
δ18O ( %° ) 
W
C C C C
C C
C
W W W WW W 
( A )  
( B ) 
k years
k years
Figure 5 . 18 ( A ) Past temperature changes for summit , Greenland , based on data from the
GRIP ice core . The temperature at the Last Glacial Maximum ( ca . 25 000 years BP ) were
about 20 °C colder than today , and the temperature shifts of the Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles
are up to 15 °C ( after Johnsen et al .  , 2001 )  . Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons
Ltd .  ( B ) Part of the GISP2 δ
18O record showing the rapid warming and slower cooling in
successive Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles between 30 000 and 45 000 years BP ( after Stuiver
and Grootes , 2000 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c05 . fm Page 152 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 153
change is a slow process that is measured on timescales of hundreds or , more likely , 
thousands of years . Ice cores , however , with their multi-parameter records and near-annually
resolved incremental chronologies , show that significant shifts in climate can take place
within decades or even less . A good example is provided by the end of the Younger Dryas
cold stage ( Figure 1 . 5 ) as recorded in the GISP2 ice core . The Younger Dryas , which has
a measured duration of 1300 ± 70 year in GISP2 ( Alley et al .  , 1993 )  , was an abrupt return
to near-glacial conditions at ca . 12 900 years when temperatures fell to 15 °C± 3 °C colder
than today ( Severinghaus et al .  , 1998 )  . Evidence from the GISP2 core shows that at the
end of the Younger Dryas there was a 5–10 °C warming and a doubling of snow accumulation in central Greenland , a large drop in wind-blown materials ( Figure 5 . 19 )  , indicating
reduced wind speed and other changes in distant source regions or between source
regions and Greenland , and a large increase in methane , indicating expansion of global
Figure 5 . 19 The end of the Younger Dryas in the Greenland GISP2 ice core , as reflected
in changes in ( a ) snow accumulation in m / ice per year ,  ( b ) electrical conductivity in
microamps ( ECM )  ,  ( c ) insoluble particulate concentrations in number per millilitre , and 
( d ) soluble calcium concentrations in ppb . Note the increase in snow accumulation indicating
rise in temperature , the increase in ECM values indicating a reduction of dust content
within the ice , and a decrease also in other particulates and Ca . The last three all reflect
reduced wind strength . The main climatic step at the end of the Younger Dryas falls
between 1677 and 1678 m depth in the core ( between the two vertical lines )  , corresponding
to an age of ca . 11 625–11 655 years BP ( after Alley , 2000b )  . Reproduced with permission
of Elsevier 
c05 . fm Page 153 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

154 Quaternary Dating Methods
wetlands ( Alley , 2000b )  . What is so remarkable is that the GISP2 ice-core chronology
shows that these major climatic and environmental changes occurred within a few
decades , and possibly within a few years , in other words in less than a modern Western
human lifetime ! 
5 . 5 . 3 . 3 Dating long-term variations in atmospheric Greenhouse Trace Gases . The world ’ s
ice sheets are unique archives of past changes in atmospheric Greenhouse Trace Gases 
( GTGs )  , and the longest record so far obtained is that from the Vostok Station in Antarctica 
( Petit et al .  , 1999 )  . In Figure 5 . 20 , a 420 000 history of carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) and methane 
( CH4 ) is shown plotted against the ice isotopic trace ( δD )  , the latter being a proxy for
temperature . Peaks in the δD curve reflect interglacial periods , and troughs cold or
glacial periods . The trace gas signals mirror this temperature record very closely , with
the highest CO2 and CH4 mixing ratios during the interglacials and the lowest during the
glacial maxima . This close correspondence between temperature variations and past
Figure 5 . 20 Greenhouse trace gases ( GTGs ) over the last four glacial–interglacial cycles in
the Vostok ice core . The peaks in the three curves , CO2 , CH4 and δD ( a proxy for temperature )  , 
reflect interglacial periods , while the troughs represent glacial episodes . Note that the
present levels of CO2 at 365 ppmv ( parts per million by volume ) and CH4 at 1600 ppbv 
( parts per billion by volume ) are significantly higher than at any time over the past
420 000 years . This reflects the impact on the earth ’ s atmosphere of recent industrial
activity ( after Petit et al .  , 1999 ; Raynaud et al .  , 2000 )  . Reproduced with permission of
Elsevier 
c05 . fm Page 154 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 155
changes in atmospheric trace gas content implies that GTGs have been an important
forcing factor in long-term climate change , with climate simulation modelling suggesting
that they may contribute as much as half ( 2–3 °C ) to the globally averaged glacial–
interglacial temperature change ( Raynaud et al .  , 2000 )  . What makes these records so
valuable is that they are not only continuous , and therefore provide time-series data , 
but they are underpinned by an independent timescale based on the unique properties of
glacier ice . 
5 . 5 . 3 . 4 Dating human impact on climate as reflected in ice-core records . The polar ice
sheets not only contain evidence of natural atmospheric changes , they also preserve a
record of human impact on the atmosphere . The well-documented ‘ Greenhouse
Effect ’  , in other words the significant increase in CO2 , other trace gases and particulate matter , following the industrial revolution in Europe during the course of the
eighteenth century ( Houghton et al .  , 2001 )  , is clearly manifest in ice cores from the
polar ice sheets . Ice-layer counting enables the timing of the increase of these atmospheric
GTGs to be dated precisely . The evidence shows that atmospheric concentration of
CO2 has increased by 31% since 1750 , and that of CH4 by 151% over the same period , 
both gases rising to levels that have not been exceeded over the past 420 000 years 
( Figure 5 . 20 )  . 
It is possible , however , that human activity has been affecting the atmospheric
environment over a much longer timescale . Figure 5 . 21 shows the record for atmospheric CH4 in the Vostok ice core over the course of the Holocene . During the Early
Figure 5 . 21 The Holocene CH4 record in the Vostok ice core showing naturally induced
change during the Early and Mid-Holocene , and the increasing anthropogenic influence
during the later Holocene . Note , in particular , the abrupt increase in CH4 at ca . 5000 years
ago which may reflect the expansion of rice farming ( after Ruddiman and Thompson , 2001 )  . 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c05 . fm Page 155 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

156 Quaternary Dating Methods
Mid-Holocene , changes in CH4 appear to reflect naturally induced variations ( in areas
of peatland , for example )  , while the abrupt Late Holocene increase is clearly indicative
of recent industrial activity ( see preceding text )  . There is , however , a sharp increase in
atmospheric methane in the Mid-Holocene ( ca . 5000 years on the Vostok timescale )  , 
and it has been suggested that this reflects the expansion of rice farming across
southeast Asia ( Ruddiman and Thompson , 2001 )  . Early attempts at rice farming would
have required relatively extensive flooding of weed-infested fields which would have
provided a major source for methane emissions . If this is so , then the first major human
impact on the earth ’ s atmospheric environment may predate the industrial revolution by
more than 4500 years ! 
5 . 6 Other Media Dated by Annual Banding 
5 . 6 . 1 Speleothems 
As we saw in Chapter 3 , speleothems are valuable sources of palaeoclimatic data , and can
be dated by U-series . Speleothem structures form through successive growth layers of
calcite and , in certain circumstances , it may prove possible not only to identify these
individual growth bands , but also to recognise them as annual increments of material 
( Baker et al .  , 1993 )  . In these instances , a chronology can be established by counting the
individual laminae ( as in dendrochronology or varve chronology )  , and a timescale
established which is either ‘ floating ’ or anchored to calendar years either by counting
back from present-day levels ( Baker et al .  , 1999 ) or by using other dating methods to
calibrate the sequence ( Paulsen et al .  , 2003 )  . The thickness of the laminae is controlled
by a range of factors , including the drip rate and carbonate deposition processes , and
individual lamina can be identified visually using both UV and visible light . However , 
they are also detectable by other techniques such as the variations in fluorescence ( or
luminescence )  . The latter derives from organic acids that have been trapped within
the speleothem calcite having been introduced from the overlying soil and vegetation
by the groundwater feeding the speleothem ( McGarry and Baker , 2000 )  . Two examples of
speleothem records dated partly or entirely by lamination counting are now considered . 
5 . 6 . 1 . 1 Dating a proxy record for twentieth-century precipitation from Poole ’ s Cavern , 
England . Annual luminescence variations in three stalagmites from Poole ’ s Cavern , near
Buxton , England , were compared with rainfall data from a nearby meteorological station
to determine whether the speleothem records could be used as a palaeoprecipitation proxy 
( Baker et al .  , 1999 )  . Counting of annual laminae from the top down showed that the
speleothems accumulated over the period AD 1910–1996 . Ten of the laminae exhibit a
double luminescent band structure and these coincide with years with either high monthly
or daily mean precipitation . This suggests that periods of high-intensity (  > 60 mm per day ) 
and high-quantity (  > 250 mm per month ) precipitation may flush luminescent organic
material onto the stalagmites from either the soil or the groundwater zones , thereby
generating double laminae . If so , then there may be considerable potential in the analysis
of stalagmite lamina structure for deriving a palaeoprecipitation signal , especially one of
precipitation intensity which may be detectable at the sub-annual scale . 
c05 . fm Page 156 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 157
5 . 6 . 1 . 2 Dating climate variability in central China over the last 1270 years . A highresolution speleothem record extending back to 1270 years has been obtained from a
stalagmite from Buddha Cave , which is located some 900 km southwest of Beijing , China 
( Paulsen et al .  , 2003 )  . Oxygen isotope ( δ18O ) and carbon isotope ( δ13C ) variations were
measured throughout the speleothem which has been dated by a combination of U-series , 
210Pb and lamination counting to a time resolution as fine as 1–3 years . The δ18O profile
provides a record of temperature change ( heavier δ18O values reflecting warmer cave
temperatures )  , while carbon isotope ratios reflect changes in precipitation ( Figure 5 . 22 , 
lower part )  . The latter is based on the principle that the carbon isotope composition of
cave speleothem reflects that of the overlying soil ( and hence of vegetation )  . Plants
adapted to a cold and wet climate ( C3 type ) typically have δ13C values lighter than those
for C4-type plants which tend to grow in a warmer and drier climate ( see also section
2 . 7 . 1 . 4 )  . The resulting palaeoclimatic reconstruction ( Figure 5 . 22 , upper part ) shows very
clearly the Medieval Warm Period , the Little Ice Age and the twentieth-century warming
trend , lending support to the global extent of these events . The isotopic records also show
clearly defined cycles of 33 , 22 , 11 , 9 . 6 and 7 . 2 years . Several of these have been
recorded in other proxy records , including another lamina-based speleothem record from
Figure 5 . 22 Oxygen ( δ
18O ) and carbon ( δ
13C ) records from the 1270-year stalagmite from
Buddha Cave , China . The oxygen isotope trace can be read as a qualitative temperature
record , the peaks in the curve ( heavier δ
18O values ) reflecting higher temperatures , while
the carbon isotope trace indicates precipitation variations ( after Paulsen et al .  , 2003 )  . 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c05 . fm Page 157 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

158 Quaternary Dating Methods
China ( Qin et al .  , 1999 )  , and point to a strong external forcing factor ( e . g . solar irradiance
variations ) in short-term climate change in eastern China . 
5 . 6 . 2 Corals 
Corals are valuable sources of high-resolution palaeoclimatic data for shallow-water
regions of the tropical oceans . Stable isotope and trace-element data from coral can be
used to reconstruct sea-surface environmental conditions , including variations in temperature and salinity , as well as precipitation , evaporation and freshwater dilution from
river run-off ( Beck etal .  , 1992 ; Charles etal .  , 1997 ; Hendy etal .  , 2002 )  . Moreover , because
coral aragonite is deposited at rapid rates of several millimetre to several centimetre
per year , variations in environmental conditions over timescales of months , or even
weeks , can be reconstructed from coral skeletons . Skeletal growth rate is primarily a
function of coral species , water temperature and depth , and it varies seasonally , producing
growth bands of differing densities that are visible by X-radiography ( Quinn et al .  , 1993 )  . 
More recently , luminescent banding within the coral structure , which is evident under
long-wave UV light , has been used to identify annual aragonite increments . These reflect
either the incorporation into the coral skeleton of terrestrial humic substances during river
flood events ( as in speleothems : see section 5 . 6 . 1 . 1 )  , or they result from episodes of
reduced calcification as the coral responds to lower salinity conditions during coastal
run-off ( Hendy et al .  , 2003 )  . Typical errors associated with coral age estimates are of
only 1–2 years per century and , in some cases , the records extend back for more than
400 years . 
5 . 6 . 2 . 1 Dating a 420-year-coral-based palaeoenvironmental record from the southwestern
Pacific . A record of changes in the tropical ocean-atmosphere system since 1565 was
reconstructed from a series of cores drilled through massive Porites sp . coral colonies
on the Great Barrier Reef , northeastern Australia ( Hendy et al .  , 2002 )  . The cores were
cross-dated ( as in dendrochronology ) using UV-luminescent bands , and annual density
banding was revealed by X-radiography . Three palaeoclimatic tracers , δ18O , Sr / Ca and
U / Ca , were analysed for each of the cores , and these provided a record of past changes in
sea-surface temperature and sea-surface salinity . The data show that both sea-surface
temperature and salinity were higher in the eighteenth century than in the twentieth
century , and that an abrupt freshening of surface water occurred after 1870 and coincided with a marked cooling in tropical temperatures ( Figure 5 . 23 )  . The higher salinity
levels in the southwestern Pacific between 1565 and 1870 , a period which equates
with the later part of the Little Ice Age in the northern hemisphere , may be explained
by a combination of advection9 
and wind-induced evaporation as a result of a strong
latitudinal temperature gradient and intensified circulation . This suggests that the Little
Ice Age glacial expansion may have been driven , in part , by a greater poleward transport
of water vapour from the tropical Pacific . 
5 . 6 . 2 . 2 Dating a 240-year palaeoprecipitation record from Florida , USA . A core through
a sample of coral of Montrastraea faveolata taken from an offshore reef in Biscayne Bay
to the south of Miami , Florida , was shown by X-radiography to contain a growth record
extending back 240 years ( Swart et al .  , 1996 )  . The density banding of the coral was
regular and distinct , with an average growth rate of 7 . 87 mm year−1 
. Analysis was carried
c05 . fm Page 158 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 159
out on the δ18O content of the coral skeleton in order to establish variations in former
levels of precipitation . The latter can be inferred from the δ18O trace , because in years
when precipitation was heavier than the average , precipitation tends to be inversely
correlated with δ18O ( heavier precipitation is indicated by ‘ lighter ’ δ18O values )  , reflecting
the greater input of isotopically depleted precipitation . In contrast , when precipitation is
below normal , there is a positive relationship between precipitation levels and δ18O . At
these times , there is a greater input of isotopically ‘ heavy ’ water flowing out of the nearby
Everglades swamplands . The δ18O record , which extends back to 1745 ( Figure 5 . 24 )  , 
suggests that the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were dry compared with the
early part of the twentieth century when precipitation levels appear to have increased . 
Again , the fact that these are annually dated records means that specific years of heavier
or lighter precipitation can be readily identified in the dataset . Temperature anomaly ( °c ) 
1600 1700 1800
Year
1900 2000
1600 1700 1800
Year
1900 2000
1°C
less saline
more saline
δ18O anomaly ( %° ) 
0 . 2% 
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 5 . 23 Proxy climate records from the Great Barrier Reef for the past 420 years .  
( A ) The Sr / Ca record , which is a proxy for temperature .  ( B ) The δ
18O trace from which the
temperature signal has been removed thereby creating a proxy palaeosalinity record . 
Note the marked decrease in sea-surface salinity after 1870 and the complementary fall
in temperature ( from Hendy et al .  , 2002 )  . Reprinted with permission from AAAS . 
© AAAS 
c05 . fm Page 159 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

160 Quaternary Dating Methods
5 . 6 . 3 Molluscs 
Marine molluscs also exhibit annual growth banding in their shells . These range from
semi-diurnal ( tidal ) to annual , and reflect the influence of a range of environmental
factors , such as salinity , water temperature , tidal position and , above all , nutrient and
food availability ( Goodwin et al .  , 2001 )  . The variations in thickness of growth bands are
therefore potential recorders of a range of environmental parameters , as well as providing
temporal frameworks for geochemical environmental proxies such as δ18O and δ13C . To
date , fewer palaeoenvironmental studies have been carried out using molluscs as opposed
to corals , but the results that have been obtained suggest that marine molluscs could prove
to be a valuable source of information about changes in marine environments over the
course of recent centuries ( see below )  . In addition , certain species of freshwater mollusc
may also provide palaeoenvironmental records , including changes in air temperature 
( Schöne et al .  , 2004 )  . 
5 . 6 . 3 . 1 The development of a sclerochronology using the long-lived bivalve Arctica
islandica . The ocean quahog , A . islandica , is an ideal species to use in palaeoenvironmental reconstructions . It has a wide range in the North Atlantic ( 35–70°N and
10–280 m depth )  , it forms easily identified growth rings ( Figure 5 . 25 )  , its growth is
continuous throughout life , and it has great longevity , ages of 100 years and more being
common in most populations ( Witbaard et al .  , 1997 )  . Moreover , studies of modern
specimens have shown that the δ18O record in Arctica is in phase with the growth banding , 
is in isotopic equilibrium with the ambient seawater , and can record ambient bottom
water temperature with a precision of ±1 . 2 °C ( Weidman et al .  , 1994 )  . As such , it could
prove to be a valuable source of information on recent changes in ocean water temperature . 
A . islandica is also an ideal species to use in sclerochronology . Given that
growth-band characteristics are strongly influenced by the immediate environment , 
Figure 5 . 24 The δ
18O signal from the Biscayne Bay , Florida , coral interpreted as a palaeoprecipitation record . Wetter weather is indicated by δ
18O values falling below the mean line 
( after Swart etal .  , 1996 )  . Reproduced by permission of SEPM Society for Sedimentary Geology 
c05 . fm Page 160 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Figure 5 . 25 Annual growth rings in a shell of A . islandica . The upper left plate shows the juvenile annual growth rings in the ligament pit
below the umbo , while the lower left plate shows the older annual growth rings taken from below the umbo . The mollusc grows relatively
quickly during the juvenile stage and hence adds thicker increments of aragonite than in old age , just as more vigorous growth in young trees is
followed by slower growth in later life and a reduction in tree-ring width with age . Hence , sclerochronologies based on mollusc shells require
the use of standardisation procedures for ring-width variations , similar to those used in dendrochronology ( Figure 5 . 2 )  ( photo : James Scourse ) 
c05 . fm Page 161 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

162 Quaternary Dating Methods
individuals from within a population might be expected to share similar growth records . 
Hence , each member of a population might form a thick annual band during a ‘ good ’ 
year , and thinner bands during subsequent ‘ bad ’ years . If so , then records of these band
widths in different individuals , both living and dead , can be correlated and spliced
together to produce long sclerochronologies using the same principles as in dendrochronology . An example of this approach is described by Marchitto et al .  ( 2000 ) using
samples of A . islandica from Georges Bank off the coast of New England , eastern
USA . They employed three live-collected and four dead-collected shells to construct
a 154-year composite sclerochronology , the band width matching indicating that the
dead-collected individuals died in 1950 , 1971 , 1978 and 1989 . A weak inverse correlation could be detected between measured sea-surface temperature records and shell
ring width , with the period of relatively high sea-surface temperatures during the late
1940s and early 1950s coinciding with a phase of lower shell growth . One explanation
for this is that warm surface temperatures led to increased water-column stratification
and colder bottom water which resulted in narrower growth bands . Marchitto and
co-workers believe that it will eventually prove possible to construct a continuous , or
near-continuous , 1000-year composite sclerochronology using this particular mollusc
species . 
5 . 6 . 3 . 2 The development of a ‘ clam-ring ’ master chronology from a short-lived bivalve
mollusc and its palaeoenvironmental significance . Composite sclerochronologies can also
be derived from molluscs of much shorter lifespan than A . islandica . Schöne ( 2003 ) used
three species of Chione ( C . cortezi , C . fluctifraga and C . californiensis : 67 specimens in all ) 
collected from the northern Gulf of California to form a master chronology covering the
period from 1982 to 1999 . This is longer than the average lifespan ( typically 6–10 years ) 
of these Chione species . A total of 63–76% of the growth variation in these molluscs can
be explained by summer sea-surface temperature variation and / or fluctuations of annual
river inflow into the Gulf of California . What makes this study so important is that in one
species , C . cortezi , it has proved possible to resolve the growth ring record into daily
increments , from which daily changes in water temperature can be inferred ( Schöne et al .  , 
2002 )  . The mollusc , therefore , contains a highly detailed record of how long a particular
temperature regime existed , and just how quickly water temperatures increased or declined . 
This is one of the highest resolution palaeoenvironmental records to be derived from any
organism , and by linking living and dead shells into a master sclerochronology it may
eventually prove possible to extend this daily record of water temperature change back
over several decades . 
Notes 
1 . Subfossils are those fossil remains in which there has been little structural change since death . 
Examples include wood and mollusc shell . 
2 . The term derives from the Swedish word ‘ varv ’ which means something that begins and ends in
the same place , such as 0° and 360° in a circle , a turn , a lap , or yearly cycle . 
3 . Clastic sediments are those formed from fragments of weathered bedrock ( sands , silts and
clays ) and have usually been transported to a point of deposition . 
c05 . fm Page 162 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Dating Using Annually Banded Records 163
4 . Chrysophytes are a group of planktonic algae that are covered with silicious scales . Many are
sensitive to pH variations in lake water and , as their remains preserve well in lake sediments , 
they may provide a useful record of changes in the lake ecosystem over time . 
5 . The term diamict or diamicton refers to non-sorted terrestrial sediments or rock containing a
wide range of particle size , regardless of mode of origin . 
6 . Dimictic lakes are those where there are two phases of overturn within the water column , one in
the spring and one in the autumn . These are interspersed with periods of relative stagnation during the summer and winter months . Dimictic lakes contrast with monomictic lakes where stagnation occurs only in one season . 
7 . Glacial isostasy refers to the crustal deformation that results from the buildup of ice sheets . As
the ice accumulates , the earth ’ s crust becomes depressed by a value proportional to the weight of
the overlying ice . Once deglaciation begins , the crust gradually returns to its pre-depression
state , a process known as isostatic recovery . 
8 . Electrical conductivity measurements ( ECM ) provide a continuous high-resolution record of
low-frequency electrical conductivity of glacier ice which is related to the acidity of the ice . 
When placed in an electrical current , strong acids , such as sulphuric acid from volcanic activity
and nitric acid controlled by atmospheric chemistry , cause an increase in current flow . By contrast , when the acids are neutralised due , for example , to an increase in alkaline dust from continental sources , the current is reduced . For further details refer Taylor et al .  ( 1993 ) and Meese et al .  
( 1997 )  . 
9 . Advection is the process of transmission by horizontal movement , and is usually applied to the
transfer of heat by horizontal movement of air . The most familiar example is the transfer of heat
through the movement of tropical air from low to high latitudes . 
c05 . fm Page 163 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

c05 . fm Page 164 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 10 : 57 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
6 
Relative Dating Methods 
All things began in order , so shall they end , and so shall they begin again .  .  . 
Sir Thomas Browne
6 . 1 Introduction 
Relative dating methods determine whether something is older than or younger than
something else ; in other words , they group sedimentary horizons , fossils , artefacts , etc .  , 
and rank them in terms of relative order of age . This approach has its roots in the
geological sciences , and particularly in stratigraphy . The great British geologist William
Smith , whose classic map of the British Isles was published in 1815 ( Winchester , 2002 )  , 
formulated the two basic principles of stratigraphy , namely that ( 1 ) if one series of rocks
lies above another then the upper series was formed after the lower series ( unless it can be
demonstrated that the beds have been inverted , for example by tectonic activity )  ; and ( 2 ) 
each bed ( or group of beds ) contains a characteristic assemblage of fossils . The first of
these principles is known as the Law of Superposition , and it is on this basis that the
various stratigraphic units within a geological sequence can be placed in relative order of
age . By the same token , it also enables the fossil assemblages within those strata to be
classified in terms of relative age . 
In Quaternary science , however , there are ways other than stratigraphy whereby
phenomena can be ranked in order of antiquity . Many of these involve the operation of
physical or chemical processes that are wholly or partially time-dependent . For example , 
c06 . fm Page 165 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

166 Quaternary Dating Methods
sub-aerial weathering1 
of rock surfaces and pedogenesis will bring about gradual changes
on rock and ground surfaces ; the outer layers of certain minerals will slowly be affected
by hydration ; 2 
chemical precipitates from groundwater will progressively accumulate in
buried bone ; while following the death of an organism , biochemical changes will lead to
the breakdown of tissues to produce compounds of a more simple chemical structure . In
each of these cases , the extent to which change has occurred will increase with time , and
this therefore forms a basis for relative dating . In this chapter , we look at a number of dating
methods that are based on these various processes . 
6 . 2 Rock Surface Weathering 
As we saw in section 3 . 4 , radiometric ages for the timing of initial exposure of older rock
surfaces can be obtained using cosmogenic nuclides ( 10Be , 36Cl , etc .  )  , while younger surfaces may be dated using lichenometry ( section 5 . 4 . 3 )  . However , it is also possible to use
the degree of rock weathering as a basis for establishing a chronology . Unlike radiometric
dating or lichenometry , however , these weathering characteristics do not , in themselves , 
allow the timing of exposure to be established in years . Rather , they enable one rock surface
to be shown to be similar to , or different from , another in terms of age . If weathering rates
can be calibrated in one locality by independent means ( cosmogenic nuclide dating , 
for example )  , then it may prove possible to use that information to establish a timescale
for surface weathering in adjacent areas . 
6 . 2 . 1 Surface Weathering Features 
All landscape surfaces are subject to weathering processes that lead to physical and
chemical alteration of surficial deposits and of the underlying bedrock , and both weathering
and soil formation ( see below ) begin immediately upon exposure of the geomorphic
surface . Physical weathering processes , such as frost wedging and exfoliation , 3 
lead to
disintegration of the surface of rocks and boulders , and operate mainly at the ground surface . Chemical weathering processes , such as oxidation , hydrolysis and dissolution , occur
where water is in contact with the rock , and can lead to the breakdown of rock both at the
ground surface and at depth . Typical weathering features include decomposed boulders , 
the crumbly nature of certain rocks and clasts ( of sandstone , for example )  , and the relative
concentrations of more durable materials , such as quartz and chert , on the ground surface . 
Most rocks tend to weather inward from their surfaces , irrespective of whether they are
exposed at the surface or buried within shallower parts of the soil . The result is a weathering rind within the rock that approximately parallels the outer surface , and variations
of thickness of these rinds can be used to establish relative order of antiquity of rock surfaces . 
Data from New Zealand and the western United States , where weathering rind variations
have been frequently used to establish relative chronologies , suggest that surface rinds are
best suited for application to shorter time intervals , such as the Holocene , whereas
subsurface rinds can be utilised more successfully for longer time intervals , perhaps several
hundred thousand years ( Knuepfer , 1994 )  . 
A number of techniques have been employed to determine variations in weathering on
rock surfaces and on boulders . Some rock types , such as andesite , basalt and fine-grained
c06 . fm Page 166 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 167
sandstones , develop clear rinds with sharp inner edges , and these can be measured often
very precisely ( to within 0 . 1 mm )  . Other rock types , such as granite and quartzite , often
have more diffuse rind inner edges , while some rocks , such as schists and limestone , tend
to display very poor rind formation ( Knuepfer , 1994 )  . In these instances , alternative
approaches have to be employed . A qualitative estimate of the degree of surface weathering
can be obtained by striking rocks or boulders with a hammer . Weathered stone or rock
surfaces produce a dull sound and weaker recoil than fresh boulders which generate a
sharp ring and strong hammer rebound ( Mahaney etal .  , 1984 )  . More quantitative estimates
of degree of weathering may be obtained using instruments such as the Schmidt hammer 
( McCarroll , 1994 )  . This measures the distance of rebound when a spring-loaded mass
strikes a surface . The amount of rebound is a reflection of the surface hardness of the rock
surface and of the degree of weathering ; unweathered surfaces thus give higher values
while more weathered surfaces result in lower rebound values . Another approach is to use
a microseismic timer which determines the compressional wave ( P-wave ) velocity
through stones and boulders , the velocity of the P-wave being determined by the soundness
of the rock material ( Crook , 1986 )  . In arid areas , coatings of clay minerals cemented to
the underlying bedrock by oxides of manganese and / or iron are found on many surfaces . 
Known as rock varnish , this thin layer of material ( typically less than 200µm in thickness ) 
can provide a relative measure of age of the surface . This is because some cations , such as
calcium and potassium , are easily mobilised , whereas others , notably titanium , are more
stable . Hence the ratio of potassium plus sodium to titanium in rock varnish decreases
over time , and provides an indication of relative age . This technique is known as cation-ratio
dating ( Dorn , 1994 )  . In addition , rock varnish may contain minute quantities of organic
material that can be dated by AMS 14C , thereby providing numerical ages for exposure of
the underlying rock surface ( Dorn et al .  , 1992 )  . Where well-jointed rock crops out at the
ground surface , variations in depths of joints can also be employed to determine relative
order of age , the deeper and more expanded joints indicating a longer exposure to weathering agencies , for example under periglacial conditions ( Ballantyne et al .  , 1998b )  . 
6 . 2 . 2 Problems in Using Surface Weathering Features to Establish 
Relative Chronologies 
Although relative-age dating using variations in surface weathering provides a useful and
often relatively straightforward means of deriving age information from bedrock surfaces
or boulders , difficulties can easily arise . While degree of weathering may indeed be timedependent , it is also influenced by a range of other variables including local climate , 
altitude , aspect and , above all , bedrock composition . Hence local variations in lithology , 
for example , may be as responsible for variations in Schmidt hammer data as time 
( McCarroll , 1991 )  . In glaciated areas , the incorporation of older materials into younger
glacial landforms can also lead to errors in Schmidt hammer data ( Evans et al .  , 1999 )  , 
while in high Arctic regions , wind polishing and case-hardening of rind surfaces may result
in anomalously high Schmidt hammer rebound values ( Lilliesköld and Sundqvist , 1994 )  . 
Particular difficulties have arisen in cation-ratio dating where questions have been raised
about the precise nature of the mechanisms that lead to cation-ratio variations ( Reneau
and Raymond , 1991 ) and about the long-term stability of the ultra-thin varnishes on rock
surfaces ( Bierman and Gillespie , 1994 )  . There have also been differences of opinion over
c06 . fm Page 167 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

168 Quaternary Dating Methods
the reliability of radiocarbon dates obtained from organic residues preserved within rock
varnish ( Beck et al .  , 1998 ; Dorn , 1998 )  . 
6 . 2 . 3 Applications of Surface Weathering Dating 
Although surface dating techniques are not as precise as numerical-age methods due to the
greater variability in the controlling physical and chemical parameters , they have proved
valuable in Quaternary studies because they can be applied to a wide range of surface
contexts . They have perhaps been most effectively employed in glacial geomorphological
investigations to group exposed glacial land surfaces of similar age , and to use weathering
contrasts on clasts and boulders in moraines to distinguish landforms of different ages 
( Bursik and Gillespie , 1993 )  . In some areas it has proved possible to calibrate weathering
rind development by radiometric dating to generate ages in years for glacial moraines
and other landforms . Surface weathering dating has also been employed in other areas of
geomorphological research , for example , to date rock avalanche events , river terrace
development , patterns of river incision , and rates of fault displacement of river terrace surfaces 
( Knuepfer , 1994 )  . Rock varnish dating has been most widely applied in the western United
States where , in addition to providing a basis for deglacial chronologies , it has been
used to constrain the ages of desert landforms such as alluvial fans ( Dorn , 1994 )  . In the
majority of cases , however , these relative dating methods have been most effectively
used in conjunction with other techniques such as lichenometry or radiometric methods , 
most notably cosmogenic nuclide dating . 
6 . 2 . 3 . 1 Relative dating of Holocene glacier fluctuations in the Nepal Himalaya . Shiraiwa
and Watanabe ’ s ( 1991 ) work in the Nepal Himalaya provides a good example of how relative dating methods can be combined with the results of radiometric dating to develop a
Holocene glacial chronology for a high mountain region . In the Langtang Valley , about
60 km north of Kathmandu , numerous moraines occur downvalley from the present-day
glaciers in the region ( Figure 6 . 1 )  . These were grouped into distinctive moraine complexes on the basis of geographical position , and a range of relative age data , including
Schmidt hammer rebound values ( R-values )  , weathering rind thickness and soil development characteristics ( section 6 . 4 )  , were obtained on each of the complexes . The relative
age evidence was supported by radiocarbon dates from organic materials either beneath or
within the glacial deposits . This combination of relative and radiometric dating enabled the
moraines to be assigned to five glacial stages : the Gora Tabela Stage ( probably preHolocene )  ; the Langtang Stage ( 3650–3000 14C years BP ) which appears to have been the
most extensive Holocene advance in the valley ; the Lirung Stage ( 2800–550 14C years BP )  ; 
and two smaller Little Ice Age advances ( Yala I and Yala II Stages ) between ca . AD 1400
and 1910 . The differences in degree of weathering between the moraine complexes
supported the initial classification of the landforms based on geographical position , 
and proved to be a key line of evidence in the development of a Holocene glacial
chronology . 
6 . 2 . 3 . 2 Relative dating of periglacial trimlines in northwest Scotland . In recent years , 
considerable attention has been directed towards reconstructing not only the spatial extent
of glaciers and ice sheets , but also ice-sheet thickness . In upland regions , an important
geomorphological indicator of the altitude of former ice masses is the periglacial trimline , 
c06 . fm Page 168 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 169
i . e . the maximum level to which glacier ice has eroded or ‘ trimmed ’ frost-weathered
debris on a hillslope ( Ballantyne and Harris , 1994 )  . The periglacial trimline effectively
marks the uppermost limit of glacial erosion on a hillside ; below the trimline will be a
zone of glacial erosion or deposition , while above the trimline will be a zone of frost
weathering ( Figure 6 . 2 )  . In practice , however , the periglacial trimline is not always easy
to identify in the field , and relative dating methods are frequently employed to confirm its
existence , working on the principle that a greater degree of weathering will be recorded
above the trimline than below it because of more prolonged exposure to surface ( periglacial ) weathering processes . 
In their reconstruction of the last ice sheet in northwest Scotland , Ballantyne et al .  
( 1998b ) employed the depth of dilation joints and Schmidt hammer measurements on
rocks above and below the mapped trimline to derive weathering indices . The depth of
joints on both Torridonian Sandstone and Lewisian Gneiss lithologies ( Figure 6 . 3A ) 
showed a statistically significant difference above and below the trimline , the joint depth
being markedly greater on bedrock outcrops above the trimline . Schmidt hammer R-values
on Torridonian Sandstone ( Figure 6 . 3B ) formed a similar pattern , with a statistically
significant difference apparent between R-values above and below the trimline . Collectively
these data pointed to a much greater degree of rock weathering above the hypothesised
trimline , confirming the view that this did indeed reflect the upper limit of glacial erosion
on these mountains , and enabling the vertical extent of the last ice sheet to be located
Lama
Gola Tabela
Langtang
Lirung
Yala l & ll
Peak & Ridge
Contour Line ( m ) 
Glacier
Langtang
Lirung
NEPAL KATHMANDU
Langtang
Valley
N
0 200 km
0 10 km
2000
3000
4000
5000
5000
6990
5000
5846
7083
6830
6918
30°N
25°N
82°E
86°E
3000
7234
Glacial Stages
Figure 6 . 1 The extent of glaciers in the Langtang Valley , Nepal Himalaya , during the Late
Quaternary ( after Shiraiwa and Watanabe , 1991 )  . Reproduced by permission of INSTAAR 
c06 . fm Page 169 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

170 Quaternary Dating Methods
with a relatively high degree of precision . The results show that the upper ice limit ranged
from 425–450 m in the Outer Hebrides to > 950 m on the mainland of Scotland . 
6 . 2 . 3 . 3 Relative dating of archaeological features by Lake Superior , Canada . Surface
exposure dating may offer considerable potential to the archaeologist , either in terms of
the physical and / or chemical weathering characteristics of rock surfaces ( McCarroll , 
1994 )  , or in terms of the cosmogenic nuclide dating of large rock or stone structures 
( Stuart , 2001 )  . Thus far , however , there are relatively few studies that have employed
either of these approaches to resolving an archaeological problem . One that has is Betts
and Latta ’ s ( 2000 ) investigation of a series of stone structures in eastern Canada . 
Along the northern shore of Lake Superior , a number of archaeological features , known as
the Pukaskwa pits , occur on the cobble beach terraces that formed through progressive
glacio-isostatic emergence of Lake Superior following deglaciation . The pits typically
appear as excavated ovoid depressions on the surface of the cobble terraces , with a ring or
wall of stones erected around their circumference . Their function is unclear and their age
is also unknown , estimates ranging from the prehistoric Late Archaic period ( ca . 3000
years ago ) to the historic Terminal Woodland period ( 1250–300 years ago )  . Dating had
hitherto proved impossible , but Betts and Latta outline a methodology using the Schmidt
hammer which has shed new light on the age of these unique structures . Because the
beach terraces are emergent features , the highest is clearly the oldest and the lowermost
Figure 6 . 2 A trimline ( T ) cut by a glacier advance during the Little Ice Age ( 14th–18th
century AD ) on Mt Elbrus , Caucasus ( photo : Colin Ballantyne ) 
c06 . fm Page 170 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 171
the youngest . This was confirmed by Schmidt hammer readings which showed a measurable difference in surface hardness ( R-values ) of granitic cobbles of different age . A significant difference was also detected at most sample sites between rock hardness of
cobbles in the pits and that on the adjacent terrace surface . For a number of beach terraces
in the Pukaskwa region , the exposure ages are known from other evidence , and these data
form the basis for a regression model of R-values against age ( Figure 6 . 4 )  . This relationship between rock hardness and age can then be used to infer a date for the structures , 
Figure 6 . 3 ( A ) Depths of horizontal joints above and below the weathering limit ( trimline ) 
on Torridonian Sandstone ( mainland Scotland ) and Lewisian Gneiss ( Harris , Outer Hebrides )  .  
( B ) Schmidt hammer rebound values ( R-values ) from above and below the weathering limit
on Torridonian Sandstone mountains on the Scottish mainland ( after Ballantyne etal .  , 1998b )  . 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 171 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

172 Quaternary Dating Methods
based on the R-values obtained from stones within the pits . The evidence shows that one
group of Pukaskwa pits was probably constructed around 900 years ago , and a second
group between 300 and 500 years later . These ages are consistent with the known period
of occupation of this area by the Blackduck people during the Terminal Woodland period . 
6 . 3 Obsidian Hydration Dating 
Obsidian is a dark coloured ( usually black ) glassy volcanic rock . It breaks with a conchoidal
fracture and may be fashioned into a sharp cutting edge ; consequently it has been widely
used for making primitive cutting tools . Freshly broken surfaces of obsidian absorb moisture
from their surroundings to form a hydration layer known as perlite . One factor governing
the extent of perlite development is time , and hence by measuring the depth of the hydration
layer , it may prove possible to estimate the relative age of exposure or breaking of the
obsidian surface , working on the principle that the thicker the perlite layer , the older the
exposed surface . Obsidian hydration dating ( OHD ) therefore enables archaeological artefacts , which are often manufactured from obsidian , to be ranked in terms of relative
order of age . If the hydration rate can be quantified or calibrated , then it may be possible 
( at least in theory ) to use the thickness of the perlite layer to determine the age of the
artefact in years . 
Figure 6 . 4 Age versus R-value plot for selected terraces from the Pukaskwa region of Lake
Superior , Canada . The curve shows that the surface hardness of a granite cobble rapidly
decreases in the early stages of exposure , but this decrease becomes smaller with age ( after
Betts and Latta , 2000 )  . Reproduced by permission of Blackwell Publishers 
c06 . fm Page 172 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 173
6 . 3 . 1 The Hydration Layer 
It is important to emphasise that the hydration layer ( or rim ) on obsidian differs from the
chemical weathering rinds developed on other rock surfaces that were discussed earlier , 
in that it forms entirely through the process of moisture absorption . The progress of this
absorption is marked by a diffusion front that separates the hydrated glass from the unaltered
glass below . A number of factors determine the rate at which hydration proceeds , and
hence the thickness of the hydration layer . These include the chemical composition of the
obsidian , the temperature of the hydrating environment , and the relative humidity of the
hydrating environment ( Beck and Jones , 1994 )  , and each of these needs to be quantified
in order for the method to work ( see below )  . The hydration layer can be seen in thin section
under a microscope when illuminated by polarising light . However , because hydration
rims are very thin ( sometimes less than 1 . 0µm )  , optical measuring techniques are not always
successful and computer-assisted imaging technology also is now used to determine the
thickness of the hydration layer ( Ambrose , 1994 )  . More recently , secondary ion mass
spectrometry ( SIMS ) has been employed to measure the concentration of hydrogen as a
function of depth in obsidian samples , a technique known as Obsidian Diffusion Dating 
( Riciputi et al .  , 2002 )  . Estimates of the rates of hydration have been made on the basis of
correlation of perlite layer thickness with associated radiocarbon dates , or through experimental work involving the exposure of fresh obsidian samples to steam or liquid at high
temperature and measurement of the hydration layer that developed ( Stevenson et al .  , 
1996 )  . Dates have been reported in the age range from 200 to 100000 years ( Aitken , 1990 )  . 
6 . 3 . 2 Problems with Obsidian Hydration Dating 
Of all the relative dating methods discussed in this chapter , there is no doubt that OHD
has proved to be the most controversial . When first developed more than 40 years ago , it
promised to be a rapid , inexpensive , relatively straightforward technique for dating obsidian
artefacts . As such it was eagerly adopted by archaeologists , and there is now a substantial
body of literature describing the results of this work . Although methodological problems
have always been a concern , over the last ten years or so fundamental questions have
been raised about the validity of the technique ( Anovitz et al .  , 1999 )  , with one critic even
posing the question ,  ‘ Where in the world does obsidian hydration dating work ?  ’  ( Ridings , 
1996 )  . Other scientists , however , have mounted a robust defence of the method , acknowledging that while OHD is not without difficulties , it can deliver useful results ( Hull , 2001 )  . 
There are several problems with the technique . Optical measurement , which has traditionally been the basis for determining hydration layer thickness , has been shown to be
relatively imprecise . This means that many obsidian hydration ages that were obtained
prior to the adoption of digital imaging techniques are likely to be in error . More serious , 
however , are problems relating to the determination of the hydration rate . We have
already seen that hydration rate is influenced by a number of factors , including chemistry
of the obsidian , temperature and relative humidity . All three may be highly variable , and
hence the correct modelling of hydration rate , which is fundamental even if only a relative
time inference is to be drawn , is far from straightforward . The calibration of obsidian
hydration rates to an absolute timescale is even more problematical . The so-called
 ‘ empirical-rate dating ’  , which involves the correlation of the width of optically measured
c06 . fm Page 173 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

174 Quaternary Dating Methods
hydration rims with independent chronometric data ( e . g . radiocarbon dates )  , has frequently generated conflicting results , while the more complex and widely applied
approach of ‘ intrinsic dating ’  , which requires experimentally determined rate constants
and a measure of site temperature , also appears to be compromised . The mathematical
model that is used in intrinsic dating rests on the assumptions that the hydration rim
grows at a rate proportional to the square root of time , and that the diffusion coefficient is
constant . However , recent work involving SIMS analysis ( section 6 . 3 . 1 ) indicates that
both of these assumptions are incorrect and , if so , the rate equation which has long been
used in traditional obsidian hydration dating must also be incorrect ( Riciputi et al .  , 2002 )  . 
These shortcomings would seem to imply that OHD simply does not work . However , 
even the most trenchant critics of the technique acknowledge that hydrated obsidian artefacts
remain a potentially valuable source of chronometric data , but that in order for this potential to
be realised , a more rigorous analytical approach is required ( Anovitz etal .  , 1999 )  . Moreover , 
it may well be that the problem is not so much with obsidian hydration dating per se , but
rather with unreasonable expectations of the temporal resolution that is possible with the
technique . If OHD is accepted as a relative dating method that can provide rapid answers
to site-specific questions , then it may still have a valuable role to play , particularly in
establishing the order of antiquity of artefacts . Indeed , in many cases it may be the only
practical dating method that is capable of resolving research problems relating to artefact – as
opposed to site or component – dating for the foreseeable future ( Hull , 2001 )  . 
6 . 3 . 3 Some Applications of Obsidian Hydration Dating 
Although OHD has been most widely applied by archaeologists to date obsidian artefacts , 
the technique has also been used in geological and geomorphological contexts , for
instance in the dating of volcanic activity ( Friedman and Obradovich , 1981 ) and glacial
events ( Pierce et al .  , 1976 )  . Globally , the OHD has been used most extensively in western
North America and in New Zealand , where outcrops of obsidian are relatively common . 
Two examples are considered here , one archaeological and one geomorphological , 
although both of these studies should be viewed in the context of the foregoing discussion
on the limitations of the technique . 
6 . 3 . 3 . 1 Dating of a Pleistocene age site , Manus Island , Papua New Guinea . At the base
of a Miocene limestone cliff on the southern side of Manus Island , Papua New Guinea , is
the Pamwack rock shelter , a site that has yielded a rich faunal and artefactual record and
a history of occupation believed to span several thousand years ( Ambrose , 1994 )  . The site
is important because it probably represents the oldest evidence for long-distance oceanic
settlement yet recorded , being more than 200 km from the nearest islands of New Ireland
across the Bismark Sea to the east . Radiocarbon dates are available from the site , but
there are a number of anomalies of age with depth , probably due to site disturbance
during prehistoric use of the site . 
Several thousand flakes of obsidian were recovered from the uppermost 1 . 8 m of
deposits in the rock shelter . The protected nature of the site , the deep profile with abundant
obsidian , and a stable equatorial mean temperature regime make it a particularly suitable
location for obsidian hydration dating . The value of applying OHD lies in the comparison
with the dating series provided by radiocarbon , particularly where organic material is
c06 . fm Page 174 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 175
sparse . To counteract possible effects of surface weathering on the outer perlite layer , 
OHD measurements were made on internal crack surfaces of the obsidian flakes . The
results show a consistent increase in hydration thickness on the crack surfaces with depth
through the site ( Figure 6 . 5A )  . An age–depth chronology was developed by comparing
these results with available radiocarbon dates ( Figure 6 . 5B )  . While this timescale must be
considered as provisional , the increase in hydration layer thickness with depth can be
regarded as a working model for a relative chronology for the site , and confirms the view
that the Pamwak rock shelter has a long history of human occupation . 
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
1 . 2
1 . 4
1 . 6
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
1 . 2
1 . 4
1 . 6
Hydration thickness in µm
years
0 5000 10 000 15 000
Depth in metres Depth in metres 
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 6 . 5 ( A ) Relation of hydration thickness on internal crack surfaces with depth in the
Pamwak site , Manus Island , Papua New Guinea .  ( B ) Provisional age–depth model for hydration thicknesses for the Pamwak site . The ages are in calibrated years BP ( after Ambrose , 
1994 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 175 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

176 Quaternary Dating Methods
6 . 3 . 3 . 2 Dating of fluvially reworked sediment in Montana , USA . An unusual application
of obsidian hydration dating is described by Adams et al .  ( 1992 ) in their study of fluvial
terraces cut into an outwash plain near West Yellowstone , Montana , USA . The floor of
the West Yellowstone basin is covered by several tens of metres of obsidian-rich gravel 
( the Obsidian Sand Plain )  , the age of which is controversial , with estimates ranging from
a glaciation predating the last interglacial ( Bull Lake ) to the Last Glacial Maximum 
( Pinedale Glaciation )  . The gravel surface has been dissected by the Madison River
following the last deglaciation leaving at least five well-developed terraces . Working on
the principle that fluvial transport will fracture obsidian grains , OHD dating was applied
to samples from each of the terraces . The results showed that there was no significant
difference between hydration layer thicknesses on obsidian samples from the different
terrace levels , suggesting that the terraces were cut in a shorter period of time than the
technique can discern . Numerical age estimates of the terraces , based on two previously
published hydration rate estimates for the area , gave ages of 19 000 ± 1000 years BP and
24 400 ± 1100 years . These dates are entirely consistent with the hypothesis that final
reworking of the Obsidian Sand Plain and terrace formation occurred during initial glacial
retreat from the Pinedale glacial maximum ( ca . 30 000 years ago )  . 
6 . 4 Pedogenesis 
Another index that can provide a basis for relative chronology is the degree of soil development . This approach involves the use of soil chronosequences , i . e . a series of soils that
have formed within a particular region in which all the factors of soil formation except
time ( climate , parent material , vegetation cover , etc .  ) are held more or less constant ( Huggett , 
1998 )  . Thus contrasts between different soil profiles in terms of , for example , particle size
variations , soil micromorphological characteristics , depth of soil development , or indeed of
other parameters such as magnetic susceptibility ( Singer et al .  , 1992 ) or clay fraction
mineralogy ( Ballantyne et al .  , 1998b )  , can be interpreted as being a function of time and
hence can provide a means of relative dating of the surfaces upon which those soils have
developed ( Birkeland , 1999 )  . 
6 . 4 . 1 Soil Development Indices 
Although qualitative estimates of soil development have made useful contributions to
the establishment of local relative chronologies , recent research has tended to adopt a
more quantitative approach . This involves the generation of soil development indices
which aim to reduce soil property data from a soil profile to a single number that
reflects the degree of pedogenic development . This allows site to site comparisons , 
making it possible to identify temporal and regional trends in soil development ( Goodman
et al .  , 2001 ) and to rank soil profiles in relative order of age . One example is the profile
development index ( PDI ) which quantifies soil development at a site by comparing
properties of a soil to those of the parent material ( Harden and Taylor , 1983 )  . This
index is calculated on the basis of a range of soil properties ( texture , structure , rubification , 
etc .  ) and points are allocated for stepwise departures of these properties from the soil
parent material values . The profile values are then divided by a standard profile thickness to
c06 . fm Page 176 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 177
produce an index ranging from 0 to 1 , with the higher values denoting greater departure
from those of the parent material . Another index reflects degree of clast disintegration
in a soil profile . The clast disintegration index ( CDI ) is calculated on the basis of the
variation in degree of clast weathering in different soil horizons . Again , points are allocated up to a value of 90 ( maximum weathering )  , and a weighted mean value of clast
disintegration can be calculated for each soil profile using a standard profile thickness 
( Berry , 1994 )  . Other soil indices , based on soil field and laboratory data , are described
by Birkeland ( 1999 )  . 
While soil development indices can be used to determine relative order of age , they
also constitute a basis for dating in years through the development of soil chronofunctions . Chronofunctions , which have been established for a number of relative
dating criteria in addition to soils , are a means whereby independently dated
sequences ( based on radiocarbon dating or lichenometry , for example ) are used to
assign numerical ages to correlated deposits , or extrapolated to estimate the age of
undated elements within or beyond the area of the dated sequence ( McCarroll , 1991 )  . 
Chronofunctions are usually derived by means of regression analysis in which the
dependent variable is a particular landscape property ( e . g . degree of weathering ) and
the independent variable is time . Hence , in the case of soil chronofunctions , the soil
development indices are modelled as a function of time ( Figure 6 . 7 )  , and this enables
the ages of the underlying surface to be inferred from the degree of pedogenesis that
has occurred on those land surfaces . 
6 . 4 . 2 Problems in Using Pedogenesis as a Basis for Dating 
Several difficulties arise in using degree of pedogenesis as a basis for dating . Probably the
most serious of these is the requirement that all soil-forming factors apart from time be
held constant . Other influences , notably topography and vegetation , have been shown to
be as important as time in explaining soil genesis , while the character of soils in an area
may also reflect past conditions ( Reider , 1983 )  . Equally , the properties of a soil profile
may have been affected as much by variations in climate as by time ( Birkeland et al .  , 
1989 )  . Questions also arise about the integrity of the soil profile , particularly where this
may have been affected by erosion and / or redeposition . Studies in New Zealand , for
example , have shown that in some older ( pre-Holocene ) soils , episodic loess erosion and
redeposition have resulted in soils that are an order of magnitude younger than the underlying glacial deposits ( Rodbell , 1990 )  . Erosion has also been noted as a problem in soil
chronosequences in the western United States , and may be the reason for a lack of age-related
trends in clast weathering and soil development on moraines of manifestly different age 
( Berry , 1994 )  . That particular investigation also highlighted a further difficulty with this
form of dating , namely the inability of the method to provide finely tuned age resolution
in regions where rates of soil development are relatively low . All of these problems suggest
that while rates of pedogenesis ( reflected in soil chronofunctions ) may , in certain areas , 
be relatively reliable indicators of subsurface age ( Goodman et al .  , 2001 )  , this particular
form of dating is again perhaps best employed in combination with other chronometric
techniques . Indeed , while there are numerous instances of relative ages being deduced
from chronosequences , there are very few examples where soil chronofunctions alone
have been employed to date surfaces of unknown age . 
c06 . fm Page 177 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

178 Quaternary Dating Methods
6 . 4 . 3 Some Applications of Dating Based on Pedogenesis 
Pedogenesis has been most widely used in the dating of glacial deposits , especially
moraines . In many mountain regions , older soils have been found to be characterised by
deeper profiles , thicker horizons , a greater depth of oxidation and increased clay accumulation , and these and other characteristics have enabled relative ages to be assigned to
moraine sequences , sometimes extending back over timescales of more than 100 000 years 
( Colman and Pierce , 1986 )  . In a number of areas , including the Himalayas ( Shiraiwa and
Watanabe , 1991 ) and the Peruvian mountains ( Rodbell , 1993 )  , soil development has been
employed in conjunction with surface weathering data in the development of glacial
chronologies . Where independent chronometric control is available , relative glacial histories
have been placed within a temporal framework on the basis of soil chronosequences . Two
examples of these approaches are discussed here . 
6 . 4 . 3 . 1 Relative dating of moraines in the Sierra Nevada , California . Along the eastern
slopes of the Sierra Nevada , California , there is evidence in the form of moraine
sequences for multiple glaciations . Geomorphological mapping has differentiated these into , 
from youngest to oldest , the Tioga , Tenaya , Tahoe , pre-Tahoe / post-Sherwin , Sherwin and
McGee glaciations . Berry ( 1994 ) describes the results of a soil-geomorphic investigation
which aimed to resolve the moraines into distinct relative age groups on the basis of soil
development , weathering of surface and subsurface clasts , and geomorphic criteria . Various
properties of the soils on the moraine crests and slopes , including carbonate content and
pedogenic clay content ( Figure 6 . 6 )  , were quantified in the laboratory , and these data
were combined with indices of soil development ( PDI ) and clast weathering ( CDI : section
6 . 4 . 1 )  . The results showed that it was possible to differentiate moraines of the Tioga and
Tahoe Glaciations in the northernmost valley studied , while in two other valleys Tioga , 
Tahoe and pre-Tahoe / post-Sherwin moraines could be differentiated . In none of the three
valleys could moraines believed to be from a Tenaya glaciation be distinguished . Berry
suggested that this was probably because the soil-geomorphic methods are insufficiently
sensitive to resolve what may be small age differences between the Tioga and Tenaya
moraines . This conclusion has subsequently been confirmed by cosmogenic nuclide
dating of the moraines which gave ages of 15 500–17 000 years for the Tioga and 18 000–
19 500 years for the Tenaya moraines in the eastern Sierra Nevada ( Phillips , F . M .  , 1995 , 
personal communication )  . Hence although soil geomorphic methods do not allow finely
tuned age resolution , they do provide important data on the relative age of the glacial
landforms , and they also constitute a basis for evaluating dates generated by chronometric
techniques . 
6 . 4 . 3 . 2 Dating glacial events in southeastern Peru . In the Cordillera Vilcanota and
Quelcayya Ice-Cap regions of southwestern Peru , there is a detailed record in the form of
moraines and associated landforms of a complex history of Late Quaternary glaciation . 
Goodman et al .  ( 2001 ) show how variations in degree of soil development , in association
with a programme of radiometric dating , can be employed to reconstruct the glacial
history of this mountain region . They generated soil development indices for profiles on
19 separate moraine crests , and these were calibrated by reference to radiocarbon dates on
buried soils or on peats , and cosmogenic isotope dates on boulders on the moraine surfaces 
( Figure 6 . 7 )  . Soil age estimates from extrapolation of field and laboratory data suggest
that the most extensive Late Quaternary glaciation occurred > 70000 years BP . This is the first
c06 . fm Page 178 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 179
semi-quantitative age estimate for maximum ice extent in southern Peru , and is supported
by a limiting radiocarbon date of ca . 41 500 14C years BP . Younger moraines occurring
upvalley from this glacial maximum appear to be associated with a glacial advance that
culminated at ca . 16 650 cal . years BP in the Cordillera Vilcanota . Following a phase
of rapid deglaciation , outlet glaciers on the northern margin of the Quelcayya Ice-Cap
Cr
CLAY 
( mg / cm3 ) 
CLAY 
( mg / cm3 ) 
0
0
50
0 50
0
Fs
100
100
DEPTH ( cm ) 
DEPTH ( cm ) 
Ti
Ta
pTa 
( A ) 
Cr
CLAY 
( mg / cm3 ) 0 50
CLAY 
( mg / cm3 ) 0 50
0
Fs
100
DEPTH ( cm ) 
0
100
DEPTH ( cm ) 
Ti
Ta
pTa
100 250 
( B ) 
Figure 6 . 6 Distribution of pedogenic clay content with depth in soils on Tioga ( Ti )  , Tahoe 
( Ta ) and pre-Tahoe ( pTa ) moraines in ( A ) Pine Creek and ( B ) Bishop Creek in the eastern
Sierra Nevada , California . The data are taken from the moraine ridge crests ( Cr ) and moraine
footslopes ( Fs ) as shown in the schematic cross-profiles above . Note how moraines of different
age display different distributions of pedogenic clay down-profile ( after Berry , 1994 )  . 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 179 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

180 Quaternary Dating Methods
readvanced between ca . 13 090 and 12 800 cal . years BP . The youngest moraines , which
show minimal soil development , have been radiocarbon-dated to < 394 cal . years BP in the
Cordillera Vilcanota and < 300 cal . years BP on the west side of the Quelcayya Ice-Cap , 
and correlate with Little Ice Age moraines of other regions . 
6 . 5 Relative Dating of Fossil Bone 
A number of elements not present ( or having only a limited presence ) in living bone are
found in buried bones . These include fluorine and uranium from groundwater that
become absorbed into the hydroxyapatite , the phosphatic mineral of which bone is composed . Secondary minerals , such as calcite and pyrite , can form in voids in archaeological
bone , and in some cases replace the bone mineral itself . Internal changes in bone structure , 
involving changes in crystallinity , have also been detected ( Millard , 2001 )  . Because time
is a factor in all of these diagenetic changes , 
4 
analysis of the chemical and structural
content of fossil bone material can provide a basis for relative dating . 
0
0 . 00
0 . 05
0 . 10
0 . 15
0 . 20
0 . 25
0 . 30
0 . 35
0 . 40
0 . 45
5000 10 000 15 000 20 000 25 000 30 000
two soils
two solis
Vilcanota soils
Quelccaya soils
Estimated Age ( yr BP ) 
Weighted Mean PDI ( extended depth ) 
Figure 6 . 7 Variations in PDI with soil age in the Vilcanota and Quelcayya regions of Peru . 
The regression line in the soil chronofunction has an r
2 
value of 0 . 87 . Arrows to the right (  >  ) 
indicate that the age assignment is based on minimum-limiting 14C date ( s ) and true age is
older than that plotted ; arrows to the left (  <  ) indicate that the age assignment is based on
maximum-limiting 14C date ( s ) and true age is younger than that plotted ( after Goodman
et al .  , 2001 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 180 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 181
6 . 5 . 1 Post-Burial Changes in Fossil Bone 
In terms of relative dating , the most widely used indicator of chemical change in bone is
the fluorine content . Because hydroxyapatite absorbs fluorine over time , the higher the
fluorine content of a piece of fossil bone , the longer the time that has elapsed since burial . 
Older bone assemblages will therefore be distinguishable from younger assemblages on
the basis of their fluorine content . Moreover , because bones that have been buried in a
particular context for the same length of time will have a broadly comparable fluorine
content , contamination of the assemblage by older or younger bones will be readily revealed
by anomalously higher ( older ) or lower ( younger ) fluorine contents ( Demetsopoulos
et al .  , 1983 )  . This not only provides valuable information about the taphonomy5 
of a bone
assemblage , but it is also a valuable screening mechanism in the selection of bones from
that assemblage for radiocarbon or U-series dating . 
An alternative approach to the relative dating of bone material is by comparison of
fluorine profiles through individual bones . In younger bones , the fluorine concentration
falls rapidly from the outer part of the bone towards the centre , whereas in older bone
material , the profile is relatively flat . The shape of the profile is therefore age-dependent
and , as such , it provides an approximate dating tool ( Aitken , 1990 )  . Again , this technique
can be used to establish relative ages in a mixed bone assemblage , and also as a guide to
selection of samples for radiocarbon dating . Uranium incorporated into fossil bone material
from groundwater can be used in a way similar to the fluorine method , and to some
extent has an advantage in that the counting of uranium emissions does not involve the
destruction of the bone material . The relative ages of fossil bones in assemblages can also
be established by analysing the nitrogen content of the bone collagen , for as the collagen
breaks down after burial , the nitrogen levels will also fall . Hence , decreasing nitrogen
content will be an indicator of increasing age . 
Post-burial crystallinity change in bone may also provide a basis for relative dating . 
This can be measured by a ‘ crystallinity index ’ based on XRD or IR spectra ( Bartsiokas
and Middleton , 1992 ; Sillen and Parkington , 1996 )  . Studies have shown that bone
crystallinity increases with time , and that the method can be used to establish the relative
age of bone material up to around 20 000 years . In addition , it can distinguish between
younger bone ( under 3000 years ) and more ancient material (  > 40 000 years )  , and hence
may prove to be a useful means of determining antiquity where the provenance of the
bone has been questioned . It also has the advantage of minimal destructiveness ( Sillen
and Parkington , 1996 )  . 
6 . 5 . 2 Problems in the Relative Dating of Bone 
In common with a number of the chemical methods considered in this chapter , the use of
diagenetic changes in fossil bone as a basis for relative dating suffers from problems
of non-uniform alteration and low levels of accuracy and reliability . Questions arise , in
particular , over the nature of the processes involved in post-burial diagenesis , and while
some , such as uranium uptake and carbonate exchange , might be described as being partly
understood , others cannot and remain the focus of much recent research ( Millard , 2001 )  . 
Similarly , while progress has been made in understanding crystallinity changes 
( Hedges et al .  , 1995 )  , more work is needed on the variation of crystallinity and solubility
c06 . fm Page 181 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

182 Quaternary Dating Methods
characteristics in bone mineral material before this can be regarded as a completely reliable
basis for establishing relative order of age . 
6 . 5 . 3 Some Applications of the Relative Dating of Bone 
Perhaps the most famous application of the relative dating of fossil bone material was the
use of fluorine analysis to show that the skull of ‘ Piltdown Man ’ was a hoax , an assertion
that was subsequently confirmed by radiocarbon dating ( Oakley , 1969 )  . In subsequent
years , however , with the development of a range of radiometric dating techniques and
growing concerns about diagenesis , interest in relative dating of bone tended to wane . 
More recently , partly because of the research that has been undertaken into the complexities
of bone chemistry , and partly because of advances in instrumentation and analytical
methodologies , attention has been focussed again on the potential of relative dating , albeit
perhaps as an adjunct to other dating techniques . Two examples of these applications are
considered here . 
6 . 5 . 3 . 1 Fluoride dating of mastodon bone from an early palaeoindian site , eastern USA . 
Tankersley et al .  ( 1998 ) analysed the fluoride content of a large number of mastodon
bones from the Hiscock site , Genesee County , New York , an early palaeoindian site
that had also yielded artefacts ( six bifaces and an end scraper )  , worked mastodon
bone and ivory , and a stone bead . The stratum from which these artefacts were recovered also
contained the bones of caribou , stag-moose , giant beaver , Californian condor and
mastodon ( Mammut americanum )  . The mastodon bed was believed to be terminal
Pleistocene in age and , like other early palaeoindian bone beds , was thought to
reflect a dynamic and evolving system of biological , cultural and sedimentary processes . Fluoride analysis ( Figure 6 . 8A ) showed that this was indeed the case , as the
results display a distinctive trend in relative time , indicating that the bones accumulated
through time rather than being amassed from a single event . The trend was further
confirmed by radiocarbon dating ( Figure 6 . 8B ) as this showed that the accumulation phase lasted for more than 1000 years . This study re-emphasises the potential
of fluoride dating for providing a rapid assessment of the taphonomy of animal bone
assemblages . 
6 . 5 . 3 . 2 Chemical dating of animal bones from Sweden . A second example of the use of
fluorine dating is Johnsson ’ s ( 1997 ) study of animal bones found buried in soil at a
number of different localities in Skåne , southern Sweden . Eighty-seven bones were
analysed for fluorine content , and 61 of these were also analysed for 13 other major and
minor chemical elements . The results showed that not only fluorine but also silicon is
incorporated into the bone mineral material over time , while silicate progressively
replaces phosphate in the bone apatite crystals . These findings were subsequently corroborated by the results of radiocarbon dating ( Figure 6 . 9 )  . Several old specimens of bone
from a large quantity of stored and undated material were analysed in a similar manner , 
and some of those with high fluorine and silicon content were radiocarbon-dated . As a
result , the oldest finds of wild horse in Scandinavia ( five specimens dated between
11 180 ± 95 and 10 495 ± 95 14C years BP ) and one of the oldest finds of domestic cattle in
Scandinavia ( 4690 ± 80 14C years BP ) were confirmed . As was the case with the Hiscock
analysis , these results show that valuable information on relative order of antiquity can be
obtained from the chemical analysis of ancient bone material . 
c06 . fm Page 182 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 183
All radiocarbon
dates
Bone and
ivory
Uncarbonized plant
material
10 000
11 000
12 000
Years BP
Vertebrae Ribs Other
0
1
2
3
% Fluoride 
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 6 . 8 ( A ) The distribution of fluoride content of individual mastodon skeletal elements
from the Hiscock site , New York . The horizontal scale reflects relative time .  ( B ) The distribution
of radiocarbon dates in bone , ivory and uncarbonised plant material from the Hiscock site . 
The vertical bars represent 1σ ( after Tankersley et al .  , 1998 )  . Reproduced with permission
of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 183 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

184 Quaternary Dating Methods
6 . 6 Amino Acid Geochronology 
All living organisms contain proteins . These are complex organic compounds that contain
atoms of oxygen , carbon , nitrogen , hydrogen and sulphur . Proteins survive in carbonate
structures , such as bone or shell , for long periods of time and have even been recovered
from Cretaceous dinosaur bones ( Wykoff , 1980 )  . In the 1950s , Philip Abelson , then at the
Carnegie Institute in the United States , found that proteinaceous residues ( amino acids ) 
manufactured by an organism during life do not disappear at death ; rather they become
locked in the mineral matrix of molluscs or egg shells , for example , where molecular
changes occur , some of which are time-dependent . Hence , the analysis of certain protein
residues from the Quaternary fossil record can provide the basis for a chronology . Unlike
0
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10 000
12 000
14 000
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
Si ( ppm ) 
Cal . 14C years BP
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10 000
12 000
14 000
0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 . 0
F ( % ) 
Cal . 14C years BP 
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 6 . 9 Plots of ( A ) fluorine and ( B ) silicon content of mammal bones from sites in
Skåne , Sweden . The timescale on the y-axis is in calibrated years BP ( after Johnsson , 1997 ) 
c06 . fm Page 184 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 185
the decay of radiocarbon , however , the precise rates at which chemical change occurs are
not easy to establish , and protein diagenesis can therefore only be used to rank fossil
materials in relative order of age . As with all of the other techniques discussed in
this chapter , it does not , at least in the first instance , provide a means for establishing
age in years . 
6 . 6 . 1 Proteins and Amino Acids 
Proteins are some of the largest molecules that exist in living organisms . They are composed
of amino acids , the basic chemical units from which proteins are synthesised by the
body . Amino acids are linked together to form compound structures known as peptides
or peptide chains , each amino acid being connected to the next by peptide bonds . The
patterns formed in this way are specific to each protein type , and the various amino acid
arrangements create thousands of different proteins , including enzymes and antibodies . 
Approximately 80 amino acids occur in nature , of which about 20 are commonly found in
proteins . Human beings need 20 amino acids for metabolism or growth of body tissues ; 
the human body can synthesise 9 of these , the remainder ( essential amino acids ) are
obtained from animal or plant tissues in the diet . A list of the more common amino acids
includes alanine , glycine , isoleucine , leucine , serine and aspartic acid . 
All amino acids ( with the exception of glycine ) exist in two molecular forms , known as
isomeric forms . In terms of chemical and biochemical properties , these two forms are
very similar . When examined under a microscope , however , there is a very clear difference , 
for they rotate plane polarised light in opposite directions . In effect , they form two nonsuperimposable mirror images ( Figure 6 . 10 ) like left and right hands . Indeed , these optical
isomers are termed L-amino acids ( after the Latin laeva – left hand ) and D-amino acids 
( dextra – right hand )  . Biologically , there is an important distinction between the L- and
D-configurations because living proteins contain only L-isomers . The D-isomeric form can
occur in a free state or as a component of non-proteinaceous structures . It also exists , 
however , in fossil material as a result of the breakdown of proteins , and it is this molecular
Figure 6 . 10 Generalised representation of D- and L-amino acids . The side chain ( R ) is
different for each amino acid . The carbon atom at the centre of the isomers ( the chiral carbon
atom ) forms the point of asymmetry which allows the formation of the two optical isomers 
( after Sykes , 1991 )  . Reproduced by permission of the Quaternary Research Association 
c06 . fm Page 185 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

186 Quaternary Dating Methods
change that forms the basis for relative dating . Further details on amino acid geochemistry
and its applications in geochronology are provided by Goodfriend etal .  ( 2000 )  , Wehmiller
and Miller ( 2000 ) and Blackwell ( 2001b )  . 
6 . 6 . 2 Amino Acid Diagenesis 
Following the death of an organism , chemical changes occur that lead to the disruption of
the peptide chains and the release of free amino acids . Degradation will be rapid in situations
where the proteinaceous residues are exposed to the atmosphere , but the process will be
retarded where the proteins are contained within harder skeletal materials . In such media , 
where effectively ‘ closed-system conditions ’ obtain , reaction times may span thousands
or even millions of years . 
In terms of Quaternary chronology , the most significant diagenetic change to occur in
fossilised material is the inversion ( intraconversion ) of the L-amino acids to their respective
D-configuration , a reaction that proceeds until an equilibrium position has been achieved . 
This process is known as racemisation . If the rate of inversion can be calculated , the time
that has elapsed since the death of an organism can be determined from the ratio of D / Lamino acids . In Quaternary science , the most commonly used reaction is that of the amino
acid L-isoleucine ( L-Ile ) to its non-protein diastereoisomer , D-alloisoleucine ( D-aIle )  . This
is a more complex process than racemisation and is referred to as epimerisation . By far
the most widely used media for amino acid epimerisation measurements have been
marine molluscan shells . In these , the ratio of D- to L-isomers increases from near zero in
modern material to an equilibrium ratio of 1 . 30 ± 0 . 05 ( Miller and Mangerud , 1985 )  . Thus
when amino acid ratios are measured , the results are expressed along the continuum from
0 to 1 . 30 ( e . g . 0 . 26 , 0 . 50 , 0 . 75 )  ; the higher the ratio , the older the material , reflecting the
fact that as time since death increases , the greater will be the number of L-isomers that
have been inverted to the D-configuration . Measurements of amino acid ratios ( AARs ) are
made using either ion exchange chromatography or gas–liquid chromatography , and
kinetic models are used to determine the trend of protein diagenesis ( Sykes , 1991 )  . 
As amino acid diagenesis occurs in all proteinaceous materials , in theory at least , 
a range of fossils could be used as dating media . In practice , however , the only really
suitable materials have proved to be those that are characterised by a ‘ tight ’ skeletal
carbonate matrix which forms a closed system and , as such , is relatively unaffected
by external factors . In addition to marine molluscs ( see above )  , successful amino acid
measurements have also been made on other carbonaceous materials , including non-marine
molluscs ( Goodfriend , 1992 )  , ostrich eggshells ( Brooks et al .  , 1990 )  , organic residues
derived originally from surface soils and now contained within the carbonates of cave
speleothems ( Lauritzen et al .  , 1994 )  , and organic materials incorporated into carbonate
rocks in coastal areas ( Hearty etal .  , 1992 ; Hearty , 2003 )  . More problematic , however , 
have been amino acid determinations on wood , as such non-carbonaceous materials
are not buffered against changes in environmental pH ( Sykes , 1991 )  . Bone is also
difficult , for although numerous attempts have been made to use amino acid diagenesis 
( especially of aspartic acid ) to date archaeological materials , bone appears to be
particularly unsuited for this purpose ( Gernaey et al .  , 2001 )  . This is principally because
bone does not constitute a closed system , so that once buried the original amino acids
can be lost and younger ones added . Indeed , studies have shown that leaching of the
c06 . fm Page 186 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 187
more soluble proteins from bone and retention and degradation of the insoluble proteins
can , potentially , give any value for a racemisation ratio ( Collins et al .  , 1999 )  . 
6 . 6 . 3 Problems with Amino Acid Geochronology 
Amino acid ratios in fossil material are affected by a number of factors , including
temperature , taxonomy and processes within the depositional environment . Temperature
is a major influence , for rates of epimerisation increase exponentially with temperature , 
with an approximate doubling of the rate for every 4 °C temperature rise . This means that
the shell of a mollusc that died during the last interglacial will have experienced significant
variations in rates of epimerisation over the course of the past 130000 years ( Figure 6 . 11 )  . If
meaningful comparisons are to be made between amino acid ratios from different sites , then
those sites have to have experienced similar climatic , and especially thermal , histories . 
A further complication is that proteins in different structural layers of a shell may often differ
in terms of their amino acid composition and rate of epimerisation . Ideally , therefore , the
same portion of each shell should be used for analysis , but in practice this is extremely
difficult ( indeed seldom possible ) when samples are taken from fragmented molluscan
assemblages . For some media , contamination and exchange of amino acids with the depositional environment may lead to aberrant amino acid ratios , although this may be less of
a problem for molluscs than for other fossil materials such as bone ( see above )  . More serious , 
however , can be the degradation of proteins due to microbiological activity during the
early stages of diagenesis , as this may result in significant differences in amino acid
Figure 6 . 11 Simplified diagram showing the increase in D / L ratio in a molluscan fossil from
northwest Europe over the past 130000 years . The most rapid epimerisation rate occurs during
the warmer interglacials , whereas during the intervening cold stage the rate was markedly
reduced ( after Miller and Mangerud , 1985 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 187 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

188 Quaternary Dating Methods
ratios in molluscs from sites of the same age with similar thermal histories ( Sejrup
and Haugen , 1994 )  . 
Although perhaps less contentious than OHD dating ( section 6 . 3 )  , amino acid geochronology has still proved to be controversial . The method has not always had a ‘ good press ’ 
and , in some quarters , continues to be treated with a degree of scepticism . Its image was
undoubtedly damaged in the 1970s by the alleged dating of some Californian palaeoindian
remains to 50 000–60 000 years ago ( Bada et al .  , 1974 ) leading to claims of very early
colonisation of America . The bones were subsequently redated by AMS radiocarbon to
5000–6000 years BP ( Bada , 1985 )  , and the error therefore corrected . Nevertheless , inconsistencies between amino acid evidence and results from other dating techniques continued
to raise questions about the validity of the technique ( Marshall , 1990 )  . More recently , the
interpretation and application of molluscan AARs has been challenged , especially where
these have been employed to characterise individual stratigraphic units , or to differentiate
between fossil beach sequences from successive interglacial episodes ( McCarroll , 2002 )  . 
AARs are naturally variable , and it is often the case that a range of values will be obtained
from any one stratigraphic context . This means that the technique needs to be applied
with due regard to the natural variability of AARs and hence age estimates must be based
on samples that are sufficiently large to characterise this natural variability . 
The foregoing critique does not mean that amino acid geochronology cannot be used
to good effect . On the contrary , because it can be applied to both marine and non-marine
mollusca , over a wide range of ages it is , potentially , one of the most useful techniques
available in Quaternary dating ( McCarroll , 2002 )  . However , AARs should perhaps be
considered more as a guide to relative age , to be assessed with other evidence , rather than as a
definitive stratigraphical or dating tool . Indeed , many studies in Britain , Europe and elsewhere
have used amino acid geochronology in this way , as the examples in the next section will show . 
6 . 6 . 4 Applications of Amino Acid Geochronology 
The ranking of fossils and their associated sediments on the basis of amino acid ratios is
referred to as aminostratigraphy , and this provides a basis for relative dating and for
inter-site correlation . When the AARs are calibrated by methods that provide an independent timeframe ( 14C , OSL , ESR , U-series , etc .  )  , an amino acid geochronology can be
developed that is applicable beyond the calibration site ( Bowen , 1999 )  , and in some cases
relative amino acid ages may range up to 1 million years ( Bowen et al .  , 1998 )  . We have
already seen that a major controlling factor on amino acid diagenesis is temperature , and
that this affects the time required to attain an equilibrium state . At mid-latitude sites , it
may take ~2 million years to reach equilibrium , whereas at Arctic sites it could require
20 million years or more to reach the same state ( Miller and Mangerud , 1985 )  . In view
of the generally low temperatures that existed at many mid-latitude regions during the
Quaternary cold stages , and their likely retarding effect on rates of amino acid diagenesis , 
it might be anticipated that it would have taken considerably longer than 2 million years
to attain the equilibrium state . This has been confirmed by amino acid ratios from East
Anglia in England , where D-aIle / L-Ile ratios have been obtained on molluscs from
the Norwich Crag ( 0 . 80 ) and from the earlier Red Crag ( 1 . 09 )  , some of the earliest
Quaternary deposits in the British Isles ( Bowen , 1991 )  . Four examples of the applications of
aminostratigraphy are considered in the following section . 
c06 . fm Page 188 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 189
6 . 6 . 4 . 1 Dating and correlation of the last interglacial shoreline ( ~MOI substage 5e ) in 
Australia using aminostratigraphy . One of the most widely used applications of aminostratigraphy has been in the identification of , and correlation between , interglacial shorelines
of different age . This approach involves the measurement of D / L ratios on marine molluscs
associated with those shorelines , and on the basis of these measurements , regionally
applicable aminozones can be developed which are characterised by a particular range of
AARs and reflect individual high sea-level ( interglacial ) events . Often these aminozones
are constrained by other evidence , such as geomorphological and stratigraphical relationships between shorelines , and by radiometric dating ( radiocarbon , U-series , etc .  )  , which
is important given the potential limitations of amino acid geochronology described in
section 6 . 6 . 3 . High sea-level events in many coastal regions have been differentiated on
the basis of aminostratigraphy including , for example , the English Channel where raised
beaches have been linked with high sea-level events in MOI stages 5e , 7 , 9 , 11 and 13 
( Keen , 1995 ; Bates et al .  , 2003 )  . 
One of the problems with this approach is that it assumes that the sites that are being
compared have experienced similar thermal histories ( section 6 . 6 . 3 )  . While this may be
the case in a relatively limited geographical region , such as the coasts of southern Britain
and northern France , it may not necessarily be so at the continental scale . However , providing that the effects of temperature variability can be corrected for , aminostratigraphy
can still prove a powerful correlative and chronometric tool over relatively large areas . 
Murray-Wallace et al .  ( 1991 ) provide an example from southern Australia . There , amino
acid racemisation data on marine molluscs associated with the last interglacial shoreline
from sites ranging from the western coast of Australia to the eastern coast of New South
Wales show how racemisation rates increase exponentially with contemporary mean annual
temperature ( CMAT )  , the latter being a function of latitude ( Figure 6 . 12 )  . Once this relationship has been established , however , then D / L ratios on shorelines of hitherto unknown age
but which fall within the envelope of the amino acid data shown on Figure 6 . 12 with
respect to the CMAT for a given sample site , are likely to be of last interglacial age . 
Figure 6 . 12 , therefore , represents a predictive model that may be used in subsequent
studies to assign preliminary ages to coastal marine deposits in southern Australia on the
basis of the amino acid ratios in associated marine molluscs . 
6 . 6 . 4 . 2 Quaternary aminostratigraphy in northwestern France based on non-marine
molluscs . The classification of Quaternary deposits in northwestern France has conventionally been based on the study of loess profiles , slope deposits , palaeosols and interbedded
fluvial sediments . In the major river valleys , such as the Seine and the Somme , the fluvial
sequences have been grouped into geomorphological ‘ terraces ’  . However , correlation between
the various deposits has often proved problematical and an overall time-stratigraphic
framework has been difficult to develop . 
Bates ( 1993 ) has proposed an alternative approach using amino acid geochronology . 
Amino acid ratios on non-marine molluscs from a number of sites in northwestern
France and from the Seine and Somme Valleys formed the basis for a regional aminostratigraphic scheme in which seven amino acid groups could be identified on the basis
of mean standardised D / L ratios . These are consistent with previous stratigraphic
schemes and confirm the relative order of the Somme terrace sequence ( Figure 6 . 13A )  . The
D / L ratios were subsequently calibrated using TL dates and magnetostratigraphy , and
c06 . fm Page 189 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

190 Quaternary Dating Methods
compared with the MOI stratigraphic framework ( Figure 6 . 13B )  . This suggests that
amino group 1 is of Weichselian age ( MOI stages 2–4 )  , that group 2 is of last interglacial ( Eemian ) age ( MOI substage 5e )  , and that group 3 is either late MOI stage 7 or
early stage 6 in age . Amino acid groups 4–6 are less easily correlated with the marine
sequence , and may span more than one marine isotopic stage . A more secure ascription
may be made in terms of amino group 7 , however , as these samples were taken from
sediments that display reversed geomagnetic polarity ( Matuyama reversed : section
7 . 4 . 3 )  , and hence must be earlier than MOI stage 20 . Despite the difficulties in correlating groups 4–6 with marine isotope stages , this scheme offers an independent means of
subdividing , correlating and dating the complex sequence of deposits in northern
France and offers the basis for a new regional time-stratigraphic framework . Similar
approaches , using amino acid geochronology , have also been employed in the subdivision
and correlation of river terrace sequences in central and southern Britain ( Bridgland
et al .  , 2004 )  . 
12 14 16 18 20 22
LAT
36°S
LAT
36°S
C . M . A . T ( °C ) 
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
Last interglaciation envelope
STAGE 7 
( SUBSTAGE 5e ) 
Uranium series
calibration site 
( 125 000 ± 20 000 year BP ) 
5470 ± 180
cal . year BP ( STAGE 1 ) 
STAGE 7
Holocene ( Stage 1 ) 
Last interglaciation 
( Substage 5e ) 
Penultimate interglaciation 
( Stage 7 ) 
D / L Valine
Figure 6 . 12 Valine racemisation in last interglacial ( MOI substage 5e ) molluscan fossils
plotted against contemporary mean annual temperature ( CMAT °C ) for coastal sites in
southern Australia within the latitudinal range 24 °S–43 °S . Note how the amino acid
data for both MOI stage 7 and MOI stage 1 ( radiocarbon-dated ) sites plot well outside the
envelope for MOI substage 5e sites . A single uranium series date calibrates the amino acid
data to the last interglacial ( after Murray-Wallace et al .  , 1991 )  . Reproduced with permission
of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 190 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 191
6 . 6 . 4 . 3 Dating the earliest modern humans in southern Africa using amino acid ratios
in ostrich eggshell . The oldest anatomically modern human remains are beyond the
range of radiocarbon dating , and the depositional contexts in which these bones have
been found often lack material suitable for other dating methods . As a consequence , age
estimates for early human skeletal material and associated sedimentary horizons in southern
Very high
terrace . 
High terrace
complex . 
Middle terrace
complex . 
Low terrace
complex . 
0 . 432
0 . 343
0 . 249
0 . 201
0 . 167
0 . 114
0 . 051 
( A ) 
D / L Value
0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 50 . 4
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Age ka BP 
( B ) 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 ? 
Figure 6 . 13 ( A ) Composite diagram showing the terrace sequence and amino acid groups in
the Somme Valley , northwest France .  ( B ) Correlation of amino acid groups in northwest France
with the MOI sequence . Note how groups 1–3 are readily differentiated from each other and
are temporally well constrained , by contrast with groups 4–6 which are less well differentiated
and appear to span much greater time ranges ( after Bates , 1993 )  . Reproduced with permission
of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 191 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

192 Quaternary Dating Methods
Africa , a key area for human evolutionary studies , are often based on long-distance
correlations with the deep-ocean record , a procedure that can only provide a general
indication of age . 
Miller et al .  ( 1999 ) offer an alternative approach to this problem by using amino
acid ratios from ostrich shell . They focus on a particular substage of the Middle Stone
Age in southern Africa , the Howiesons Poort industry , which is a distinctive culturalstratigraphic marker in sequences south of the Zambesi River . Anatomically modern
human material has been found associated with , or in horizons older than , the Howiesons
Poort layer in stratified deposits in Border Cave and at Klasies River ( Figure 6 . 14A )  . 
Miller and co-workers took samples of ostrich shell material , which had been brought into
the cave for food and was interstratified with lithic material and other evidence of human
occupation , from the Howiesons Poort horizons in Border Cave , Boomplaas Cave and
Apollo 11 cave . Isoleucine epimerisation data from the ostrich shells were calibrated to a
timescale using radiocarbon dates on organic materials found in the upper parts of the
sequences ( Figure 6 . 14B )  . Collectively the data suggest that the Howiesons Poort lithic
industry is bracketed by limiting dates of 56 000 and 80 000 years , and is most likely
centred on 66 000 ± 5000 years . 6 
Anatomically modern human remains in deeper levels in
the caves are more than 100 000 years old , which lends strong support to the hypothesis of
an African origin for Homo sapiens ( see also section 3 . 2 . 4 . 2 )  . 
6 . 6 . 4 . 4 Dating sea-level change in the Bahamas over the last half million years . 
Developing long-term records of global sea-level change ( known as eustatic change ) 
is often frustrated by the fact that few areas of the world are tectonically stable . This
means that it is difficult to separate the eustatic effect from changes in levels of the
land resulting , for example , from glacio-isostatic changes or other tectonic effects . 
One area that is tectonically stable is the Bahamas , which makes these islands
especially important for global sea-level studies ( Carew and Mylroie , 1995 )  . Although
there is abundant evidence for long-term sea-level change on the islands , direct dating
has often proved difficult as much of the evidence lies beyond the range of radiocarbon , 
while only a small percentage of the older marine deposits contain corals for U-series
dating . 
An alternative approach is to use amino acid geochronology , and Hearty and Kaufman 
( 2000 ) describe a variant on this technique known as ‘ whole-rock aminostratigraphy ’  . 
The coasts of the Bahamas are characterised by sequences of limestones , which are
marine deposits formed during interglacial high stands of sea level , and interbedded
palaeosols that reflect low stands of sea level during glacial events . Each ‘ couplet ’ of
limestone and overlying soil therefore reflects a full interglacial–glacial cycle , with six
separate couplets being identified in the Bahamas sequence ( I–VI : Figure 6 . 15A )  . The
marine limestones include coated grains and aragonite muds , and their organic residues
contain concentrations of amino acids similar to those in marine and terrestrial molluscs . 
D-aIle / L-Ile ratios from these residues enabled the sea-level events to be ranked in terms
of relative order of age . Seven aminozones could be identified ( A–I in Figure 6 . 15A ) and
these were calibrated by a kinetic model of epimerisation rate and U-series dating ( Table 6 . 1 )  . 
The aminozones were then correlated with the marine isotope sequence , aminozones
A , C , E , F / G , and I with MOI stages 1 , 5e , 7 / 9 , 11 and ≥13 , respectively ( Figure 6 . 15B )  . 
This study provides a detailed record of global eustatic change over the course of the last
c06 . fm Page 192 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 193
Border Cave
Lithostratigraphy Industry 14C age 
( ka ) 
aIIe / IIe AAR
age ( ka ) 
1
2
3
4
5
6
1BS
2BS
UP
LR . A
LR . B
LR . C
LR . A
LR . B
LR . C
UP
1WA
2WA
3BS
5BS
3WA
4BS / 4WA
5WA
6BS
ELSA
MSA
3b
MSA
3a
MSA 2 
( H . P .  ) 
MSA 1
38 ± 1 0 . 271 ± 0 . 018 ( 25 ) 
0 . 255 ± 0 . 022 ( 9 ) 
0 . 328 ± 0 . 022 ( 2 ) 
0 . 388 ± 0 . 012 ( 18 ) 
0 . 468 ± 0 . 018 ( 4 ) 
0 . 87 ± 0 . 11 ( 4 ) 
0 . 97 ± 0 . 07 ( 7 ) 
38 – 40 
> 49 
> 100
69
56
47
∗
∗ 
( B ) 
Namibia
WINDHOEK
Botswana
Zimbabwe
Mozambique
MAPUTO
Border Cave
JOHANNESBURG
South Africa
Lesotho
Boomplaas Cave
Klasies River Mouth
Apollo 11 Cave
CAPE TOWN 
( A ) 
Figure 6 . 14 ( A ) Southern Africa showing the locations of Border Cave , Apollo 11 Cave , 
Boomplaas Cave and Klasies Mouth Cave .  ( B ) Summary of the lithostratigraphy , cultural
industries , radiocarbon dates and amino acid ratios for Border Cave . MSLA – Early Middle
Stone Age ; MSA – Middle Stone Age ; HP – Howiesons Poort horizon . Amino acid ratios are
the mean and standard deviation based on the number of separate preparations shown in
parentheses .  * are the radiocarbon calibration levels . Uncertainty in the AAR dates is
estimated to be 10% ( after Miller et al .  , 1999 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c06 . fm Page 193 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

194 Quaternary Dating Methods
Table 6 . 1 Summary of sea-level data for the Bahamas over the past half million years . 
The right-hand column shows amino acid ratios with the number of separate analyses 
in parentheses , and also uranium-series dates ( after Hearty and Kaufman , 2000 ) 
Marine isotope 
( sub ) stage
Estimated sea level 
( m ± present datum ) 
Limestone
couplet
Regional whole-rock A / I ratio 
( Table 1and [ U-series ]  ) 
Late 1 0 Datum VI 0 . 09 ± 0 . 01 ( 6 ) 
Mid 1 −5 0 . 11 ± 0 . 01 ( 7 ) 
5a 0 to −5 V 0 . 31 ± 0 . 02 ( 19 ) 
Latest 5e + 6 to + 10 IV 0 . 40 ± 0 . 03 ( 90 )  
[ 128 − 117 103 
year ] 
Early 5e + 3 0 . 48 ± 0 . 04 ( 28 )  
[ 130 − 119 103 
year ] 
7 0 to −5 III 0 . 55 ± 0 . 03 ( 17 ) 
9 0 to + 3 [ 300 103 year ] 
Late 11 + 18 to + 20 II 0 . 68 ± 0 . 03 ( 36 ) 
Mid 11 + 7 . 5 [ ≤550 103 
year ] 
Early 11 + 2 
13 −5 to −10 I 0 . 76 ± 0 . 04 ( 2 )  
[ ≥550 103 
year ] 
A 
( A )  
( B ) 
C E F / G H I
Aminozones 
+ 20 
+ 10
S . L . 
–10
–20
–2 . 2
0 . 0
0 100 200 300 400 500 103 year
0 100 200 300 400 500 103 year
2 . 2
meters
l . s . 
l . s . 
l . s . 
l . s . 
l . s . 
l . s . 
l . s . 
red soil
l . s . 
red soil
red soil
red soil
red soil
red soil
VI V IV III II I
δ18O normalized
a c
e
MIS 5
MIS 1
MIS 7 MIS 9 MIS 11 MIS 13
Couplets
Figure 6 . 15 ( A ) Sea-level high stands in the Bahamas over the course of the last 500 000
years and ( B ) comparison with the SPECMAP δ
18O curve . Aminozones ( A–I ) and limestone
red soil couplets ( I–VI ) are shown . Note how the high stands of sea level occur early in each
 ‘ interglacial ’ as reflected in peaks in the SPECMAP curve ( after Hearty and Kaufman , 2000 )  . 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier
c06 . fm Page 194 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Relative Dating Methods 195
half million years , and clearly demonstrates the value of the whole-rock aminostratigraphy
method in dating and correlating widespread emergent marine deposits . 
Notes 
1 . Sub-aerial weathering refers to the combination of weathering processes that occur on a land
surface . 
2 . Hydration is the process through which an anhydrous mineral ( one that does not contain water
within its crystal structure ) takes up water to form a new and crystallographically distinct mineral . 
3 . Exfoliation refers to the weathering of a rock by the peeling off of the surface layers . It is sometimes
referred to as ‘ onion-weathering ’  . 
4 . Diagenesis refers to the alteration of minerals and sediments by a combination of processes . 
These include the influences of oxidation and reduction , hydrolysis , solution , biological changes , 
compaction , cementation , recrystallisation , and changes to the lattice structure of clays through
the expulsion of water and ion exchange . 
5 . Taphonomy is the study of the processes that lead to the formation of a fossil assemblage . 
6 . These age estimates are in broad agreement with a more recent date from Border Cave of
74 500 ± 5000 BP obtained by ESR dating on a human mandible ( Grün et al .  , 2003 )  . 
c06 . fm Page 195 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

c06 . fm Page 196 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 26 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
7 
Techniques for Establishing Age 
Equivalence 
For time is the longest distance between two places . 
Tennessee Williams
7 . 1 Introduction 
A long-established approach to dating in geology is to employ geological boundaries
between the principal stratigraphic units . Working on the assumption that these reflect
major environmental changes , for example between the tropical forest environments of
the Carboniferous and the more arid landscapes of the Permian , and that these environmental shifts were global or , at least , hemispherical , in terms of their effects , then the
geological boundaries could be considered to be broadly synchronous . If so , they can be
regarded as time-planes , and hence a geological boundary in one area will be of a broadly
equivalent age to the same boundary elsewhere . As such , these geological boundaries
form the basis for time-stratigraphic correlation ( correlation between stratigraphic
horizons of comparable age ) between often widely dispersed sites . Moreover , by using
radiometric or other techniques to assign ages to the boundaries , there is a basis for
dating , working on the principle that if the boundary has been dated radiometrically in
one locality , that age can be applied to another locality where the boundary may not have
been dated directly . 
c07 . fm Page 197 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

198 Quaternary Dating Methods
In Quaternary deposits , however , especially those that have accumulated during later
Quaternary time , these approaches are more difficult to apply . This is because of the
phenomenon known as time-transgression . In older geological strata , the sedimentological
and , more particularly , the fossil record which forms the cornerstone of stratigraphical
subdivision is a reflection of major climatic changes , and while these may well have been
synchronous , the geological and biological response to those changes will not necessarily be
so . It takes time , for example , for glaciers to waste away , for rivers to adjust to new rainfall
regimes , and for plants and animals to react to a change in climate . As a consequence the
response will occur earlier in some areas than in others , and this will be reflected in
the geological record . Because of the vast spans of time that are involved , however , the
geological boundaries appear to be synchronous , and indeed we treat them as such , even
though we know that , strictly speaking , they are time-transgressive . In Quaternary deposits , 
by contrast , where ultra-rapid climatic shifts are often reflected in stratigraphic
sequences , and where the sedimentary record can be examined at a far higher level of
resolution than that for earlier geological periods , the time-transgressive nature of the
physical ( i . e . sedimentological ) and biological responses to climatic change is all too
apparent . Hence , lithostratigraphic and biostratigraphic boundaries cannot be regarded as
synchronous time-planes , and cannot therefore be used as a basis for correlation and for
dating . 
In many Quaternary depositional sequences , however , there may be marker horizons
that do represent time-planes and which can , therefore , form a basis for dating . As with
stratigraphic boundaries in the older geological record , these cannot be used in the first
instance to date sedimentary successions directly because other methods are required to
determine their age . But once dated by radiometric or incremental techniques at one site , 
they enable those age estimates to be transferred to other sedimentary sequences where
that particular marker horizon is also present . In addition , they provide a means for timestratigraphic correlation between individual depositional records . Four approaches to
dating based on this principle of age equivalence are considered here : oxygen isotope
chronostratigraphy , which rests on the premise that changes in oxygen isotope ratios
in deep-ocean fossils reflect globally synchronous shifts in the isotopic signal in
ocean water ; tephrochronology , which uses volcanic deposits ( ashes , etc ) as a basis for
correlation and dating ; palaeomagnetism , which employs the record of changes in the
earth ’ s magnetic field contained in rocks and sediments to develop a chronology ; and
palaeosols ( fossil soils )  , which can form time-planes in sediment profiles and which , in
some circumstances , may be used to establish age equivalence between stratigraphic
sequences . 
7 . 2 Oxygen Isotope Chronostratigraphy 
In Chapter 1 ( section 1 . 5 )  , we saw how the oxygen isotope record in deep-ocean
sediments constituted a proxy record of long-term climate change . What is particularly
remarkable about this record is that not only is it continuous and spans the entire duration
of Quaternary time ( and beyond )  , but that the isotopic signal is largely geographically
consistent . Irrespective of whether cores are taken from the Atlantic , Pacific or Indian
c07 . fm Page 198 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 199
Oceans , the isotopic profiles are essentially the same . This means that the MOI trace
forms a proxy record of global significance . 
7 . 2 . 1 Marine Oxygen Isotope Stages 
It was also explained in section 1 . 5 that the isotopic signal from deep-ocean cores could be
divided into isotopic stages based on inflections in the oxygen isotope curve . Accordingly , 
those parts of the curve representing warmer ( interglacial ) intervals ( reflected in lighter
δ18O values ) were given odd numbers and the cold ( glacial ) stages ( heavier δ18O values ) 
even numbers . This notation is applied on a ‘ count from the top ’ principle , and hence
MOI stage 1 represents the Holocene period , and higher numbers indicate successively
older cold and warm stages . In the majority of cases , the numbers refer to episodes of full
interglacial or glacial rank , but there are some exceptions . For example , MOI stage 3 is
anomalous in that although recognised as a warm stage , it is only considered to reflect a
period of interstadial status . Also , the preceding ‘ interglacials ’  , MOI stages 5 and 7 , have
been subdivided into separate warmer and colder episodes . MOI stage 5 includes five
substages , of which 5a , 5c and 5e are warmer episodes while 5b and 5d are cooler . The
last interglacial , sensu stricto , is considered to be represented by MOI substage 5e . Similarly , MOI stage 7 is now divided into two warmer phases ( substages 7a and 7c ) separated
by a colder interval ( substage 7b )  . 
A distinctive feature of most deep-ocean oxygen isotope profiles is the ‘ saw-tooth ’ 
shape of the curves ( Figures 1 . 4 and 7 . 1 )  , with the most rapid isotopic changes occurring
at the transition from cold to warm episodes . These seemingly abrupt shifts in the earth ’ s
climate system from glacial to interglacial modes are referred to as Terminations 
( Broecker , 1984 )  . They too are numbered on a top down basis : Termination I therefore
refers to the marked δ18O shift at the end of the last glacial , but because MOI stage 3 is
not considered to be of full interglacial rank , Termination II marks the MOI stage 6 / 5
transition . Terminations therefore constitute major events in the oxygen isotope record
and can be used as universal reference points for inter-core correlation . 
Because the mixing time in the oceans is relatively rapid , and because of the relatively
slow rate of sediment accumulation on the deep-ocean floor , effectively masking any
time transgression in the isotopic signal , the isotopically defined stage boundaries , and
especially the Terminations , are essentially time-parallel . They therefore form key
age-equivalent marker horizons within ocean sediment sequences , and hence provide
the basis for a high-resolution correlative chronology that is globally applicable 
( Jansen , 1989 )  . 
7 . 2 . 2 Dating the Marine Oxygen Isotope Record 
There are two principal ways in which the MOI record can be dated . One involves the use
of the palaeomagnetic record in the ocean sediments , and particularly the location in the
isotopic sequence of the major geomagnetic boundaries which reflect reversals of the
earth ’ s magnetic field . This is explained more fully in section 7 . 4 . 5 . Using this approach , 
individual stage boundaries cannot be dated directly , but by interpolation ( based on estimated rates of sediment accumulation ) from the horizons whose ages can be inferred
from the palaeomagnetic timescale . 
c07 . fm Page 199 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Time ( ka BP ) 
1
0
–1
δ O ( Normalised ) 18
1 . 1
2 . 2
3 . 1
8 . 5
8 . 4
7 . 5
7 . 4
7 . 3
7 . 2
7 . 1
6 . 6
6 . 5
6 . 4
6 . 3
6 . 2
5 . 5
5 . 4
5 . 3
3 . 3
5 . 1
5 . 2
2 . 21
2 . 23
8 . 02
3 . 13
3 . 31
4 . 22
4 . 23
4 . 24
5 . 31
5 . 33
5 . 51
5 . 53
6 . 41
6 . 42
3 . 0
2 . 0
8 . 0
4 . 0
5 . 0
6 . 0
7 . 0
Figure 7 . 1 Orbitally tuned chronostratigraphy for a composite (  ‘ stacked ’  ) deep-ocean isotopic record spanning the last 300 000 years ( after
Martinson et al .  , 1987 )  . The numbered vertical lines indicate distinctive features in the record ; the basis for the notation scheme is explained in
the text . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c07 . fm Page 200 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 201
An alternative method involves the procedure known as orbital tuning and this enables
ages to be inferred for each of the isotopically defined stage boundaries . Time-series
analysis of oxygen isotope records has revealed periodicities ( or regularities ) in the
isotopic trace that can be related to the astronomical ( Milankovitch ) variables ( Chapter 1 : 
Note 4 )  . Since these orbital parameters are constant and their frequency is known , they
provide a basis for timing the cycles reflected in the oxygen isotope records . Thus , the age
of each cycle ( and hence each stage boundary ) can be calculated by extrapolating back
from the present day . This approach was first applied by Imbrie et al .  ( 1984 ) who obtained
a timescale for the past 800 000 years ( known as the SPECMAP timescale )  , by ‘ tuning ’ 
an amalgamation of several isotopic records (  ‘ stacked records ’  ) to the known frequencies
of the astronomical variables . Subsequently , other orbitally tuned timescales have been
developed for the Middle and Early Pleistocene periods ( Shackleton et al .  , 1990 )  , while the
technique has also been used to develop chronologies for Chinese loess sequences ( Ding
et al .  , 1994 ) and trace gas records in Antarctic ice cores ( Ruddiman and Raymo , 2003 )  . 
A high-resolution orbitally tuned chronostratigraphy for the last 300 000 years is
shown in Figure 7 . 1 . This diagram also includes an alternative approach to the designation
of oxygen isotope stages , in that each event within a stage is given a decimal notation so
that negative ( interglacial ) and positive ( glacial ) excursions are assigned odd and even
numbers , respectively ( Martinson etal .  , 1987 )  . Thus the isotopic events within MOI stage 5
which were previously referred to as 5a , 5c and 5e are now designated 5 . 1 , 5 . 3 and 5 . 5 . 
The boundary between MOI stages 5 and 6 is now designated 6 . 0 . The rationale behind
this revision to the oxygen isotope stage notation is that the precise stratigraphic level of
each peak or trough in the isotopic curve can be clearly defined in one curve and correlated with exactly the same level in another . In this way , age equivalence is much more
readily established between different isotopic sequences . 
7 . 2 . 3 Problems with the Marine Oxygen Isotope Record 
Although the oxygen isotope record provides a powerful correlative and chronological
tool , interpretation of the isotopic evidence is not always straightforward ( Patience and
Kroon , 1991 )  . Sedimentation rates in the deep oceans are variable , but in many sequences
the rate of sedimentation is very low . The result is that a single sample for isotopic analysis
may span a time interval of several thousand years . This relatively low stratigraphic
resolution may be exacerbated by sediment mixing on the sea floor , either through the
movement of bottom currents or as a result of bioturbation caused by benthic ( deep-ocean ) 
organisms . In some cases , scouring by ocean bottom currents may lead to removal of
sediments leaving a hiatus in the depositional record which will further complicate the
isotopic signal . In deep oceans , the carbonate fossils ( foraminifers ) that carry the isotopic
record can dissolve as they settle down through the water column , with the result that
a biased assemblage consisting only of the more robust forams will accumulate on the
ocean floor . The critical depth is between 3 and 5 km ( the carbonate compensation
depth or CCD ) and oxygen isotope studies therefore tend to be confined to water that do
not exceed the CCD . Other sources of error arise through incorrect correlation of stages
or stage boundaries between different isotopic profiles , through the incorrect attribution
of warm stages to interglacial as opposed to interstadial episodes ( e . g interstadial
c07 . fm Page 201 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

202 Quaternary Dating Methods
MOI stage 3 )  , and because of the complexities of certain isotopic stages ( e . g . MOI
stage 5 with five substages )  . All of these mean that consistency of interpretation between
different isotopic profiles may not be easy to achieve , especially in those records where
stratigraphic resolution is poor . 
The foregoing difficulties notwithstanding , there is no doubt whatsoever that the marine
oxygen isotope sequence provides a remarkable , indeed unique , record of Quaternary
climate change . The stage boundaries form time-stratigraphic markers and offer a basis
for establishing age equivalence not only between records in different ocean cores , but
between marine sequences , terrestrial records and ice cores . As such , the deep-ocean
oxygen isotope signal constitutes the basis for a scheme of Quaternary correlation that is
global in terms of its application . 
7 . 3 Tephrochronology 
During the course of a volcanic eruption , large quantities of ash and other materials
are ejected into the atmosphere and these are subsequently dispersed over a large area
downwind of the volcanic source . The tephra will rapidly accumulate as an airfall deposit
in lake sediments , on peat surfaces , on river terraces , on the sea bed and in glacier ice . As
the deposition of the tephra layers is essentially instantaneous on a geological timescale , 
these horizons provide distinctive and often widespread isochronous ( i . e . of the same age ) 
marker horizons that offer a valuable basis for inter-site correlation . Each tephra horizon
contains a unique geochemical fingerprint relating it to the source of the eruption . Moreover , 
it is frequently possible to date the tephra , either directly using argon isotope , ESR or
fission track dating , or indirectly by radiocarbon dating of organic material associated
with the tephra layer ( section 7 . 3 . 2 )  . Tephra horizons therefore constitute important chronostratigraphical event markers , and as such provide a basis for dating ( tephrochronology ) 
and also for correlation ( tephrostratigraphy )  . 
The dating and correlation of Late Quaternary deposits by means of tephrochronology
began in the 1920s and 1930s with work in Japan , New Zealand , South America and , 
especially , Iceland ( Einarsson , 1986 )  . The pioneering work of the Icelandic scientist
Sigurdur Thorarinsson was especially significant , as this formed the basis for the first
detailed tephrochronology from any region of the world . Indeed , it was Thorarinsson
who introduced the word tephra ( taken from the Greek τεφρα meaning ‘ ash ’  ) into the literature . Tephra is now used as a collective term for all airborne pyroclasts , 1 
including
both airfall and pyroclastic flow material , and may include a wide range of different-sized
fragments , including ash (  < 2 mm )  , lapilli ( 2–64 mm ) and blocks and bombs (  > 64 mm )  . 
Tephrochronologists who work with materials deposited a considerable distance away
from the volcanic source are primarily concerned with tephra in ash-size fragments 
( Haflidason et al .  , 2000 )  . Such ash-fall deposits are usually referred to as distal tephras
to distinguish them from proximal tephras which are found close to the point of eruption . 
7 . 3 . 1 Tephras in Quaternary Sediments 
In areas close to volcanic eruptions , tephras are visible as light-coloured layers in stratigraphic sections of soils , peats or lake sediments . Distal tephras , by contrast , are seldom
c07 . fm Page 202 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 203
visible to the naked eye , although they do occur occasionally . A good example is the widely
dispersed Vedde Ash ( dated to ca . 12000 cal . years BP ) which can be seen in lake sediment
cores from Loch Ashik on the Isle of Skye , Scotland ( Davies et al .  , 2001 )  , more than
1000 km from its source in the Katla volcanic complex of southern Iceland ( Figure 7 . 2 )  . 
In the majority of cases , however , distal tephras are represented in peats , in lake sediments or in deep-ocean sediments at the microscopic level . Typically these consist of tiny
glass shards , and the isolation and identification of these microtephra ( or cryptotephra )  ,  
( A )  ( B ) 
Vedde
Ash
Younger
Dryas / Loch
Lomond Stadial
Figure 7 . 2 ( A ) The Vedde Ash ( dark band ) in a 5 cm diameter by 1 m long core from Loch
Ashik , Isle of Ske , Scotland . The lowermost deposits in the core ( left ) are organic lake muds
of Lateglacial Interstadial age ( Figure 1 . 5 )  . These are overlain by light-coloured silts and
clays of the Loch Lomond / Younger Dryas Stadial and by organic lake muds and peats of
Holocene Age ( B )  . The Vedde Ash occurs towards the top of the Stadial sediments ( photo : 
John Lowe ) 
c07 . fm Page 203 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

204 Quaternary Dating Methods
and their subsequent extraction from both organic and minerogenic sediment , entails
meticulous laboratory preparation techniques . These include ashing of organic matter
from peats ( Pilcher and Hall , 1992 )  , the removal of biogenic silica2 
especially from lake
sediments ( Rose etal .  , 1996 )  , X-ray analysis ( Dugmore and Newton , 1992 )  , density separation ( Turney , 1998 ) and magnetic separation ( Mackie et al .  , 2002 )  . The last two methods
have proved especially valuable for the detection of microtephras in minerogenic lake
sediments where volcanic glass shards are often present in very low concentrations ( Turney
and Lowe , 2001 )  . 
Tephras have long been identified on the basis of their physical properties , including
colour , grain-size distribution , thickness , lithic content , refractive indices of glass shards
and mineral inclusions . These characteristics may be valuable diagnostic criteria in regions
near the source vents , especially those deposited during historical times when there may
also be documentary records of particular volcanic events ( Haflidason et al .  , 2000 )  . For
more distal ashes , however , the chemical composition of volcanic glasses has proved
to be a more appropriate method for identifying particular tephras . This geochemical
fingerprinting not only enables a unique ‘ signature ’ to be obtained for each tephra , but it
also provides a basis for linking tephras directly to known centres of eruption . In many
volcanic centres , such as Iceland , the individual volcanic systems are characterised by
distinctive rock suites which are petrologically and geochemically distinguishable from
each other ( Jacobsson , 1979 )  . Distal tephras can be related to these volcanic centres
because the glass shards that comprise the tephras are formed during the rapid cooling
of volcanic magma and therefore have a composition that is representative of the bulk
geochemistry of a particular magma . 
The technique most widely applied to determine the geochemical composition of a tephra
is electron probe micro-analysis ( EPMA )  . The glass surface of each tephra shard is
bombarded with an electron beam , the X-ray energy produced being unique to each
chemical element , while the intensity of the signal is proportional to the amount in the
glass shard ( Hunt and Hill , 1993 )  . Usually about ten major elements ( expressed as oxides ) 
are selected for geochemical analysis . Measurement is either by energy dispersive
spectrometry ( EDS ) or by wave-length dispersive spectrometry , the latter normally
being preferred because although requiring a higher electron beam current and longer
counting time , it offers a greater degree of analytical precision ( Davies et al .  , 2002 )  . 
Considerable efforts have been made in recent years to standardise the analytical methods
used by different laboratories , the reporting procedures , and the ways in which tephrochronological data are presented ( Hunt and Hill , 1993 ; Hunt et al .  , 1998 )  . 
7 . 3 . 2 Dating of Tephra Horizons 
Tephra horizons may be dated directly by a number of methods . Where a tephra is associated
with organic materials , such as wood , peat , or lake sediments , the age of the ash bed can
be determined by radiocarbon dating . For example , in the sediments of Kråkenes Lake in
western Norway , the mean of four AMS radiocarbon dates on samples of Salix herbacea
leaves adjacent to the Icelandic Vedde Ash ( Figure 7 . 2 ) date the tephra to 10 310 ± 50 14C
year BP ( Birks et al .  , 1996 )  . In Ireland , radiocarbon dates on 20 separate tephra horizons
in peat and lake sequences underpin a tephrochronology extending back to the eighth
millennium BP ( Hall and Pilcher , 2002 )  . In some cases , tephras have been dated directly
c07 . fm Page 204 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 205
by radiometric determinations on the primary mineral constituents . Examples include
40Ar / 39Ar dating of the widely dispersed Laacher See Tephra ( 12 900 cal . years : Figure 7 . 5 ) 
from the Eifel region of Germany ( Van den Bogaard , 1995 )  ; ESR dating of the Youngest
Tuff ( 81 000 ± 17 000 years ) from the Toba Volcano in Sumatra ( Wild et al .  , 1999 )  ; and
fission-track dating of the Rockland Tephra ( 400 000 years )  , an ash layer that is widespread in northern California and western Nevada ( Meyer et al .  , 1991 )  . 
Calendar ages for tephras can be obtained from varved sediment sequences ( Zillen
et al .  , 2002 )  ; for instance , the Laacher See Tephra referred to above has also been dated
by varve chronology and an age ( 12 880 years ) similar to the 40Ar / 39Ar date obtained 
( Brauer et al .  , 1999 )  . Ice-core records provide a further means of assigning precise ages to
tephras ; a good example is again the Vedde Ash , which has been dated to 11 980 ± 80
years in the Greenland GRIP Core ( Grönvold et al .  , 1995 )  , an age which also equates
well with the calendar age estimate 12 045–11 975 cal . years BP based on radiocarbon
dating ( Wastegård et al .  , 1998 )  . Further means whereby tephra can be dated include
stratigraphical position in relation to other tephra layers , palaeomagnetic correlations and
relationships to oxygen isotope stage boundaries in deep-ocean sediments ( Wastegård
and Rasmussen , 2001 )  . 
7 . 3 . 3 Problems with Tephrochronology 
While tephrochronology is undoubtedly a technique of considerable potential , it is not
without its problems . These relate partly to the fact that it is , at best , a dating method that
is regionally or areally specific , for the dissemination of tephra from the volcanic source , 
and hence the distribution of individual ash layers , will depend on a range of factors , 
including the magnitude and type of volcanic eruption , the strength of the prevailing
wind , the direction of the wind at the time of the eruption , etc . Many volcanic plumes
appear to have been relatively narrow , and hence the spatial distribution of tephra fall-out
from the atmosphere will be restricted . This means , of course , that tephrochronology can
only be applied in those areas that are immediately downwind of a major volcanic source . 
Post-depositional processes may also influence tephra presence in the sedimentary
record . In peatland areas , for example , where there has been protracted snow cover , 
redeposition by wind and meltwater may result in patchy distributions of tephras across
the bog surface , and hence only fragmentary tephra records may be preserved in peat
sequences ( Bergman et al .  , 2004 )  . A further difficulty arises with tephras in marine
sediments . Tephras falling over the high-latitude northern and southern oceans may not
reach the sea bed , and hence the marine sediment archive , because of sea-ice cover at the
ocean surface . Moreover , tephras incorporated into glacier ice may subsequently be
ice-rafted into the oceans and deposited in marine sediments . If so , then older tephras
would be incorporated into younger stratigraphic horizons ( Bond et al .  , 2001 )  . 
A number of analytical problems also remain to be resolved . Although considerable
progress has been made in the standardisation of laboratory procedures ( section 7 . 3 . 1 )  , 
there is still a measure of variability in laboratory and operator practice ( Hunt and Hill , 
1996 )  . Moreover , while individual tephra layers may be shown by EPMA analysis to be
geochemically distinct , when the geochemical envelopes representing the major element
chemistry of different volcanic provinces are plotted , there are often overlaps between
them ( Figure 7 . 3 )  . Hence , it may be necessary to employ other diagnostic criteria , such as
c07 . fm Page 205 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

206 Quaternary Dating Methods
the physical properties of the glass shards and the stratigraphic position of the tephra
layer in order to distinguish between individual tephras and to determine tephra provenance ( Davies et al .  , 2002 )  . Even then , a correct sourcing of the tephra to a particular
eruptive event may not be possible , simply because of a lack of data on the eruptive histories
and diagnostic geochemistries of different volcanic events . Finally , theoretical stability
10
8
6
4
2
0
K2O ( % ) 
K2O
40 50 60 70 80
Laacher See
Massif Central
Iceland
Etna
Campanian
SiO2 ( % ) 
Icelandic volcanic centres
Grimsvötn-Kverkfjöll
Hekla
Katla ( basalt ) 
Katla ( rhyolitic ) 
Veidivötn-Dyngjufjöll 
( A )  
( B ) 
80
60
40
20
40
60
80
100
20
100
100 406080 20
FeO
CaO
K2O
Na2O
80
60
40
20
40
60
80
100
20
100
100 406080 20
CaO
Figure 7 . 3 ( A ) Bi-plot of SiO2 and K2O concentrations in tephras from the main European
ash provinces . Note the overlaps between the Laacher See and Campanian ( northern Italy ) 
envelopes . Reproduced by The Royal Society .  ( B ) Ternary plots showing variations in the
proportions of FeO , CaO and K2O ( left ) and CaO , Na2O and K2O ( right )  . Again , note the
overlaps between the tephras from different volcanic sources ( after Davies et al .  , 2002 )  . 
Reproduced by The Royal Society 
c07 . fm Page 206 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 207
modelling suggests that some tephras ( particularly basaltic tephras ) may have relatively
poor chemical stability in the post-depositional environment , leading to major changes in the
tephra geochemistry ( Pollard et al .  , 2003 )  . If so , then this could provide a further difficulty
for the correct geochemical typing and provenancing of distal tephras . 
7 . 3 . 4 Applications of Tephrochronology 
Significant advances have been made in tephrochronology over the course of the last 20
years , and it is now clear that tephrochronology as a Quaternary dating and correlation
tool has come of age . While the technique has continued to be applied in the western
Cordillera of North America , in Japan , in New Zealand and in Iceland , areas where
tephrochronology has had a long and distinguished record ( e . g . Machida , 1981 ; Thorarinsson , 
1981 ; Lowe , 1988 )  , it has been increasingly employed around the North Atlantic province
and in Europe , where a greatly expanded Icelandic tephra database ( Haflidason etal .  , 2000 ) 
can now be combined with tephra data from the major European volcanic provinces of
Germany , France and the northern fringes of the Mediterranean . Some archaeological and
environmental applications of tephrochronology are considered in the following sections . 
7 . 3 . 4 . 1 Dating the first human impact in New Zealand using tephrochronology . New
Zealand , an isolated archipelago in the southwest Pacific , was the last substantial landmass
to be settled in by humans . The orthodox view has been that the colonisers migrated
southwestwards from eastern Polynesia , and that the first settlement occurred between
ca . AD 750 and 950 . A Polynesian origin for the New Zealand Maori people has never
been questioned , but in recent years two schools of thought have emerged relating to the
timing of settlement , one favouring an early settlement between AD 0 and 500 while the
opposing view arguing for a later colonisation between AD 1150 and 1300 . Discussion has
centred on both the evidence for human impact ( vegetational disturbance reflected in pollen
records , for example )  , and the reliability of radiocarbon dates associated with human-related
evidence , particularly as the relatively short-time intervals involved limit the effectiveness
of radiocarbon dating for defining the order of archaeological events . 
An alternative approach to resolving this problem is to use tephrochronology ( Lowe
et al .  , 1998 )  . A number of tephras from eruptive centres in North Island are found in
stratified contexts and several have archaeological significance . The most important of
these is the regionally extensive Kaharoa Tephra , which erupted from Mt Tarawera in the
Okataina Volcanic Centre ( Figure 7 . 4A )  , and which has been dated to 665 ± 15 14C years
BP on the basis of more than 20 radiocarbon measurements on a range of materials , 
including wood , peat and charcoal . This age determination is equivalent to calibrated dates
ranging from AD 1300 to 1390 ( 1σ )  , or AD 1290 to 1400 at the 2σ level ( Lowe et al .  , 
1998 )  . Wiggle-match radiocarbon dating ( section 2 . 6 . 5 ) using wood samples gives a more
precise estimate of age , AD 1314 ± 12 , again at the 2σ level ( Figure 7 . 4B )  . The Kaharoa
Tephra is a critical marker horizon for two reasons . First , no cultural remains are
known to occur beneath it and so it provides a maximum age for settlement in North
Island of ca . AD 1300 . Second , palynological and charcoal analyses from a substantial
number of sites , all of which contain the Kaharoa Tephra datum ( Figure 7 . 4A )  , indicate
sustained deforestation very close to the time of its deposition ( Lowe et al .  , 1998 ; Horrocks
et al .  , 2001 )  . This implies that the earliest inferred human impacts in eastern North Island
c07 . fm Page 207 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
1100 1200 1300 1400 1500
cal AD
BP 
( B ) 
1
2
4
3
5
TASMAN
SEA
PACIFIC
OCEAN 
( A ) 
Great Barrier Is . 
Kopouatai
Hamilton
NORTH
ISLAND
SOUTH
ISLAND
Rotonuiaha
Napier
Wellington
Wairau
Bar
Walkaremoana
Te Rangaakapua
Crater Rd
Section
Okataina
Volcanic Centre
BOP
Kohika
Papamoa
Matakana Is . 
Waihi Beach
Repongaere
Lake
Taupo
Holdens
Bay
176°E
35°S
39°S
3 cm
100 0
Kilometres
Mt Tarawera
N
Wharau Rd
Auckland
Figure 7 . 4 ( A ) North Island , New Zealand , showing the distribution of the Kaharoa Tephra ( dashed line )  , Mt Tarawera in the Okataina Volcanic
centre which is the source of the tephra , and the location of pollen profiles ( open circles ) where the tephra has been recorded .  ( B ) Five radiocarbon
dates on wood samples contained within the tephra at the Crater Road section ( Figure 7 . 5A ) wiggle-matched to the southern hemisphere terrestrial
radiocarbon calibration curve . The individual data points are shown as rectangles , with the width of each rectangle indicating the number of rings
spanned by the radiocarbon-dated sample ( 10 years ) and the height indicating the sample standard error ( ±1σ )  . The wiggle-match provides an age
for the tephra of AD 1314±12 years ( after Hogg etal .  , 2003 )  . Reprinted by permission of A . G . Hogg and Antiquity Publications Ltd 
c07 . fm Page 208 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 209
as reflected in pollen and other records occurred no earlier than ca . AD 1290 . In turn , this
lends support to the ‘ late arrival ’ hypothesis for the first settlements in New Zealand . It
also suggests that the earliest Maori people in New Zealand may have witnessed the
Kaharoa eruption very soon after their arrival ( Lowe et al .  , 1998 )  ! 
7 . 3 . 4 . 2 Dating and correlating events in the North Atlantic region during the Last
Glacial–Interglacial transition using tephrochronology . The transition from the Last
Glacial to the Holocene , often referred to as ‘ Termination 1 ’ in the MOI sequence 
( section 7 . 2 . 1 ) or the Lateglacial in the terrestrial record ( Figure 1 . 5 )  , is one of the most
intensively studied episodes in Quaternary science . During the period from approximately
15000 to 10 000 years ago , climatic changes of interstadial / stadial amplitude occurred and
are reflected in a wide range of environmental data ( Lowe and Walker , 1997 )  . These
often dramatic climatic oscillations are the most recent manifestations in the geological
record of the unstable nature of the global climate system , and they therefore provide
atmospheric scientists with natural analogues for models of climate change . The Lateglacial is also of great interest to earth scientists who are seeking to understand the spatial
and temporal interactions between the atmosphere , cryosphere , ocean and terrestrial biosphere on millennial timescales . Establishing a chronology for the sequence of climatic
events is of paramount importance , but the most widely used method , namely radiocarbon
dating , is known to be particularly problematic for this time period ( Lowe et al .  , 2001 )  . 
Hence , alternative bases for dating and correlation are being sought and one of these is
tephrochronology . 
A key area for research on environmental change during the Lateglacial and Early
Holocene is the North Atlantic region where the potential for tephrochronology is considerable ( Lowe , 2001 ; Turney et al .  , 2004 )  . This is because there are a number of discrete
volcanic centres in the region , of which those in Iceland , the Eifel region of Germany , the
Massif Central of France , and the Italian provinces of Campania ( around Naples )  , Etna
and the Aeolian Islands ( Figure 7 . 5A ) are known to have erupted during this time period . 
In all , 34 distal tephras from these volcanic complexes have been discovered in sequences
spanning the Last Termination ( Davies et al .  , 2002 )  . Key tephras include the widely
dispersed Icelandic tephras , including the Saksunarvatn Tephra ( ca . 10 200 cal . years BP )  , 
the Vedde Ash ( ca . 11 980 cal . years BP ) and the Borrobol Tephra ( ca . 14 400 cal . years
BP3 
)  ; the Laacher See Tephra ( ca . 12 900 cal . years BP ) from Germany ; and the Neapolitan
Yellow Tuff ( ca . 14 400 cal . years BP ) from Italy ( Figure 7 . 5B )  . Not only do these tephras
constitute key dated marker horizons in terrestrial sequences , particularly in lake sediments , but the fact that the tephras can also be identified and provenanced in cores from
the North Atlantic ocean and from the Greenland ice sheet means that they form a basis for
time-stratigraphic correlation between terrestrial , marine and ice-core records . As such , 
they provide a broad chronological framework for climatic and environmental change
throughout the entire North Atlantic province during the transition from the Last Cold
Stage to the present interglacial . 
7 . 3 . 4 . 3 Dating Middle Pleistocene artefacts and cultural traditions in East Africa using
tephrostratigraphy . During the Middle Pleistocene , African hominids abandoned the
manufacture of handaxes and cleavers and began making points , a cultural transition
which archaeologists interpret as marking the end of the Acheulian and the beginning of
the Middle Stone Age . This is an important event in the record of human technological
c07 . fm Page 209 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Confirmed records of Vedde Ash
Known area of Laacher See Tephra
Confirmed records of Neapolitan Yellow Tuff
Volcanic centres of particular relevance to this study
Other major volcanic centres in Europe
500 km 0
Saksunarvatn Ash : ca . 10 200 cal . year BP [ Iceland ] 
 ‘ Högstorpsmossen ’ Tephra [ Iceland ] 
I-THOL-1 [ Iceland ] 
L3574 [ Iceland ] 
Ulmener Maar Tephra [ Germany ] 
Puy de Dôme [ France ] 
C1 , Phlegrean Fields [ Italy ] 
Godivelle Tephra 4 [ France ] 
Vedde Ash : ca . 11 980 cal . year BP [ Iceland ] 
Godivelle Tephra 5 [ France ] 
I-THOL-2 [ Iceland ] 
Laacher See Tephra : ca . 12 900 cal . year BP [ Germany ] 
La Nugère [ France ] 
Borrobol Tephra : ca . 14
IP-14 [ Iceland ] 
Y1 , Etna [ Italy ] 
400 cal . year BP [ Iceland ] 
C2 , Neapolitan Yellow Tuff [ Italy ] 
9 . 0
10 . 0
11 . 0
12 . 0
13 . 0
14 . 0
BP Radiocarbon years , 
N 
( A )  ( B ) 
Figure 7 . 5 ( A ) Location of the principal volcanic centres that were active during Termination 1 ( after Davies et al .  , 2002 )  . Reproduced by The
Royal Society .  ( B ) Chronology of tephra layers dated to between 14 500 and 9500 14C years BP from sites in Europe and the Mediterranean Sea 
( after Lowe , 2001 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c07 . fm Page 210 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 211
development , and may possibly reflect a major behavioural shift or even a speciation event
reflected , perhaps , in the first appearance of Homo sapiens ( McBrearty and Brooks , 2000 )  . 
Few locations , however , preserve a continuous well-dated sedimentary or occupational
record across the Acheulian–Middle Stone Age transition . 
Sites containing both Acheulian and Middle Stone Age artefacts occur in several stratified
sequences in the Tugen Hills of western Kenya ( Figure 7 . 6A )  . The artefacts are found
within and below the Bedded Tuff , a widespread volcaniclastic unit consisting of up to 12
tephra horizons interbedded with sediments and palaeosols ( Tryon and McBrearty , 2002 )  . 
Two tephra units high in the sequence have been dated by 40Ar / 39Ar to 235 000 ± 2000
years and 284 000 ± 12 000 years ago , the latter date providing a minimum age for the
archaeological materials , all of which underlie this particular tephra horizon ( Figure 7 . 6B )  . 
The Bedded Tuff outcrops within the study area ( Figure 7 . 6A ) have been correlated on
the basis of field stratigraphic relationships , and on the geochemical signatures of the
individual tephra horizons . Distinctive geochemical changes within Bedded Tuff units
permit a chronological ordering for the archaeological sites . The results show that :  ( a ) the
Acheulian–Middle Stone Age transition in this part of Africa began well before 285 000
years ago ;  ( b ) the projectile points found in three of the sites ( GnJh-17 , GnJh-63 and
GnJi-28 ; Figure 7 . 6B ) are the oldest yet known from Africa ; and ( c ) perhaps most interestingly , there is no unidirectional succession at all of the sites from Acheulian to Middle
Stone Age industries for , in some cases , Acheulian artefacts ( handaxes ) overlie strata
containing artefacts of Middle Stone Age affinity ( points )  . Whether this technological
diversity reflects more complex human adaptations , diverse palaeoenvironments within the
area , or perhaps even the presence of multiple human species remains unclear . Whatever
the case , it is clear that the Acheulian–Middle Stone Age transition in this part of Africa
was a more complex cultural process than may hitherto have been considered . 
7 . 3 . 4 . 4 Dating Early and Middle Pleistocene glaciations in Yukon by tephrochronology . In
the mountains of western North America tephras , mainly in the form of ancient tuffs , 
have long been recognised as important time markers in Late Pliocene and Early and Middle
Pleistocene deposits . These include the Bishop Ash ( K–argon age 738 000 years )  , the
Pearlette ‘ O ’ Ash ( 610000 years )  , the Pearlette ‘ S ’ Ash ( 1 . 27 million years ) and the Pearlette
 ‘ B ’ Ash ( 2 . 01 million years )  , and all are found throughout the High Plains , Rocky
Mountains , Colorado Plateau and the Great Basin , where they are frequently inter-stratified
with glacial deposits . They have provided a basis for correlating these glacial sediments , 
while dating of the tuffs has enabled an outline chronology of Early and Middle Pleistocene
glacial events to be developed ( Richmond and Fullerton , 1986 )  . 
Further north , in Alaska and Yukon , tephras also occur inter-stratified with glacial
sediments . Central Yukon lies within the sphere of influence of volcanoes in the Wrangell
Mountains and the more distant Aleutian arc-Alaskan Peninsula ( Figure 7 . 7 )  , so that the
Late Cenozoic sediments contain a large number of distal tephra beds ( Preece etal .  , 2000 )  . 
Westgate et al .  ( 2001 ) have shown how these tephras can be used to determine the age of
extensive cordilleran and alpine glaciations in central Yukon . At three sites , between
Dawson City and Whitehorse ( Figure 7 . 7 )  , sequences of sediment containing both tephras
and basalt lava flows were discovered . At two of these sites , Fort Selkirk and Midnight
Dome Terrace , the tephra horizons overlie glacial and / or glacial outwash deposits . Fission-track dating of the tephras gave ages of 1 . 48±0 . 11 million years for the Fort Selkirk
c07 . fm Page 211 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

to Kipcherere Kasurein River 
( K5 / LS ) Upper silts 
& gravels / Loboi silts
Kapthurin Fm . 
Exposures 
( K4 ) Bedded Tuff 
( K3 / K3 '  ) Middle silts 
& gravels
Older sediments 
& lava
Drainage
Road or track
Archaeological sites 
 & sampling locales
0 500 m
KENYA
Map area 
Nairobi
to Loruk
N Kapthurin River
GnJh-15
GnJh-03
GnJh-63
GnJh-17
Test trench D
Kobosowany River
Mugoyuwoni River
to Marigat NRS Ndau River
Bartekero River
235 ± 2 ka
284 ± 12 ka
GnJh-63 GnJi-28
Rorop Lingop
GnJh-03
LHA
GnJh-17
GnJh-15
K3
sediments
K4
trachytic 
tuff
CYS97-1
MCB97-2
Artefact icons
handaxe pick point
small biface
on cobble
handaxe on 
Levallois flake
blades and
blade core
Levallois
core 
( B )  ( A )  
? 
K4 
 " upper " 
basaltic
tuff ? 
MBTU 
? 
K4 
 " lower " 
basaltic
tuff
Figure 7 . 6 ( A ) The Kapthurin Formation in part of the Tugen Hills , western Kenya , showing the location of the sampling sites .  ( B ) A summary
of the stratigraphic relationships between units of the Bedded Tuff , radiometric dates and archaeological assemblages ( after Tryon and
McBrearty , 2002 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c07 . fm Page 212 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 213
Tephra and 1 . 45 ± 0 . 14 million years for the Midnight Dome Tephra . When set alongside
an age of 1 . 60 ± 0 . 08 million years on an basalt flow from beneath glacial deposits , this
constrained the age of an extensive Early / Middle Pleistocene glaciation in the area to ca . 
1 . 5 million years BP . At the Ash Bend site ( Figure 7 . 7 )  , a younger tephra overlying a thick
suite of glacial deposits ( Reid Glaciation ) could be linked geochemically with the Sheep
Creek Tephra of central Alaska ( TL date : 190 000 years )  . This showed the Reid Glaciation
to be older than MOI stage 6 , and an MOI stage 8 is suggested , thereby placing the glacial
event around 250 000 years ago . 
7 . 4 Palaeomagnetism 
Magnetism is something that is known to most of us . We are familiar with the idea of
a magnet consisting of two poles ( a dipole ) which we often refer to as north and south . 
Such magnets attract ferrous objects that are themselves not magnets . We can also visualise , 
Figure 7 . 7 The two major volcanic zones in Alaska responsible for the deposition of silicic
tephras across Alaska and the Yukon territory : AAAP – Aleutian arc Alaskan Peninsula ; WVF –
Wrangell Volcanic Field . The three study sites referred to in the text are indicated by the
filled squares : MDT – Midnight Dome Terrace ; AB – Ash Bend Terrace ; FS – Fort Selkirk 
( after Westgate et al .  , 2001 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c07 . fm Page 213 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

214 Quaternary Dating Methods
at least in very general terms , a magnetic field associated with such a magnet where lines
of force emanating from one pole of the magnet pass through free space in a series of
loops to reach the other pole ( Smith , 1999 )  . Many will also be aware that the earth itself
behaves like a giant magnet and creates a magnetic field that is analogous to the magnetic
field generated by a small hand-held magnet ( Figure 7 . 8 )  . What may be less well known , 
however , is that the earth ’ s magnetic field is not constant ; rather it changes over time , and
a record of these changes will be contained in rocks and sediments . As was the case with
tephras , these palaeomagnetic changes form time-planes in stratigraphic records and
constitute a basis for inter-site correlation . If they can be assigned an age by radiometric
dating ( argon isotope , fission track ) or other means ( varve chronology , for example )  , then
they also provide a basis for dating . 
7 . 4 . 1 The Earth ’ s Magnetic Field 
The source of the earth ’ s magnetic field lies deep in the fluid part of the earth ’ s core . 
There , a dynamo mechanism and the associated electrical currents generate the magnetic
field that we experience at the earth ’ s surface ( Figure 7 . 8 )  . About 85% of the spatial variation
of the geomagnetic field at the earth ’ s surface can be attributed to the pattern expected for
a dipolar field ( Sternberg , 2001 )  . In addition , however , there is a non-dipolar component
in the geomagnetic field arising , for example , from irregularities in current flow near the
Figure 7 . 8 A bar-magnet representation of the dipole component of the earth ’ s magnetic
field . The lines of force represent , at any position , the direction in which a small magnetised
needle would try to point . The concentration of these lines is a measure of the field strength
or field intensity ( after Aitken , 1990 )  . Reproduced by permission of Pearson Education Ltd 
c07 . fm Page 214 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 215
earth ’ s core-mantle boundary . The effects of these are localised in that they affect
restricted regions of the earth ’ s surface ( Aitken , 1990 )  . Over time , the earth ’ s magnetic
field varies in both field strength and direction . There are two elements involved in these
changes : major dipole changes , where the dynamo currents that generate the main dipole
field become reversed ( polarity changes4 
) so that effectively the north pole becomes the
south pole and vice versa , and secular variations , which operate largely ( although not
entirely , because of the influence of non-dipole effects ) through a process known as
 ‘ dipole wobble ’ whereby the axis of the dipole field ( magnetic north ) precesses5 
around
the earth ’ s axis of rotation ( true north : Figure 7 . 8 )  . Secular variations occur over centuries
or less during which field direction changes at a rate of 1° every few decades , while field
strength changes several per cent per century ( Sternberg , 2001 )  . The major polarity
changes , by contrast , are measurable over timescales of thousands or millions of years . It
is a combination of secular changes and polarity changes that forms the basis for palaeomagnetic dating . Good reviews are provided by Tarling ( 1983 )  , Aitken ( 1990 )  , Eighmy
and Sternberg ( 1990 ) and Sternberg ( 1997 )  . 
There are three components in the earth ’ s magnetic field . Declination is the angle
between magnetic north and geographic ( true ) north . Currently this is 11 . 5° , but will
vary with the dipole wobble described above . Inclination refers to the angle of dip of
the prevailing magnetic field , in other words the angle between the prevailing lines of
force in the magnetic field and the horizontal . If a needle is suspended in space exactly
at its centre of gravity , its north-seeking end will dip below the horizontal in line with
the prevailing magnetic field . Inclination varies from 0° at the magnetic equator to 90° at
the magnetic poles . Third , there is the intensity or strength of the earth ’ s magnetic field . 
At present the field strength at the geomagnetic poles is twice that at the geomagnetic
equator . 
7 . 4 . 2 The Palaeomagnetic Record in Rocks and Sediments 
Rocks and sediments that contain magnetic minerals , either in crystal form in the case of
igneous rocks or as particles in sediments , can acquire a permanent or remanent
magnetism . This natural remanent magnetism ( NRM )  , typically in the ferromagnetic
minerals magnetite and hematite , will reflect the earth ’ s geomagnetic field at the time of
rock or sediment formation . Volcanic rocks will acquire a remanence through heating , 
which is referred to as thermoremanent magnetism ( TRM )  . Archaeological materials
that have been heated , such as pottery and hearths , will also contain a TRM signal , and
again this will reveal the direction of the earth ’ s magnetic field at the time of firing . Sedimentary rocks and unconsolidated sediments that have accumulated on the sea floor or in
lakes , for example , contain a different form of magnetic remanence – a depositional or
detrital remanent magnetism ( DRM )  . As ferromagnetic sediment particles settle
through the water column or in water-saturated sediments , the grains become aligned
with the prevailing geomagnetic field . This DRM signal , although sometimes weak , can
easily be measured in cores of sediment from lakes and from the deep ocean floor , and
again enables the changes in the direction of the earth ’ s magnetic field to be measured
over time . Further details of the magnetic properties of minerals , rocks and sediments are
provided by Thompson and Oldfield ( 1986 )  , while various aspects of environmental
magnetism are described by Walden et al .  ( 1999 ) and Evans and Heller ( 2003 )  . 
c07 . fm Page 215 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

216 Quaternary Dating Methods
7 . 4 . 3 Magnetostratigraphy 
The study of variations in magnetic properties through a sequence of rocks or sediments
is termed magnetostratigraphy . Even very small amounts of ferromagnetic minerals in
a body of rock or sediment can provide a record of past geomagnetic field variations , and
the identification of major polarity changes in volcanic rocks or in deep-sea sediment
records , or of variations in inclination and declination ( secular changes ) in different
depositional sequences , provides a basis for relative dating and for correlation . In addition , 
mineral magnetic potential , in other words the concentration and magnetic susceptibility of
magnetic minerals , can also provide a basis for correlating between sedimentary sequences . 
7 . 4 . 3 . 1 Polarity changes and the palaeomagnetic timescale . During the course of geological time there have been numerous changes in the earth ’ s magnetic polarity , with the
magnetic poles changing relative positions through 180° . These polarity or field reversals
are of considerable importance in magnetostratigraphy , for they can be detected in the
geological record where they form time-parallel marker horizons in stratigraphic sequences . 
At present , the earth ’ s magnetic field is regarded as possessing normal polarity , but
when the field is inverted from the present it is referred to as reversed polarity . Periods of
long-term fixed polarity , whether normal or reversed , are termed polarity epochs , and
have a time range from 100 000 up to 10 million years . Within these long-term polarity
episodes are polarity changes of much shorter duration . Polarity events typically last
from 10 000 to 100 000 years , while polarity excursions , in which the geomagnetic pole
changes direction through 45° or more for a short-time interval only , are of much shorter
duration ( 1000–100 000 years )  . 
Polarity epochs and polarity events are global phenomena and hence they form a basis
for world-wide correlation . Many of these have been detected in volcanic rocks where
they have been dated by K–argon ( Tarling , 1983 )  . The palaeomagnetic timescale can also
be dated using the deep-ocean sediment record . In ocean water , ferromagnetic minerals
settling through the water column adopt the direction of the earth ’ s magnetic field , and
hence a core through ocean-floor sediments will contain a long-term record of geomagnetic changes . As we saw in section 7 . 2 . 2 , ocean cores can be dated by ‘ orbital tuning ’ 
and this enables an age to be assigned to those parts of the core where geomagnetic
changes are recorded ( Funnell , 1995 )  . These dated horizons form the basis for a palaeomagnetic timescale for Quaternary and Late Tertiary sequences ( Figure 7 . 9 )  . Over the
course of the past 3 million years , three polarity epochs have occurred , the Brunhes Normal 
( which extends to the present day )  , the Matuyama Reversed and the Gauss Normal . Dating
the epoch boundaries places the Brunhes–Matuyama at 0 . 78 million years and the
Matuyama–Gauss at 2 . 58 million years . Important polarity events include the Jaramillo
Normal ( 0 . 99–1 . 07 million years ) and the Olduvai Normal ( 1 . 77–1 . 95 million years )  , 
both of which occur within the Matuyama Reversed polarity epoch . 
7 . 4 . 3 . 2 Secular variations . Secular variations , which are due to both dipole and nondipole field behaviour and are variable over time and space , are reflected in changes in
declination , inclination and intensity . Past variations in these parameters are referred to as
palaeosecular variations ( PSV )  . In Britain , an observational record of the geomagnetic
field extends back to AD 1576 , and a plot of inclination against declination for London
shows geomagnetic field changes over the course of the last 400 years ( Figure 7 . 10A )  . 
c07 . fm Page 216 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 217
Age ( K–Ar )  , 
Ma
Astronomically tuned
Age ( Ma ) 
Blake 0 . 12
Brunhes
Emperor 0 . 42
0 . 78
0 . 99
Jaramillo
1 . 07
Cobb Mountain 1 . 19
Gilsá 1 . 68
1 . 79
Olduvai
1 . 95
Reunion 2 . 13
2 . 6
Kaena
Mammoth
3 , 40
3 , 15
3 , 05
3 , 01
2 , 92
2 , 48
2 , 14
2 , 12
2 , 04
2 , 01
1 , 87
1 , 67
1 , 55
1 , 17
1 , 15
0 , 97
0 , 90
0 , 73
Gauss Matuyama
Figure 7 . 9 The palaeomagnetic timescale of the last 3 . 5 million years . Black areas indicate
periods of normal polarity ; white areas show episodes of reversed polarity . K–argon ages are
shown on the left-hand side ; astronomically tuned ages from deep-ocean cores are on the
right ( after Mankinen and Dalrymple , 1979 ; Cande and Kent , 1995 ; Funnell , 1995 ) 
c07 . fm Page 217 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

66
68
70
72
74
76
78
24 20 16 12 8 4 0 4 8 12 16
1800
1900
1700
1600
London
50
60
70
80
–30 –20 –10 0 10 20 30 40 50
50
60
70
80
–30 –20 –10 0 10 20 30 40 50
Inclination in degrees Inclination in degrees Declination in degrees
Declination in degrees
14
13 
19
18
17
12
11
15
10
9 8 6
7 16
H1
H2
2
1
3
4
5
6
–1
–2 –3
–4
–5
–6
–7 –8
–9
–10
West East
Declination ( D )  
) l Angle of dip (  
( A )  
( B ) 
Figure 7 . 10 ( A ) Secular changes in declination and inclination as observed in London from the late sixteenth century onwards ( from Aitken , 
1990 )  . Reproduced by permission of Pearson Education Ltd .  ( B ) The current British archaeomagnetic calibration curve . Upper : AD 600–1975 ; 
lower : 1000 BC–AD 600 . Also shown are the remanence measurements for samples from two medieval tiled hearths from York . The plots give
archaeomagnetic ages of AD 1625 ± 75 and AD 1475 ± 75 ( after Batt , 1997 )  . Reproduced by permission of Blackwell Publishers
c07 . fm Page 218 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 219
During this period , declination has varied from 11°E in AD 1570 to 24°W in AD 1820 , 
has subsequently decreased to its present value of around 5°W , and continues to
decrease at a rate of 9 min each year . Inclination has varied from more than 74° in AD
1700 and is now near to 66° ( Thompson and Oldfield , 1986 )  . Such curves of secular
geomagnetic variations based on observational data can be extended into the historic
period by using archaeomagnetic measurements from features dated by documentary
sources , dendrochronology , pottery typology , coins , radiocarbon or other methods 
( Batt , 1997 )  . 
These curves can be used as a basis for dating , for artefacts or other objects of previously
unknown age , but whose remanent magnetic properties ( inclination and declination ) have
been determined , can be matched to the curve and a date obtained . In order to do this , 
however , the magnetic measurements must be fitted to a calibration curve ( or master
curve ) which shows the changes through time in declination and inclination of the earth ’ s
magnetic field for a specific geographical area ( Figure 7 . 10B )  . As the geomagnetic field
reflects spatial as well as temporal variations , however , all archaeomagnetic measurements must be corrected to a central location , and only data from an area approximately
1000 km across can be used to construct a calibration curve without introducing significant
errors ( Nöel and Batt , 1990 )  . Geomagnetic master curves have been developed from
many parts of the world , in some cases extending back over two or three millennia . 
Examples include those from Britain ( Clark et al .  , 1988 )  , Meso-America ( Wolfman , 
1990 ) and the American Southwest ( Lengyel and Eighmy , 2002 )  . 
Longer-term records of secular variations can be obtained from geomagnetic
changes recorded in lake sediment sequences ( King and Peck , 2001 )  . These can be
dated by , for example , radiocarbon or varve chronology , and will then constitute
regionally specific type profiles against which other secular magnetic records can be
matched . These ‘ master curves ’  , some of which extend back into the Early Holocene , 
are often at a very high degree of stratigraphic resolution , particularly those dated by
varve chronology ( section 7 . 4 . 5 . 1 )  . The master curves may be applicable to sediments
found up to 2000 km from the type site . Correlation between individual cores is based
on distinctive inflexions ( turning points ) in the magnetic profiles . Long lake
sequences showing geomagnetic secular variations are now available from many areas
including Britain ( Turner and Thompson , 1981 )  , North America ( Lund , 1996 ) and
Sweden ( Snowball and Sandgren , 2002 )  . In addition to inclination and declination
data , some lake sediment sequences also contain a record of relative geomagnetic
palaeointensity ( Ojala and Saarinen , 2002 )  . 
7 . 4 . 3 . 3 Mineral magnetic potential . Two other magnetic characteristics have sometimes
been used in magnetostratigraphy , namely mineral magnetic susceptibility ( MS ) and
isothermal remanent magnetism ( IRM )  . Neither of these depends on changes in the
earth ’ s magnetic field , but rather they reflect variations in the nature and origins of magnetic
minerals in sediments ( Dearing , 1999 ; Walden , 1999 )  . These properties cannot in themselves form a basis for a chronology , but they offer a potential basis for correlation . This
is because changes in MS and IRM are often a reflection of environmental change , and as
these will be broadly synchronous , the magnetic signal in sediments may provide a basis
for correlation between depositional contexts and across a range of timescales ( Lowe and
Walker , 1997 )  . 
c07 . fm Page 219 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

220 Quaternary Dating Methods
Mineral magnetic susceptibility measures the degree to which a material can be
magnetised ; in other words it is an index of its ‘ magnetisability ’  . MS has a range of applications in the archaeological and environmental sciences ( as an indicator of sediment flux
and erosion in lake catchments , for example )  , but it has also been used as a basis for
correlation between cores from Holocene lake sediment sequences and other palaeoenvironmental records ( Snowball etal .  , 1999 )  . Isothermal remanent magnetism is the magnetism
generated within a sample of material by being placed in a strong steady magnetic field . 
With a gradual increase in field strength , IRM will increase until saturation isothermal
remanent magnetisation ( SIRM ) is reached . Beyond this point , any further increase in
the magnetic field will not be accompanied by an increase in IRM . SIRM measurements
reflect variations in the size and types of magnetic material in a sample , and again these
properties have been used in the correlation of Holocene lake sediment records ( Snowball
and Thompson , 1992 )  . 
7 . 4 . 4 Some Problems with Palaeomagnetic Dating 
As with all dating techniques , there are a number of potential error sources in palaeomagnetism ( Aitken , 1990 )  . One area of concern relates to the acquisition and retention of the
magnetic signal . In some sediments , for example , natural remanent magnetism can be
acquired by chemical action , where the crystallisation of ferromagnetic oxides results in
a chemical remanent magnetism ( CRM )  . This process may occur later than and under
a different magnetic field from that of DRM , a record of which is contained in the same
sedimentary unit . In this way a secondary magnetisation is introduced into both volcanic and
sedimentary materials which , of course , serves to mask the true record of palaeomagnetic
variations . In some volcanic rocks , acquisition of TRM in the opposite direction to the
prevailing magnetic field has been demonstrated for certain special types of magnetic
material . These self-reversals will serve to complicate the true palaeomagnetic record . In
some sediments , a form of DRM may be acquired subsequent to deposition . This postdepositional remanent magnetisation ( PDRM ) may develop because although sediment
will consolidate relatively quickly ( within days )  , in other situations consolidation is a
much longer process and might span thousands of years . The consequence is that there may
be a substantial lag of the magnetic record behind the date of deposition . Indeed , the
 ‘ smoothing-out ’ of directional changes that do not last very long could mean that shortlived polarity events could be missing altogether from a record . Also , in lake sediment
sequences , bioturbation ( disturbance of the surface sediments by biological activity ) 
might result in any immediately formed magnetisation being destroyed . 
Problems also arise in the construction of secular calibration curves and in dating the
palaeomagnetic timescale . With regard to the former , measurements of archaeomagnetic
materials used to construct the curves are not always straightforward , and a range of values
may well be obtained . In a weakly magnetised structure , such as a hearth or kiln , it is
possible for the local magnetic field recorded in the cooling sample to be distorted by the
presence of nearby iron objects or by iron slag . In the dating of burnt structures , there
may also be a distortion in the local field due to the magnetism of the baked clay itself 
( magnetic refraction )  . Hence a range of measurements will be needed in order to obtain
meaningful values for declination and inclination . When these data are used to plot the
calibration curve , as with radiocarbon dates , they are expressed in terms of probabilities . 
c07 . fm Page 220 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 221
On the calibration plots , therefore , there is circle of confidence ( reflecting 95% probability ) 
about each individual data point that has been used to construct the curve . With reference
to the palaeomagnetic timescale , there are discrepancies between K–argon dates and
those based on the tuning of the deep-ocean isotope record ( Figure 7 . 9 )  . While it is likely
that , at least to some extent , these age differences reflect often poor stratigraphic ( and
hence temporal ) resolution in deep-ocean sequences , it is also the case that the K–argon
method is not sufficiently precise to date some of the relatively short-lived polarity
events . In this case , their positions on the palaeomagnetic timescale have been established
by extrapolation based on the ages of epoch boundaries . The consequence is that the
dating of some polarity events tends to be less secure . 
7 . 4 . 5 Applications of Palaeomagnetic Dating 
Palaeomagnetism has long been used as a basis for dating and correlation in the geological sciences and a sequence of magnetic reversals has been established back beyond
100 million years . In the Quaternary , the palaeomagnetic timescale has proved especially
valuable for the dating of Early and Middle Quaternary stratigraphic sequences , including
those that contain human remains and artefacts , while archaeomagnetic dating based
on secular variations has proved to be a useful chronometer for the historic and late
prehistoric periods . It has also been used to date key levels in the MOI record using , in
particular , the Brunhes-Matuyama boundary which is located in MOI stage 20 , the onset
of the Olduvai event at the base of MOI stage 63 and the Matuyama–Gauss boundary in
MOI stage 104 ( Shackleton et al .  , 1990 )  . Four further examples of these applications are
considered here . 
7 . 4 . 5 . 1 Dating lake sediments using palaeosecular variations . In some lake sequences
where organic carbon content is low or where there are likely to be significant amounts of
older carbon residues , reliable radiocarbon ages cannot be obtained from the lake sediments . 
It may also be difficult to find suitable terrestrial macrofossils for AMS radiocarbon
dating , particularly in deeper lake basins . One way around this problem is to use the
palaeomagnetic record contained within the lake deposits . Providing that this can be related
to a regionally specific master curve which itself has been calibrated by an independent
dating method , the record of palaeosecular variations can be used to develop a timescale
for a lake sediment sequence . 
An example of this approach is provided by Saarinen ( 1999 ) in a study of Late Holocene
lake sediments in northern Europe . A high-resolution record of palaeosecular variations
dated by varve counting had previously been obtained from Lake Pohjajärvi in southern
Finland ( Saarinen , 1998 )  , and this calibrated master curve was used to date three other lakes
in Finland and one in northwest Russia ( Figure 7 . 11 )  . A number of distinctive fine-scale
declination and inclination fluctuations are apparent in the PSV records for the last 3200
years and these ‘ turning points ’ form a basis for correlation between the individual lake
cores . They also enable each lake core to be linked to the master curve from Lake
Pohjajärvi . Figure 7 . 11 shows how an absolute timescale for Lake Päijänne can be obtained
in this way . The dating error for the last 3200 years is estimated to be less than ±50 years . 
This study shows that palaeomagnetic dating can be an accurate and relatively rapid dating
tool for lake sediments that cannot be dated using more conventional techniques . 
c07 . fm Page 221 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

222 Quaternary Dating Methods
7 . 4 . 5 . 2 Palaeomagnetic correlations between Scandinavian Ice Sheet fluctuations and
Greenland ice-core records . As noted in Chapter 5 , during the Last Cold Stage a number
of rapid and large amplitude climatic events [ Dansgaard–Oeschger ( D–O ) cycles ] are
recorded in the oxygen isotope records from the Greenland Ice Sheet ( section 5 . 5 . 3 . 1 )  . 
These D–O events are also recorded in palaeoceanographical changes in the North Atlantic
and in vegetational changes in the Iberian Peninsula ( Peterson et al .  , 2001 ; Roucoux et al .  , 
2001 )  . There are , however , few data on how the Scandinavian Ice Sheet reacted to these
often abrupt climatic changes , partly because much of the evidence has been removed by
erosion as the ice sheet advanced to its maximum around 20 000 years ago , but also
because the evidence that is preserved in pre-Last Glacial maximum sediments is difficult
to date with sufficient accuracy to allow the terrestrial record to be correlated with the
relatively short-lived D–O events . 
Figure 7 . 11 Palaeomagnetic dating of sediments from Lake Päijänne , Finland , based on a
correlation of the declination ( left ) and inclination ( right ) records with the dated PSV master
curves from Late Pohjajärvi . Open boxes indicate matching declination features and solid
boxes show matching inclination features . Ages are in varve years before present ( after
Saarinen , 1999 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c07 . fm Page 222 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 223
One way in which correlations ( and , by implication , dating ) can be achieved between
the Scandinavian and Greenland ice-core records is by means of palaeomagnetism . 
Mangerud et al .  ( 2003 ) describe evidence from three large caves in western Norway , 
which were blocked by advancing glacier ice , and which contain thick sequences of
laminated sediment . Two clearly defined palaeomagnetic excursions were identified in
stratigraphic superposition within these deposits : the Skjong which is correlated with
the well-documented Laschamp magnetic reversal and the Valderhaug correlated with the
Mono Lake excursion . These events have been dated radiometrically elsewhere to ca . 
44 000–47 000 years BP and ca . 31 000–33 000 years BP , respectively ( Benson et al .  , 
2003 )  . The excursions are also reflected in the Greenland ice cores , for during a magnetic
reversal or excursion , the earth ’ s geomagnetic field is weakened and this will be marked
by increased concentrations and fluxes of cosmogenic nuclides such as 10Be and 36Cl 
( section 3 . 4 )  . Such increases occur in the ice cores ca . 41 000 and ca . 34 000 years ago , 
dates that are closely comparable with those described above . Assuming that the geomagnetic excursions recorded in the Norwegian caves are the Laschamp and Mono
Lake events , this allows the Norwegian terrestrial record to be correlated with that from
Greenland ( Figure 7 . 12 ) and enables advances and retreats of the Scandinavian Ice Sheet
to be linked with the Greenland D–O cycles . For example , the major readvance in western
Norway during the Valderhaug / Mono Lake excursion took place just at the transition
from Greenland Interstadial ( GIS ) 7 to Greenland Stadial ( GS ) 7 in the Greenland cores . 
In other words , the Scandinavian Ice Sheet was responding rapidly to the climatic downturn reflected in the Greenland isotope record . This cause and effect relationship can
only be demonstrated because of the palaeomagnetic-based correlation between western
Scandinavia and Greenland . 
7 . 4 . 5 . 3 Palaeomagnetic dating of the earliest humans in Europe . There has been a lively
debate over the timing of the first human migrations into Europe . While there are signs of
early humans in Asia 1 . 7 million years ago , and in the Middle East 1 . 5 million years ago , 
conclusive evidence for humans of comparable antiquity in Europe has , until relatively
recently , proved to be frustratingly elusive . This has led some to advocate a relatively
 ‘ short chronology ’ of human occupation , extending over no more than 500 000 years 
( Roebroecks and von Kolfschoten , 1994 )  . Others , by contrast , have argued for a more
protracted period of human colonisation (  ‘ long chronology ’  ) extending , perhaps , to 1 million
years or even earlier ( Arribas and Palmqvist , 1999 )  . 
A key area in this debate has been the Iberian Peninsula , as its proximity to North
Africa means that it could have been one of the first areas of Europe to be colonised
by humans moving northward out of Africa , and a key site has proved to be the cave of
Gran Dolina in the Sierra de Atapuerca , near Burgos in northern Spain . The cave contains
a number of distinct fills , and one of the strata , the Aurora Bed , has yielded 85 human
remains , almost 200 stone artefacts and more than a thousand fragments of vertebrate bone 
( Aguirre and Carbonell , 2000 )  . Natural remanent magnetisation ( NRM ) measurements
show that ca . 1 m above the Aurora Bed , there is a marked change in polarity from normal
to reversed . This has been interpreted as representing the Brunhes–Matuyama boundary , 
while the Jaramillo Event ( Figure 7 . 9 ) may be recorded some 8 m further down the
sequence ( Parés and Pérez-Gonzalez , 1999 )  . If so , the hominid-bearing strata have an age
between 780 000 and 980 000 years . The Grand Dolina evidence , therefore , lends support
c07 . fm Page 223 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

224 Quaternary Dating Methods
to the ‘ long chronology ’ for human occupation of Europe , and adds to a growing body of
evidence from other sites around the northern Mediterranean for early human presence in
Europe between 700 000 and 1 million years ago ( Balter , 2001 )  . 
7 . 4 . 5 . 4 Palaeomagnetic dating of the Sterkfontein hominid , South Africa . Sterkfontein
Cave near Johannesburg in the Gauteng Province of South Africa is one of the most
Figure 7 . 12 Correlation between glacier fluctuations in western Norway ( left-hand column )  , 
Greenland ice-core data ( centre ) and cave sequences in western Norway based on two
palaeomagnetic excursions . The ice-core data is in the form of the oxygen isotope ( δ
18O ) 
signal , with the Greenland Stadials ( GS ) reflecting colder periods on the left and the Greenland
Interstadials ( GIS ) reflecting warmer periods on the right . The timescale is in ice-core years BP . 
The cave records show the generalised stratigraphy of the cave sequences and magnetic
polarity ( after Mangerud et al .  , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c07 . fm Page 224 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 225
important early hominid sites on the African continent . Since the discovery in 1936 of the
first adult Australopithecus , the older cave breccias6 
have yielded large concentrations of
A . africanus fossils , while successively younger breccias have been found to contain not
only hominid fossils , but also stone tools of Oldowan ( ca . 2 . 0–1 . 7 million years ) and Late
Acheulian ( ca . 1 . 7–1 . 4 million years ) Age ( Kuman and Clark , 2000 )  . 
Perhaps the most striking of the recent finds at Sterkfontein was the discovery in 1997
of parts of a skeleton , including the skull , of Australopithecus ( Figure 7 . 13A )  . This is the
first discovery of such a complete Australopithecus skull and skeleton ( Clarke , 1998 )  , 
and the stratigraphic position of the fossil remains in the cave , and possible affinities with
early hominids from other parts of Africa , suggested that the skeleton may be between 2 . 7
and 4 . 0 million years in age . Precise dating of the cave deposits proved to be difficult , 
however , as radiometric techniques could not be applied to the Sterkfontein cave fills . 
Palaeomagnetism had been attempted , but the cemented breccias in which the bones are
found do not preserve a stable palaeomagnetic signal . Partridge et al .  ( 1999 )  , however , 
tried an alternative approach , which involved the extraction of a palaeomagnetic record
from flowstone deposits that are interbedded with the cave breccias . Nine samples were
measured and five changes in polarity identified . The determined polarity record was
compared with the palaeomagnetic timescale and this places the skeleton in the time
range of 3 . 22–3 . 58 million years ( Figure 7 . 13B )  . Interpolation of sedimentation rates
over the small intervals between the magnetic reversals allows this age estimate to be
reduced to 3 . 30–3 . 33 million years . This dating is highly significant in studies of human
evolution , for it means that this is the oldest hominid skeleton yet discovered . Moreover , 
the bones may belong to a species of Australopithecus other than africanus , and could
possibly be a contemporary of A . afarensis from East Africa . 
7 . 5 Palaeosols 
Soils develop through the combination of physical , chemical and biological processes
operating on the earth ’ s surface . Once a soil becomes buried by younger sediments , 
however , they are no longer affected by contemporary soil-forming processes , and they
become relict or fossil features . These fossil soils , or palaeosols , are frequently encountered in Quaternary stratigraphic sequences ( Figure 7 . 14 )  . Two of the principal soil-forming
factors are climate and vegetation , and as these will be characteristic of often broad
geographical regions where topography and parent material are also uniform , soils that
develop under a particular climatic regime or vegetation cover ( zonal soils ) will , at least
in theory , possess a common set of pedological characteristics . Hence , in any one climatic
region , palaeosols that formed in different localities during the same climatic episode will
not only be broadly coeval , but will be comparable in terms of soil properties . These now
buried palaeosols therefore constitute time-planes or marker horizons in stratigraphic
sequences and , as such , can form a basis for establishing age equivalence . Where the
palaeosols can be dated by other means , for example by radiocarbon dating of contained
organic materials , or by luminescence dating of overlying and underlying sediments 
( assuming , of course , that no erosion has occurred )  , the palaeosols can form chronostratigraphic marker horizons . 
c07 . fm Page 225 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Matuyama ( R ) Gauss ( N ) Gilbert ( R ) 
Stratigraphy 
& Determined Polarity Geomagnetic Polarity Timescale
Age ( Ma ) 
2 . 140
2 . 150
2 . 581
3 . 040
3 . 110
3 . 220
3 . 330
3 . 580
4 . 180
4 . 290
Réunion ( N ) 
Kaena ( R ) 
Mammoth ( R ) 
Cochiti ( N ) 
9
H
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 H = Sample Number = Hominid Remains = Sampled Flowstone Layer
3
2D
2C
2B
2A 
( B ) sample position ( A ) 
Figure 7 . 13 ( A ) The Sterkfontein skull ( StW 573 ) and left humerus .  ( B ) Correlation of the determined Sterkfontein magnetostratigraphy to the
geomagnetic polarity timescale ( after Partridge et al .  , 1999 )  . Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons Ltd
c07 . fm Page 226 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 227
7 . 5 . 1 The Nature of Palaeosols 
Buried palaeosols may not always be easy to identify in Quaternary stratigraphic
sequences , for a wide range of weathered materials are interstratified in Quaternary
sediments , not all of which may be soils sensu stricto ( Lowe and Walker , 1997 )  . There are , 
however , a number of properties of buried soils which enable them to be distinguished
from other deposits . When a soil forms on a land surface , a distinctive , vertically differentiated
series of layers or horizons evolve in response to variations in weathering processes and
to the movement of weathering products up and down the profile ( Catt , 1986 )  . In younger
palaeosols , such as those that are found on later prehistoric and historic archaeological
sites , both the A and the B horizons7 
may be present . Sometimes these are buried by
younger sediments , such as blown sand , colluvial deposits or peat growth , whereas in
other situations they may be found beneath structures such as ancient field boundaries 
( Molloy and O ’ Connell , 1993 )  . In older palaeosols , however , the organic A horizon is no
longer preserved having been lost through prolonged decomposition post-burial or
erosion . In some situations , however , the mineral part of the A horizon may remain , and
may be recognised on the basis of its distinctive clay content which differs from that of the
B horizon below ( Catt , 1988 )  . In most buried palaeosols , it is the B horizon which enables
pedogenic ( soil forming ) processes to be identified ( Catt , 1990 )  . Important diagnostic
P
Figure 7 . 14 The ‘ Eemian ’ palaeosol ( dark layer ) in a sedimentary sequence at Straubing , 
Bavaria , Germany . Although the palaeosol may have formed initially during the Last Interglacial 
( MOI substage 5e )  , it probably reflects the operation of pedosedimentary processes during
the whole of MOI stage 5 ( photo : Rob Kemp ) 
c07 . fm Page 227 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

228 Quaternary Dating Methods
features of the B horizon include colour , textural variations , weathered minerals and
enrichment or depletion in carbonate content . For example , soils in semi-arid areas will
tend to be enriched in carbonate , while those in wetter environments ( acid soils ) will
show evidence of carbonate depletion , a process known as decalcification . 
There are two other diagnostic characteristics of buried soils , soil micromorphology
and mineral magnetic properties . The former refers to the distinctive arrangement
of particles and voids which together make up what is referred to as the soil fabric , and
which is determined by examining thin sections of soils under a microscope . Soil micromorphology is now regarded as one of the most important methods for detecting evidence
of pedogenesis , for elucidating processes that contributed to the formation of a particular
soil , and for inferring former environmental conditions ( Kemp , 1998 ; Davidson and
Simpson , 2001 )  . The magnetic properties of the mineral constituents of soils ( especially
magnetic susceptibility – section 7 . 4 . 3 . 3 ) are also a valuable diagnostic tool in the detection
and characterisation of buried palaeosols , for magnetic minerals produced or enriched
through pedogenic processes often generate distinctive mineral magnetic signals 
( Thompson and Oldfield , 1986 )  . 
7 . 5 . 2 Palaeosols as Soil-Stratigraphic Units 
Well-developed palaeosols that developed during the course of a specific soil-forming
interval , and which are sufficiently distinctive in terms of their pedological characteristics
that they can be traced over a relatively wide area , can be considered as soil-stratigraphic
units ( Morrison , 1978 )  . A soil-stratigraphic unit was defined initially by the American
Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature ( 1961 ) as ‘ a soil with physical features
and stratigraphic relationships that permit its consistent recognition and mapping ’  . Subsequently , the North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature ( 1983 ) introduced
the term ‘ pedostratigraphic unit ’ to refer to ‘ a buried , three-dimensional body of rock
that consists of one or more differentiated pedological horizons ’  . Such well-defined
palaeosols ( or geosols ) constitute marker horizons and form the basis for inter-site
correlation and for establishing age equivalence . 
Some distinctive palaeosols will develop over a relatively short weathering interval . For
example , radiocarbon dates on the Lateglacial Interstadial ‘ Pitstone Soil ’  ( or ‘ Allerød Soil ’  ) 
which is found throughout southeast England ( Rose et al .  , 1985 ) suggest a period of
formation of less than 1000 years ( Preece et al .  , 1995 )  , while the Farmdale Geosol 
( 25 000–28 000 14C years BP ) which is widespread in Illinois and adjacent areas may have
a development duration of around 1000 years ( Grimley et al .  , 2003 )  . Other palaeosols
have formed over a more protracted time period and may be polygenetic , in other words
they have evolved under a range of different climatic / vegetational conditions . For
instance , the Sangamon Soil of the American Midwest appears to have formed over a
period of 100 000 years ( ca . MOI stages 3–5 ) during which the climate shifted from cold
to warm to cold again ( Hall and Anderson , 2000 )  , while the older Yarmouth Soil evolved
over the course of 180 000 years of interglacial weathering , including MOI stages 7 , 9
and 11 ( Grimley et al .  , 2003 )  . 
In situations where landscapes have been responding to cyclical changes in climate , 
pedogenesis may have been interrupted during phases of instability , only to resume once
more during a succeeding stable phase . The result is series of palaeosols preserved in
c07 . fm Page 228 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 229
a stratigraphic sequence . This is a characteristic phenomenon of the loess regions of the
world , where numerous soil-stratigraphic units ( reflecting landscape / vegetational stability ) 
are interbedded with suites of aeolian ( wind-blown ) sediment ( Derbyshire , 2001 ; 2003 )  . 
These are found , for example , in central Europe , in the American Midwest and in the
Pampas of Argentina , but the most spectacular record of loess and interbedded palaeosols
occurs on the Chinese Loess Plateau , where the loess–palaeosol sequence extends back to
around 2 . 5 million years . The soil-stratigraphic units within these more or less continuous
sequences form the basis for correlation between the different loess provinces , and also
serve as marker horizons for linking these terrestrial records to that from the deep oceans 
( section 7 . 5 . 4 . 3 )  . 
7 . 5 . 3 Some Problems with Using Palaeosols to Establish Age Equivalence 
Once a land surface has been exposed to the atmosphere , soil-forming processes begin , and
the degree of pedogenesis will reflect a range of site and climatic factors ( parent material , 
vegetation cover , exposure , etc .  ) as well as the length of time over which pedogenesis has
been operating . Time has often been regarded as a major element in this process . Thus , in
North America , for example , where palaeosols have been widely employed in the
establishment of age equivalence between stratigraphic sequences , the assumption has
been that episodes of rapid soil formation will occur during interglacial and , to a lesser
extent , interstadial episodes , while negligible soil development will occur during intervening cold stages . Thus , well-developed buried soils ( such as the Sangamon Soil ) have
been considered as indicative of interglacial episodes and have therefore been employed
as key marker horizons for time-stratigraphic correlation . It is now accepted that soil
development cannot simply be regarded as a function of time , however , but that other
soil-forming factors will affect the degree of soil development at both the local and
regional scale ( Boardman , 1985 )  . Moreover , as we saw above , many older buried palaeosols 
( including the Sangamon Soil ) are polygenetic , and reflect more than one phase of
pedogenesis . Hence assigning an older buried soil to a particular interglacial or interstadial
episode may not be possible in the absence of additional evidence . 
Other difficulties arise in terms of the recognition of buried soils . For example , buried
soils may be affected by post-depositional diagenesis due , for example , to changing
groundwater conditions , or to the effects of differential compaction arising from the
weight of the overburden . These can cause complex physical and chemical changes in the
buried soils ( e . g . in microfabric structures ) and can lead to difficulties in distinguishing
true palaeosols from ‘ pseudosoils ’  , which are distinctive coloured horizons in sedimentary
sequences caused by the mobilisation of iron , manganese and other elements during
diagenesis ( Robinson and Williams , 1994 )  . Also , a buried soil may be modified both
physically and chemically by soil-forming processes acting on the new ground surface , 
and a welded soil may develop if the younger soil profile is superimposed upon , or
merges with , the buried one . In these cases , it may be difficult to distinguish between
separate phases of soil formation ( Dahms , 1994 )  , and this clearly poses a problem when
correlating soil-stratigraphic units in one area with those in another . The Sangamon Soil
of the midwestern United States ( see above ) is a case in point , for it is evident that in
many areas the interglacial Sangamon Soil forms a pedologic continuum with the overlying
cold-climate Early Wisconsian loess , and hence the palaeosol , rather than being a time-parallel
c07 . fm Page 229 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

230 Quaternary Dating Methods
horizon , is time-trangressive ( Follmer , 1983 )  . Furthermore , in some palaeosols , short-range
variations have been detected in key diagnostic properties such as micromorphology ( Kemp
and Faulkner , 1998 )  , and this again creates difficulties when comparing and correlating
polygenetic palaeosols over longer distances . Dating of palaeosols is also problematic . 
Soils are some of the most difficult materials to date by radiocarbon ( section 2 . 5 . 4 )  , and
few other methods are applicable to the dating of ancient soil material , although cosmogenic nuclides such as 10Be have been employed with apparent success in some areas 
( Markewich et al .  , 1998 ; Muhs et al .  , 2003 )  . In general , therefore , palaeosols have to be
dated using other approaches , such as optical dating of overlying or underlying sediments , a technique that has been widely used in loess–palaeosol sequences , or by means
of proxy data including fossil fauna or artefact evidence ( Chlachula , 2003 )  . 
7 . 5 . 4 Applications of Palaeosols in the Establishment of Age Equivalence 
In spite of these problems , palaeosols have been used successfully to establish timestratigraphic correlations in a number of different circumstances . On the local scale , they
have proved valuable as marker horizons and have formed an important component in
the development of site histories ( see below )  . On a wider canvas , in Europe , North
America and parts of Asia they have been employed as basis for inter-site correlation at
the local and regional scale ( Birkeland , 1999 )  . Some examples of these applications are
considered here . 
7 . 5 . 4 . 1 Buried palaeosols on the Avonmouth Level , southwest England : stratigraphic
markers in Holocene intertidal sediments . Around the Severn Estuary in southwest England
is a range of wetland landscapes known as the Severn Levels . These include the Gwent
Levels in South Wales and the Avonmouth Levels to the north of Bristol ( Figure 7 . 15A )  . In
all , these wetland areas cover some 840 km2 
and have yielded a series of spectacular
archaeological discoveries , including Mesolithic human footprints , the remains of Bronze
Age , Romano-British and medieval boats , Iron Age buildings , and historic structures
such as ancient piers and fishtraps ( Rippon , 1996 )  . Dendrochronological work at one of
these sites ( Goldcliff near Cardiff ) was described in section 5 . 2 . 4 . 4 . Underlying the
present surface of the Levels is a sequence of estuarine muds and / or alluvial silts with
interbedded organic horizons known as the Wentlooge Formation ( Allen and Rae , 1987 )  . 
These organic units , which reflect stabilisation of the land surface during periods of
episodic flooding , sometimes comprise peats , but in a number of cases are the remains
of soils that have been buried beneath the silts and clays during a subsequent marine
inundation . When exposed in section , some are indicated by the presence of gleyed8
horizons , occasionally overlain by a thin layer of organic material . Others comprise a
thicker layer of clay with a widespread but less dense organic component which probably
reflects the A horizon of a conventional dry-land soil ( Locock , 1999 )  . Some of these
palaeosols have provided sufficient material for radiocarbon dating , and where they can
be identified in the buried stratigraphy , they form key time-stratigraphic marker horizons . 
As such they are potentially extremely valuable in archaeological excavation , and in the
reconstruction of site histories . 
On the Avonmouth Levels , several prehistoric and historic settlement sites have been
investigated , and excavations have revealed the presence of a number of buried palaeosols
c07 . fm Page 230 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 231 
( Locock et al .  , 1998 ; Allen et al .  , 2002 )  . At the Kites Corner site to the east of Avonmouth 
( Figure 7 . 15A )  , for example , two palaeosols have been found in stratigraphic sequence : 
a lower buried soil radiocarbon dated to ca . 3900–4200 14C years BP and which micromorphological analysis shows to be a ripening or developing soil , and an upper palaeosol
dated to ca . 3000–3300 14C years BP which , on the basis of micromorphological evidence , 
appears to be a moderately long-lived soil with seasonal drying of surface horizons and
earthworm activity ( Figure 7 . 15B )  . Both of these buried soils are important in the context
of the archaeological investigations on the Avonmouth Levels . The lower palaeosol is
remarkably extensive and has been traced in trial pits over more than 500 m . It therefore
constitutes a key marker horizon in the general stratigraphic sequence . The upper palaeosol
is interesting because the dates are older ( by more than 400 14C years ) than those on
charcoal from a nearby human activity scatter . This suggests that the activity post-dates
renewed flooding ( and submergence of the soil )  , and could therefore have been taking
place in the inter-tidal area as opposed to the nearby land area ( Locock , 1999 )  . 
7 . 5 . 4 . 2 The Valley Farm and Barham Soils : key stratigraphic marker horizons in southeast
England . Unlike continental Europe and North America , there are few key soil-stratigraphic
units forming marker horizons in the British Quaternary record . Two that have been
described are the Barham and the Valley Farm Soils of East Anglia ( Figure 7 . 16 )  , which
together represent a depositional hiatus within Early and Middle Pleistocene sequences 
( Kemp et al .  , 1993 )  . Not only do they provide valuable data on environmental change 
( A ) 
Rhymney Usk
Taff
NEWPORT
CARDIFF
Caerphilly
WENTLOOGE LEVEL
CALDICOT LEVEL
Chepstow
Caldicot
Goldcliff
0 5 10
G W E N T L E V E L S
Clevedon BRISTOL
S E V E R N E S T U A R Y Avonmouth
AVONMOUTH
LEVEL Kites
Corner 
Avon
6 . 00m
a . 0 . D 
( B ) 
Top soil
Sub soil
Silty clay
Clayey silt
Alluvium
Alluvium
Alluvium
Upper gleyed
horizon
Lower gleyed
horizon
0 50 cm
Figure 7 . 15 ( A ) The Severn Estuary Levels in southwest England .  ( B ) The stratigraphic
sequence at Kites Corner on the Avonmouth Levels , showing two gleyed horizons interbedded
with estuarine silts and clays . The lower palaeosol is dated to 3900–4200 14C years BP , and
the upper palaeosol to 3000–3300 14C years BP ( after Locock et al .  , 1998 )  . Reproduced with
permission of English Heritage 
c07 . fm Page 231 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

232 Quaternary Dating Methods
during time periods not covered by the depositional record , these buried palaeosols , 
and particularly the Barham Soil , also fulfil an important correlative role as distinctive
stratigraphic units . 
The Valley Farm Soil is rubified , mottled , and contains large quantities of translocated
clay . It is considered to be a complex stratigraphic unit with component soils developed
on a series of different age surfaces and perhaps spans a series of cold and temperate
intervals over a time period of more than a million years . Its latest stage of development
0 10 20 30
Km
CHELMSFORD
LONDON
COLCHESTER
IPSWICH
CAMBRIDGE
STEBBING
NEWNEY GREEN
HATFIELD
PEVEREL
GREAT BLAKENHAM BARHAM
VALLEY
FARM IPSWICH AIRPORT
N
Recorded exposures of composite profiles of
the Valley Farm and Barham Soils
Recorded exposures of the Barham Soil
developed in Cromerian sediments
Area in which Valley Farm Soil identified
from 219 borehole records
Area of non-buried soils containing
relict features from the Valley Farm
and Barham Soils
Southern limit of the Anglian Till
Major built-up areas
NORWICH
BROOMFIELD
NEWNEY GREEN
Figure 7 . 16 The distribution of the Valley Farm and Barham Soils in southeast England 
( after Kemp et al .  , 1993 , Fig . 1 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier 
c07 . fm Page 232 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 233
appears to have been during the Cromerian IV Interglacial ( Zagwijn , 1996 ) which equates
with MOI stage 13 ( ca . 450 000 years ago ; Figure 1 . 4 )  . The Barham Soil , which is buried
beneath sediments of the Anglian glaciation ( MOI stage 12 )  , formed through pedogenesis
in a periglacial environment and is characterised by a variety of cryogenic features . It
fulfils the requirement of a soil-stratigraphic unit in that it consists of a series of soil
profiles that can be traced regionally and have similar stratigraphic relationships , 
although the properties may vary from place to place according to local site conditions . 
Its stratigraphic position , immediately above the Valley Farm Soil and below the overlying
Anglian glacial deposits , places it in the Early Anglian cold stage . This closely constrained
age , coupled with its widespread distribution throughout East Anglia ( Figure 7 . 16 )  , means
that it forms a key time-stratigraphic marker horizon for this part of southeastern England . 
7 . 5 . 4 . 3 Correlation between the Chinese loess–palaeosol sequence and the deep-ocean
core record for the past 2 . 5 million years . While the MOI signal ( section 7 . 2 ) forms an
unparalleled record of global climate change during the course of the Quaternary , there
are relatively few terrestrial sequences that possess the climatic sensitivity and , above
all , the continuity to match this record . One that does is the loess–palaeosol sequence
from interior China , the area known as the ‘ Loess Plateau ’  . There , great thicknesses of
wind-blown sediment ( loess ) accumulated during cold episodes when a strengthened East
Asian winter monsoon transported loess grains from the inland deserts of northern and
northwestern China onto the Loess Plateau . During intervening warm periods , however , a
reduction in winter monsoonal intensity and a strengthening of the summer monsoon
brought moisture from the south . This led to an expansion of the vegetation cover and
increased pedogenesis . The result is stacked sequences of loess and interbedded palaeosols
which constitute a long-term record of glacial–interglacial climate changes that can be
compared directly with the oxygen isotope signal from the deep oceans . Such records are
vitally important to climatic modellers and atmospheric scientists seeking to understand
the causes of long-term climate change . 
Within the area of the Loess Plateau , 37 soil-stratigraphic units have been identified , 
and these can be correlated between sections using palaeomagnetic reversals and key
stratigraphic markers ( Kukla and An , 1989 ; Ding et al .  , 1993 )  . At one of these sites , Baoji
in the extreme south of the Loess Plateau ( Figure 7 . 17A )  , a continuous record of glacial–
interglacial changes has been obtained from grain-size variations down the profile 
( Figure 7 . 17B )  , the grain size in the loess beds being proportionately coarser than
that in the palaeosols ( Ding et al .  , 1994 )  . Tuning of this record to the astronomical
frequencies ( section 7 . 2 . 2 ) shows that major shifts in climatic periodicity occurred
around 1 . 6–1 . 7 million years ago when the Asian winter monsoon changed from variable
periodicities ( 55 000–400 000 years ) to a 41 000-year periodicity , and between 800 000
and 500 000 years ago when an increase in monsoonal intensity was accompanied by the
transition to a 100 000-year periodicity ( Liu et al .  , 1999 )  . The more recent change matches
that in the oxygen isotope signal from the North Atlantic ( Figure 7 . 17B )  , but the 1 . 6 / 1 . 7
million year shift is less pronounced in the deep-ocean record . This may reflect different
climatic forcing mechanisms between the North Atlantic and eastern Asia in the early and
Mid-Quaternary , including the climatic effects of the expanding northern hemisphere
ice sheets . The dated loess–palaeosol record from China is therefore proving to be a key
source of proxy data in the study of the past global climate system . 
c07 . fm Page 233 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

234 Quaternary Dating Methods
100°
40°
35°
0 80km
105°
Qiniling Mountains
Xian
Luochuan
Xifeng
Huining
Desert
DESERT
Lijia Yuan
Yellow River
Baoji Weinan Weihe
River
Mu Us
Yulin 
( A ) 
Figure 7 . 17 ( A ) The stratigraphy of the Baoji section showing the soils ( S ) interbedded with
loess deposits ( after Ding et al .  , 1994 )  . The palaeomagnetic timescale is on the right . The
inset map shows the location of Baoji in the lee of the Qinling Mountains in the south of the
Loess Plateau . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier .  ( B ) The Baoji grain size record ( left ) 
compared with the δ
18O ratio from North Atlantic core DSDP Site 607 ( right )  . The soils are
labelled with the prefix ‘ S ’  , the loess units with the prefix ‘ L ’  . The decrease in grain-size ratio
to the right reflects finer-grained sediments ( palaeosols ) that formed during interglacial
episodes ( after Liu et al .  , 1999 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier
c07 . fm Page 234 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Techniques for Establishing Age Equivalence 235
Notes 
1 . The term pyroclast refers to all the volcanic material that has been blown into the atmosphere by
explosive activity . Pyroclastic rocks are formed entirely of this fragmental volcanic material . 
2 . Diatom fragments and higher plant silica bodies ( including phytoliths ) that are found in peats
and lake muds may be of a comparable size to volcanic glass , and may have similar optical
properties . Removal of this material makes the optical scanning of slides for volcanic glass much
more straightforward , especially if the glass is present in very low quantities ( Hall and Pilcher , 
2002 )  . 
3 . More recent work at a site in southern Sweden ( Davies et al .  , 2004 ) suggests an age of 13 900 cal . 
years BP , for the Borrobol Tephra . It is therefore possible that there may be more than one
 ‘ Borrobol Tephra ’  , albeit with similar geochemical characteristics . 
4 . A polarity change is due to the reversal of the dynamo currents producing the main dipole field , 
and the transition is thought to involve the falling to zero of these currents and the subsequent
re-growth in the opposite direction ( Aitken , 1990 )  . 
5 . The term precession is used to describe the slow movement of the axis of rotation of a spinning
body ( such as a gyroscope or spinning top ) about a line that makes an angle with it , so as to
describe a cone . 
6 . Breccia is a rock that consists of angular fragments of material usually from a limited source . In
caves , the rock fragments are cemented together to form a very hard porous rock known as cave
breccia . 
7 . The soil profile can be considered to consist of three horizons : an A horizon which comprises
an upper ‘ topsoil ’ containing a mixture of organic and mineral material , and a lower ‘ subsoil ’  
( E horizon ) from which clay and sesquioxides of iron and aluminium have been removed ; a B horizon
where organic matter is sparse and where precipitated minerals leached from the overlying
A horizon have accumulated ; and a basal C horizon of parent material comprising partially
weathered rock or sediments . 
8 . Gleying in soils occurs under reducing conditions , usually when a soil is saturated . In such
circumstances , iron and manganese oxides are reduced and dissolved , thereby imparting a grey
colour to the matrix . The reduced iron and manganese may then be redistributed , oxidised and
reprecipitated in mottles within the soil body , or removed entirely from the soil profile . 
c07 . fm Page 235 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

c07 . fm Page 236 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 11 : 44 AM 

Quaternary Dating Methods M . Walker
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
8 
Dating the Future 
Time present and time past 
Are both perhaps present in time future , 
And time future contained in time past 
T . S . Eliot
8 . 1 Introduction 
The range of dating methods now available to the Quaternary scientists is impressive , and
the technical and methodological advances that have been made over the course of the
last 50 years have been extraordinary . How the portfolio of dating techniques will look
50 years from now is , of course , impossible to predict , but it is perhaps worth reflecting , 
albeit briefly , on some areas where development might take place over the coming
decades . In this final chapter , therefore , we take a prospective view on what Hedges 
( 2001a ) has succinctly described as the ‘ future of the past ’  . 
8 . 2 Radiometric Dating 
The startling developments that have occurred in radiometric dating in recent years have , 
in large measure , been a direct result of major advances in measuring instrumentation . 
The innovation of accelerator mass spectrometry ( AMS ) in the 1980s , for example , not only
revolutionised radiocarbon dating , but paved the way for cosmogenic nuclide dating
c08 . fm Page 237 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

238 Quaternary Dating Methods
in the 1990s . In U-series dating , the development of thermal ionisation mass spectrometric 
( TIMS ) techniques in the late 1980s , followed by the use of multi-collector inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry ( MC-ICP-MS )  , has resulted in significant improvements
in sensitivity , speed and analytical precision , and the extension of analyses to materials
with lower U and Th concentrations . In due course , this may lead to the analysis of
U-series isotopes with shorter half-lives , such as 210Pb ( Goldstein and Stirling , 2003 )  . 
Laser ablation ICP-MS is another innovation that is likely to improve numerous aspects
of uranium and thorium analysis ( Eggins et al .  , 2003 )  . Recent developments in mass
spectrometry have also enabled measurements to be made of other isotopes , such as
40Ar and 39Ar , again leading to marked improvements in accuracy and precision of
measurement , as well as an extension of the 40Ar / 39Ar technique at the younger end of the
dating range . The striking advances that have been made in luminescence dating since the
1980s , most notably in the applications of IRSL to single grains of sediment , have produced
a dating method that is beginning to rival radiocarbon over the last 50 000 years , with the
added advantage of an age range that extends well beyond that of 14C ( Duller , 2004 )  . 
Further analytical refinements in all of these areas might confidently be expected over the
coming years . 
Radiometric dates , however , are only as good as the materials that are being dated , and
in recent years a concerted effort has been made to understand the physical , chemical and
biological composition of sample material , and this too is likely to be a feature of dating
programmes in the next few decades . Over the past ten years or so , much has been learned
about post-mortem diagenesis in fossil assemblages , and the development of increasingly
sophisticated models of uranium uptake , for example , are now enabling more reliable
U-series and electron spin resonance ( ESR ) dates to be obtained from biochemically
complex materials such as bones and teeth ( Pike and Hedges , 2001 ; Pike and Pettitt , 2003 )  . 
Similarly , careful screening of sample material and prior determination of key physical and / or
chemical characteristics mean that it is now possible to obtain coherent U-series dates
from , for instance , such hitherto problematical material as marine molluscs ( Jedoui et al .  , 
2003 )  . Improved methods of chemical extraction and a better knowledge of environmental
biomolecular diagenesis are now enabling radiocarbon dates to be obtained on compoundspecific molecules , such as lipids , and work is likely to continue in this area . Some
success has been had in the breaking down of polymers , 1 
such as insect chitin ( Hodgins
et al .  , 2001 )  , in order to generate ‘ purer ’  ( and hence less contaminated ) samples for
radiocarbon dating . Similarly , considerable progress has been made in the extraction , 
purification and radiocarbon dating of residues from rock art sites ( Hedges et al .  , 1998b ; 
Watchman and Jones , 2002 )  , one of the greatest challenges for archaeology in the next
decade . It is in these and other areas of sample chemistry that knowledge and capabilities
are almost certain to increase in the near future ( Hedges , 2001a )  . 
Three radiometric techniques in particular perhaps merit further consideration : 
radiocarbon , electron spin resonance and cosmogenic nuclide dating . In radiocarbon
dating , one of the disappointments of the past 20 years has been the difficulties that have
been experienced in pushing the age range back beyond the 50 000-year ‘ barrier ’  . There
were great expectations of AMS , but a number of technical difficulties , including the
necessity of keeping background contamination low enough , have meant that the upper
age limit of the method is not a great deal different from what it was two decades ago . 
Refinements to the pretreatment process , such as the ABOX system , along with the
c08 . fm Page 238 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

Dating the Future 239
stepped combustion approach to target preparation ( Bird et al .  , 2003 )  , have succeeded in
extending the dating range to 50 000–60 000 years , but that is still some way short of the
75000-year range of the isotopic enrichment methods of the 1970s ( section 2 . 3 . 3 )  . Whether
the next generation of AMS systems , many of which are likely to be on a much smaller scale 
( reflecting a combination of lower capital costs and reduced running / maintenance costs )  , 
will be capable of pressing the age range of radiocarbon back beyond , say , 80 000–90 000
years will only become apparent in due course . 
One area where further developments are certain to occur is in radiocarbon calibration . 
The recently published calibration ( CALIB 4 . 4 ) is the most comprehensive of the four
calibrations now available , incorporating as it does data from dendrochronology , marine
varve sequences , corals and speleothems . However , the most securely dated part of the
curve , that based on dendrochronology , still only extends to ca . 12 000 cal . years BP , and
while the combination of varve chronology and larger numbers of TIMS U-series coral
and speleothem dates to calibrate older parts of the curve is a significant advance on previous calibrations , uncertainties in all of these areas mean that further refinements of the
curve beyond the dendrochronology limit are bound to emerge over the course of the next
decade or so . A key element here is the extension of the European dendrochronology
record back into the Lateglacial ( Friedrich et al .  , 2001 )  , and there are realistic expectations that this will be achieved within the next few years . Dendrochronological work in
New Zealand ( section 8 . 3 ) may provide additional important dendrochronological calibration beyond the range of European pine . A more securely based calibration curve
should enable further applications of the ‘ wiggle-match ’ approach ( section 2 . 6 . 5 )  , 
although this will require much larger numbers of radiocarbon dates than have often been
available from individual sites hitherto ( Lowe et al .  , 2001 )  . The next significant development in radiocarbon calibration is likely to be the publication of INTCAL04 , the successor
to INTCAL98 , but at the time of writing ( June 2004 )  , this program was still not available . 
In some respects , the major advances that have occurred in luminescence dating 
( Chapter 4 ) have not been matched in ESR dating . A number of recent developments , 
however , might point to ESR becoming a more widely used technique over the coming
decades . For example , problems of accurate determination of the equivalent dose rate , which
had hitherto been a problem in the ESR dating of fossil coral , may soon be resolved 
( Schellmann and Radtke , 2001 )  , while innovations in the use of ESR for the dating of
sediments ( Voinchet et al .  , 2003 )  , including the single-grain dating of quartz ( Beerten etal .  , 
2003 )  , could herald a new phase of applied ESR dating . Indeed , with a time range extending
from 10 000 to more than 1 million years , this may prove to be a valuable ancillary , and in
some cases an alternative to luminescence dating . The use of ESR , in combination with
U-series , particularly for the dating of human tooth enamel is likely to become a routine
method over the next few years ( Grün , 2001 )  . 
The newest of the Quaternary radiometric dating family , cosmogenic nuclide dating 
( CN )  , is certain to see major developments over the coming decades . Although important
advances have been made during the past 15 years , further refinements are still needed in
estimates of terrestrial production rates of different nuclides , and improved simulation
models are required for CN production in shallow rocks ( Gosse and Phillips , 2001 )  . More
empirical calibrations are also necessary at well-characterised sites in order to establish
temporal variations in CN production , while better control is required on the parameters that
affect nuclear interactions in rock . Developments in all of these aspects of CN dating
c08 . fm Page 239 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

240 Quaternary Dating Methods
might reasonably be anticipated in the next decade or so . Of particular significance in this
respect is the recently established CRONUS ( Cosmic-Ray Produced Nuclide Systematics ) 
Project , an international research programme involving earth scientists , particle physicists and
chemists from North America and Europe , which will investigate the sources of uncertainty
in cosmogenic nuclide production in order to improve the accuracy and reliability of
cosmogenic surface exposure applications . The aim is to reduce the current levels of uncertainty in CN measurements to around 5% , which would bring CN dating more into line
with other radiometric techniques . In addition to these technical developments , the range of
nuclides routinely used for dating is almost certain be increased to include , for example , 
41Ca and 14C . The short half-lives of these two isotopes mean that they could potentially be
used in the determinations of younger exposure ages . Successful measurements of in situ
production of 14C in such diverse media as desert sand , meteorites and glacier ice ( Jull et al .  , 
2000 ; Lal and Jull , 2001 ) point to some of the potential future uses of this cosmogenic
nuclide . CN dating is also likely to see an expansion beyond the present focus on geomorphology and landscape history into such diverse areas as environmental geology involving , 
for example , issues of tectonic stability and nuclear waste disposal ( Gosse and Phillips , 
2001 )  , and archaeology , where initial attempts have already been made to date rock engravings 
( Phillips et al .  , 1997 ) and stone artefacts ( Ivy-Ochs etal .  , 2001 )  . 
8 . 3 Annually Banded Records 
Three areas of dating , involving the use of annually banded records , where there are
likely to be significant advances over the coming years are dendrochronology , ice-core
chronology and sclerochronology . In dendrochronology , one of the principal challenges
is to extend the European pine record through the Younger Dryas Stadial to anchor the
floating 1051-year chronology that has been developed for the Bølling-Allerød period 
( Friedrich et al .  , 2001 )  . This would enable a continuous dendrochronological series to be
developed back into the early part of the Lateglacial and , as noted above , will provide
a basis for dendrochronological calibration of the radiocarbon timescale back to 14 000
years . Beyond this date , the most important developments in dendrochronological radiocarbon
calibration may well be in New Zealand , where the kauri ( Agathis australis )  , a species that
commonly lives up to 600 years and , in some cases ,  > 1000 years ( Ogden etal .  , 1992 ; 1993 )  , 
is likely to play a major role . This is because kauri wood , which is well preserved in
peats , is frequently of considerable antiquity with ages in the range of ca . 20 000–40 000
14C years BP ( Figure 8 . 1 )  . The potential for developing a continuous dendrochronological
series from these sub-fossil kauri is considerable and this , in turn , could form the basis for
a new high-precision radiocarbon calibration . In addition to these long dendrochronological
series , the coming years are likely to see the development of an increasing number of
 ‘ floating chronologies ’ associated , for example , with archaeological investigations , and
both the anchoring of these tree-ring series in time and the integration of the records into
regional master chronologies . 
Although numerous drilling programmes have been mounted in both Greenland and
Antarctica over the past 15 years , there are no signs of a slowing in the pace of ice-core
research , despite the considerable costs that are involved in mounting and sustaining
c08 . fm Page 240 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

Dating the Future 241
these programmes . The first detailed results of the new European ice-core project at
North GRIP , Greenland , have recently appeared ( North Greenland Ice Core Project
Members , 2004 ) and further data from this deep ice core are likely to be published over
the course of the next few years . Here , the development of multi-parameter dating
approaches , including high-resolution visual stratigraphy derived from digital scanners 
( Svensson etal .  , 2005 )  , offers the potential for providing an ice-core timescale of remarkable
accuracy and precision . In Antarctica , the EPICA coring programme is ongoing with an
expectation of eventually reaching ice almost one million years old ( EPICA Community
Members , 2004 )  . The EPICA core clearly offers a basis for the development of a long
continuous chronology , although ice-flow modelling , which has hitherto been the principal
method in the dating of deep Antarctic ice cores ( Chapter 5 )  , may not be capable of
providing a timescale of sufficiently high resolution . An alternative could be to employ
the technique of orbital tuning , in other words to adapt the approach that has been used
for the dating of deep-ocean sediments where the oxygen isotope signal has been ‘ tuned ’ 
to the astronomical variables ( section 7 . 2 . 2 )  . Ruddiman and Raymo ( 2003 ) have shown
how this method can be applied to the methane record from the Vostok ice core to generate
a coherent timescale for the past 350000 years ( Figure 8 . 2 )  , and it is possible that a similar
approach might well be used for EPICA and for other cores that will be drilled over the
course of the next two to three decades . 
A third aspect of annually banded records where progress is likely to be made within
the next few years is sclerochronology . In section 5 . 6 . 3 we saw how composite chronologies are being developed on the basis of certain long-lived molluscan species , and
the prospect was raised of a 1000-year continuous or near-continuous chronology
0 10 20 30 40
40
30
20
10
0
Number of samples
Thousands of years BP
Manoa
Kauri
Figure 8 . 1 Frequency distribution of radiocarbon dates on kauri ( A . australis )  . Note the
cluster of dates in the Mid- and Late Holocene , and also in the period from 20 000 to 40 000
14C years BP ( after Ogden et al .  , 1992 )  . Reproduced by permission of Blackwell Publishing
c08 . fm Page 241 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

242 Quaternary Dating Methods
being developed on the basis of A . islandica ( Marchitto etal .  , 2000 )  . Recent work on specimens from the North Sea , involving the cross-matching of living and dead specimens of
Arctica , underpinned by a programme of AMS radiocarbon dating , suggest that a 1000-
year sclerochronology may indeed soon be attainable ( Forsythe et al .  , 2004 )  . Indeed , the
recovery of Arctica specimens from the North Sea dating to various phases of the
Holocene and into the Lateglacial means that it may be possible , at some time in the
future , to construct a continuous chronology of 10 000 years , or even more . This would
have major implications for our understanding of spatial and temporal marine reservoir
changes in coastal and shelf seas , as well as providing an absolute chronological template
for geochemical proxies of marine environmental change . The prospects for the further
development of chronologies based on coral records ( section 5 . 6 . 2 ) are also good . Thus
far , coral sclerochronologies have been confined largely to the past few hundred years , 
but recent work has shown that these records could well be extended back into the Late
Quaternary through the sampling of dead ( fossil ) corals ( Tudhope et al .  , 2001 )  . This offers
the prospect for developing floating chronologies for raised interglacial reef sequences
which can then be anchored by U-series dating . Such high-resolution chronologies could
have far-reaching implications for studies of past sea-level change , sea-surface temperature
fluctuations , and short-term climatic variability such as the El Niño Southern Oscillation . 
8 . 4 Age Equivalence 
In the field of age-equivalent dating , perhaps the greatest advances in recent years have
been made in tephrochronology , most notably in the development of a tephrochronology
for the eastern North Atlantic region during the Last Termination ( section 7 . 3 . 4 . 2 ) and
also during the Holocene ( Hall and Pilcher , 2002 ; Van den Bogaard and Schmincke , 
Figure 8 . 2 The methane ( CH4 ) record from the Vostok ice core ( solid line ) for the past
350000 years tuned to the July 30°C insolation curve ( dotted line ) derived from the astronomical
variables ( after Ruddiman and Raymo , 2003 )  . Reproduced with permission of Elsevier
c08 . fm Page 242 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

Dating the Future 243
2002 ; Chambers etal .  , 2004 )  . Refinements in tephra extraction techniques , in geochemical
fingerprinting and tephra provenancing , have led to the development of an outline
tephrostratigraphic framework that is applicable at the continental scale . The coming
years are likely to see an increasing fine-tuning of this scheme , as the ranges of individual
tephras are more clearly defined , and new tephras are discovered and sourced ( Davies
et al .  , 2003 ; 2004 ; Hunt , 2004 )  . Progress towards a high-resolution tephrochronology for
the North Atlantic prior to the Last Termination might also be anticipated , as recent work
on North Atlantic Ash Zone II ( ca . 53000 years ago ) has demonstrated ( Austin etal .  , 2004 )  . 
There are certain to be further developments in tephra identification , perhaps through the
use of minor , trace and rare element analysis ( Pearce et al .  , 2002 )  , and through experimental
work on the chemical stability of tephras in different depositional contexts ( Pollard etal .  , 
2003 )  . The ages of individual tephra horizons will almost certainly be more closely constrained by additional radiocarbon dates and also , perhaps , by the direct dating of tephras
by 40Ar / 39Ar ( e . g . Van den Bogaard , 1995 )  . In addition , the search for and detection of
tephras in varved sediment sequences will provide a further chronological underpinning for
this evolving tephrochronological framework ( Litt et al .  , 2003 )  , as also will the identification of volcanic events in the Greenland ice-core records . Work currently in progress on the
NorthGRIP , which is focussing not only on the detection of tephra shards in the ice but
also on the proxy signals of volcanic events , notably sulphur and calcium peaks , 2 
should , 
within the next few years , enable many of the major North Atlantic Tephra horizons to be
dated with a very high degree of accuracy and precision . 
Major advances in tephrochronology may also be anticipated in regions other than the
North Atlantic . In New Zealand , for example , which was one of the first areas of the
world to develop an integrated tephrochronology ( Lowe , 1988 )  , a very large number of
Late Quaternary tephras have been identified and many have been dated ( Froggatt and
Lowe , 1990 ; Shane , 2000 )  . Refinement of this tephrochronological framework might
be anticipated in the coming years , notably in the extension of the range of key tephras
through the identification of microtephras in both terrestrial and marine sediments 
( Newnham et al .  , 2003 )  . In South America , by contrast , despite the numerous active
volcanoes in the mountains of the Andes , tephrochronology is in its infancy . However , 
recent work has shown the enormous potential for tephrochronology in this region of the
world ( Haberle and Lumley , 1998 ; Thouret et al .  , 1999 ; 2002 )  , and in the next decade or
so it is likely that the outline tephrochronology for the past 15 000 years for southern Peru
will eventually be extended in time back to ca . 50 000 years , and in space into adjacent
areas of Bolivia and northern Chile . 
8 . 5 Biomolecular Dating 
Finally , one area that has not been covered in this book , but where there may be the
potential for the development of a new field of dating , is biomolecular evidence . The last
ten years have seen dramatic advances in this field , no more so than in the study of
ancient DNA ( Yang , 1997 ; Brown , 2001 )  . The recent remarkable discoveries of plant and
animal DNA preserved in the permafrost and in cave sediments , for example , have
shown the potential for reconstructing palaeoenvironments from these genetic signals
c08 . fm Page 243 Wednesday , March 23 , 2005 3 : 28 AM 

244 Quaternary Dating Methods 
( Willerslev et al .  , 2003 )  . Changing plant and animal distributions in response to the global climate changes of the Quaternary would also have had major genetic consequences , 
and the advent of DNA technology provides the basis for the development of suitable
markers to examine these genetic responses ( Hewitt , 2000 )  . Most significant , perhaps , are
the DNA data that are emerging from research into the evolution of anatomically modern
humans . Molecular genetic and archaeological studies are now combining to elucidate
the origin and spread of modern humans worldwide , with studies of genetic molecular
diversity providing a basis for reconstructing human lineages , for example the relationship ( or non-relationship ) between Neanderthals and Homo sapiens ( Krings et al .  , 1997 )  , 
and periods of population expansion ( Jorde et al .  , 1998 )  . 
Recent research has shown how the timing of genetic mutations can be determined by
 ‘ molecular clock analysis ’  ( Chou et al .  , 2002 )  . Work linking gene mutation with anatomical
changes in human lineage , specifically accelerated encephalisation ( brain expansion ) 
possibly associated with a reduction in size of jaw muscles , has enabled this key genetic
change to be dated at 2 . 4 ± 0 . 3 million years ( Stedman et al .  , 2004 )  . Of particular interest , 
however , are the small changes or mutations in mtDNA , the tiny pieces of DNA that are
inherited only down the female line . The genetic clock based on changes in mtDNA suggests , for example , that modern humans migrated out of Africa into Asia 80 000 years
ago , and then spread from South Asia through the Near East and into Europe between
54 000 and 50 000 years ago ( Oppenheimer , 2003 )  . Whether such an approach will eventually form the basis for a complete human evolutionary chronology remains to be seen , 
but as Hedges ( 2001b ) among others has observed , it would be surprising if , in the
very near future , much of the chronological evidence for human evolution and population dispersal is not based on genetic data . 
Notes 
1 . Polymers are compounds with very large molecules made up of repeating molecular units . They
may be natural substances , such as proteins , starch , cellulose and rubber , or synthetic materials
such as nylon and plastic . 
2 . Large volumes of sulphur are often ejected into the atmosphere during the course of a volcanic
eruption . This reacts with other atmospheric constituents to form sulphuric acid which is disseminated
globally and , through precipitation , becomes incorporated into polar ice . Peaks in sulphur concentration in ice cores are therefore reflective of former episodes of volcanic activity . In addition , the
interaction between the sulphur aerosol and calcium-rich dust circulating in the atmosphere over the
polar ice sheets produces calcium sulphate ( gypsum )  , which also finds its way into the ice via precipitation . Hence calcium peaks in polar ice cores may also provide a record of volcanic eruptions . 