INTRODUCTION
00SYOB_Intro . indd 1 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
2
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Still a good time to 
start up…
If you have picked up this guide and are reading this page , the chances 
are that you are thinking about starting your own business . And , 
despite whichever direction the prevailing economic wind is blowing 
in , you are not alone . Until the recession in 2008 , more and more 
people were feeling the entrepreneurial urge . More than 200 , 000 new 
businesses registered for VAT ( value-added tax ) in 2007 , according 
to the latest government statistics in November 2008 – a rise of 
23 , 700 over 2006 . Although the 2008 fi gures won ’ t be available until 
late 2009 , indications are that there will be only a small decline in 
VAT registrations , despite de-registrations – those companies going 
out of business – expected to increase signifi cantly , according to the 
Department of Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Reform . This 
is because many people who have lost their job are starting up on 
their own . 
Despite the downturn , small- and medium-sized businesses 
remain a key driver of the UK economy . The days of hundreds of large 
companies employing thousands of staff are no more . The number 
of aspiring entrepreneurs starting small businesses has surged in 
recent years , and their companies now make up 99 . 9% of the total 
businesses in the UK , and are responsible for almost half of the UK ’ s 
workforce . 
Starting a business in a 
recession – pros and cons
Reasons not to start in a recession 
1 . People are spending less money 
2 . It will be harder to raise money 
3 . It feels risky at a time when everyone is scared of risk
Despite the 
downturn , 
small- and 
medium-sized 
businesses 
remain a key 
driver of the 
economy
00SYOB_Intro . indd 2 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
3
INTRODUCTION
Reasons not to start in a recession 
1 . It is cheaper to start now than at any other time 
2 . So it needs less cash to start than at any other time 
3 . Your opportunity cost is small 
4 . People and businesses still consider some new options 
5 . Creative non-cash deals easier to do e . g . partnerships 
6 . Easier to hire great staff / consultants 
7 . Your positive energy amid a sea of depression will stand out 
8 . Cheap acquisitions
Technology has advanced to such a stage , it ’ s now possible to 
start a global business from a laptop , forcing the entrepreneurial 
doors wide open to everyone from teenagers to the retired and those 
who quite sensibly want to dip their toes in the water ( or at least on 
eBay ) before taking the plunge . There ’ s also a greater range of fi nance 
available to help make your entrepreneurial dreams a reality than ever 
before . Even though some of the key sources of fi nance , such as 
banks and equity investors ( which take a stake in your company in 
exchange for fi nance ) have been badly hit by the credit crunch , and 
are investing less in new businesses , money is still available . So if your 
idea is good enough – and presented in the right way – people will 
want to invest in you .  ( For a detailed discussion of fi nance options , 
see Chapter 4 )  . What ’ s more , if you can gain investment in tougher 
economic times , it ’ s tantamount to a rubber stamp of success . 
There has also never been so much help and information for people 
who are thinking about striking out on their own , and the government 
has never been so geared to encourage enterprise . The National 
Enterprise Academy , which will open its doors in September 2009 , 
will deliver the UK ’ s fi rst full-time accredited courses in Enterprise and 
Entrepreneurship . It is the brainchild of Dragon ’ s Den entrepreneur 
Peter Jones and its aim is to give students – aged from 16 to 18 –
the skills , experience and support to learn how to set up and run 
successful and innovative businesses , or to become enterprising 
employees , helping to grow existing businesses – skills that can be 
used across any business sector , and skills for life . 
CONTACT
The National 
Enterprise 
Academy
www . thenea . org
00SYOB_Intro . indd 3 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
4
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Prime-time television shows such as Dragon ’ s Den , The Apprentice , 
Tycoon and Risking It All have pushed the idea of running your own 
business to the forefront of the national psyche – no longer is it 
exclusive to the daring or the pinstriped , it ’ s for everyone . Of course , 
startups . co . uk has been championing business pioneers and helping 
those inspired to follow in their footsteps for some time now , through its 
website , awards and other events . As such , startups . co . uk has been 
more aware than many of the rise in interest in entrepreneurialism . But 
even we were surprised when our fi rst book How They Started , telling 
the startup stories behind some of the UK ’ s best-loved brands , from 
Innocent Drinks to Pizza Express , hit Amazon ’ s Top 20 on its release in 
2007 , and garnered considerable media coverage . Such is the current 
buzz around business . 
The startups . co . uk website has become a font of knowledge 
and debate on starting your own business , and Start Your Own 
Business 2010 draws all this vital information together in a defi nitive 
guide to starting your own company . The book is presented in the 
readable , sharp , jargon-free style that characterises startups . co . uk , 
with key tips , action points and engaging case studies to help you on 
your way . Whether you have designs on becoming the next Richard 
Branson or simply want to go it alone and be your own boss , you 
have come to the right place . The following pages will guide you 
through choosing the right business to run and deciding whether 
you are up to the job of launching your own company , to drawing up 
your business plan and everything else involved in preparing you for 
take off . 
So fasten your seatbelt and get ready for the ride of your life…
Entrepreneurs are 
people like you
For some people , the word ‘ entrepreneur ’ automatically brings to 
mind Peter Jones and his ilk – those high fl yers who set up and run 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 4 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
5
INTRODUCTION
more successful businesses than most of us could manage in several 
lifetimes . But in reality , an entrepreneur is anyone who chooses to go 
it alone and make the most of a business opportunity for themselves , 
no matter how big or small . 
Nowadays , being an entrepreneur is becoming a legitimate career 
choice for more and more people . Gone are the days when you had 
to have years of business experience under your belt before you might 
even consider taking the plunge with a startup of your own . Before 
getting down to the nuts and bolts of how to start a business , here ’ s a 
brief insight into why a selection of successful entrepreneurs decided 
to start their own business . 
People choose to become entrepreneurs for a variety of reasons . 
For some it ’ s an opportunity to escape their mundane nine-to-fi ve 
existence and to commit their working life to something that is a lot 
closer to their heart . For the ‘ lifestyle ’ entrepreneurs , the important 
part of the deal is not how much their business grows , but the effect 
it has on their life . 
David Creswell , the 27-year-old founder of the comics website 
ComicDomain . co . uk falls into this category .  ‘ I don ’ t care if I ’ m a comic 
geek , it ’ s my hobby and I ’ ve turned that into a small business ,  ’ he 
says .  ‘ I ’ m proud of the service we provide and our customers are 
also happy .  ’ For others , the motivation for starting up will come from 
spotting a gap in a market they know well . Self-confessed ‘ ski bums ’ 
Tim Slade and Jules Leaver spotted an opportunity for ‘ been there 
done that ’ T-shirts to sell to skiing holidaymakers , and started the 
highly successful high-street chain Fat Face . 
And for Dee Edwards , 29 , the same kind of insight helped her to 
launch internet company Habbo .  ‘ I really believed internet business 
could be made successful by using technology to run a company 
effectively , and leveraging the different way people were changing 
their communication ,  ’ she says . Whether it ’ s T-shirts or technology , 
the world is littered with those who ’ ve been able to see a business 
opportunity others simply can ’ t . In fact , a lack of business experience 
could well give you the kind of perspective those with a blue-chip 
curriculum vitae would struggle to attain . Nowhere is this better 
Gone are the 
days when 
you had to 
have years 
of business 
experience 
under your 
belt before 
you might 
even consider 
taking the 
plunge with a 
startup of 
your own
00SYOB_Intro . indd 5 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
6
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
illustrated than by Lena Bjorck . Arriving in the UK from Sweden with 
no qualifi cations she landed a job as a kitchen porter , but quickly 
realised the country ’ s service industry was just not up to scratch . So 
without a pound in her pocket or even the most basic equipment , 
she quit . She now runs one of the country ’ s most successful catering 
companies , Inn or Out . 
To help inspire you , here are profi les of four companies , started by 
entrepreneurs with quite different backgrounds and ideas , who took 
the decision to launch a business for the fi rst time and succeeded . 
Betfair
When Andrew Black , co-founder of Betfair . com says :  ‘ I ’ ve had a very 
varied career and done a lot of job hopping ’  , he ’ s making somewhat of 
an understatement . If ever there ’ s an entrepreneur who ’ s trodden an 
unlikely path to fortune and success , it ’ s Black . He ’ s had to overcome 
being expelled from university , being sacked and a personal tragedy 
to rise to the head of a business that ’ s giving the likes of established 
bookies William Hill and Ladbrokes a real run for their money . But 
every experience , Black insists , whether it be stocking shelves at B & Q , 
caddying on the European golf tour , dealing on the stock exchange , 
gambling for a living , or caring for his dying brother , contributed to 
the day he thought up Betfair while working on a secret project for 
GCHQ . 
Building up experience
Black ’ s working life was delayed when his brother developed a serious 
brain infection . Having only had a handful of dead-end jobs , Black 
stopped working to care for his brother for the fi nal two years of his 
life . Following his brother ’ s death , Black had a brief , and unsuccessful , 
sojourn onto the European golf tour , before landing his fi rst serious job 
at 26 , working in software . In the following four years , Black ’ s natural 
fl air for fi gures saw him fl ourish , as he wrote heavy computer code 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 6 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
7
INTRODUCTION
and saw how big business , particularly the stock market , worked . The 
high-risk stakes of stocks and shares captured Black ’ s imagination , 
and prompted him to start gambling . 
 ‘ When you ’ re at the sharp end of trading you ’ re trading very much 
in the short term and it is very , very similar to gambling ,  ’ he says . 
 ‘ When I left , I didn ’ t have enough money to go trading .  ’ Instead , Black 
turned to more conventional forms of gambling for his kicks – and 
his income .  ‘ I won £25 , 000 on a £20 bet on a horse and then had a 
£30 , 000 win from a £1 , 000 bet on a race ,  ’ he recalls .  ‘ I ’ d won about 
£50 , 000 in three months . Compared to what I was earning at the time 
it was a lot of money .  ’ 
Black programmed his own models for betting on football and 
golf , and also played bridge for substantial fi gures . But despite doing 
 ‘ pretty well ’  , it wasn ’ t enough to keep him occupied . So he moved 
back to buying and selling shares .  ‘ I was seeing the whole mechanics 
of the New York stock exchange fi rst hand and getting fantastic 
experience in this incredibly exciting environment ,  ’ he says . But 
Black ’ s excitement was cut short – he was fi red after a disagreement 
over business ethics – and he returned to programming ,  ‘ earning 
ridiculous amounts of money for very little work ’ in a period where IT 
skills were in demand . However , his obsession with the stock market 
and intellectual thirst for a challenge or bet never went away . While 
working on a secret GCHQ project , he had the time to contemplate 
how this passion could be twinned with his IT skills . 
 ‘ We started work at nine and fi nished at fi ve , and if you weren ’ t 
out of the offi ce on the dot they got rid of you ,  ’ he explains .  ‘ So I had 
a lot of spare time . I was living in a small remote farmhouse and was 
lonely .  ’ But the solitude gave Black precious time to turn things over in 
his head and come up with ‘ the idea ’  . It was conceived from the way 
the stock exchange works .  ‘ It ’ s simple ,  ’ he explains ,  ‘ Betfair is a crosssection of taking stock exchange technology to the gambling market 
using the internet . In my career I ’ ve worked directly with the stock 
exchange , I ’ ve been a professional gambler and I ’ ve built websites . 
I ’ ve been there on all three of them .  ’ 
Betfair is 
a cross
section of 
taking stock 
exchange 
technology 
to the 
gambling 
market 
using the 
internet
00SYOB_Intro . indd 7 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
8
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
The big gamble
As Black ’ s IT contractor job was going well , he was undecided whether 
it was worth giving up for the risk of starting his own business . Did 
he really want to leave his excellent lifestyle behind by going out on a 
betting venture ?  ‘ In my heart I knew I had to do it because I couldn ’ t 
face the thought of going to my grave having had one great idea and 
not actually putting it into action ,  ’ he says . However , before doing 
anything Black wanted a partner .  ‘ I wanted someone who understood 
business ,  ’ he says . But fi nding one proved diffi cult , until he met 
Ed Wray , the brother of a friend .  ‘ Ed was talking about a horse he ’ d 
bet on but was complaining he hadn ’ t won much ,  ’ says Black .  ‘ I 
said :  “ Well it shouldn ’ t have been like that , soon bookmaking will all 
change .  ” Ed said :  “ Tell me more ,  ” so I explained the idea .  ’ 
A short time later , Wray got in touch to fi nd out if Black had done 
anything about the idea and Black asked if he ’ d like to be his partner . 
Wray agreed in principle , but not without certain changes . He said 
Black had the right product and the idea was great , but he thought 
the business plan was totally wrong . He thought if it was going to be 
done , it needed to be done properly and that they needed to raise 
some serious fi nance . The pair spent the next fi ve months working on 
the idea and carefully planning the business . In the end , Betfair was 
born . Black and Wray wanted conventional venture capital investment , 
but it turned out they had missed the boat .  ‘ A company called Flutter 
had got there before us ,  ’ says Black .  ‘ They were selling the eBay of 
betting and had got a lot of funding . They didn ’ t have the knowledge 
or substance we had , but it was still terrible news .  ’ 
Breaking ahead of the game
The rival in the marketplace ruled out interest from venture capitalists , 
and the pair were about to quit . Then they came up with an idea 
to present their concept to wealthy individuals they knew in the city 
who had money to invest .  ‘ We ’ d pick a bank , do a presentation and 
two or three would leave the room having invested £25 , 000 ,  ’ says 
Black .  ‘ It soon added up and we cobbled together the £1 million fairly 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 8 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
9
INTRODUCTION
quickly .  ’ They added £30 , 000 each and didn ’ t pay themselves for the 
fi rst eight months . The site was created and launched in June 2000 , 
the day before Derby Day – one of the biggest days in the horseracing 
calendar . As funds were tight , Betfair deployed guerrilla tactics to 
promote the launch . 
 ‘ We led a procession with coffi ns saying “ Death of the bookmaker ” 
through the city and held fake demonstrations with “ Betfair – unfair ” 
protestors to try and get some publicity ,  ’ explains Black . The antics 
made the front page of The Times business section . In its fi rst week 
Betfair traded £30 , 000 , but really hit the big time after merging with 
rival Flutter .  ‘ There was a big fuss when they launched and they 
had all this money , but it wasn ’ t until six months down the line that 
it became obvious people were using us ,  ’ says Black .  ‘ They had a 
huge advertising budget , but they also had a message board where 
people were discussing Betfair . Punters were coming into them and 
leaving to us . About eight months later , they realised we had 97% of 
the market , despite the fact they ’ d spent 10 or 20 times what we had . 
At that point they realised the only way forward was our way .  ’ 
A merger was negotiated with Betfair reportedly securing favourable 
terms , along with access to a ‘ top-class ’ chief technology offi ce , the 
hardware and most importantly ,  ‘ the big punters ’ that were essential to 
driving the business forward . Since then Black and Wray haven ’ t looked 
back , establishing Betfair as the leading online betting website . 
So rather than the establishment of their rival Flutter being the 
end of their dream , it proved to be the catalyst to their huge business 
success . 
Jigsaw Research
Sue Van Meeteren and Ann Morgan struck out on their own to do 
the same as they were doing in the company they left with the aim 
of replacing the bureaucracy and board meetings of the corporate 
world with a fresh balance of home and egalitarianism – almost their 
own utopian view of how a business should be run . Their goal was a 
I couldn ’ t face 
the thought of 
going to my 
grave having 
had one great 
idea and not 
actually 
putting it into 
action
00SYOB_Intro . indd 9 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 24 PM
10
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
unique company , individual in its approach , setting itself out as a small 
fi sh in a big pond . 
Dissatisfaction to motivation
The duo ’ s business was market research and together they launched 
Jigsaw Research in 1998 . What ’ s particularly interesting is that Van 
Meeteren and Morgan weren ’ t exactly minions within a great corporate 
machine . Van Meeteren was managing director at their former 
employer , the sector giant Research International ( and had been with 
the company for seven years )  , while Morgan had been her deputy . They 
had both been members of the UK board of directors and were highly 
infl uential in the context of a company that was part of a larger group . 
But both wanted to break free of their corporate trappings , and had 
to make a decision that would shape their future . Should they simply 
jump ship to another leading agency or give up their safe , secure and 
lucrative jobs – and risk it all – by launching a brand new name in the 
already crowded market research sector . Confi dent that they would be 
able to attract business quickly and sure of the support of some of their 
existing clients they decided to go it alone . Their aim was to devise a 
new model ; a new way of working . The seed for their new concept 
was sown when some Research International ( RI ) clients complained 
to them that they were not satisfi ed with the larger agencies ’ approach 
and wanted greater access to more senior researchers . So Meeteren 
and Morgan felt there was room for a small company that focused 
more single-mindedly on its clients ’ needs . 
Coping with the culture shock
However , before Jigsaw Research was launched , there was one 
remaining piece to be slotted into the puzzle . A former RI colleague 
of Van Meeteren and Morgan , Jo McDonald , had remained in touch 
with them and it was her encouragement that steered them towards 
setting up a new business rather than going freelance . She completed 
the launch team . Of course , there were other small market research 
companies , so it was vital for Jigsaw to establish itself as unique . It 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 10 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
11
INTRODUCTION
did this by tackling the two main types of market research ( qualitative 
and quantitative )  , offering an integrated approach , while most small 
agencies specialised in one or the other . This was clearly going to be 
a challenge , but with strong marketing and business qualifi cations 
behind them , along with several years ’ experience on the job , Van 
Meeteren and Morgan were convinced they could pull it off . Their 
personal lives had also reached a crossroads , with both Van Meeteren 
and Morgan starting families . This made them more determined than 
ever to rid themselves of the 12-hour corporate days they were 
putting in at RI . They wanted a business where they could control the 
growth rate ; that was fl exible enough to be able to accommodate their 
family commitments .  ‘ At the start , our ambitions were very low-key ,  ’ 
stresses Morgan .  ‘ We certainly weren ’ t trying to take on the world .  ’ 
Their goal was to generate a decent amount of business , have some 
good clients on the books and do a good job for them . If they wanted 
to take more time to focus on family life and less on expanding , or if 
they wanted to take on a small or charitable client that would not be 
very profi table , they could . 
The concept seemed sound and timing appeared to be right , but 
what the Jigsaw founders hadn ’ t planned for was the culture shock . 
Sure , they were keen to lose the corporate lifestyle , but they found the 
drop in status tough to handle at fi rst . From their positions at the top 
of the corporate tree , Morgan describes the stark contrast of fi nding 
herself sitting around wondering if a client might phone them . The 
prestige and professional self-esteem they were used to had vanished . 
They also found that they had to make big fi nancial sacrifi ces for a 
number of years . Just like any new business , they had to be frugal 
at fi rst , so gone were the fat cat salaries – and despite the cultural 
shift , the team was determined to run a tight ship at the start . They 
launched Jigsaw with £40 , 000 of savings between them , which is 
relatively modest for a startup . This allowed them to avoid an overdraft 
or bank loan , and the associated repayments that can hit cashfl ow in 
the early days . They kept overheads low , only spending on what they 
perceived to be essentials , such as serviced offi ce space , computers 
We certainly 
weren ’ t trying 
to take on the 
world
00SYOB_Intro . indd 11 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
12
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
and a letterhead . This meant they were able to pay themselves back 
the £40 , 000 within the fi rst couple of years , but salaries remained 
suppressed for longer . 
The key to Jigsaw ’ s initial success was its founders ’ contacts and 
experience . They knew certain RI clients who were looking for new 
suppliers , and American Express , Shell and PricewaterhouseCoopers 
were soon on board – but with small projects initially , so Van Meeteren , 
Morgan and McDonald could cope and deliver the right standard of 
service . Meanwhile , word was spreading and drawing more clients to 
the business . This meant they were in the privileged position of not 
having to do any marketing . 
The balance of the team also proved crucial , with McDonald 
setting up the administration and fi nancial side of the business , 
leaving Van Meeteren and Morgan to focus on developing their new 
business model and , consequently , the client work that they actually 
wanted to do .  ‘ She has become a sort of unoffi cial fi nancial director , 
but with operations and facilities manager also being part of the job 
description ,  ’ explains Morgan , who is keen to stress that having good 
support can make or break a company .  ‘ Getting Jo on board was the 
single most sensible thing we did ,  ’ she adds . 
Although Jigsaw had a dream start from a business perspective , 
the early client wins coupled with Morgan ’ s pregnancy meant they 
had to take on staff earlier than they would have done to provide the 
necessary maternity cover . Recruiting two former colleagues made 
the process far easier than it might have been , and by the end of the 
fi rst year the company had fi ve employees . Of course , experienced 
performers require salaries to match , but with business fl ourishing , 
Jigsaw could afford to pay market rates . However , that certainly 
wasn ’ t the case for the founders , who took less money than they 
could have commanded as employees elsewhere . But this sacrifi ce 
was well worth it according to Morgan .  ‘ The advantages massively 
outweighed the drawbacks ,  ’ she says . Jigsaw has grown into an 
established and successful medium-sized agency . But despite its size 
and continued growth , the principles on which the founders built the 
business have never been compromised , with the focus still fi rmly on 
The advantages of 
launching 
Jigsaw 
massively 
outweighed 
the drawbacks
00SYOB_Intro . indd 12 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
13
INTRODUCTION
client care , excellent service – with the minimum of bureaucracy and 
not a board meeting in sigh . 
Bigger feet
Many business opportunities arise from everyday frustrations , but it 
still takes a shrewd entrepreneur to exploit such gaps in the market . 
When you achieve this when you are just 16 years old , however , you 
are an inspiration to anyone who is considering starting their own 
business – and it ’ s little surprise that the media beat a path to your 
door . 
Oliver Bridge , a schoolboy from Cambridgeshire , has found 
himself in front of the cameras of the BBC and CNN , as well as 
seen his face staring back at him from various newspapers , since 
starting up Bigger Feet . Despite his tender years , Bridge has not been 
daunted by the exposure he has gained , displaying a business brain 
that belies his years . He has a plan and has put it into place – and he 
understands the importance of gaining good publicity . 
 ‘ We ’ re not interested in getting a venture capitalist on board , 
because they would want a big part of the business , but there are 
other ways of expanding the business ,  ’ he says .  ‘ We could get a 
private investor on board by saying :  “ We ’ ve been on the BBC and 
CNN and got massive coverage – do you want a piece of the pie ?  ”  ’ 
Seeing opportunity in frustration
Bigger Feet is an online shoe retailer for people who are larger than 
average below the ankle . The business was born from Bridge ’ s own 
frustrating experiences .  ‘ I was sitting in a shop saying it ’ s annoying 
that I couldn ’ t get any shoes and that someone should sell them ,  ’ he 
explains .  ‘ My mum just said :  “ Why don ’ t you just start up your own 
business then ?  ” When I thought about it , I decided it was a distinct 
possibility .  ’ 
Besides knowing that he was only one of several people at his 
school who required large shoes , Bridge did some research and 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 13 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
14
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
People 
respect me 
more because 
I ’ m young and 
going for it
found that about a million people in the UK have large feet – men 
over size 12 and ladies upwards of size nine . So having pretty much 
established there was a market for his idea ( or rather his mum ’ s )  , 
he decided to go for it . Also he knew someone who had started his 
own business , so he thought it was a realistic idea .  ( The person in 
question , Paul Wilkinson , is now Bridge ’ s business partner and adult 
guarantor for banks who get jumpy dealing with under-18s they can ’ t 
retrieve money from .  ) 
From the off , Bridge faced some of the same problems that adults 
looking to start a business encountered . Just as many people fi nd it 
tough to work on a launch while holding down a day job , Bridge was 
concerned about how he was going to fi nd time .  ‘ At fi rst I was a bit 
worried , I thought I wouldn ’ t be able to run the business and do my 
schoolwork at the same time and that I should put it off until I was 
older ,  ’ he confesses .  ‘ But I thought I should go for the opportunity , 
it can ’ t do any harm , it ’ s not going to cost that much money and if it 
gets too busy , we can always hire staff .  ’ Wise thoughts for someone 
not yet out of their teens . 
Another fear that older entrepreneurs don ’ t come up against 
was that people wouldn ’ t take him seriously due to his age . Luckily , 
this was largely unfounded .  ‘ There ’ s been a great response ,  ’ says a 
relieved Bridge .  ‘ There ’ s only been a few comments about my age . 
People seem to treat me as an adult , and , if anything , they respect me 
more because I ’ m young and going for it .  ’ 
Jumpstarting the modern way
Setting up in the family home with a small offi ce space to store 
the shoes , Bigger Feet could be held up by internet providers as a 
demonstration of the low-cost fl exibility of the web .  ‘ So far , we ’ ve 
only put £4 , 000 into the business from our savings , which is a really 
tight budget ,  ’ Bridge reveals .  ‘ A website allows you to put something 
across very professionally at a very low cost . Our website probably 
rivals a medium-sized business , when in fact we ’ re working from a 
tiny offi ce . It ’ s so fl exible . Because it ’ s all internet-based , we are going 
At fi rst I was 
a bit worried , 
I thought I 
wouldn ’ t be 
able to run 
the business 
and do my 
schoolwork 
at the same 
time
00SYOB_Intro . indd 14 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
15
INTRODUCTION
on holiday to Barcelona in a couple of weeks and are going to be 
running the company from Spain .  ’ 
Finding stock
Key to the success of any retail business is fi nding the right supplier 
and striking a good deal with them so that you can maximise the profi t 
margin . When you hear about the deal Bridge cut with a wholesaler 
to supply him with shoes , it ’ s again hard to believe he can ’ t yet legally 
vote or drink . After going to various trade shows in the UK and 
Europe , he agreed with UK distributors to sell him shoes as and when 
he needs them . He , therefore , rarely has more than 30 or 40 pairs 
of shoes in his possession , cutting down on overspend . An almost 
perfect situation to be in as a retailer . 
 ‘ Because we weren ’ t ordering massive quantities in advance , they 
said that would be OK – we are not a credit risk to them ,  ’ Bridge 
explains .  ‘ We are only placing relatively few orders , so if it all goes 
belly up , they are only going to lose a bit of money . We get them in as 
we need them , so we cut down on liability . If we get no orders for a 
month , all it costs us is our phone bill – we won ’ t go out of business , 
we ’ ll simply be stagnant for a month .  ’ 
A signifi cant headache for Bridge has been the reluctance of 
Nike and Reebok to supply him with trainers . Despite approaching 
them directly , he got short shrift .  ‘ They didn ’ t want to hear it at all ,  ’ 
he says .  ‘ We went up to a representative of Reebok at a trade show 
and he gave us a business card and basically told us to get lost . We 
wrote a few letters to Nike , and they just shoved us from department 
to department . The big brands aren ’ t interested in small business 
because they think it tarnishes their image . It ’ s silly really , they should 
be selling to everyone they fi nd , because ultimately people are going 
to get hold of Nikes directly or indirectly . They would surely make a 
better profi t if they sold directly to us .  ’ 
The media interest ( and Google advertising ) has understandably 
boosted sales , which means that generally his age has been a benefi t 
rather than a hindrance . Meanwhile , Bridge insists that Bigger Feet is a 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 15 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
16
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
 ‘ friendly , personal company ’  , and has certainly benefi ted from the niche 
market and cheap prices he is able to generate , although he insists on 
quality .  ‘ We don ’ t import stuff from China that ’ s rubbish ,  ’ he insists . 
Staying ahead with personal development
With his family happy to step into the breach when his workload 
increases with A levels , and an array of impressed school friends , 
Bridge would be forgiven for thinking he has a career made . But he 
plans to go to university before making any defi nite decisions – so 
clearly his feet are fi rmly on the ground .  ‘ The business may be able to 
pay off my tuition fees , which would be great ,  ’ he says .  ‘ I don ’ t think 
that it will grow into a multi-million pound business empire , although 
you never know .  ’ And he could be right , because there certainly aren ’ t 
many big shoe retailers out there . 
Bebo
For proof that persistence is a key entrepreneurial trait , look no further 
than Michael Birch , founder of social networking website Bebo . 
About 28 million ‘ young ’ people signed up as members within 18 
months of its launch in 2006 . But this was no overnight success for 
Birch . Since quitting his IT job , he had been grafting away for years , 
and Bebo was his sixth venture . 
Climbing up the learning curve
 ‘ It took three years of trying before three years of success ,  ’ he recalls . 
 ‘ It ’ s a learning experience . Just because something fails , it isn ’ t a 
complete waste . You learn from it , perhaps realise one element that 
works well , and leverage that into a new business .  ’ 
Birch had always dreamt of being an entrepreneur and the rise 
of the internet gave him the boost he ’ d been waiting for .  ‘ I quickly 
realised it was the prefect medium ,  ’ he says ,  ‘ and I already had half of 
the equation , because I understood the IT side of it .  ’ 
Birch had experienced some success with one of his earlier 
websites BirthdayAlarm . com , a diary alert website that reminds 
Just because 
something 
fails , it isn ’ t 
a complete 
waste . You 
learn from 
it
00SYOB_Intro . indd 16 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
17
INTRODUCTION
you of key dates by email to stop you forgetting people ’ s birthdays 
and anniversaries . Once this was up and running successfully , he 
started experimenting with online social networks , which have now 
become hugely popular .  ‘ I was fascinated with the early ones like 
Sixdegrees . com ,  ’ he says .  ‘ I had ideas on how that content could 
be improved .  ’ This resulted in Ringo . com , which proved an instant 
success , surprising Birch and his team . It had quickly become the 
second biggest social network and needed time and resources that 
Birch couldn ’ t afford . 
Unable to keep up with the growth , Birch quickly sold Ringo . 
com just three months after starting it .  ‘ We decided to sell and focus 
on other things we were running at the time ,  ’ he explains . But Birch 
was far from fi nished with social networking , which was building 
momentum as household internet connections approach critical mass 
for the fi rst time .  ‘ I saw how people inter-acting with each other could 
integrate with other types of media , such as music and video , and 
how whatever suddenly becomes hot fi ts easily into it ,  ’ he recalls . 
Finding the right niche
Birch knew that he couldn ’ t just launch any old social networking 
website . He had to fi nd a niche – a unique proposition – to give himself 
the best possible chance of success . The sector was growing rapidly , 
and that meant so was the competition . So he decide to target young 
people with a product that matched their demands and understood 
exactly what they wanted – and didn ’ t want – from a network host . 
Initially , this meant being as inclusive as possible .  ‘ We always intended 
Bebo to be a broad social network ,  ’ says Birch , who intentionally 
made the website less complex and with fewer features than some of 
its competitors . 
 ‘ It ’ s designed to be simple ,  ’ he says .  ‘ You can register , get a 
homepage and be up and running in minutes . Other sites put people 
off by being too tricky .  ’ The key was to create an environment that 
encouraged young people to network with each other .  ‘ It ’ s about 
trying to foster a healthy community , without trying to dictate how 
that community behaves ,  ’ Birch explains .  ‘ We control things like 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 17 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
18
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
The customer 
was the 
absolute 
focus
pornography , or it would escalate , but we won ’ t delete anything 
just because we think it ’ s silly . If you want to create profi les for your 
pets , that ’ s fi ne by us . We ’ ve also been careful about using the right 
language , treating people with respect , while making it light-hearted 
and fun .  ’ 
Focusing on the customer
Birch knew getting it right would take a lot of thought , as the youth 
market can be a harsh critic , so he put more emphasis on tailoring 
the environment to the people who were going to use it rather than 
making it hi-tech , all singing and all dancing – the customer was the 
absolute focus . He insists that Bebo ’ s modest aesthetics and simple 
functionality , along with its very limited advertising spaces and casual 
controls , was fundamental to building its credibility among its target 
market .  ‘ It was crucial that we weren ’ t too corporate ,  ’ he says .  ‘ If you ’ re 
too corporate , the social network society will backlash against it .  ’ 
This made promoting the website tricky – mass marketing was 
clearly a no go . In the end Birch took a major risk and did almost no 
advertising or promotion for Bebo when it went live in July 2005 . He 
posted a link to Bebo on BirthdayAlarm . com , the social website he 
had created years earlier , for just two days , and let the internet take 
its course .  ‘ We literally seeded it with the fi rst few people and let it just 
grow on its own .  ’ And how it grew ! 
Forward fi nancial planning
With no marketing spend or major premises and equipment expenditure 
to worry about , launching Bebo proved very inexpensive . Initially , his 
and his co-founder wife Xochi ’ s wages , along with the fees of two 
technical programmers that he used , were covered by BirthdayAlarm . 
com profi ts . The main costs were new computer servers to support 
the anticipated new traffi c , as Birch was determined that he wasn ’ t 
going to repeat the experience he ’ d had with Ringo . com . 
 ‘ Within a month Bebo was generating revenue from advertising ,  ’ 
reveals Birch .  ‘ It took another month for that money to come through , 
so in eight or nine weeks it was cashfl ow positive .  ’ The advertisements 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 18 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
19
INTRODUCTION
were sold by specialist online ad agencies that specialise in selling 
advertisements on other people ’ s websites , which helped keep 
costs down and let Birch do what he does best , and concentrate on 
developing the website . 
Another good move proved to be using off-the-shelf software to 
post the advertisements on the website , rather than Birch developing 
it from scratch . The common platform also meant advertisements 
could be sold in different countries , even though Birch and his team 
were only based in one . This capitalised on the fact that Bebo soon 
had substantial numbers of users across the globe . 
From startup to growth business
So rapid was the growth of Bebo ’ s membership that within a year the 
site had 28 full-time staff , and Birch found that recruiting was one of 
the biggest challenges he had ever faced .  ‘ It has been diffi cult ,  ’ he 
says .  ‘ Recruitment and interviews is something we really focus on .  ’ 
Although keen to maintain a small-business culture , in May 2006 
Birch took the big step of taking $15m of venture capital investment 
from Benchmark for a stake in the company that remains undisclosed . 
 ‘ We raised it because it ’ s good to have a cash buffer even though 
you ’ re profi table ,  ’ he explains .  ‘ It gives us the confi dence and ability 
to grow aggressively if we need to .  ’ 
Bebo ’ s revenue comes solely from advertising , but Birch isn ’ t 
prepared to threaten de-stabilising his growing community by selling 
too much advertisement space or making it overly intrusive . He realises 
that Bebo ’ s members are its lifeblood and would rather build profi ts 
slowly .  ‘ Clearly we could make a lot more money in the short term by 
throwing advertising at it , but it terms of growing a community that 
wouldn ’ t be right and people wouldn ’ t react well ,  ’ says Birch .  ‘ We ’ re 
aiming to make money , but not as much as we possibly can . The aim 
is to grow the business , and we think we can do that more quickly 
by not being greedy and , ultimately , we ’ ll then have a much bigger 
business that we can make more money from .  ’ And with millions of 
members already online , and more signing up daily , it looks like Birch ’ s 
careful customer-focused approach is paying dividends . 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 19 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
20
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
EXPERT 
OPINION
STAY AHEAD OF THE GAME
The National Register has some tips on how to make the most of the tools 
available to give your startup a headstart
In today ’ s competitive environment , a catchy , quirky 
name and image isn ’ t enough to launch a business 
and capture the attention of potential customers . 
With an overcrowded and sometimes saturated 
market , many other factors have to be addressed . 
Online presence and 
business name issues
Although it wasn ’ t so long ago when many 
were suspicious of the e-commerce revolution , 
today in a business sense , if you are not online , 
you are not alive . Nor is it a straight choice of 
 ‘ Do I get a . com or a . co . uk ?  ’ There are so many 
domain suffi xes to choose from , including . eu ,  . 
tv and . mobi , and the list will only get bigger and 
bigger ! Then there are the numerous website 
design options to be considered ‘ Do I want Flash ? 
Do I need a shopping basket ? How much webspace do I need ?  ’ The list goes on and on…
Once you are fi nally up and running online , you 
are competing with literally millions of websites 
to be seen , and this is where search engine 
optimisation comes in . It is no longer enough 
to just ‘ have a website ’  , you have to make sure 
it can be found through the many online search 
engines . So you have to consider metatags , 
pay per click and sponsored listings among 
other options . 
Of course all of these preferences can be 
expensive , coupled with sorting out branding 
and trademarks , business names and company 
names . You will need to fi nd out whether your 
chosen business name , company name , 
domain name and trademark is already in use 
in relation to your chosen nature of business 
and intended market area . You then need to 
consider registration to protect your corporate 
identity . 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 20 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
21
INTRODUCTION
Time management
Time is one commodity that is very precious in 
today ’ s commercial arena and usually in very short 
supply . Most owner-managers would just want 
to run and manage their business within their 
area of expertise and not get bogged down with 
additional responsibilities . But unfortunately , in 
the real world , you can ’ t run a business without 
paying attention to them and you will have ensure 
adequate time is set aside for them – either by you 
or someone else . 
Staying ahead of 
your competitors
Just as important is to ensure that you are 
one step ahead of your competitors and constantly monitoring and evolving where required . This 
can involve repeatedly checking to see if 
your current trading style is being copied and 
updating your corporate image periodically , 
making sure it does not become tired or outdated . 
The modern business environment is continually 
changing and if you are not moving forward 
you might soon be overtaken by your rivals 
who are . 
Keeping up with 
business news
In keeping with the last point , it ’ s essential that 
owner-mangers of businesses , whether sole traders , partnerships or limited companies , keep up 
to date with the latest business news , changes 
in legislation and fi nancial updates . Whether 
business is good or bad , the economic climate 
is optimistic or pessimistic it is important to keep 
informed of current trends . 
Use the free tools available on the internet and 
don ’ t be slow in seeking the advice and guidance 
of experts in the areas that you may not have the 
time or knowledge to fully embrace . 
Contact : The National Business Register can help 
you and your business . 
For more information on business names , trademarks or company formation , call freephone 0800 
069 9090 . 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 21 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
22
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
10 REASONS TO START A BUSINESS
1 . Being your own boss
If you have your own business , the only person you have to answer to is yourself . Being your own 
boss gives you the freedom to do things your way and implement your own plans . Of course , you live 
or die by your decisions , but that ’ s what ’ s good about it , isn ’ t it ? 
2 . Doing what you love – or at least have a keen interest in
The good thing about being an entrepreneur is that you can choose what kind of fi rm you start up , 
and where . So , provided that you ’ ve done your research properly and there is a gap in the market , 
you can turn a hobby or interest into a profi table enterprise . 
3 . Playing by your own rules
Start your own fi rm and you get to set and meet your own deadlines . Of course , you won ’ t be able to 
just lie in bed until 2pm – you will need self-discipline . But meeting your own targets can be a huge 
motivation to work hard and drive the business forward . 
4 . The freedom to express yourself
If you have considered going it alone , you will have thought out how you would do things your way . 
You will have the freedom to express yourself and develop your concept in any way you choose . Of 
course , there may be fi nancial constraints , but you will have the opportunity to be as creative as you 
like . 
5 . Plenty of support available
The news is full of stories about the amount of red tape and taxes that small fi rms have to face on a 
daily basis . However , over the past few years , several measures have been introduced that should 
make it easier to go it alone . From the Small Firms Loan Guarantee ( see page 160 ) to various innercity projects , the government certainly can ’ t be accused of doing absolutely nothing for budding 
entrepreneurs . With the Prince ’ s Trust , Shell LiveWIRE and other support organisations also up and 
running , you should be able to secure the help and funding needed to get you started . 
6 . Make a fortune – or at least enough to live 
There are countless stories of entrepreneurs hitting on a great idea , exploiting it successfully and being well on their way to their fi rst million by the end of the year . Although the startup process can be 
tough , with long hours and little money not uncommon , if you run your business well , the rewards can 
be huge . And , from a purely selfi sh point of view , you will get most of the profi ts yourself . 
7 . Doing a variety of things 
Dealing with spreadsheets one minute , suppliers the next and then having a look around your new 
offi ce – an entrepreneur ’ s work is not just busy , it is also extremely varied . If you want a career where 
every day is different , going it alone could be for you . 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 22 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
23
INTRODUCTION 
8 . Have a second career 
Of course , if you don ’ t want to give up a regular income , you can always get the best of both worlds 
and remain as an employee while running your own fi rm . Although juggling the two can be tricky , 
having a successful sideline should be a profi table option . Do something that you are interested in 
and go for it . 
9 . Cutting commuting by setting up close to home 
Although most small fi rms operate from offi ces , many entrepreneurs fi nd that operating from home 
helps keep costs down in the early stages . As well as having familiar , comfortable surroundings to 
work in , you don ’ t have to endure the daily tangle with public transport or clogged up roads . 
10 . Realising your big dream 
You may feel that starting up a small fi rm won ’ t lead to anything more than having your own desk 
and taking on a few extra staff . However , it ’ s possible to make it really big – just think of the late 
Anita Roddick , who became a Dame thanks to her entrepreneurial achievements . She started a 
small shop in Brighton on a shoestring in the 1970s . Before long , she had a chain of Body Shop 
stores across the UK and was launching her concept in the USA . So , don ’ t dismiss your dreams as 
a mere fantasy – it really could happen . What are you waiting for ? 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 23 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
24
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Can you do it too ? 
The case studies in the previous section highlight the qualities required 
of an entrepreneur – of which one of the most important is passion . 
No matter how much potential your business might have for making 
money , unless you believe in it , how can you expect anyone else to ? A 
bit of self-belief can go a long way . Hand in hand with passion comes 
commitment to the cause . From day one you will need to work hard , 
often forgoing friends and family to get your venture off the ground . 
Ask yourself whether you are prepared to make that kind of sacrifi ce 
and whether you can keep yourself motivated to put in those long , 
long hours . If you are the sort of person whose new year resolution 
lasts until 2 January you might want to think again whether you ’ ve got 
what it takes , particularly when things might not be going your way . 
Also , as you ’ ve probably realised , the chances are you will be going 
through all of this on your own . While escaping the offi ce might seem 
like paradise now , you could soon be missing that offi ce gossip and 
backchat . You ’ ll need to dig deep to fi nd the kind of emotional resilience 
to keep you from losing the plot when there ’ s no one around to lend a 
helping hand . So while you don ’ t need qualifi cations on paper , not just 
anyone can become an entrepreneur . But if you think you ’ ve got what 
it takes then it could be one of the best decisions you ever make . 
00SYOB_Intro . indd 24 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 25 PM
25
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ Not everyone starts a business following a ‘ eureka !  ’ 
moment – in fact few people actually do . Some simply 
want to work for themselves . But , of course , to do 
this you need to fi nd the right business for you , and 
hopefully one that has a good chance of success . 
Starting up is likely to take quite a bit of your time , 
energy and money , so it pays to think carefully about 
the kind of business to launch . This chapter should 
provide some inspiration…
1 . 0
IDEAS FOR 
STARTUPS
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 25 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 31 PM
26
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
The right startup for you
Although thousands of people dream of escaping the nine-to-fi ve 
grind and becoming their own boss , many are unsure of what sort 
of business they want to start up and how they can ensure their new 
venture is a success . Ultimately , this is your choice , but it can help if you 
initially think about what you want from your business . Before Kirsty 
McGregor launched her web-based company Entertainthekids . com , 
which provides inspiration for parents looking for ways to keep their 
children entertained , she laid down her vision of ‘ business utopia ’  , as 
she puts it . 
 ‘ I had quite a strict list of what I wanted any business to be for me , 
in my circumstances ,  ’ Kirsty says .  ‘ These were my requirements : 
• The business shouldn ’ t be reliant upon my input as the limiting 
factor in the growth of the business . This is a personal thing , as 
I wanted to start and grow the business and then be able to get 
 “ time freedom ” as quickly as possible . It ’ s the whole point of being 
able to run my own business – flexibility for the family while being 
financially comfortable and secure . 
• It either had to provide a product or service that was niche and high 
value , or have mass-market appeal with a low price . 
• The business needed to be scalable , without any major scarce 
resource , such as fixed employee or machinery hours , etc . 
• Overheads / fixed costs had to be as low as possible , so that I could 
break even on a fairly low turnover . 
• The product should preferably not be a fashionable item or have 
laws or regulations that will change quickly . 
• The business should not have to deal with any stock issues , such 
as storage , delivery and suppliers – it had to be a service ! 
• It had to have low startup costs ( unfortunately that also means low 
barriers to entry for competitors )  .  ’ 
To fi nd out how McGregor went on , look out for the ‘ Kirsty ’ s 
Story ’ boxes in this guide . Of course , your vision could be completely 
different from hers , but getting it down on paper can give you key 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 26 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 31 PM
27
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
pointers about the kind of business you would like to launch . To give 
you some food for thought , this chapter gives you 20 business ideas . 
Some have popped up recently due to certain trends , while others 
have been around for some time , but all are either very popular now 
or growing rapidly in popularity . If none of them appeals to you , then 
at least you know what you don ’ t want to do – and they might inspire 
you to fi nd the business that is right for you . 
A big problem for many people who want to start a business is 
being able to afford to do it , especially in these current diffi cult fi nancial 
times . But don ’ t let a lack of fi nancial resources put you off . Starting 
a business on a shoestring seems like an impossible task , conjuring 
up visions of compromises and cutting corners that will ultimately 
undermine your best efforts . But it doesn ’ t have to be that way as 
many industries are well suited to budget beginnings . This is not a 
case of restricting yourself to mean margins . There are several steps 
you can take to keep overheads down : 
• The most obvious costs in the early days are premises and staffing . 
If you start by working from home , your office space or workshop 
budget can go elsewhere . Obviously , this is easier if you are in a 
desk-bound profession . If it doesn ’ t matter where you are based , 
rents on out-of-town premises or those in unfashionable areas will 
also keep costs down . And if you don ’ t have the money for staff 
immediately , don ’ t forget friends and family . Provided that you don ’ t 
abuse their goodwill , most will be prepared to help you out on the 
odd occasion . 
• It ’ s inevitable that you will have to put 120% into the business at 
first , so try to become competent in as many tasks as possible . 
It will save you money if you can do things such as basic desktop 
publishing and accounting yourself . You will also gain a better 
understanding of the day-to-day running of the business . 
• Where possible , lease rather than buy and purchase second-hand . 
Tools , machinery and ovens , for example , are widely available to 
lease if you can provide assurance that payments will be made . 
You can also make great savings if you opt for used desks , chairs 
Many 
industries are 
well suited 
to budget 
beginnings
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 27 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 31 PM
28
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
and filing cabinets . Search on the internet or in the Yellow Pages
for outlets and warehouses . Most large offices refurbish reasonably 
regularly , so the second-hand market is generally well stocked . 
Half of the business ideas that follow are relatively inexpensive to 
launch , while the other 10 require more capital input . But no matter 
how much money you have , the points above are worth bearing in 
mind , because during the startup phase of a business , every penny 
counts . 
Shoestring startups
An eBay business
Setting up a company on eBay is an increasingly popular choice 
among would-be entrepreneurs . With millions of potential customers 
! TOP TIPS
CHOOSING THE RIGHT BUSINESS 
! Base it on a key skill or interest 
! Draw up a list of what you are looking for from your ideal business 
! Search out the most successful businesses nationally and locally 
! Find a gap in your local market 
! Canvas opinion from friends and family about your idea 
! Consult business contacts about your idea , such as your accountant 
! Check out local competition and decide if you can do it better 
! Look into the level of finance you will need and whether you will be able to secure it 
! Find out if anyone likes your idea enough to go into business with you
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 28 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 31 PM
29
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
just a couple of clicks away from your products , setting up an eBay 
store is a cheap and easy way to do business online . 
Once you ’ ve created a business account you can set up an online 
shop for just £6 . It then costs between 15p and £2 to list an item on 
eBay , depending on the opening value or reserve price of the item . 
eBay takes a slice of the selling fee once an item is sold , depending on 
how much the item is worth . For items under £30 , eBay takes a 5 . 25% 
share . For items between £30 and £599 . 99 , eBay ’ s share is 3 . 25% for 
the part of the bid above £30 , and for items over £600 , eBay takes 
1 . 75% . Making and receiving payments through Paypal , eBay ’ s online 
payment system of choice , also incurs a small transaction charge . 
Julie King , from Newcastle , gave up her job as an IT consultant 
after she found she could buy and sell designer shoes and handbags 
on eBay for a profi t . Her eBay business , Killer Heels , now makes more 
than £6 , 000 a month buying shoes and bags from wholesalers and 
selling them on eBay . Meanwhile , Wilmamae Ward set up a vintage 
clothing business , The Gathering Goddess .  ‘ The most important 
thing is to fi nd a niche that few other people are competing in ,  ’ she 
says .  ‘ Start with selling something that you know about and / or love 
doing . Then research the eBay market in your particular sector , as well 
as on the internet in general , to see what the competition is doing and 
what is being offered . This will mean you can fi nd a point of difference 
that will set you apart from your competitors .  ’ 
 ‘ It ’ s also important to build up your positive feedback , as this is 
the bedrock of eBay and is what sets you apart as a good seller ,  ’ she 
continues .  ‘ Excellent customer service equals great positive feedback , 
so never slack on processing orders .  ’ 
Personal trainer
Despite the government ’ s on-going drive to cut obesity and encourage 
people to get fi t , recent fi gures show that gym membership is falling . 
According to the Leisure Report , people are seeking out a ‘ wellness ’ 
lifestyle – and who better can help than a personal trainer , who will 
The most 
important 
thing is to 
fi nd a niche 
that few other 
people are 
competing 
in
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 29 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
30
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
take you outside the stuffy , artifi cial atmosphere of the gym and into 
the fresh air ? There ’ s no doubt that as the government gears itself up 
for the battle against obesity , and the UK set to showcase its sporting 
prowess in 2012 , the next few years will see a peak of sporting activity 
– and those helping the population to achieve that goal could be set 
to reap the rewards . 
If you think this could be for you , fi rst you need to decide which area 
you want to specialise in , for example helping people to lose weight 
ACTION POINT
LAUNCH AN eBAY BUSINESS
Start with selling something that you know about and / or love doing : This will help to drive your 
motivation and will be vital in maintaining your work levels , which will be heavy to start with . 
Research the eBay market : In particular , do this in your sector , as well as on the internet , to see what 
the competition is doing and what is being offered . Find a point of difference that will set you apart from 
your competitors . 
Be committed to it : It isn ’ t easy , but it can be extremely rewarding . 
Build up your positive feedback : This is vital for successful selling on eBay because it lets potential 
customers know exactly where you stand among the competition . And remember that excellent customer 
service will automatically get you this all-so-important positive feedback . Always aim to provide the best 
possible customer service . 
Always keep track of your competition : Don ’ t just research them once or occasionally . Remember 
they are looking at you and as your business steams ahead , they are plotting and planning to take over . 
Half of Wilmamae ’ s eBay time is spent researching competitors and new marketing techniques . 
Be as transparent as you can with your potential customers : Don ’ t hide costs , and describe your 
items clearly and honestly . Building trust builds business on eBay . 
Don ’ t spend huge amounts of money on stock and setting up : Start small and grow it slowly . The 
world of eBay is quite complex and the best way of discovering this world is by experiencing it . If you 
plough in with a huge store full of stock without knowing the ins and outs of how eBay works , you risk 
falling quickly on your face . 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 30 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
31
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
by combining fi tness and nutrition , working with pregnant women or 
training elite athletes . Next , fi nd a suitable and respected course that 
will give you the training and qualifi cations you need . Although there is 
no singular qualifi cation that you need to gain for becoming a fi tness 
instructor , some courses are better respected than others , so it is 
worthwhile weighing up the alternatives . 
Other than the cost of training , which can range from £300 to 
£5 , 000 depending on your specialty and prior knowledge , other 
overheads are limited . Public liability insurance is a must , and will 
often be in the region of £100 a year . Transport is also vital , but other 
costs depend on you . Most personal fi tness trainers work from their 
clients ’ homes , so investment in the necessary equipment , such as 
free weights or a blood pressure machine , for example , is usually an 
early outgoing . 
Linda Grave , a personal fi tness trainer based in Suffolk , says ,  ‘ Most 
of my clients know each other because friends have recommended me 
to them .  ’ How much you will earn will depend on several factors , not 
least how hard you want to work , but the low overheads associated 
with the profession does mean that it can prove quite profi table . 
Steven Jones , sales manager at Premier Fitness , says the average 
hourly rate charged by fi tness trainers is between £20 and £50 .  ‘ It 
depends on several factors , such as how well known you are , your 
location , your specialist skills , etc .  ,  ’ he explains .  ‘ I know one guy in 
London who charges £100 an hour .  ’ 
Dating agency
Rising divorce rates and the scarce social time enjoyed by hardworking employees have resulted in a large increase in the number of 
single people in the UK looking for partners . However , to run a dating 
agency , you need to be able to deal well with other people ’ s emotions , 
and be both diplomatic and supportive . 
Introductions can be made at organised social events such as 
dinners or drinks , or in lunch appointments as opposed to evening 
The low 
overheads 
associated 
with the 
profession 
does mean 
that it can 
prove quite 
profi table
Introductions 
can be made 
at organised 
social events 
such as 
dinners or 
drinks , or 
in lunch 
appointments 
as opposed 
to evening 
dates
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 31 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
32
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
dates . In addition , many people prefer to meet those in the same 
situation as themselves , for example , single , widowed or divorced 
parents . An agency can offer any combination of these services , but you 
may do better to specialise in order to offer a good service , particularly 
if you are starting very small . Organised dinners , for instance , can be a 
good way of starting to build up a database of people . Each guest will 
have a friend to recommend you to , who will recommend you in turn 
and so on . To help decide which area to specialise in , check out the 
local competition for a gap in the market . 
Bringing people together in the more traditional ‘ one-to-one ’ basis 
can be achieved in one or a combination of three ways : 
• Personal introductions , where all clients are personally interviewed
• Computer comparison , where software compares submitted client 
details for suitability
• Lists method , where the clients receive a list of selected members . 
This obviously makes for an agency with a local focus . To start 
small , but have a national clientele would mean running a largely 
computer and internet-based agency . So , you need to decide this 
from the start as the routes are very different . Costs will revolve 
around setting up a website with a payment-processing facility , and 
initial marketing . An agency might charge £50 for computer matching 
up to £2 , 000 plus for executive or hand-picked selection . 
Driving school
With approximately 1 . 6 million learner tests conducted annually the 
demand for new instructors is very much there , so if you have the 
time , patience , skill and concentration , and can gain the required 
competence to teach other people to learn to drive , you could consider 
this as a career . You will also need a healthy sense of humour . You will 
need to pass a three-stage exam to become an approved driving 
instructor ( ADI )  . Then you can choose to start out on your own or 
train with and sign up to a pre-established franchise that already has 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 32 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
33
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
a list of pupils , contacts and trainers . In both cases you will be selfemployed but with varying degrees of individuality and support . 
If you have your own car , costs are fairly minimal . If not , you will 
have to either invest in one with dual controls , which will be a major 
expense , or be supplied with one by the franchise you work under . 
You will spend a large amount on fuel each week so it may be worth 
opening an account with a petrol station . However , the major cost 
is the training ( up to £2 , 500 plus training licence , £100 ; ADI licence , 
£200 ; literature , £50 )  , the three-part exam ( under £200 ) as well as the 
on-going franchise fee ( £40–£300 )  , which , with a larger brand name , 
may be a high percentage of the work they supply you with . Against 
these costs , Nick Zapettis of A2Z Motoring gives a rough indication 
of what you can expect to earn .  ‘ If you charge around £15–£16 
an hour , which is the going rate , take between 30 and 50 lessons 
a week , including weekends and evenings , and take into account 
the franchise fee , then you could be earning a net salary of roughly 
between £15 , 000 and £22 , 000 per year ,  ’ he explains . This can be 
more if you go it alone , and of course the idea is that ultimately you 
will have your own school and franchisees . 
Tutoring
If you are a good communicator and enjoy passing on your skills , 
then you may fi nd tutoring attractive . Essentially , you will be offering 
extra tuition that provides children and young people ( from primary 
to A level ) with one-to-one or few-to-few attention they can ’ t get in 
school or college . This is a profession that is ideal for people who 
need to be at home for certain times of the day , for example those 
with children . It can be operated from home , although by travelling to 
your clients ’ homes , you can increase your appeal and income . You 
must have a comprehensive knowledge across the complete range of 
your subject , and be at least one level in advance of the level you are 
tutoring . It isn ’ t essential to be a qualifi ed teacher , but having some 
teaching experience can reassure parents . 
You can 
choose to 
start out on 
your own or 
train with and 
sign up to an 
established 
franchise
By travelling 
to your 
clients ’ 
homes , 
you can 
increase your 
appeal and 
income
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 33 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
34
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Cost-wise you will need access to the correct year ’ s syllabus 
( around £2 )  , sample exam papers ( 50p to £1 ) and a range of upto-date relevant textbooks ( £10 upwards )  . Lessons are generally 
charged by the hour and fees vary across the country and for different 
levels , but you might charge between £15 and £20 at home , plus a 
few extra pounds for travel . This isn ’ t a big money business , but it can 
easily be built up into much more than a part-time one if you can work 
at weekends and do longer evenings . To make tutoring a success , it ’ s 
vital to keep up to date with the curriculum , and as word-of-mouth 
is so important for generating more business in this fi eld , make sure 
you get on well with your pupils and that they get better grades than 
predicted . 
Public relations
A public relations ( PR ) and communications agency promotes and 
represents businesses in the general marketplace , in their specialist 
fi elds and within the media . That is , it is concerned with creating a 
name for its client and helping it succeed . As a PR agent you will 
work closely with a variety of companies , identifying their needs , while 
focusing on an area of personal interest and increasing relevance to 
each client ’ s core business . You will need to understand the objectives 
of your client ’ s business and identify a strategy for achieving them 
through increasingly diverse communication channels . Then you have 
to sell that story effectively to a chosen audience . 
The bare essentials are : offi ce premises ( £650 a week )  , computers 
( £2 , 000 )  , printer ( £300 )  , desks and other furniture ( £700 )  , telephones 
( £200 )  , print costs ( £1 , 000 ) and legal expenses ( £120 )  . But initially you 
could run this business from home . A sample hourly rate for executive 
time is £70 and you should focus on securing retained clients on a 
regular monthly income . In theory , therefore , two executives should 
be able to generate an annual income of around £150 , 000 . 
It is essential that you identify a market area to focus on that is not 
only new , but also experiencing growth , as this indicates that there is a 
You will need 
to understand 
the objectives 
of the client ’ s 
business and 
identify a 
strategy for 
achieving 
them
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 34 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
35
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
proven market and also competition , so that companies will need help 
to stand out . For example , Tim Lewis and Greg Moore of Synapse 
Communications specialise in corporate social responsibility ( CSR )  , 
working with companies that promote responsible practices to benefi t 
business and society . Remember that this is a ‘ people ’ business , so 
you and your staff will need good communication skills , and the ability 
to be both friendly and persuasive . 
Dog walking
It ’ s often said that Britain is a nation of animal lovers , but with the 
credit crunch , animal care has taken a backseat as many people are 
putting longer and longer hours in at work in an attempt to pay off 
their debts . 
There ’ s no doubt , then , that Britain ’ s dogs are crying out for 
attention , and if you are an animal lover with an entrepreneurial streak 
who empathises with these oft-overlooked victims of the economic 
downturn , then starting a dog-walking business could be the right 
business for you . 
Despite reports that dog walkers have suffered from the effects of 
the credit crunch , a report by insurance company Insurantz . com has 
found that with 6 . 5 million dogs in the UK , dog walkers can earn up to 
£8 an hour per dog from time-strapped workers . 
William Taylor , from industry body the National Association of 
Registered Petsitters (  ‘ NARP ’  )  , agrees .  ‘ Although people might not 
have so much disposable income to spend on a pet sitter , they will 
have to work longer hours so they will need one in that instance ,  ’ he 
says . There ’ s good money to be made in the business , according 
to Taylor . A recent survey by NARP revealed that demand rose by 
almost 60% in 2008 . In Philadelphia , USA , one dog-walking business 
grossed US$650 , 000 ( £377 , 800 ) in 2008 . 
Startup costs are relatively low for a dog-walking business . Your 
major expenditures at the beginning will be public liability insurance 
( £80–£150 a year )  ; a police CRB ( Criminal Record Bureau ) check – 
Identify a 
market area 
to focus on 
that is not 
only new , 
but also 
experiencing 
growth
Startup costs 
are relatively 
low for a 
dog-walking 
business
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 35 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
36
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
which is recommended as it will reassure your clients you are reliable 
– costing just over £30 ; fl yers and business cards to spread the word 
in your local area ( you can get 5 , 000 fl yers printed for around £100 )  . 
It ’ s also a good idea to join NARP , from which you will get insurance 
and all the forms and paperwork you will need to get the business 
going for around £450 a year . NARP members are advised to charge 
around £10 an hour per dog .  ‘ That does vary somewhat , though ,  ’ 
advises Taylor , so do some research into how much competitors in 
your area are charging before you decide on your fees . 
Debt collection
Debt collectors chase so-called ‘ delinquent debts ’  , through snail mail , 
telephone and email , for businesses . The older the debt , the higher 
the commission you can collect . And with rates running as high as 
60% , the earning potential of this business is clear . Although this may 
not be the fi rst business opportunity that springs to mind nowadays 
it as an essential service to businesses and you should ignore any 
stigma that people may attach to it . Then you need market it in the 
same way as you would any other business . 
Debt collection today requires good interpersonal skills and 
careful organisation . The ‘ old school ’ heavy-handed approach is 
no longer relevant , as businesses want subtlety , so that they can 
maintain their business relationships with the companies that owe 
them money . 
It could be argued that debt collection is certainly a business for 
these times . First , it is a prime example of a sustainable business , 
requiring nothing more than a telephone in the fi rst instance . Second , 
these are tough times , and as customer debt grows , the demand 
for non-court action debt collection is increasing . Also , companies 
are realising the value of this service more and more , as suffi cient 
cashfl ow becomes increasingly vital . Many debt agencies operate 
from a home base , and if you network well , and establish good wordof-mouth , you can quickly build up a client base . 
Debt collection today 
requires good 
interpersonal 
skills and 
careful organisation
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 36 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
37
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
So if you are self-motivated , enjoy dealing with people and can 
think quickly on your feet , debt collection could be the right business 
for you . 
Cake making
Although cake making has been hit by everything from high fl our costs 
to aggressive supermarket pricing , the British cake market was worth 
close to £1 . 8 billion in 2007 , and according to Euromonitor , this fi gure 
is forecast to grow by almost 5% by 2012 . So if you are interested in 
cake making as a business , and can ride out the current economic 
conditions , the demand seems to be there for you to reap the rewards 
when the good times return . 
Keeping your head above water in this industry will require 
organisation , a good head for fi gures and a certain amount of artistic 
fl air .  ‘ We work long hours and it ’ s tiring , because you ’ ve got to hit 
delivery times spot on ,  ’ explains Lynn Oxley , who has been running 
Oxley ’ s of Morpeth and its accompanying website , Cake Perfect , 
since 2003 . 
Your cakes will need to look as professional as possible , so training 
in all aspects of the industry , from sugarcraft to marzipan techniques , 
is essential if you want to compete in a busy market . However , there 
are several courses available for all levels of cake making , so you 
should fi nd one which will suit your commitments . Courses start at 
around £190 for 10 weekly sessions , rising to around £500 for a 30-
week NVQ course . Alternatively , The Bakery School has an online 
course that you can complete at your own pace . A one-year licence 
for the downloadable software costs £250 plus VAT . 
Shaz Yousaf ’ s preparation for starting up his own organic cake 
making business , The Healthy Dessert Kitchen , included testing 
his creations out on friends and work colleagues , and noting down 
comments and reactions . He also looked for key opportunities to 
publicise his enterprise , such as appearing on Asian TV channel 
Sunrise . 
Your cakes 
will need 
to look as 
professional 
as possible
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 37 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
38
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Your startup costs will depend on how big an operation you wish 
to run . The fewer overheads you have , the lower your expenditure , so 
working from home initially is a good idea . But you will soon need to 
trade up to professional catering equipment , and follow the required 
hygiene and health and safety guidelines . 
Pricing is tricky , but you can charge from around £30 for a simple 
10-inch diameter sponge to up £900 for an intricate , fi ve-tiered 
wedding cake . 
Landscape gardener
The Horticultural Trade Association ’ s fi gures show that the landscape 
gardening industry employs over 60 , 000 people and has an annual 
turnover of approximately £3bn – and it is growing . This presents a 
great opportunity for greenfi ngered entrepreneurs , but there is real 
hard graft involved – most landscape gardeners start off as oneperson operations . According to Kath Walker , fi eld offi cer for the 
Association of Professional Landscapers , there is far more to the job 
than people generally think . 
 ‘ You have to have training . It ’ s a diverse industry and you have to 
have expertise in lots of different areas ,  ’ she says . Areas in landscape 
gardening include water features , building , paving , stonework , wind 
structures , decking , joinery , groundsmanship , draining and irrigation . 
You also need fairly comprehensive knowledge of plants and what 
can grow where . 
As landscape gardener Mark Gregory of Landmark puts it :  ‘ At 
its simplest it ’ s doing garden makeovers . At its best it ’ s an art form .  ’ 
This , of course , means there ’ s plenty of scope to develop a landscape 
gardening business to match your skills and ambitions . The key to 
success is building a strong reputation which leads to most business 
coming through recommendations . 
So , if you like getting your hands dirty and being creative , then 
perhaps it ’ s time to start thinking . 
The business is sensitive to the weather , with excessive rain making 
work diffi cult , and it is also seasonal . So you need to be resourceful 
At its simplest 
it ’ s doing 
garden 
makeovers . 
At its best
it ’ s an art 
form
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 38 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
39
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
and plan carefully . Warren Hall , who runs his own landscape 
gardening business in Kingston-upon-Thames , Surrey , explains :  ‘ The 
fi rst year was exceptionally diffi cult ; I had to do lots of maintenance 
work , but as the days got sunnier , the work picked up . It ’ s ideal to 
squirrel the money away : the summer may be busy , but you need to 
cover yourself over winter .  ’ 
Landscape gardening can be one of the cheaper businesses to 
go into . In fact , Gregory estimates the average startup cost to be 
somewhere between £5 , 000 and £10 , 000 . This will cover everything 
VALUEFLORA AND THE 
CHEAP SHOT
Company : Valuefl ora
Owner-manager : Russell Hirst
Russell Hirst was just 21 years old when he set up his online fl ower delivery service from a bedroom at 
his parents ’ home in Manchester . Hirst ’ s ‘ one room , one computer ’ company is now selling fl owers to 
120 countries . 
Hirst says he is self-taught when it comes to the internet and attributes his success with Valuefl ora to 
noticing a gap in the market . By putting customers in touch with the farms that grew the fl owers , he could 
cut out the middle man ( high street fl orists )  . Customers choose their fl owers from the website , their order 
is sent directly to the fl ower farms , where the fl owers are packaged and sent off directly to the customer . 
There are no call centres – everything is done online , and Valuefl ora has just six members of staff . 
The fl owers come from all over the world , from the UK to Thailand and Cost Rica , while Valuefl ora ’ s 
customers are also global . Amazingly , Hirst claims his global enterprise cost under £10 to start .  ‘ It was 
done on a shoestring ,  ’ says Hirst .  ‘ I paid £8 for the domain name and it was pretty much just me for the 
fi rst 18 months , cold calling people and getting in touch with the farmers .  ’ 
Living at home kept overheads low .  ‘ I was fortunate in that respect ,  ’ says Hirst ,  ‘ because it ’ s not easy 
living without a wage for two years .  ’ Hirst says the biggest obstacle to overcome was cashfl ow . Because 
virtually no money was spent on starting up the company , every penny of profi t was invested back into 
the business to ensure its growth . Hirst also dedicated a great deal of time to search engine optimisation 
( SEO )  , spending up to 60 hours a week looking to establish Valuefl ora ’ s search ranking . 
With a current annual growth rate of 700% and a turnover of more than £1m , Hirst is planning to branch 
out into providing fl owers for events , and remains keen to extend the Value brand further . 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 39 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
40
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Truffl eshuffl e 
was only ever 
intended to 
be a hobby – 
something 
to bring in a 
bit of spare 
cash
from an array of light and heavy tools to a second-hand van . At 
the outset , charging around £100 a day and allowing for four days 
ruled out a month through the weather , while taking into account 
petrol and insurance costs , you can generate an income of around 
£15 , 000 a year . 
Other popular options
Online businesses
Starting an online business can be as simple as setting up a basic 
shop on eBay ( see ‘ Shoestring startups ’  , above ) to sell a few wholesale 
items , to coming up with a completely new online concept with a 
novel way of monetising it . 
The beauty of the online business is that it ’ s suited to just about 
anyone . You don ’ t need to be an MBA graduate based in London 
to succeed . You can start your operation from anywhere , as long as 
you ’ ve got access to an internet connection and a bit of business 
acumen . You can start off small , work on it part-time or even view it 
as a hobby before you decide whether to commit to it . 
Claire Lewis and Pat Wood started their online retro T-shirt 
shop Truffl eshuffl e . com as a part-time venture .  ‘ It all started after Pat 
bought a retro T-shirt in the States and friends kept asking where 
he ’ d got it ,  ’ explains Claire .  ‘ Truffl eshuffl e was only ever intended to 
be a hobby – something to bring in a bit of spare cash . It was only 
when the site went live and started growing that we thought :  “ There ’ s 
mileage in this .  ”  ’ 
At the other end of the scale , Sophie Cornish and Holly Tucker
did a fi ve-year profi t-and-loss feasibility plan before they started work 
on their website , Notonthehighstreet . com , an online marketplace 
where customers can buy from a whole range of independent , quirky 
and specialised small businesses in a single transaction . 
Key factors to consider for an online business are : making sure 
your domain name refl ects your business ; choosing the right hosting 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 40 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
41
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
service ; adhering to online trading rules ; working carefully on the 
design and functionality of the site and optimising it for search engines 
to maximise exposure . 
Startup costs for online businesses vary widely from very little for an 
eBay set-up to thousands of pounds for a hosted , e-commerce site . 
Crafts
If you are creative and enjoy making things , then you could put these 
talents to good use and enjoy real job satisfaction by starting up a 
crafts business . For example , you could launch a blown glass design 
company , which would involve individually designing and making glass 
awards , vases , bowls , paperweights and commissioned sculpture . 
Alternatively you could work with other materials such as metal 
( designing and making popular items such as wrought iron gates , 
curtain poles , bases for tables )  , wood ( using your carpentry skills to 
make furniture )  , or clay ( creating crockery and ornaments )  . 
A crafts business can be relatively cheap to start up , as you can 
set up a workshop at home so that you only have to buy tools and 
materials . To go into the glass blowing business , for example , it is 
possible to rent a studio one day a week ( around £130 ) to blow the 
glass and give yourself enough work for the rest of the week . Susan 
Nixon of Susan Nixon Design established a workshop for under 
ONLINE BUSINESS MODELS
After you have decided how much time , money and resources you want to put into your online venture , 
there are three basic online business models you can follow : 
• E-commerce – which means that customers buy directly from your website
• Advertising – which means you get as many visitors as possible , increasing the amount of customers 
your advertisers reach
• Subscription – which means users pay to access all or part of that content . 
You can of course base your website around a combination of two or all of these models . 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 41 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
42
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
£4 , 000 , including £500 for a compressor and £500 for a sandblaster . 
If you do this , however , remember you need to follow the necessary 
health and safety guidelines . 
To be taken seriously in your fi eld you will need formal design 
training either from a university or college . Nixon spent over two 
years on a glass blowing scholarship , demonstrating in a museum . 
Learning in someone else ’ s business can also be invaluable practical 
experience . But you may be able to study part-time while working , 
and this is also a business that you can start while in another job to 
build up contacts and examples of your work . 
The demand for individually designed artefacts is booming , but 
this also means there is plenty of competition . Getting along to and 
exhibiting at national and international craft fairs and events can help 
you build key contacts . However , bear in mind that it will take time to 
establish yourself as a known artist . 
You will earn money through individual commissions , selling directly 
through trade shows or , if you hit the big time , creating pieces for 
retail chains . Studio glassware starts at around £20 rising to £1 , 000 
upwards . For exclusive pieces , £150 upwards is not uncommon , and 
around £100 for retail vases . 
Photography
For many amateur photographers , running a professional photography 
business would be a dream come true , and now it can be . The 
photography industry offers many opportunities for keen amateurs 
who want to make a living from it . 
Wedding photography is the most high-profi le money-maker . It is 
generally recognised by most photographers as being a highly skilled 
job – not only in terms of taking photographs , but handling all kinds 
of people at a potentially emotional time . It tends to be seasonal , too . 
May to September is the busiest time – accounting for 80% – 90% of 
the work – with the rest of the year being relatively quiet , when many 
wedding photographers will turn to other sources of income , such as 
The 
photography 
industry 
offers many 
opportunities 
for keen 
amateurs who 
want to make 
a living from 
it
You will need 
formal design 
training either 
from a 
university or 
college
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 42 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
43
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
passport and portrait work , or commercial and industrial photography . 
This means it pays to be fl exible . 
Photography is a business you can run from home , but you 
will need to set aside some space for administration and storing 
equipment . Many home-based photographers convert a garage 
into an all-in-one studio , admin , storage and reception facilities . A 
double garage attached to your home is ideal for doing this . Budget 
around £5 , 000 for your conversion costs . Alternatively , you can 
rent a small shop with a display area and a small studio ; prices will 
vary depending on your location . But , of course , a shop will give 
you a higher public profi le and you may not need to spend as much 
on marketing your business . You will also need photographic 
equipment – a reasonable camera and lens , studio lights and backdrops will cost around £5 , 000 . Then there ’ s general administration and marketing , which could rise to between £4 , 000 and £8 , 000 
over the year . 
You can learn your trade through a college course or if you are 
a gifted amateur you can pick up professional tips by offering your 
services to a local business . 
Your potential earnings will depend on many factors , not least your 
range of services and your ability to market yourself as a top-notch 
photographer . However , a reasonably established photographer 
should expect to earn an least £20 , 000 a year , with weddings , for 
example , potentially generating a profi t from around £50 to £750 
each , depending on the size of the event . 
Catering
Whether it ’ s a major sporting event or a low-key wedding , food and 
drink at gatherings will always be in fashion . In fact , with a growing 
population of foodies and people becoming more nutritionally aware , it 
is increasingly a key part of an event . The key to success in catering lies 
in a passion for excellent quality food and service , along with exploiting 
any gap in the catering marketing that may exist in your area . 
It won ’ t be 
until you 
have a large 
operation 
that you 
start bringing 
in good 
money , so 
it could be 
worthwhile 
to start up 
part time
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 43 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
44
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
As an independent there are two main sectors you can target – 
private and corporate events . The former category consists of , for 
example , family occasions such as weddings , birthday parties , dinner 
parties and funerals . In serving the corporate world , you are more 
likely to provide food for business breakfasts , business lunches , board 
meetings and evening receptions . Some caterers specialise in one or 
the other , while others try to cover both . 
Taking into account the professional equipment you will need , you 
are looking at between £20 , 000 and £50 , 000 to start up , depending 
on the size of business and whether you are starting up at home or 
moving into premises . It won ’ t be until you have a large operation that 
you start bringing in good money , so it could be worthwhile to start up 
part-time . Sue Roberts did this and has grown Bristol-based Topline 
Catering gradually over 20 years , moving from sandwich delivery to 
business lunches , and fi nally to corporate and private events for up to 
1 , 000 guests . From fi rst-day takings of £13 , the business now turns 
over £300 , 000 a year . It obviously takes several years to build up to 
this size , but a small yet successful business could nevertheless turn 
over £100 , 000 and earn a net profi t of £40 , 000 . 
Florists
Opening a fl orist business may be the result of a gardening hobby , 
but even if you are new to the sector you can start up and make a 
success of this business . Of all retail businesses , this is one that could 
probably be almost recession-proof , as people always want to send , 
and appreciate getting , fl owers , whether the occasion is happy or 
sad . But an online presence is practically a must these days . 
The fl ower market has been on the increase since the early 1990s 
with UK fresh fl owers and indoor plants representing £1 . 5bn at retail 
level . Before setting up , carry out thorough market research of the 
area you want to cover , the people who live and work there and the 
existing competition .  ‘ Any kind of specialisation is benefi cial . Florists 
should also emphasise the additional design input and technical skill 
Floristry has 
the classic 
retail cost 
base of 
premises and 
stock , so the 
initial outlay 
can be 
signifi cant
You will start 
bringing in 
good money 
once you go 
big time , so 
it could be 
worthwhile to 
start up parttime
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 44 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 32 PM
45
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
that goes into their work ,  ’ says Andrea Caldecourt of the Flowers 
and Plants Association .  ‘ This often has a personal touch – just as 
artists and clothes designers are recognisable by their work .  ’ 
Of the 6 , 700 fl orist businesses in the UK , around 80% are members 
of relay organisations such as InterFlora , Telefl ower or Flowergram , 
which allow people in one part of the country to ‘ send ’ fl owers to a 
someone in another part of the country or abroad through a network 
of fl orists . The benefi t of this membership is that you will receive 
support in marketing and sales , and product and design , and as a 
result of the organisations ’ international links , you may compete with 
multi-national fi rms , and respond to a changing market . Floristry has 
the classic retail cost base of premises and stock , so the initial outlay 
can be signifi cant . As with clothing retail , risks are high , but if you get 
it right , the rewards can be substantial . 
Running a hotel
Whether it ’ s just a simple bed and shared bathroom or full en suite 
luxury , somewhere for the weary traveller to stay for the night is always 
in demand . Obviously , location is the key to success , but the rise 
of boutique establishments means that many people are increasingly 
going for style and ambience over fi ve-star blandness . 
The fi rst thing to consider is what type of hotel you want to run . Is it 
going to be a small , cosy affair catering for couples seeking a romantic 
weekend break , or a larger , metropolitan establishment servicing the 
corporate market ? Some hotels pitch for both business and private 
clients . The types of client you attract depend , to a large extent , on 
the hotel ’ s location . The size of the hotel , its location and the clientele 
you are aiming to attract will all determine costs . It is possible to rent , 
but buying means you keep more of the profi ts . 
As an example , Stephen Hipwell bought a 20-year lease on the 
Granville Hotel in Brighton for £350 , 000 , with the total expenditure , 
excluding VAT , expected to be £280 , 000 a year . There are basically 
two schools of thought when it comes to turnover . The fi rst is to keep 
The types 
of client 
you attract 
depend , to a 
large extent , 
on the hotel ’ s 
location
CONTACT
Flowers and Plants 
Association
www . fl owers . org . uk
020 7738 8044
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 45 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
46
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
earnings below the VAT threshold , which is £54 , 000 , which at a usual 
40% profi t margin you are looking at clearing £20 , 000 . The alternative is to go all out to earn as much as possible . To make it worthwhile you need to earn considerably more than the VAT threshold , 
which means taking £100 , 000 . Hipwell is forecasting a turnover of 
£400 , 000 this year . 
Hairdressing
If there was a service that was always in demand , this could be it . 
Having said that , competition is fi erce , and you do need to train hard 
to gain the necessary qualifi cations ; it also involves long hours . But 
if you fi nd the right location you are almost certain to make money . 
With the variety of customers , from children to adults , it pays to be a 
people person in this business . However , unless you open your own 
chain of shops , it ’ s unlikely to make you a millionaire . But as Linda 
Heald from Keeping Up Appearances in Chichester , West Sussex , 
says :  ‘ Getting paid for something you love doing and working with 
friends in a nice atmosphere can ’ t be beaten .  ’ 
A look at hairdressing companies currently for sale over the 
internet indicates that purchasing such a business can cost anywhere 
between £5 , 000 and £59 , 000 , including fi xtures and fi ttings . If you 
are starting from scratch , there ’ ll be the usual outlay for either renting 
or buying premises , plus fi xtures , fi ttings and equipment . Keeping it 
basic , Heald spent £1 , 000 on basic salon fi ttings and a further £3 , 000 
on chairs and dryers . Having sat down and costed all the equipment 
she had to buy to fully kit out her salon , she found out that it set her 
back £1 , 800 . But this could be a lot more expensive depending on 
the level of ostentation .  ‘ You could stagger these costs though and 
just get essentials and then buy extras as you begin to make a profi t . 
Also , you must remember to set aside money for the taxman right 
from day one ,  ’ she says . On a good week , Heald can earn around 
£1 , 300 . But when you take away costs , she will be left with a fi gure 
more likely to be between £300 and £400 . 
If you fi nd 
the right 
location you 
are almost 
certain 
to make 
money
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 46 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
47
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
Running a day nursery
Day nurseries are a vital service for the many families that can ’ t afford 
to give up a regular income to stay at home . Clearly , you need the 
ability to spend long hours with children as well as patience and other 
child-minding skills , but this is a growing area and one that appears 
to be increasingly in demand . It is a business that tends to attract 
working parents – usually either because they have found a gap in 
what nurseries in their area offer or because there is nothing available 
in the area at all . 
Running a nursery will not make you quick money . But , if you want 
a job – and a business – that offers hourly challenges and a lot of 
rewards then this could be right for you . Finding suitable premises is 
a must . The regulations set out how much space you will need per 
child , so once you have worked out how many children you want to 
have you will know the minimum space required . You can either rent 
or buy , or build from scratch , but this can be expensive . Some local 
authorities allow modular nurseries , which are much cheaper to build 
and can be up and running quickly – for 25–30 children they cost 
around £80 , 000 . 
Freya Derrick set up Hopscotch Day Nursery for £600 , 000 and 
is now turning over £50 , 000 per month with 82 children currently 
attending the nursery .  ‘ You ’ ve got to decide right from the beginning 
if you want to run the business as a lifestyle choice , or as a profi tmaking thing , and that will determine the size of the operation ,  ’ she 
says .  ‘ I wanted to have the freedom to spend time with my children , 
but I also wanted to run a successful business .  ’ 
Running a restaurant
Despite the downturn , eating out remains big business with a huge 
variety of restaurants now inhabiting British high streets . However , 
whatever the climate , many new restaurants won ’ t survive for long due 
to the sheer amount of competition . But if you can think strategically and 
Finding 
suitable 
premises 
is a must
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 47 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
48
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
fi nd the right niche for your location , the rewards can be great in terms 
of both job satisfaction and money . For his restaurant , which seats 
40 people , Stephane Luiggi , owner of the French Living restaurant 
in Nottingham , spent £5 , 000 on kitchen equipment , some of which 
was second-hand , and £5 , 000 on tables and chairs . Then there ’ s the 
premises .  ‘ You need to have quite a lot of money , particularly in central 
London , where an 80-seater restaurant would cost you about £1m ,  ’ 
explains restaurant consultant Torquil Macleod . However , if you are 
going for something slightly more modest , a restaurant on a suburban 
high street for example , then you should have between £70 , 000 and 
£150 , 000 in your pockets , explains Mike Rogers , director of startups 
and small businesses at Barclays . 
Aside from the equipment , staff will be one of your biggest fi xed 
costs . If you are open seven days a week , you will need more than 
one chef . Head chefs can these days command salaries of between 
£30 , 000 and £40 , 000 per year – and getting a good chef will be critical 
to your business . To avoid being just another restaurant casualty , 
be prepared to run a business rather than merely indulge a hobby . 
Market research is essential .  ‘ You need to check out the location and 
the competition ,  ’ says Rogers .  ‘ What ’ s your catchment area ? What ’ s 
more , you can ’ t charge a premium when you fi rst open . You need to 
know what will make people want to come and spend their money 
with you . With local research you can see what is popular whether it 
be Mexican , Thai , Japanese , whatever .  ’ There are also all the hygiene 
and health and safety regulations to negotiate , and initially long hours 
to cope with , but if you think strategically and implement your business 
plan carefully , you will fi nd that there is money to be made . 
Internet café
Although the number of households with a broadband connection is 
soaring , internet cafés are still highly popular among people who need 
to get online while on the move . And even though wifi is increasingly 
available , those with laptops still need somewhere comfortable to 
If you are 
open seven 
days a week , 
you will need 
more than 
one chef
Many of our 
users have a 
PC at home 
and work and 
yet still use 
us… simply 
because they 
are so used to 
using it
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 48 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
49
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
BEATTHATQUOTE . COM AND THE 
COPY CAT PRINCIPLE
Company : BeatthatQuote . com
Owner : John Paleomylites
Launched in 2005 , and winner of the 2006 Startups Awards , price comparison site Beatthatquote . com 
continues to plough , behemoth-like , past its competitors . It was recently crowned the fastest-growing 
site on the web , with monthly fi gures for unique visitors growing by 1 , 165% , beating Facebook , which 
came second with a measly 781% . Serial entrepreneur John Paleomylites is ever the ambitious business owner :  ‘ There ’ s still plenty more growth that we are on target to achieve ,  ’ he says . 
Paleomylites started up to compete with MoneySupermarket . com and is quite convinced that you don ’ t 
have to have an original idea to succeed in business . In fact , he thinks it can be a hindrance .  ‘ The business model was entirely copied ,  ’ he says .  ‘ What we aimed to do was better it , so we looked to see what 
they did , saw where we could improve on that process , and then employed it – with much more effective 
technology . 
 ‘ I think it ’ s easier to make money from an unoriginal idea than it is an original idea . If you look at it in the 
way a venture capital company would , an original model is a market risk . If the market has accepted the 
product that you are trying to sell or the service you are trying to sell , there ’ s no market risk . 
 ‘ With a new idea , you don ’ t know whether you can develop the technology to meet the business requirements because it ’ s the fi rst time that business requirement has been infl uenced , so there ’ s a technology 
risk there . You don ’ t necessarily know whether you can get skilled staff to move from something they 
haven ’ t done before to something entirely new , so there ’ s a management risk there . 
 ‘ With my last company , everything was new . Every time you sold something to a client you had to explain to that client what it is that you do – there was a six-month sales cycle before they even understood 
what it was that you were selling . This time , all that work has been done and everyone understands what 
it is that we do .  ’ 
base themselves between appointments or simply to while away a 
few hours . So this business could make a tidy profi t . 
 ‘ Many of our users have a PC at home and work and yet still use 
us or other cafés , simply because they are so used to it ,  ’ says Jason 
Deane of Quarks ( www . quarks . co . uk )  , a chain of internet cafés in and 
around London .  ‘ Once you have chosen a suitable space for your 
café , you will need to set a budget for all the equipment and add-ons 
you plan to provide customers .  ’ 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 49 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
50
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
 ‘ Our own branches have cost between £17 , 000 and £150 , 000 
to start , so the amount is hugely varied ,  ’ Deane continues . On top of 
this , you are also likely to have to pay out for internet access ( £4 , 000 
a year )  , PCs ( £400 a year )  , networks ( up to £1 , 000 a year )  , timing 
systems to ensure customers do not go over their time limit ( £500 a 
year )  , a website and hosting ( £1 , 000 a year )  , plus equipment such as 
printers , fax , scanners and CD burner ( around £1 , 000 depending on 
requirements )  . These costs are just a guide as internet cafés vary in 
size and what they provide . To make money with an internet café , you 
must plan carefully and meet public demand for additional services . 
Research the businesses that will surround your café – do they offer 
the services that you could offer , such as gaming , printing , scanning 
and , most importantly , web surfi ng ? If no companies in your area 
offer these things , you should consider incorporating them into your 
internet café . This market is very competitive and internet access is a 
commodity , nothing more . Therefore your service has to be different 
and priced accordingly .  ’ 
Protecting your 
business ideas
Once you have come up with an idea for a new business , it ’ s important 
to think about protecting any original aspects of your concept that 
could prove invaluable to its success . This is known as your intellectual 
property . The main reason for guarding this is to prevent others from 
using your key business ideas without your permission . Failing to 
protect the intellectual property of your business can mean that ideas 
vital to your product or service could be used by competitors , and this 
could severely affect the performance of your company in the future . 
Your intellectual property could be rooted in your product , which 
may contain a feature that makes it different from other similar 
products and vital to its appeal to your customers . This may also be 
the case for a particular service . You may also want to make sure 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 50 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
51
1 . 0 IDEAS FOR STARTUPS
no other company uses the original name or brand of your specifi c 
product or service . 
The UK Intellectual Property Offi ce can help you to identify the 
key elements of your business that you may need to protect , from 
trademarks to designs and processes . It will also provide advice on 
how best to go about doing this , such as applying for a patent or 
copyright . 
Protecting your intellectual property is also vital from an investment 
perspective . When starting up and as your business develops , you 
are likely to need fi nancial backing to help your company grow . 
This could be for anything from boosting cashfl ow to taking on new 
staff and moving to new premises . Any investor , whether a bank or 
private equity company , will carefully examine your business before 
lending any money , to make sure that the business is sound and that 
their investment will be safe . During this ‘ due diligence ’ process , if 
an investor discovers that you have not adequately protected your 
intellectual property , they are unlikely to provide the required fi nancial 
support . This is because , not only does this open your business to 
outside competition and therefore risk , but it also refl ects badly on you 
as the proprietor for not having considered protecting your intellectual 
property in the fi rst place . Further down the line when you come to 
selling your business , your intellectual property can have a signifi cant 
infl uence on its value , as well as its appeal to prospective buyers . 
So , as you develop the idea for your business towards a possible 
launch , it ’ s important to bear in mind any potentially valuable intellectual 
property that you may need to protect . 
CONTACT
UK Intellectual 
Property Offi ce
www . ipo . gov . uk
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 51 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
52
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
KIRSTY ’ S STORY
My lightbulb moments
The website Entertainthekids . com was set up by Kirsty McGregor and her brother 
Gregg . It provides a one-stop shop for parents and carers looking for some inspiration 
when it comes to the diffi cult job of keeping kids entertained , and is proving highly successful . Throughout this guide Kirsty will be giving you an insight into setting up her business and some of the problems 
she has faced . Here she describes the moment she came up with the idea , and how beforehand she 
had listed the criteria her business had to meet : 
 ‘ My lightbulb moments came in early January 2005 , both of them borne out of sheer frustration at trying 
to entertain my own baby , then only 12 months old . After the initial idea popped into my head , I started 
researching the market ( namely , the internet ) and found that what I wanted to do appeared to be fairly 
unique . Most of the “ competition ” was more general sites , offering a whole range of things for parents , 
but no site appeared to specialise in just providing activity ideas… We have amended the product 
slightly since those early days . For example , we thought about recommending books and toys , but then 
decided that we were straying away from our core focus area , and to provide personal opinions could 
alienate some members who didn ’ t agree with our tastes . 
We also considered a chat room or message board , but again decided that it wasn ’ t for us . There are 
plenty of great “ community ” sites that do this really well , and we didn ’ t want to compete with them . We 
knew what we wanted , and we just had to see if it was viable . As well as provide parents and carers with 
inspirational activities for children , we also wanted the site to be : 
• Quick to load and easy to use
• Clean , uncluttered ( the company ’ s strapline is “ … and now you can relax !  ”  ) 
• No banner advertising or pop-ups , instead the business model is based on members paying a subscription
• Original content , not just a myriad of links to other sites
• Focused on traditional entertainment activities for children aged 0–11 , not straying into other areas , 
such as advice , health or education .  ’ 
01SYOB_CH_01 . indd 52 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 42 : 33 PM
59
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ Having formulated your idea , or even if you are still 
trying to choose the right kind of business for you , 
you may feel ready to start taking the fi rst steps to 
starting up on your own . But before you do so make 
sure you know what it takes to be an entrepreneur . 
This chapter will help you understand the commitment 
it involves and the kind of person you need to be to 
succeed , and when to take the plunge and quit your 
present job . By the time you reach the end of this 
chapter , you should know for certain whether you are 
cut out for entrepreneurialism , so read on…
2 . 0
DECISION TIME
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 59 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 36 PM
60
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
What it takes to become 
an entrepreneur
Although it ’ s critical to carefully consider what kind of business you 
would like to launch , having a good idea doesn ’ t automatically lead 
to success . An original concept or devising a company that you are 
confi dent has a strong market is great start , but the key to making 
it a going concern is , quite simply , you . No matter how good your 
idea , it will only be a success if you have the necessary drive to turn 
it into a profi table business . Whether you have what it takes to be a 
successful entrepreneur ultimately comes down to three factors : 
• Being certain you want to start your own business
• Being certain you can take the risk to give up a secure income
• Being certain you are cut out for it . 
Are you sure you really want 
to start your own business ? 
You shouldn ’ t view becoming your own boss as simply an escape 
route from your current job , and certainly not as an easy option . In all 
probability , you will be working harder than you are at the moment . 
You need to be prepared to do this and be totally committed to your 
business idea . 
Is it too great a risk to give 
up a secure income ? 
Initially , starting up is likely to put pressure on your fi nancial stability , 
as it will be a big risk , no matter how good an idea you ’ ve come up 
with . Be sure that you have the resources to survive , otherwise the 
fear , stress and an inability to support yourself can mean that your 
business never gets off the ground . 
No matter 
how good 
your idea , 
it will only 
be a success 
if you have 
the necessary 
drive to turn 
it into a 
profi table 
business
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 60 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 36 PM
61
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
Are you really cut out for it ? 
Launching your own business will probably the most exciting and 
rewarding thing you have ever done – it ’ s also likely to be the biggest 
challenge you have ever faced . So be honest about whether you think 
you will be able to cope . This is such an important factor that this 
chapter is dedicated to defi ning what qualities an entrepreneur needs 
and helping you recognise whether you have them . 
The reality of starting up
Launching your own business will change your life , the way you 
think , the way you work , the way you spend money and the way 
you socialise . You will most likely need to work every hour possible 
to get your business off the ground , and even longer to keep it afl oat 
during the early days . You probably won ’ t have another holiday for a 
couple of years and virtually your entire life will become focused on 
making your business venture succeed . If you are in a relationship , 
it will likely feel the strain , and if you ’ ve got a family , prepare to be 
repeatedly torn between them and ‘ the business ’  . 
This is the truth of starting your own business . However , if what 
you have just read hasn ’ t curbed your desire , keep reading – you are 
now showing the attributes an entrepreneur needs when starting up in 
business . Sure , you will still have plenty of anxieties and unanswered 
questions , but like every successful entrepreneur starting a small 
business , the thought of a challenge excites and enthuses you . 
If you are going to succeed , you will most likely need to concentrate 
all your energy into the new business , because it will be ‘ your baby ’ 
and you and your family will be the ones reaping the rewards . You will 
also need the enthusiasm and ideas to fi nd solutions to the obstacles 
in your path . But remember , you won ’ t be the fi rst person to have 
to cope with anxieties or to face the obstacles involved in starting 
your own business . Every successful entrepreneur has overcome 
many barriers and continues to do so every week with whatever new 
business he or she is bringing to market . 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 61 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 36 PM
62
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Many successful entrepreneurs have no business qualifi cations or 
experience prior to starting up . And many spent months , even years , 
formulating their idea into a viable business proposition , and every 
single one will have made mistakes , accepted help and learnt lessons 
as they ’ ve gone along . 
The average UK 
entrepreneur
The latest statistics on business startups in the UK reveal that the 
majority of entrepreneurs are white males in their forties , who live 
in the south-east . They are likely to have been educated to degree 
or A level standard and to have previous work experience in the 
same sector as their business – although they are not necessarily 
experienced in owning or managing a business . If you don ’ t fi t this 
profi le , take heart : the greater part of entrepreneurs may be white , 
middle-aged and male , but fi gures suggest that there is considerable 
scope for increasing the extent of entrepreneurship among women , 
those from ethnic minorities and younger people . Existing women-led 
and minority ethnic group-led businesses are very likely to be startups , 
with around 90% at the micro-business level . 
The age factor
Most small business owners and co-owners fall into three age ranges : 
35–44 ( 25% )  , 45–54 ( 31% ) and 55–64 ( 26% )  . Starting a business is 
being promoted as a viable career option for young people more than 
ever before . But statistically , although this sector is likely to grow in 
the future , young people are more likely to consider starting up as a 
sideline venture or as a something to do later in life . This is borne out 
by survey fi ndings which show that just 9% of small business owners 
and co-owners are aged under 35 . 
Many 
successful 
entrepreneurs 
have no 
business 
qualifi cations 
or experience 
prior to 
starting up
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 62 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 36 PM
63
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
Gender – shouldn ’ t count but does
Only 14% of small and medium enterprises are led by a woman or 
by a management team mostly comprising women . But the gender 
gap is slowly closing , with the fi gures up since 2005 , when just 
12% of startups were led by women . With the government keen to 
encourage women in business , there ’ s every indication the upward 
trend will continue . On a wider level , the UK has some work to do , as 
fi gures released in 2008 revealed the UK to be thirteenth in the gender 
gap index out of 130 countries surveyed . Although this may seem a 
respectable position , this is down from eleventh in 2007 . For more 
about female entrepreneurs , see later in this chapter . 
Education – does it matter ? 
Educational background clearly has a large impact on entrepreneurship and rising levels of education can be associated with 
higher relative rates of enterprise activity . Figures show the highest 
proportion of owner-managers tend to be educated to A level or 
equivalent ( 29 . 4% ) followed by a degree or equivalent ( 21 . 8% )  . 
However , a signifi cant minority of owner-managers – 11% – have 
no educational qualifi cations whatsoever . Almost two-thirds of 
entrepreneurs say that before working in their business , they had no 
prior experience of owning or managing a company , although half of 
active entrepreneurs have previously worked in the sector they start 
a business in . 
Ethnic background – is the 
gap closing ? 
Although the majority of entrepreneurs may indeed be white , most 
ethnic minority groups are far more entrepreneurial than their white 
Only 14% 
of small and 
medium 
enterprises 
are led by a 
woman
Most ethnic 
minority 
groups are far 
more entrepreneurial 
than their 
white counterparts
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 63 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 36 PM
64
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
counterparts , according to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor ( GEM ) 
UK 2004 . But despite high levels of entrepreneurial activity , the reality is 
that many ethnic minority businesses are concentrated at the bottom 
of the value-added chain and located in some of the most deprived 
areas of the UK . Many minority ethnic groups report problems relating 
to access to fi nance and to public sector business support . 
The most recent Department of Business , Enterprise and Regulatory 
Reform fi gures reveal that just 8% of UK small business employers are 
led by a member of a minority ethnic group ( MEG ) or have a management 
team with at least half of its members from MEGs . This fi gure has grown 
since 2004 , however , when the fi gure was closer to 5% , and has almost 
returned to the 9% level recorded in 2003 . London is the focus of MEG 
entrepreneurial activity , with 22% of small businesses run by MEG 
groups , compared with 8% across the UK as a whole . 
Business prospects north 
of Watford Junction
London and the south-east is also the focus of nearly a third of all 
the entrepreneurial activity in the UK , boasting more than 1 , 400 , 000 
businesses . In the GEM UK 2007 , respondents in the ‘ South ’ – the 
area comprising London , south-east England , south-west England 
and the east of England – were much more likely to think they had 
the skills to start a new business than those living in Scotland and 
Northern Ireland . Similarly , a relatively high proportion of Londoners 
expect to start a business over the coming three years . So it seems as 
if the north–south divide still exists . However , government initiatives to 
decentralise enterprise funding mean there should be greater support 
for entrepreneurs outside the South East in coming years . 
What really counts
Finally , unsurprisingly , the differing attitudes of entrepreneurs aren ’ t 
recorded – but perhaps they should be . Regardless of your age , 
London and 
the southeast is the 
focus of 
nearly a third 
of all the 
entrepreneurial 
activity in 
the UK
CONTACT
Global 
Entrepreneurial 
Monitor
www . gem
consortium . org
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 64 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
65
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
background , gender or ethnicity , your success as an entrepreneur 
is most likely to be down to your attitude to business . If you ’ re determined , prepared to make personal sacrifi ces , have the ability to plan 
ahead and take on board advice while remaining focused on your 
goal and also , of course , have a decent business idea , you will have 
every chance of success wherever you ’ re from and whatever age you 
are . The next section will take you through the personal traits that 
mark successful entrepreneurs . 
The entrepreneurial 
personality
You need to be able to not only draw up a viable business plan , but 
also possess the essential skills and personal traits required to make 
that plan work . To help you decide , we have described the core skills 
you need to have or develop to make your business a success in the 
sections below , from commitment to self-motivation . But remember 
that although starting up does demand an array of talents , the tradeoff is the freedom and fl exibility of running your own show . 
A sense of commitment
Can you work incredibly hard , all day , every day ? Before you answer , 
think about the implications , bearing in mind the words of Bob 
Pierce , joint managing director of online style emporium Pupsnuts . 
com :  ‘ There will be more work and it will be more diffi cult than you can 
possibly imagine . And it will be around you all the time .  ’ 
So , it isn ’ t about putting in a couple of late nights , or making an 
extra effort for a one-off project . By launching your fi rst business , you 
could fi nd yourself on the wrong end of a potentially gruelling timetable 
that could go on for weeks and weeks , even months and months . 
Or , in the case of Dylan Wilk , a whole year . When Wilk was setting 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 65 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
66
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
You can feel , 
professionally 
at least , very 
isolated at 
times
up Gameplay . com during the 1990s , he claims he was permanently 
 ‘ doing 24 / 7… I was working every single second of every single 
minute ,  ’ he says .  ‘ Sure I had to give up a few things , like sleeping 
and eating , but I was willing to do that .  ’ Are you prepared to make the 
same commitment ? 
Motivation – without it there 
is no business
Linked to your level of commitment is your ability to be motivated , and 
most crucially , self-motivated . Being self-motivated is not the same 
as being pushed by someone else to do something . This motivation 
has to come from within you . It has to come from your energy , your 
discipline , your focus . This is diffi cult enough when things are going 
well , but what about when things are going badly ? 
 ‘ It ’ s really tough ,  ’ admits Wilk , who recalls just a few things that 
went wrong in the early days .  ‘ We were burgled around eight times ; 
we had tens of thousands of pounds in stock stolen ; we had someone 
register our name and then try to slap a writ on us – that was pretty 
hairy ; we had moments where it looked like the business was going to 
go under . And , at times , I didn ’ t really know what to do .  ’ So even the 
most determined of entrepreneurs have moments when they are not 
sure what direction to take . Even if they do know , some have simply 
had enough and can no longer be bothered taking it . 
 ‘ This can affect all of us ,  ’ admits Alan Denbigh , executive director of the Teleworkers Association .  ‘ To succeed in self-employment you 
have really got to be a self-starter .  ’ Wilk adds :  ‘ You have to really believe 
in yourself and decide that , no matter what , you will not be beaten .  ’ 
Emotional resilience – beating 
the isolation
Belief in yourself is not enough though . You must also have a capacity 
to work for yourself , often by yourself . At fi rst this might sound like 
Sure I had to 
give up a few 
things , like 
sleeping and 
eating , but I 
was willing to 
do that
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 66 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
67
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
bliss , with no more workplace politics and gossip . But what about 
the banter , the social life , and more seriously , the brainstorming of 
solutions and the bouncing around of ideas ? If you are like most solo 
entrepreneurs , you will miss this .  ‘ The simple fact is that it can be 
very lonely ,  ’ says Andrew Ferguson , founder of the Breakthrough 
Centre , which counsels people on new ways to work .  ‘ You can feel , 
professionally at least , very isolated at times .  ’ 
CONTACT
The Breakthrough 
Centre
www . breakthrough
centre . net
AMBITION 24HOURS AND THE 
FLYING PIGS
Company : Ambition 24Hours
Owner-manager : Penny Streeter
If you looked around for someone who embodies determination and self-motivation , the virtues just 
discussed above , you would be hard-pressed to fi nd anyone to top Penny Streeter , founder of 
Ambition 24Hours , an employment agency for medical staff that she launched in 1996 . 
Defying the odds , South African-born Streeter , a single mother , has overcome a lack of fi nance and 
negative attitudes to build up a company that , in less than 10 years , has an annual turnover of £60 
million . Having your bank manager write the words ‘ Pigs will fl y ’ on your business plan or experiencing 
clients looking over your shoulder as you enter a meeting , looking for a more senior man to talk to , would 
crush lesser people . But for Streeter , the adversity she faced did not dent her belief that she could start 
up on her own and develop her idea into a world-class , multimillion-pound business . 
With successive bank managers looking down their noses at her business plan , Streeter had to build up 
her fi rm without any funding at all . To make ends meet , she worked weekends as a children ’ s entertainer . 
 ‘ It was essential for our funding ,  ’ she says .  ‘ We ’ ve never had any outside investment or loans for the 
business – initially because no one was interested in fi nancing us !  ’ 
Looking back at her early struggles , it seems slightly astonishing that Streeter has built up Ambition 
24Hours into a business with such a big annual turnover , around 13 , 500 healthcare staff on its 
books and 19 branch offi ces .  ‘ We relied very much on our own resources , with no outside help , so we 
made mistakes , but we never made the same ones twice ,  ’ she says .  ‘ Ultimately , you have to rely on 
yourself and be prepared to make the big decisions , although now we have an excellent management 
team .  ’ 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 67 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
68
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
EXPERT 
OPINION
WHAT MAKES AN ENTREPRENEUR ? 
Shell LiveWIRE www . shell-livewire . org , runs through the big attributes . See 
how you compare…
The problem
Entrepreneurship is something that seems to 
be on television screens constantly , and more 
people are becoming interested in the benefi ts of 
starting their own business , be it to try to make 
their fortune – or more often these days , to fi t into 
their lifestyle . The word ‘ entrepreneur ’ seems to 
be bounded around everywhere ! But , starting 
a new business is unlike any other job – it ’ s an 
enterprise , it ’ s an adventure , it ’ s a once in a lifetime decision . You will be in many new and often 
diffi cult situations which you need to be able to 
overcome . Your future will be in your own hands – 
you are well and truly in control ! 
Can you trust yourself with this responsibility ? Will 
you give yourself the job ? 
The answer : thorough 
self-evaluation
You will have your own view of who you are . But 
what about how others see you ? Your parents , 
your friends , your colleagues , your work mates , 
your boss may all have a different image of you , 
and there may be elements of truth in what they 
think . One great trait of entrepreneurs is to be 
refl ective on themselves . There ’ s no single 
stereotype , but experience has shown that there 
are some things that successful self-employed 
people often have in common . Think for a 
moment what qualities might be important ; 
then compare your list with this one : 
• Persistent , enduring , have loads of stamina
• Aware
• Positive , optimistic , enthusiastic
• Tenacious
• Logical , perceptive , organised , realistic , 
responsible – good at getting things done
• Patient
• Have a sense of humour
• Willing
• Creative , imaginative – always coming up with 
new ideas
• Assertive
• Out-going , confident , cocky
• Flexible , adaptable
• Open-minded – able to take advice
• Forgiving
• Sociable , approachable , good leader – can win 
people over instead of getting their backs up
• Single-minded , decisive , independent
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 68 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
69
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
• Communicator – able to get a point across
• Opportunist , risk taker , ambitious
• Hard working , committed , determined ,  ‘ get up 
and go ’ type
• Self-motivated
• Self-belief , individual – not afraid to stand out 
from a crowd , or of what others think
• Recognise importance of quality . 
You don ’ t need all of these qualities , but you may 
discover that you do possess many of them but 
have never had to demonstrate them before . It ’ s 
not easy to get a true picture of yourself . You have 
to work at it . You need to do the following : 
Be honest – You are not selling yourself to an 
employer . There ’ s no point in conning yourself . 
Face up to what you really are , not what you 
wish you were . If you don ’ t feel ready for selfemployment now , perhaps you will in a few years 
time , with more experience and qualifi cations . 
Remember you need to do what the customer 
wants not what you think they want ! 
Get an opinion – Different people will have different views of you . Talk to someone whom you 
know well , and trust . Get a good range of views . 
Try to sort out when they have a point ( even if it 
makes you feel uncomfortable ) and when they are 
just trying to make you fi t in with an image that 
happens to suit them . Often , it ’ s a mixture of both . 
Prove it – Wherever possible , look for an example 
of the qualities that you have identifi ed . If you think 
you are an organiser , what have you organised ? 
Remember to look at all aspects of your life , not 
just work experience and qualifi cations . 
Keep notes – Everyone , young or old should 
have a fi le on themselves . It ’ s useful for planning , 
as well as applying for jobs . The great thing about 
enterprise is that it helps you to grow and develop 
as a person . You need to keep tabs on yourself – 
what are your strengths and weaknesses ? What 
do you need to learn ? 
The future for entrepreneurs in the UK is somewhere that will be immensely exciting , where 
more and more people make a specifi c choice 
on leaving education to start their own enterprise 
and create their own futures . New technology will 
allow relatively small businesses to fl ourish further , 
and because of their size they will be able to react 
to changes in the market and compete with larger 
established corporations , challenging them at every level . The small fi rm will dominate as time goes 
on , fl ourishing in a knowledge-based economy 
– not only in the UK but all over the world . Most 
importantly we will see entrepreneurs who care 
about their surroundings and environment , entrepreneurs who have a social conscience and a 
drive to make the world a better place . Have you 
got what it takes ? 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 69 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
70
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Gwen Rhys , founder and director of networking organisation 
EW agrees .  ‘ But there is a solution ,  ’ she says .  ‘ You need to build up 
a virtual team . You need to develop a circle of colleagues that you 
communicate with in much the same way you did in the offi ce , except 
now it may be over the phone , via email , or face to face , but once a 
month rather than every day . You also need to make sure that you do 
get out there and mix with people . It is worth joining a professional 
group you connect with , even if it is only to learn that there are others 
who have been through what you are going through and identify with 
how you are feeling . In itself this can be a great source of support .  ’ So 
be aware that there will be some lonely times . 
Optimism and opportunism
All this talk about what can go wrong may sound daunting , and the 
last thing you will probably expect to be feeling is optimistic . However , 
Wilk says that this is exactly what you have to be .  ‘ There is no point 
doing something if you think it will not work ,  ’ he says .  ‘ But sometimes 
you just have to think of ways of making it work better .  ’ 
Ferguson is equally encouraging .  ‘ It ’ s an opportunity to do something you ’ ve always wanted to do but never quite found anyone to 
pay you to do it . It ’ s your big chance to do something that makes you 
happy .  ’ 
How and when to quit 
your job
Like many entrepreneurs , you have probably come up with the idea 
to launch your own business while still in employment . As mentioned 
above , many people launch startups into a market similar to that 
in which they were previously working as an employee . Of course , 
starting up by yourself will have serious ramifi cations on your existing 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 70 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
71
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
job , and you have probably decided to quit it . But what is the best 
time to hand in your notice , and what exactly do you say to your 
boss ? 
The right time to quit
A lot of research and planning will need to be put into your business 
before you can give up that monthly salary . Continuing to earn while 
you are planning the business will allow you to save up some cash to 
act as a buffer . That way you will be able to focus your attention on the 
business rather than worrying about next month ’ s gas bill . 
Tina Jesson put away half her salary for two years before quitting 
her job to set up property development company Home Stages , so 
she had personal income to cushion her through the fi rst year of the 
business . She spent two years researching and planning , so her 
move from employee to business owner was a gradual one .  ‘ I was 
spending about 30 hours a week on the business . I told my company 
that I either wanted to go part-time or leave , and I guess they thought 
that by allowing me to work part-time they could keep my skills for a 
while ,  ’ she explains . 
Before you make the leap to self-employment , get as much done 
as you possibly can . You may have been using your spare room to sell 
a couple of items a week through your website while you were working , 
but if you are going to make a living out of it , perhaps you need to 
think about commercial premises . You might also want to use this 
period to prove the business model , through an eBay shop , or some 
other form of e-commerce selling and marketing . Potential investors 
will have far more confi dence in an idea that has been tested . 
Ask yourself if your revenue predictions are accurate , too . If you ’ ve 
budgeted for selling more than is realistic , you could fi nd yourself in 
a tight spot when your last pay cheque gets used up .  ‘ You should 
have some idea of at least two or three potential customers who can 
provide the beginnings of an income stream ,  ’ says John Lees , author 
of How to Get a Job You ’ ll Love ( McGraw-Hill , 2006 )  .  ‘ Only when you 
Continuing to 
earn while 
you are 
planning the 
business will 
allow you to 
save up some 
cash to act as 
a buffer
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 71 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
72
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
get customers saying “ yes ” to your offer should you really consider 
making the leap .  ’ 
Jeremy Martin , co-founder of men ’ s health drinks brand For 
Goodness Shakes , says he and his business partner Stuart Jeffreys
did as much work as possible while still in full-time employment . But 
eventually you need to make the move .  ‘ It was defi nitely the right 
thing to do ,  ’ argues Martin , adding that cutting the cord ‘ commits 
you 100% . When you make the leap , it ’ s surprising how fear gets you 
working harder and makes you more committed than ever before .  ’ 
How should you do it ? 
If your business is going to compete with the company you work 
for , it ’ s probably not a good idea to mention it until you ’ ve handed 
in your notice , if at all .  ‘ It ’ s best to say as little as possible if you are 
becoming a competitor ,  ’ recommends Lees . In addition , if you are 
likely to compete with the company you work for , you need to check 
your employment contract carefully for competition clauses , notice 
periods or anything else that could cause legal problems if you decide 
to start your own business . If there ’ s nothing threatening in your 
contract , though , and your employer ’ s biggest worry is losing your 
skills , it may help to talk about your idea .  ‘ Thank your boss for his or 
her support ,  ’ says Lees .  ‘ Make it clear that you are leaving for entirely 
positive reasons . Your previous employer could be in a position to 
refer you new business , so if you can , be as clear as possible about 
what you plan to do .  ’ 
When Liz Jackson left to set up Great Guns Marketing , her 
employers provided her with a few days worth of work a week , which 
gave her crucial income while she was trying to win new clients . The 
lesson here is don ’ t burn your bridges . There are just as many risks as 
rewards when setting up your own business , but if you plan your exit 
carefully , you may just manage to tip the balance in your favour . 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 72 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
73
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
Women entrepreneurs
As a woman interested in starting your own business , you will be faced 
with several stiffer challenges than men , mainly due to your gender . 
The 2006 GEM report on women and entrepreneurship revealed some 
interesting facts about women ’ s route to self-employment . 
What the fi gures say
Female entrepreneurs worldwide , for example , are much more likely 
than men to start their businesses when still employed . This may not 
only have benefi ts in terms of resources and social capital , but also 
act as a safety net , as women often express less self-confi dence in 
their entrepreneurial ventures than men ( although perhaps men are 
simply far less willing to admit their fears )  .  
! TOP TIPS
LEAVING YOUR JOB WITHOUT BURNING 
THE BRIDGES 
! Don ’ t do it immediately after your ‘ eureka !  ’ moment 
! Get as much preparation done as possible fi rst 
! Consider going part-time for a period 
! Make sure you have at least some customers before ditching your income stream 
! Keep your venture quiet before you leave if it ’ s in a similar market 
! Check your contract for possible legal issues relating to your startup 
! Talk to your boss about your idea if he could be a possible customer 
! Leave on a positive note – thank your boss for their support , etc . 
The important 
thing is to not 
focus on 
obstacles but 
on goals
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 73 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
74
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Early-stage entrepreneurship in women continues to grow globally , 
although startup rates among men are still higher . More than a third 
of people involved in entrepreneurial activity are women . However , 
in high-income countries , men are almost twice as likely to be earlystage or established business owners than women . 
Female entrepreneurship is an increasingly important part of 
the economic profi le of any country . But the male / female gap is 
still signifi cant , especially in high-income countries and technologyintense sectors . 
In addition , the 2004 GEM Monitor showed that independent 
startup activity among women is 3 . 1% of the adult female population , 
but 6% among men . Russia is the only country where the rate of female 
early-stage entrepreneurship is signifi cantly higher than the male rate . 
Regionally , the highest number of female startups is based in 
London , where 8 . 4% of the female workforce is self-employed , and 
female entrepreneurs are least active in the north-east , according 
to the Labour Force Survey 2003 . And fi nally , a recent White Paper , 
entitled The Observed Characteristics of Outstanding Women in 
Business , found that while businesses run by women contribute 
£70bn to the UK economy and employ more than one million people , 
there would be 750 , 000 more female-led startups if rates matched 
those in the USA . 
Ability to fi nd funding
Access to investment is unfortunately one of the biggest barriers 
facing female entrepreneurs . Recent eye-opening research from the 
Women ’ s Enterprise Task Force showed the scale of the problem . The 
taskforce found that when starting up , businesses owned by women 
access an average of only £10 , 000 worth of funding , compared with 
£15 , 000 for men . The task force believes that this disparity is likely 
to ‘ constrain business performance ’  . Furthermore , it has been found 
that women tend to be charged higher rates of interest when taking 
out loans – an average of 2 . 9% , substantially more than the 1 . 9% 
More than a 
third of people 
involved in 
entrepreneurial 
activity are 
women
Women tend 
to be charged 
higher rates 
of interest 
than men , 
when taking 
out loans
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 74 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
75
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
average charged to men . Pam Alexander , co-chair of the task force , 
says :  ‘ The under-capitalisation of women-owned businesses results 
in under-performance and slower growth .  ’ For this reason , the task 
force has said that its key priority will be creating better access to 
funding and appropriate investment for women . 
 ‘ We need to work with business support providers and banks 
to encourage women to be ambitious in their business plans and 
investment ready ,  ’ says Alexander . But this isn ’ t to say that women 
aren ’ t fi nding funding opportunities . Female entrepreneurs generally 
make better use of alternative sources of funding , with the British 
Chambers of Commerce ( BCC ) fi nding that although women put 
in less of their own money than men in the startup stage ( £10 , 106 
compared with £13 , 500 )  , 27% of women will obtain further funding 
from family , compared with just 17% of men . What ’ s more , 33% of 
women-owned businesses , compared with 20% of men-owned fi rms , 
had used government programmes to fund their business startup . 
For both men and women , however , the bank is still the main 
provider of startup fi nance , funding 46% and 43% of new businesses , 
respectively . The BCC found there is no statistically signifi cant 
difference between men and women with regard to usage of bank 
fi nance . It makes sense then that there is evidence that banks are 
waking up to the growth of female entrepreneurship and making more 
effort to attract female clients . 
Prejudice – and pride
The world of business is changing . But there ’ s still a lingering attitude 
that assumes that a successful business is owned by a man . Women , 
especially young women , often report coming away from meetings or 
pitches feeling patronised or not taken seriously . As an entrepreneur 
though , a thick skin is something of a necessity . 
Claire Nicholson , co-founder of marketing agency More2 , fi nds 
her job surprises people even in a social environment .  ‘ When I meet 
new people socially they often assume you are at home bringing 
CONTACT
Women ’ s Enterprise 
Task Force
www . womensenter
prisetaskforce . co . uk
CONTACT
British Chambers 
of Commerce
www . british
chambers . org . uk
020 7654 5800
As an entrepreneur , a 
thick skin is 
something 
of a necessity
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 75 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
76
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
up the children and not running a business ,  ’ she says . It ’ s not just 
Nicholson ’ s gender , but also her age that surprises people , with the 
combination of the two causing looks of disbelief .  ‘ We set up More2 
when I was just 28 and so many people don ’ t expect you to have your 
own business at that age ,  ’ she adds . 
Despite these challenges , many female entrepreneurs never 
experience any form of prejudice or negative reaction on account of 
their gender .  ‘ I do feel that male / female prejudice is a bit of a red 
herring – the main problem with startups is access to good advice and 
supportive subsidised incubators , as well as government bureaucracy , 
anti-competitive practices from large incumbents ,  ’ says Katie Allcott
of FRANK Water .  ‘ I am aware of a few situations where it has taken 
longer for me to gain respect , but I think this is not just because I am a 
woman , but also because I am considered to be young and that I run 
a very ethical , values-driven company .  ’ It ’ s important to remember that 
every entrepreneur faces specifi c problems , and whatever you battle 
through will leave you even more determined to succeed . As Allcott 
articulates :  ‘ Varying problems exist for tall people , short people , thin 
people , fat people , men , women , young people , old people – if you 
look for them . But the important thing is to not focus on obstacles but 
on goals .  ’ 
Being self-confi dent
Findings do show that women are more put off by the fear of failure 
when it comes to starting a business . Women are less positive about 
their skills , according to Prowess ( an advocacy network for women ’ s 
business ) and perceive fewer opportunities than men . However , this 
may just demonstrate that women are more honest or realistic than 
their male counterparts ! Entrepreneurs are by their nature confi dent 
people who like taking risks , and anyone with these qualities won ’ t be 
held back long by a fear of failure .  ‘ I think that as long as women have 
plenty of support around them they can be very successful ,  ’ says 
Allcott .  ‘ That ’ s support from friends and family as well as colleagues , 
Whether 
a man or 
woman , you 
do need a 
reasonable 
amount 
of selfconfi dence
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 76 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
77
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
BABYLICIOUS AND THE LAW 
OF HARD KNOCKS
Company : Babylicious
Owner-manager : Sally Preston
Many prominent entrepreneurs have suffered setbacks on the path to success . Some have had to 
overcome a severe lack of funds , others have had to battle against negative attitudes . But few business 
owners have had to deal with as much adversity as Sally Preston , founder of Babylicious . 
Having endured an acrimonious divorce , she was diagnosed with skin cancer . She chose this 
turbulent period in her life to launch Babylicious , a frozen baby food business . But the knocks kept 
coming for Preston – someone deliberately tried to steal her business ’ s name and a hoax caller 
untruthfully told her retailer customers that the company was under investigation by the Advertising 
Standards Authority . 
Preston remains tight-lipped about the identity of the malicious character who plagued her business , but 
admits it was a dispiriting time .  ‘ It was the ongoing knock-backs – you can take one and you can take 
two , but they keep coming at you and it ’ s very wearing after a while and it begins to wear you down ,  ’ 
she says .  ‘ I think you have to be like one of those Weeble things , you get pushed over and you 
constantly keep picking yourself back up again .  ’ 
To her credit , Preston has made a stunning success of Babylicious since the launch of the company in 
September 2001 . The business has picked up a host of awards and expanded overseas . The various 
setbacks have certainly not defeated the ambitious and refreshingly honest Preston . 
support agencies , bank managers , suppliers and customers . Whether 
a man or woman , you do need a reasonable amount of self-confi dence , 
even more so , total confi dence and passion for the business or idea 
itself… then with good support networks you have a great start .  ’ 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 77 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
78
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS HAVE THEIR SAY
CLAIRE YARWOOD-WHITE
Yarwood-White
 ‘ When I was younger ,  “ entrepreneur ” was a scary word ! In my twenties , I thought business was a secret 
that no one had let me in on , and running a business was best left to the big boys . As I worked my way 
through various companies and bosses as an employee , I realised that much of the secret was common 
sense , making good decisions at the right time and that confi dence played a huge part in success . As 
my own confi dence grew , I began to think :  “ I could do that .  ”  ’ 
GEMMA STONE
Rock and Ruby
 ‘ I am probably part of the smallest statistic of entrepreneurs – under 30 , female , mother of two , without a 
degree . But I work hard , enjoy what I do and am motivated to be a loving and giving mother and a successful businesswoman . If there are barriers in my path then I say :  “ Bring it on !  ”  ’ 
CLAIRE NICHOLSON
More2 ( integrated marketing agency ) 
 ‘ Within a few months of starting up the agency , I discovered I was expecting my fi rst child . My husband 
was studying full-time , so money was extremely tight and life was very stressful . At the beginning , to 
succeed you have to work every spare hour and with a small team you have to be prepared to do everything . Even now that the agency is fi ve years old I wrestle with how little I see my two daughters . My top 
tip is work on the train . I save work to do on my journey home so that when I step in the door I can be a 
mum . Once they are in bed I can open up my laptop and get back to work .  ’ 
SARAH TREMELLEN
Bravissimo
 ‘ I never saw a ceiling for it , I just thought it would be fun , setting up from scratch and making something 
from nothing .  ’ 
ANITA RODDICK
The Body Shop
 ‘ No one talks of entrepreneurship as survival , but that ’ s exactly what it is .  ’ 
RACHEL ELNAUGH
Red Letter Days
 ‘ Key is understanding what type of entrepreneur you are , and then doing business in a way that is true to 
yourself , and above all , one that brings you personal happiness and fulfi lment .  ’ 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 78 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
79
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
So you ’ ve made your 
decision…
You started reading this chapter with an idea that you think you 
can turn into your own business , or because you simply want to 
be your own boss . If you now think that the trials and tribulations of 
entrepreneurialism are not for you , then simply close the book and walk 
away , safe in the knowledge that you ’ ve at least carefully considered 
setting up on your own . However , if the last few pages have made 
you even more determined to launch your own company , then it ’ s fair 
to say that you have decided to join the ranks of entrepreneurialism , 
and there ’ s no better time to start planning your next move than the 
present . 
So where should you start ? The next step is easy – simply keep 
on reading and you will be guided through the key steps of starting 
your own business , from researching your idea to writing a business 
plan and raising fi nance and how to deal with the upheaval . Work–
life balance is an over-used term you will hear from every business 
coach and all the business startup services you will encounter . But 
if you ’ ve worked 20 hours a day for two months in a row you will be 
physically and mentally drained and appreciate the need for striking 
that balance . 
The next chapter will take you through the research stage , to help 
you test drive your idea to see if it ’ s commercially viable and if there ’ s 
the market demand for it . Then you will learn how to make cost and 
revenue forecasts and to present your idea in the form of a business 
plan that you can then take to prospective business investors and 
partners . Further chapters deal with naming your venture and how to 
register that name , as well as the format your business should take , 
from a limited company or partnership to a sole trader . There is also 
advice on developing the key skills you will need when starting up . For 
instance , there ’ s a guide on safely negotiating the minefi eld that is tax 
and the practices , products and systems that will help you organise 
your accounts effi ciently . If you are raising fi nance , there are plenty of 
There ’ s no 
better time to 
start planning 
your next 
move than the 
present
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 79 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
80
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
sources from which to choose . There ’ s a rundown of the advantages 
and disadvantages of using different fi nanciers , from high-street banks 
to venture capitalists and business angels – and how best to impress 
them while still getting a good deal . There ’ s also guidance on whether 
to work from home or seek premises , along with the right space for 
your business and how to get the best from your chosen location . 
You will also fi nd advice on how to get the most from your working 
day and ways that you can ensure your time is put to good use , such 
as the best way to take calls when you are in a meeting with clients . 
Do you need to use a virtual secretary , and would it be cost effective ? 
There are tips on tracking down reliable and affordable suppliers , 
which can be one of the hardest tasks for new business owners , as 
well as talking to other entrepreneurs . Networking is a word that often 
strikes fear into the hearts of new business owners . Walking into a 
room of people who ’ ve been in business for decades can be quite 
daunting . But select the right networking groups and a format that 
you are comfortable with , and it will help you build a valuable source 
of contacts that can help to drive your business forward . 
Word of mouth may not be enough to get your business working 
to its full capacity and it ’ s likely that you will need at least some 
marketing and public relations ( PR )  . There are clear explanations of 
all the options available to you , what is most likely to prompt the best 
response rates and advice on how to handle PR companies . You will 
also gain an insight into the type of marketing and PR that you can do 
for yourself for very little money . 
If you are launching an internet business , website design , 
marketing and internet connectivity will be important issues from day 
one . Even if you are not starting an internet business , you might want 
a website or even to sell online too . You will fi nd guidance on the 
process of getting a website designed from one of the thousands of 
companies now specialising in the service . There ’ s help on deciding 
the level of complexity your website needs , along with advice on how 
to drive traffi c to it . 
If you will need to take on one or two people straightaway , do you 
think you are experienced enough at recruiting ? You might know a 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 80 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
81
2 . 0 DECISION TIME
friend of a friend who can help out , but you need to make sure that 
you can entrust this person with your business ’ s future . So read on 
and you will be taken through all the issues involved in recruiting and 
employing staff , along with health and safety issues , employer liability 
insurance , virus protection and general employment legislation . Red 
tape is the bugbear of every business owner , but the weight of the 
problem is signifi cantly lessened if you are organised and know what ’ s 
expected of you . 
02SYOB_CH_02 . indd 81 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 43 : 37 PM
83
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ Once you have decided that you are going to go 
ahead , the next step is to start planning your venture 
to help you gain any investment you may need , and 
to make sure everything is in place for a successful 
launch . Find out as much as you can about the 
market you propose to launch into , your potential 
customers and any rivals who are already trading 
in your chosen area . This information will tell you 
whether your idea is viable , provide key data for your 
business plan and prove invaluable when you start 
up . So read on to fi nd out how to approach market 
research…
3 . 0
PRE-STARTUP 
RESEARCH
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 83 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
84
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Market research
Properly targeted market research is the key to a thriving business 
and can make the difference between success and failure , say 
experts . Market research can be a cost-effective way of discovering 
what your customers want and matching products and services to 
this demand . Even better , it can help a business grow by keeping 
you up to date with current trends and with what your competitors 
are doing . Knowing the state of the market and how to improve your 
position within it can revolutionise your businesses but this can only be 
achieved by carrying out proper market research .  ‘ Unfortunately , most 
companies shy away from market research , and then they wonder 
why they don ’ t succeed ,  ’ says Simon Wieremiej , spokesperson for 
the British Market Research Association ( BMRA )  . 
If you are looking to start a company , it pays to carry out the 
necessary research into the potential viability of your venture . First , 
it will provide key material for your business plan , which is an essential part of attracting the investment you may need to launch 
your business . Second , it would help you assess the chances of 
success . 
A lot of companies already succeeding in the area you ’ d like to 
enter , doesn ’ t automatically mean you are on to a winner . It could 
mean the competition may be too fi erce and there may not be a 
demand for what you are offering in the specifi c location you plan 
to launch your version of the business . Equally , you may have had a 
highly original idea and there may be little or no competition around , 
but this could be for a very good reason . In either case , marketing 
research can help provide the answers . One key area you need to 
look at is demand : 
• Do people want what you plan to offer , and if not , is it simply down to 
their profile in the particular location where you planned to launch ? 
• If there is demand , can you put a figure on it ? 
Most 
companies 
shy away 
from market 
research , and 
then they 
wonder why 
they don ’ t 
succeed
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 84 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
85
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH
You also need to examine the competition : 
• What other companies are offering something similar to what you 
are proposing ? 
• How successful are they ? 
• Can you improve on their offer , or strategically differentiate your 
offer from theirs , while maintaining demand ? 
Other research can provide key information on pricing , location , size 
of premises , etc . Securing these data early on not only shows potential 
sources of investment that you are serious about your proposal , but 
also reassures them that you are organised and motivated , making 
them more likely to want to lend to you . And , of course , it also increases 
the chances of your launch being a success , if after carrying out the 
research you decide to go ahead . 
For many would-be owner-managers of small businesses , the cost 
of commissioning a market research agency can be prohibitive , so you 
will most likely want to conduct the basic market research yourself for 
the purposes of informing your business plan and providing an early 
indication of the viability of your venture . But remember that it needs 
to cover all the points discussed above so , depending on the market 
you are considering entering , you may fi nd the process too complex 
and time consuming , and that calling in the experts can save you 
money through producing more accurate results
How important are trends ? 
Before discussing the key market research techniques , here are 
some useful offi cial startup statistics , published by the Department 
for Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Reform ( BERR )  , which offer 
a key insight into the types of business that are on the increase or 
decline . The BERR publishes a lot of business statistics , such as 
those in Table 3 . 1 , which are a useful starting point for you to make 
a quick assessment of the viability of your idea before embarking on 
more thorough research , while also informing you of the most popular 
sectors for business startups . 
CONTACT
Department 
for Business , 
Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform
www . berr . gov . uk
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 85 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
86
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
When looking at the sector you intend to enter , consider : 
• How many businesses were started in the current year , and how it 
compares with the previous year . Is it a growing market ? 
• If so , has that now been fully exploited and will it drop in the coming 
year ? 
• If it ’ s less than in the previous year , why is that ? 
Also consider the changes to the total number of businesses that 
occurred during the current year . For instance , while around 10 , 100 
new manufacturing businesses were started in 2007 , around 10 , 500 
folded . If you are looking to enter a market that ’ s losing businesses , 
you will need to consider why this is so and fi nd out which particular 
fi rms are suffering and why . 
Table 3 . 1 Numbers of enterprises registering and de-registering for VAT by industry , UK , 
2007 .  
Thousands
Registrations De-registrations Stock
2007 change 
on 2006
2007 change 
on 2006
start of 
2008
change 
during 20071
% change 
during 20071
All industries 205 . 7 23 . 7 147 . 8 3 . 5 2 , 031 . 1 57 . 9 2 . 9
Agriculture , fishing 4 . 0 0 . 0 6 . 1 1 . 1 153 . 7 –2 . 2 –1 . 4
Mining , energy , water 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 0 2 . 0 0 . 1 3 . 8
Manufacturing 10 . 1 1 . 0 10 . 5 –0 . 3 152 . 5 –0 . 4 –0 . 3
Construction 25 . 9 2 . 5 16 . 6 1 . 12 44 . 0 9 . 3 4 . 0
Wholesale , retail , 
repairs
34 . 1 0 . 2 29 . 6 –1 . 2 401 . 3 4 . 5 1 . 1
Hotels , restaurants 18 . 0 –0 . 7 14 . 2 –1 . 1 145 . 5 3 . 8 2 . 7
Transport , communication
8 . 5 0 . 2 6 . 9 –0 . 1 85 . 9 1 . 6 1 . 9
Finance 1 . 7 0 . 0 1 . 5 0 . 1 21 . 8 0 . 2 0 . 9
Business services 89 . 5 20 . 3 50 . 7 3 . 4 644 . 6 38 . 8 6 . 4
Education , health 3 . 2 0 . 4 1 . 7 0 . 1 32 . 8 1 . 6 5 . 1
Other services 10 . 6 –0 . 3 10 . 0 0 . 4 146 . 9 0 . 6 0 . 4
Source : BERR Enterprise Directorate ( Statistics Team ) 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 86 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
87
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH
Evaluating the statistics doesn ’ t mean that you shouldn ’ t enter into 
a sector that is shrinking , but it should alert you to whether important 
changes are afoot . In addition , you should think about the outside 
infl uences that are likely to have affected startup business fi gures . For 
instance , how much have the fi sh , agriculture , hotel and restaurant 
trades been affected since the start of the economic downturn ? 
Starting up in the downturn
As the UK didn ’ t offi cially go into recession until 2008 , Table 3 . 1 will 
not provide an accurate indication of this , and new registration and 
de-registration statistics will not be published until November 2009 . 
This is when a little more digging is needed . You might expect both 
startups and closures to be up during 2008 , as a result of the downturn , 
but , according to the BERR , this will not necessarily be the case . In 
fact , it believes there has only been a minor drop in new company 
registrations , indicated by fi gures for the number of self-employed 
people in the UK , which early 2009 fi gures reveal has only fallen by 
2% compared to 2008 . This view is also supported by Barclays ’ new 
business bank account statistics , which rose by 1% during 2008 . This 
can be explained by the rise in unemployed people , which has led to 
many who are out of work starting up on their own . 
It ’ s likely those companies closing , however , will reveal a completely 
different picture . BERR statistics for the fourth quarter of 2008 show 
that insolvencies were up 50% on the same period in 2007 . Therefore , 
although there ’ s every chance that startups for 2008 have only fallen 
slightly , closures look like they will have grown signifi cantly on the 
previous year . The key here is which sectors have been worst hit , and 
Barclays ’ data unsurprisingly suggest that the fi nancial , property and 
construction industries have borne the brunt of the closures , while 
health , education and social work have actually grown . 
With so many companies going out of business , this is clearly 
a challenging time to launch your own company , particularly in the 
sectors highlighted above . However , projections by BERR for 2008 
suggest that many people are still starting up . In fact , it ’ s unwise to 
launch without preparation in any kind of economic climate , so as 
New business 
bank account 
statistics rose 
by 1% during 
2008
Evaluating 
the statistics 
doesn ’ t mean 
that you 
shouldn ’ t 
enter into a 
sector that is 
shrinking , but 
it should alert 
you to 
whether 
important 
changes are 
afoot
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 87 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
88
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
long as you have done the groundwork , there ’ s no reason why you 
can ’ t launch in a recession . And if you can turn over a profi t in tough 
times , you should be ready to go full steam when the recovery arrives , 
and hopefully grow signifi cantly . Also , there are some businesses that 
have been doing well in the downturn , and not just in the public sector 
areas mentioned previously . Pharmacists traditionally do well when 
times are hard , perhaps because people are feeling more down and 
under stress . There have also been reports that takeaway restaurants 
and home movie rental companies are performing well , as more 
people are staying in to save money . 
Relevance of trends to your circumstances
Although national startup statistics are important to consider , they 
are by no means relevant to every situation . For instance , trends 
may vary in different parts of the country and at different times . The 
local economy will also affect your chances of success . Unless you 
are about to launch on a national scale , probably the most valuable 
research you can do is to investigate what need exists for your 
business locally . Look how many other similar businesses are in the 
area ; can you fi nd an area where there are few companies offering the 
service or products you are looking to launch , or where there ’ s room 
for competition , either in terms of better quality service or on price . 
There ’ s also the argument that trends should be made and not 
followed , and there ’ s some truth to this . The telecommunications 
industry is full of very young , bold , and now wealthy , individuals who 
proved a lot of sceptics wrong , and it can pay to be at the forefront of 
the latest movement . However , over-confi dence can also be perceived 
as arrogance or naivety , and it ’ s always worth checking the state of 
the markets even if you then choose to ignore them . 
The do-it-yourself approach 
to sizing up the competition
There ’ s no better way of testing than by using the services and 
products directly . A good place to start assessing the potential of your 
The fi nancial , 
property and 
construction 
industries 
have borne 
the brunt 
of the 
closures
Trends should 
be made 
and not 
followed
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 88 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
89
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH
startup idea is the internet . Make a list of keywords that people would 
use when looking for companies that provide your potential product 
or service . Remember to keep a note of these words and phrases as 
they will prove useful in the future to help with optimising your website . 
Internet searches should throw up the range of companies across the 
UK that you will be competing with if you launch . If there are none , you 
have an original idea – but is there a market for it ? If there are lots of 
competitors , is there room for you ? To fi nd this out , assess the local 
competition , what they are offering and whether you can improve on 
this . You can get much of this information from company websites , 
initially . 
Depending on the business you are proposing to launch , in the 
next level of assessment , get out of the offi ce and check out the 
competition fi rst hand , either personally or by enlisting the help of 
others . There ’ s no better way of fi nding the quality of the competition 
and how successful they are than by sampling it . For example , if you 
plan to launch a restaurant or catering business , you need to check 
out rival establishments for the following : 
• How good is the food ? 
• Is the wine list special ? 
• Is the service up to scratch ? 
Also , you should fi nd out your rival ’ s unique selling point , and 
whether you could match it . If you are well known in the area , ask 
your friends to help out . 
If you do your marketing research fully enough , you can organise 
your business in a way that gives you a clear advantage afterwards . 
You can even play detective and go on a stakeout to observe how 
busy your rivals ’ premises are , and subtly question customers about 
what they are looking for in this kind of business . 
You can also investigate the performance of your rival companies 
by tracking down their annual accounts at Companies House . 
Although the data are likely to be at least a year old , you can source 
turnover and profi t and loss details , which will give you an idea of how 
successful each business is . If your rivals are having problems , try to 
There ’ s no 
better way 
of fi nding the 
quality of the 
competition 
and how 
successful 
they are than 
by sampling 
it
CONTACT
Companies House
www . companies
house . gov . uk
0303 1234 500
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 89 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
90
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010 
! TOP TIPS
THREE FACTS ABOUT MARKET RESEARCH 
! It ’ s one thing recognising the importance of market research and quite another carrying it out properly 
! Of those companies that do conduct research , many simply don ’ t approach it in the 
right way .  
! This can be just as dangerous as not doing any research at all , as it produces inaccurate results , which can lead to the wrong business decisions being made and false 
confi dence on the part of the entrepreneur
fi nd out why this is so . It could be simply that they are not very good , 
or that there are simply too many companies offering this service in 
the area , or that the service isn ’ t in demand . 
TRUSTEDPLACES AND THE 
CUSTOMER FOCUS
Company : trustedplaces
Owners : Sokratis Papafl oratos and Walid Al Saqqaf
Sokratis Papafl oratos and Walid Al Saqqaf gave up their jobs to set up the social networking website 
Trustedplaces . com in 2006 , inspired by the realisation that many of their friends were walking events 
guides .  ‘ We thought that if could we bring all those friends together in one place , all of a sudden we 
would have access to hundreds of people ’ s knowledge ,  ’ says Papafl oratos . 
 ‘ We did things like going to Starbucks and spending the day there , buying strangers coffee and asking 
them about some ideas that we had . They were kind of impromptu focus groups ,  ’ Papafl oratos continues . The success of the focus groups was such that so far , the company hasn ’ t spent any money on 
advertising since starting up . 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 90 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
91
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH 
! TOP TIPS
COMPARATIVE RESEARCH
Several special industry sector reports have been regularly published by independent 
research companies such as Mintel and Keynote , which have been producing reports for 
more than 35 years . The reports will cost you hundreds and tend to be written from a certain perspective , which may not be your own . However , you can carry out desk research 
yourself , gathering together reports and comparing statistics . Ask your local library for 
Keynote and Mintel reports , and use the index to search for the relevant sectors . 
Finally , there ’ s always room for some background reading either through the local 
papers , or by visiting the public library . Check out whether your rivals make the most of 
free editorial coverage , and whether you could dream up a newsworthy item to interest 
a news editor . Some pubs and restaurants , for example , thrive by being media-friendly . 
Could you dream up some publicity stunts of your own ? 
YOUNG GUNS AND THE 
MASTERPLAN
Not too many £1 million businesses startup on as little as a £1 , 500 overdraft , but that ’ s 
what brothers Dominic and Alex Lyon did when they launched music management company Young Guns . A crucial element in them not requiring any more was that their business plan was right 
on the button , and benefi ted from the careful thought that the pair put into it over a long period of time . 
Having both graduated from prestigious music colleges , the brothers were frustrated at the lack of 
options for musicians once they ’ d fi nished their education . So they came up with the idea of launching 
a music management company that pools existing acts as well as creating new groups , packages them 
up , then promotes them to record companies , as well as for corporate events . 
But the pair were kicking around the idea for the best part of a decade before it actually got off the 
ground .  “ We spent 10-years developing the business plan , thinking , researching and obsessively 
chatting about it ,  ” explains Dominic , who was at that time working as an account manager in the 
advertising industry . 
Eventually , they felt confi dent enough . So in 2005 , the brothers fi nally took the plunge . It seems the time 
and effort spent on the business plan has really paid off . 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 91 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
92
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Primary research
Primary research is research that you can conduct yourself or commission someone else to do for you , instead of using information that 
is already published . You can carry out research into your market and 
competition using the internet as mentioned previously , or through 
direct contact with your potential customers . The latter falls into two 
broad types : quantitative research , which focuses on a broad crosssection and produces a numerical result , such as ‘ 36% of the target 
audience think this ’  , which can be useful fi gures to show a potential 
investor ; and qualitative research , which is more in-depth , often using 
a smaller , but representative , sample , and discovers not only what 
people do , but why they buy a certain product , how they feel about it 
and how they would like to see it improved . 
An example of qualitative research is a focus group . You gather 
a small number of people who represent a cross-section of your 
target market for a discussion with an assigned leader to assess 
their opinions of the product or service you will be offering . If this can 
include giving the focus group members fi rst-hand experience of that 
product or service , their opinions will be better informed . To entice 
people to attend a focus group , you will need to give them some kind 
of inducement , such as a small payment or gift . A simple direct survey 
of your target audience ( the bigger sample , the better ) is an example 
of quantitative research , where you either send questions out to a 
database ( either by post or through email )  , go doorstepping or ask 
people in the street . 
Michael Warren , former director general of the Market Research 
Society ( MRS ) and now a freelance researcher and consultant , 
emphasises that it is misleading to suggest that one kind of research 
suits certain goods and services better than others .  ‘ Qualitative and 
quantitative research are complementary to each other , and should 
be used together ,  ’ he advises .  ‘ Qualitative research , in particular , can 
be used to give a greater understanding of the fi gures .  ’ The key to 
success for both qualitative and quantitative research , though , is the 
kind of questions asked and how they are put across . So a properly 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 92 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
93
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH
devised questionnaire can be an invaluable marketing tool , as long as 
you avoid the common pitfalls . A good market research agency with 
experience in your sector can help with this , because you need to 
take care in drawing up the questions . Alternatively , you can consult 
marketing guides for advice , but bear in mind that this is something 
of a skill and getting it wrong can mean you would have wasted any 
effort you put into doing the research . 
Simon Wieremiej , spokesperson for the British Market Research 
Association ( BMRA )  , says questions such as ‘ Would you buy this 
product ?  ’ can give misleading answers .  ‘ The answer might be ‘ Yes ’  , 
but they could mean that they would pay £1 whereas the price might 
actually be £10 ,  ’ he explains . So avoid closed questions with yes / 
no answers , as you ’ re likely get more information by eliciting a fuller 
response . Warren is equally cautious .  ‘ In sectors such as fast-moving 
consumer goods , where market researchers are trying to explore the 
image of one client ’ s products against those of its rivals , it is usual for 
respondents to be asked about other products , some of which they 
may never have used ,  ’ he says .  ‘ You might ask them about a range of 
variables , including smoothness , price , levels of satisfaction , but you 
have to be careful about what you compare the product to . Asking 
people how a new car , say , compares to a Rolls-Royce really gets 
up respondents ’ noses because they have probably never driven a 
Rolls .  ’ 
Secondary research
Secondary research is information others have acquired and already 
published which you may fi nd relevant , for example the BERR startup 
statistics mentioned above . 
Access to this secondary market research data may be yours for 
the asking and cost you only an email , letter , phone call , or perhaps 
a nominal fee for copying and postage . There are many websites , 
sponsored by a variety of organisations , which provide you with the 
business information you will need at the beginning , a jump-off place 
for more in-depth research for your business and marketing plans . For 
CONTACT
Marketing 
Research Society
www . mrs . org . uk
020 7490 4911
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 93 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
94
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
ACTION POINT
KEY STEPS TO DOING YOUR 
OWN RESEARCH
Whichever type of primary research you decide to undertake , there are a number of factors you should 
bear in mind before you start . 
KISS ( keep it simple , stupid !  )  : Long-winded questionnaires are likely to put respondents off , and will 
distort the response – the only respondents may be those with nothing better to do that day , which may 
not be your target market .  ‘ Telling them that a survey will take fi ve minutes is likely to get a better response than one lasting 25 minutes ,  ’ says Warren .  ‘ If it does last longer than that , it is bad for the industry 
and not good for your product image .  ’ 
Choose a representative sample : It ’ s no good working hard on a producing a good questionnaire , 
if you present it to the wrong people , so you need to make sure that your ‘ sample ’ represents a crosssection of your potential customers . 
Circulate the questionnaire appropriately : Via the internet is usually the best way to do this ,  . 
Offer a prize draw for completed questionnaires : Remember that a low response rate will distort fi gures , and often people need an incentive to complete questionnaires , because they take up valuable time . 
Respect confi dentiality : The Marketing Research Society ’ s code of conduct specifi es that respondents 
should not be misled over what they are being asked about . Do not use their responses for follow-up 
sales once you are trading . 
example , websites of trade associations , government departments 
and market research fi rms ( which will usually charge for general market 
profi les and more specifi c information )  . Spending time researching the 
relevant media now will pay dividends later . 
Many industries have an active trade association that serves as 
a vital source of industry-specifi c information . Such associations 
regularly publish directories for their members , and the better ones 
include statistical information that tracks industry sales , profi ts , ratios , 
economic trends and other valuable data . Find out about and contact 
possible associations , and visit their websites to see what information 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 94 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 55 PM
95
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH
is available . When in doubt , call or email the industry association 
offi ces and communicate with the managers . 
Industry-specifi c business magazines can offer a wealth of information on your proposed venture and your market . Aside from the major 
general-interest business publications , such as Business Week and The 
Economist , many specialty publications look at specifi c industries . 
Tim Berry and Doug Wilson ’ s book On Target : The Book On 
Marketing Plans advise ‘ specialism is an important trend in the 
publishing and internet businesses . Dingbats and Widgets may be 
boring to the general public , but they are exciting to Dingbat and Widget 
manufacturers who read about them regularly in their specialised 
magazines . The titles are an important medium for industry-specifi c 
advertising , which is important to readers as well as advertisers . 
The editorial staff of these magazines have to fi ll the space between 
the adverts . They do that by publishing as much industry-specifi c 
information as they can fi nd , including statistics , forecasts and industry 
profi les . Consulting these magazines or websites can sometimes 
produce a great deal of business and market forecasting , along with 
key economic information .  ’ 
If you don ’ t know which magazines focus on your business area , 
the best place to start looking is on the internet . For traditional printed 
directories , several good reference sources list magazines , journals 
and other publications . They also offer indexes to published articles 
which you can use to search for the exact references you need . These 
will be kept in the reference section of most libraries . Once you have 
identifi ed the right magazines , contact the editorial departments using 
their website , phone number and published contact information . Use 
the indexes to identify useful published information . When you fi nd an 
index listing for an article that forecasts your industry or talks about 
industry economics or trends , jot down basic information on the 
publication and ask your local library if it has a copy or contact the title 
directly . Many business magazines will send back issues free , or allow 
you to go into their offi ces and consult them there . 
Lastly , special industry sector reports are regularly published by 
independent research companies such as Mintel and Keynote , which 
Industryspecifi c 
business 
magazines 
can offer a 
wealth of 
information 
on your 
proposed 
venture 
and your 
market
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 95 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 56 PM
96
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
have been producing reports for more than 35 years . The reports 
are very expensive and tend to be written from a certain perspective , 
which may not be your own . However , you can access Keynote and 
Mintel reports in your local library and carry out desk research yourself 
by using the index to search for the relevant sectors . 
Market research agencies
Sharing the cost of the survey with other organisations can save 
money . 
For many startups , the costs of using an agency may be prohibitive , 
and good ones are likely to start at four fi gures , according to Michael 
Warren . But those costs should be set against the real benefi ts to 
your business of getting right the product , the retail layout or new 
KIRSTY ’ S STORY
Focus groups were really useful
To refi ne her product , Kirsty McGregor , founder of parenting website Entertainthekids . 
com , decided to arrange around nine special preview evenings attended by childcare 
experts to get feedback on her website , to make sure it was right for her target market . 
 ‘ We spent days on end collating address lists , stuffi ng envelopes , and sticking stamps to send out a 
7 , 000 mailing inviting those who work with children ( nurseries , kids clubs , childminders , football clubs , 
primary teachers , tutors , etc ) to our preview evenings . There were some good ideas voiced by the attendees , many of which we incorporated into the site prior to the launch . 
 ‘ It was incredibly nerve-racking . I ’ m normally so confi dent , and have such a strong belief in the site . But 
just prior to every preview evening start time I got so nervous . Would anyone show up ? What would they 
think of it ? Would they tell us something that we hadn ’ t realised that would make the site useless , or 
certainly not as good an idea as we thought it was ? Your self-confi dence plummets , so you have to pull 
yourself up by the bootstraps , smile and wait to see what happens . 
 ‘ On the whole they have been very positive , although we had a real wobble one evening when at 
6 . 30pm , the start time , no one had arrived . Thankfully that wasn ’ t the case by 6 . 40pm .  ’ 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 96 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 56 PM
97
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH
It ’ s important 
to know 
whom you will 
be competing 
with for your 
potential 
customers ’ 
time and 
money
restaurant . Good market research should pay for itself and , as with 
anything , there are also ways to keep costs down . 
First , shop around . The BMRA offers a free helpline and a free 
service through its website to help you select a market research 
agency . Contact three or four , outline what you need , then compare 
prices and service . A good agency should have detailed proposals 
about ways to carry out the research and should also be happy for you 
to contact existing or former customers for testimonials . Sharing the 
cost of the survey with other organisations , who have their questions 
included in the same questionnaire , can also help to cut costs . 
When approaching an agency , be clear from the outset about 
what you want to discover , whether it is testing a new product during 
development , or gauging customer needs and people ’ s responses to 
different products . Going to a market research agency with a defi nitive 
set of objectives , and a good sense of how you will use research results 
to improve your business , can make the agency ’ s task much simpler . 
Understanding your 
competition
As mentioned previously , fi nding out about your competition is a key 
part of the market research you need to carry out before starting up . 
But collecting information isn ’ t enough , it ’ s also vital that you gain an 
in-depth understanding of your potential competitors . It ’ s important to 
know whom you will be competing with for your potential customers ’ 
time and money . What are their strengths and weaknesses ? How are 
they positioned in the market ? A good competitive analysis varies 
according to what industry you are looking at and your specifi c 
marketing plan and situation , but there are some common themes . 
Begin by thinking about the general nature of the competition in 
your type of business , and how and why customers seem to choose 
one provider over another : 
• Price or billing rates
• Reputation
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 97 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 56 PM
98
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
• Image and visibility
• Are brand names important ? 
• How influential is word of mouth in providing long-term satisfied 
customers ? 
For example , competition in the restaurant business might depend 
on reputation and trends in one part of the market and on location and 
parking in another . Alternatively , for the internet and internet service 
providers , speed of connection and response rates to problems might 
be important . Meanwhile , a purchase decision for a car may be based 
on style , or speed or reputation for reliability . For many professional 
service practices , the nature of competition depends on word of mouth 
because advertising is not completely accepted and , therefore , not as 
infl uential . Is there price competition between accountants , doctors 
and lawyers ? 
Next , think about the factors that make the most difference for 
your business and why : 
• How do people choose travel agencies or florists for weddings ? 
• Why does someone hire one gardener over another ? 
• Why would a customer choose Starbucks over the local coffee 
house ? 
• Why select a Dell computer instead of one from HP or Gateway ? 
This type of information is invaluable in understanding the nature 
of competition . Compare your potential product or service in the light 
of those factors of competition . For example : 
• If you are planning to open a travel agency , will your agency offer 
better airline ticketing than others , or perhaps be located next to 
a major university and cater to student traffic ? Are existing travel 
agents offering good service , better selection or better computer 
connections ? 
• The computer you plan to sell is faster and better , or perhaps comes 
in fruity colours . Do existing computer agents offer better price or 
service than you have planned ? 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 98 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 56 PM
99
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH 
! TOP TIPS
WHERE TO FIND KEY MARKET INFORMATION 
! The internet 
! Trade associations 
! Government departments 
! Local libraries for reference directories 
! Industry magazines 
! General interest business titles 
! Market research fi rms
In other words , you should know how you plan to position yourself 
in the market . Why would people buy your product or services 
instead of the others offered in the same general categories ? What 
benefi ts will you offer at what price , to whom , and how will your mix 
compare to others ? Think about specifi c kinds of benefi ts , features 
and market groups , comparing where you think you can show the 
difference . Describe each of your potential major competitors in 
terms of those same factors . This may include their size , the market 
share they command , their comparative product quality , their 
growth , available capital and resources , image , marketing strategy , 
target markets , or whatever else you consider important . Make sure 
you specifi cally describe the strengths and weaknesses of each 
competitor , and compare them to your own plans in terms of service , 
pricing , reputation , management , fi nancial position , brand awareness , 
business development , technology , or other factors that you feel are 
important . Consider the segments of the market in which competitors 
operate and their strategy . How much are they likely to affect your 
business , and what threats and opportunities do they represent ? 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 99 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 56 PM
100
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
As indicated earlier , you can fi nd an amazing wealth of market 
data on the internet . The hard part , of course , is sorting through it and 
knowing what to keep . Access to competitive information is variable , 
depending on where you are and the nature of the competition . 
Competitors that are publicly traded may have a signifi cant amount 
of information available , as regular fi nancial reporting is a requirement 
of every serious stock market in the world . Wherever your target is 
listed for public trading , it has to report data . Competitive information 
may be limited in situations where your competitors are privately held . 
If possible , you may want to play the role of a potential customer 
and gain information from that perspective . Industry associations , 
industry publications , media coverage , information from the fi nancial 
community , and their own marketing materials and websites may be 
good resources to identify these factors and ‘ rate ’ the performance 
and position of each competitor . 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 100 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 56 PM
101
3 . 0 PRE-STARTUP RESEARCH
SIX CONTINTENTS AND THE 
TARGETED APPROACH
For the Six Continents pub company , a change in the make up of drinkers led to it 
developing a new bar concept–All Bar One . Now it ’ s hard to imagine a city centre in the 
UK without one . It ’ s a spectacular business success story , but what are the reasons behind it and what 
can you learn from it ? 
 ‘ The fi rst All Bar One opened in December 1994 . It was a time of major change in the British pub market , 
following the gentle , long-term decline of traditional pub goers ,  ’ explains Bob Cartwright , communications director for Six Continents . With the traditional customer base of predominately male , blue-collar 
pub drinkers shrinking , pub companies such as Six Continents realised they had to attract new types of 
customers–women , in particular . 
 ‘ Shifting social attitudes were changing the role of women at this time . They were taking around 80% of 
new jobs in knowledge-based businesses and there was a dramatic shift in the age at which they were 
marrying and having children ,  ’ explains Cartwright . These young , women professionals , combined with 
an ever-expanding group of professional men , had formed a new pub-going market the existing pubs 
weren ’ t catering for .  ‘ We needed female-friendly pubs that young professionals of both sexes would 
want to visit .  ’ So Six Continents developed All Bar One . 
For a start , the buildings broke the traditional pub mould , with spacious saloons and large windows 
instead of the usual frosted glass frontage .  ‘ This was so people could walk past and see immediately 
whether it was the sort of place they would feel comfortable in ,  ’ says Cartwright . Behind the bar , things 
changed as well .  ‘ Beer had always been the traditional pub drink . We decided to have a large choice 
of wine , displayed very clearly and available to buy by the glass or bottle ,  ’ explains Cartwright .  ‘ We also 
compiled a large [ food ] menu that would be attractive to both men and women .  ’ In short , everything 
about All Bar One was designed with its target market in mind–a lesson that small businesses would do 
well to take on board . 
03SYOB_CH_03 . indd 101 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 44 : 56 PM
103
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ By this point you should have carried out the relevant 
research into the viability of your proposed venture , 
including having examined your market and looking 
at customers and competition . With all these data 
to hand , and convinced that your company will be a 
success , you now need to start planning the business 
properly . The best way to do this is to prepare a 
business plan , which will prove valuable not only in 
securing any necessary funding , but also in helping 
you run the company after launch . This can be 
one of the most daunting aspects of starting up a 
business , because so much can ride on it . However , 
if you approach it carefully and logically , and clearly 
understand each key element , you will have little to 
worry about . Read on for a defi nitive guide to drawing 
up your business plan and the various types of fi nance 
it could help secure…
4 . 0
WRITING A 
BUSINESS PLAN 
AND FINANCE 
ISSUES
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 103 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
104
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Why write a business plan ? 
Having a well-researched and logical business plan will not only get 
your venture off the ground , but also keep it on track when it is up 
and running . In the fi rst instance , unless you have a strong plan , you 
are unlikely to secure any funds and your idea could fall at the fi rst 
hurdle . Your plan will serve as a structured form of communication to 
your investors , whether it ’ s the government ’ s Business Link service , 
the banks or even family and friends , and it will provide reassurance 
as well as a means for everyone , yourself included , to measure your 
business ’ s performance . 
A business plan will help you to prioritise what exactly needs to 
be achieved and by when . Do you need to fi nd premises for your 
business before you hire staff ? Should you be talking to wholesalers 
before your product has been fi nished ? In the current climate , it ’ s also 
important to outline what strategy you have in place for getting your 
venture through the recession – perhaps you consider it recessionproof , or you have done your research and have started in a sector 
where companies are growing , or you have strong measures to control 
expenditure . The answers will be different for each business , but it 
certainly helps if they are clear in your mind .  ‘ If objectives are clearly 
fl agged up , they are more likely to be achieved ,  ’ says Tim Berry , 
president of business planning software company Palo Alto . 
By using your business plan to prioritise key tasks , you can also 
use it to plan your cashfl ow . It ’ s vital to establish just how much you 
intend to spend and when . Whether it ’ s to buy stock , order uniforms , 
lease equipment etc .  , unless your fi nances match your requirements 
at the right moment , your business could stall . 
Clearly , compiling a business plan should be at the top of your ‘ to 
do ’ list . If you are in a partnership or part of a potential management 
team , then decide early on who will write the plan , and then the same 
individual should be assigned the task of making the business stick 
to it . How far ahead to plan will again depend on your own aims and 
the type of business , but a year , broken down month by month , will 
be a minimum . 
It ’ s vital to 
establish just 
how much 
you intend to 
spend and 
when
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 104 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
105
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
Once you ’ ve established responsibility and a timeframe , you need 
to decide on certain criteria , on which your business ’ s success will be 
determined and how these can be achieved . For instance , it could be 
hitting a given number of sales by a set date through an aggressive 
marketing campaign , or expanding to three more product lines through 
extensive market research . Whatever these achievement criteria turn 
PRIDE VALLEY FOODS 
AND THE CAREFUL PLAN
Company : Pride Valley Foods
Owner-manager : Hossain Rezaei
Pride Valley Foods was founded in 1990 by Hossain Rezaei . The fi rm supplies speciality breads to 
some of the biggest suppliers in the country , including Tesco and Marks & Spencer . Based in Seaham , 
County Durham , the business now employs 250 staff and has , on average , doubled in size every year . 
Rezaei attributes his success to research and planning . 
After researching the market , Rezaei planned his company ’ s growth , for which he used the Tick Tree 
method . In this method , each of the steps must be completed on time and within budget . Starting from 
the fi rst branch on the tree , Rezaei borrowed a small amount and built the business gradually . He illustrates his approach with a household example . If you want to decorate a room in your house , you plan a 
timetable outlining each of the steps . The fi rst step is to remove the furniture , then you may need another 
person to help you move it and perhaps need somewhere to move it to . You may need to budget for 
removal costs , such as £50 to hire a van and the time it will take to move the furniture . Only then can you 
move on to the next stage . With business , the fi gures are larger but the principle is the same . 
 ‘ You have to borrow £10 , 000 and then deliver what you said you would do . When you have done that 
you can go back and borrow more . A lot of people fail because they go straight to step two or three and 
they haven ’ t got the track record , the experience or the market knowledge ,  ’ Rezaei says . 
Rezaei ’ s careful planning also ensured that when Pride Valley ’ s factory was destroyed by fi re and insurers 
initially refused to pay out on the policy , Rezaei kept the business running . While keeping sight of his 
original plan , Rezaei moved back to old premises , handed customers over to competitors and returned 
to his backers with an emergency plan . Within six months , his business was back on track because 
Rezaei had planned a series of steps to get back to his original plan . 
Rezaei believes that any business will succeed or fail on the basis of the three Cs – capital , character 
and capability . What he didn ’ t add to the list was careful planning – but this has undoubtedly been the 
key to the success of Pride Valley Foods . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 105 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
106
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
out to be , you need to think hard about them without making too 
many assumptions . Consider your business failing in two or three 
years ’ time and try to imagine the reasons it might do so . 
Preparing data for your 
business plan
This section will describe the key data you will need to compile before 
you start , some of which you will be able to get from your market 
research , discussed in the previous chapter . 
The legal structure of your startup
While , understandably , the focus of most entrepreneurs is on their 
 ‘ idea ’  , it is vital that the operational and logistical requirements are 
not neglected . For example , decisions regarding whether you intend 
to trade as a sole trader , partnership or limited company are very 
important . Prior to deciding , enlist the help of a local accountant or your 
local Business Link offi ce .  ( The options available to you are discussed 
in Chapter 5 . 0 )  . Similarly , you should understand and cover issues 
such as your potential VAT ( value-added tax ) obligations , registering a 
trademark or trade name and drafting employment contracts . 
Managing the numbers
Whether you like fi gures or not , having a thorough understanding of 
 ‘ the numbers ’ that will impact on your business is a crucial component 
to running a successful business , particularly at the planning stage . At 
the outset , it will be important to understand : 
• Your startup costs
• Your funding requirements
• Your cashflow forecast for the following months . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 106 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
107
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
Your startup costs
Your startup costs include how much it will actually cost to get your 
business up and running : what you will need to pay out before the 
launch date , such as legal and administrative fees that may be involved 
in registering your company , and any marketing , ranging from prelaunch advertising to the design of your logo and stationery . There ’ s 
also the cost of renting premises if you are not working from home 
and any stock or equipment you may need , such as general offi ce 
and IT items , to specialist tools that may be required for your particular 
business . You will also need to consider how much money you will 
need during the early months , once you are up and running – this is 
known as your cash reserve and covers you initially when you are likely 
to be making a loss . How much your cash reserve will be depends 
on how quickly you can start to bring revenue into the company , so 
you need to consider carefully how long it will take until you reach the 
break-even point ( see below ) and move into profi t . Here ’ s an example 
of typical startup costs and how you can itemise them : 
Initial expenses ( legal costs , stationery , sales literature , logo and 
branding design ) 
£2 , 500
Money in the bank as reserve for early losses £16 , 500
Startup stock or raw materials ( if required ) £900
Other short-term assets ( leasehold improvements , fixtures , 
signage , etc .  ) 
£700
Long-term or fixed assets ( land , machinery , IT equipment , etc .  ) £10 , 000
Total startup requirements £45 , 000
Your funding requirements
To get your business off the ground , you will most likely need fi nancial 
help to cover some of the startup costs outlined above . Your business 
plan will be a vital tool for convincing lenders to support your company . 
So , you will need to have carefully worked out how much money you 
need to borrow , and explain your reasoning behind the fi gure . It ’ s 
important to remember that once you have secured fi nance , it won ’ t 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 107 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
108
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
be easy going back to ask for more , so it ’ s vital that you get it right fi rst 
time . Although it ’ s wise not to overestimate how much funding you 
need , as it ’ s likely investors will react unkindly to such an approach , 
you do need to make sure you don ’ t ask for too little , as this will put a 
lot of pressure on your company . This is when working out the amount 
of cash you will need in reserve becomes important , and when you 
are likely to reach the break-even point . 
Your break-even point
Your break-even point is the critical milestone at which your new 
company stops making a loss and is about to move into profi t once 
all the additional expenses have been taken into account – estimating 
as accurately as you can when you will reach this point is an expected 
part of you business plan . Before you can work this out you need to 
formulate your startup costs and monthly running costs , taking into 
account any repayments on loans , salaries , etc . You then need to 
build in your sales projections of how many products , or how much 
demand you will have for your service , per month . By comparing your 
projected monthly revenues against your total monthly costs , you 
should be able to come up with a point at which you start to move 
into profi t , that is , your break-even point . 
Calculating the break-even point will give you an excellent idea of 
the costs involved in your business and the level of sales you will need 
to generate , which will in turn affect your overall business strategy . 
How much business you have to generate ( either number of products 
or units of service ) in a given time to break even can be calculated 
using the equation below : 
Total revenue per month  Total costs per month
Unit sale price  Unit sales  Total monthly fixed costs  ( Unit variable cost 
Unit sales )  
( Unit sale price  Unit sales ) – ( Unit variable cost  Unit sales )  Total fixed costs 
( Unit sale price – Unit variable cost )  Unit sales  Total fixed costs
Unit sales per month  Total fixed costs 
Unit sale price – Unit variable cost
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 108 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
109
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
Once you know how much you need to sell in one month to break 
even , you can work out from your sales projections how long it will 
take for your business to reach this point . You can also see in the table 
the elements of the equation that you need to change to reach the 
break-even point sooner if you want to . 
Your cashfl ow forecast for the following months
Estimating the amount and origin of cash coming into your business , 
together with how much is being paid out and where it ’ s going during 
any given period is a vital part of good business management . This 
is known as a cashfl ow forecast and it ’ s also what many lenders 
or investors will be looking for before they decide to invest in your 
business . This makes it a key part of your business plan . Once your 
business is established , it ’ s usual to produce cashfl ow forecasts for a 
quarter or even a year in advance . However , during the early stages 
of your business , it ’ s probably wiser to do this more frequently – 
say a month in advance . When formulating a cashfl ow forecast , it ’ s 
critical that you don ’ t overestimate your incoming cash . You will fi nd it 
easier to get an accurate indication of your outgoings as you should 
be able to itemise them , as described above . The problem is , you are 
unlikely to be able to accurately identify how much money is going 
to be coming in , as you can only estimate how much business you 
will generate each month . This means it ’ s vital to err on the side of 
caution , keeping your forecast on the conservative side . 
Identifying the right people
Along with fi nancial predictions , the people entrusted with putting 
your plan into action will be subject to particular scrutiny by potential 
fi nanciers . Regardless of the entrepreneur ’ s / founder ’ s skill set , he 
or she will invariably need help . While many non-core activities can 
be outsourced , certain functions , such as sales , will need full-time 
attention . You should outline the various skills required to run the 
business , price them into the model , and also identify any gaps and 
prospective candidates to fi ll them . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 109 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
110
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Clearly defi ning and articulating 
the customer benefi ts
Many entrepreneurs fail to clearly articulate the benefi ts of their new 
venture . As a result , the term ‘ elevator pitch ’ was introduced into 
modern lexicons as a proposed solution to this . An elevator pitch is your 
idea , supported by your business model , company solution , marketing 
strategy and competition , all stated in the length of time it takes for 
a short elevator ride . This simple idea encourages entrepreneurs to 
think carefully about the language they use when describing their new 
venture ( particularly technological ones )  . It also reminds you to remain 
customer-focused and ensure that you concentrate on describing the 
benefi ts . 
Getting a mentor
Many startup entrepreneurs are paranoid that their idea will be stolen 
and behave secretively prior to launch . Often the idea is closely guarded 
and only discussed with close confi dantes . However , your confi dantes 
( often family or friends ) may fi nd it diffi cult to pose suffi ciently rigorous 
questions to you , because they don ’ t want to offend you or they lack the 
relevant experience or judgement to critically analyse your new venture . 
Hence , an idea with serious fl aws , which could have been rectifi ed early 
on in the process , can move ahead only for the wheels to come off at 
the most important phase . It is highly recommended that you engage 
an independent mentor or plan reviewer at an early stage . This person 
can help hone your idea before you present to fi nanciers or bankers . 
Key elements of your 
business plan
The business plan should give a concise description of what your 
company will sell or the service it will offer , the buyers you will be 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 110 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
111
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
selling to and how you will be fi lling a gap in the market , by touching 
on pricing and existing competition . So it should be prepared to a 
high standard , be verifi able ( meaning that you need to be able to
back up your statements with facts ) and with no jargon or general 
position statements . It should offer the reader a combination of 
clear description and analysis , including a realistic SWOT ( strengths , 
weaknesses , opportunities and threats ; see page 116 ) test of 
each area . This will demonstrate to investors that you are realistic 
about your company ’ s prospects . So ensure that you have a full 
appreciation of the risks , and you know how to grab your market
share – all of which , of course , should have been covered in your
market research . For your own benefi t as well , it must contain details 
of how exactly you intend to meet your key objectives , as well as 
sales forecasts , target dates and who , apart from yourself , is to be 
responsible for this . 
Then comes the boring , but just as necessary part – a fi nancial 
analysis that shows clearly how much fi nance you need and where 
you plan to source it from ( see the section on Raising fi nance , 
page 129 )  , a summary of startup costs , break-even point and cashfl ow 
forecast ( as described above )  , plus profi t and loss and balance sheet 
projections . 
The key to all this will be striking a balance between coveringyour 
business in enough detail , and keeping the plan clear and to the point 
for it to be useful to refer to time and time again rather than just sitting 
on a shelf gathering dust once you ’ ve begun trading . 
The key features of your plan are fi rst described below in brief and 
then explained in more detail later in the chapter . 
The length
The length of a business plan depends on individual circumstances . 
It should be long enough to cover the subject adequately and short 
enough to maintain interest . Unless your business requires several 
million pounds of venture capital and is highly complex , the business 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 111 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
112
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
plan should be no longer than 15 pages . The British Venture Capital 
Association ( BVCA )  , the members of which you may well be pitching 
your plan to , recommends erring on the side of brevity . If investors are 
interested , they can always call to ask for additional information . 
The look
The plan should look professional . Ensure there are no grammar or 
spelling mistakes . Use graphs and charts where appropriate and titles 
and subtitles to divide different subject matters . Although the aim is to 
make the plan look good , do avoid expensive stationery , as this could 
suggest unnecessary waste and extravagance . 
The company
The business plan should detail all the important aspects of your 
company , viz .  , the market and customers , the products / services , 
the strength of the management team – and if there are any gaps 
in talent , identify how you will fi ll them . The plan should also explain 
how products will be made or services provided . Realistic fi nancial 
projections should be outlined and you should provide different 
scenarios for sales , costs and cashfl ows for both the long and short 
term . 
 ‘ What if ’ s and ways out
A number of possible scenarios should be presented , along with how 
your company would cope in different situations . These ‘ What if ?  ’ 
questions will show how your business will react to or counter the 
effects of an unexpected drop in sales or an increase in costs . The 
business plan should also detail potential exit strategies . 
Although 
the aim is to 
make the plan 
look good , 
do avoid 
expensive 
stationery
Contact
British Venture 
Capital Association
www . bvca . co . uk
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 112 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
113
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
The executive summary 
and mission statement
The last thing to be written is the fi rst part of the business plan : the 
executive summary . This is the most important section and summarises in two pages what you have written in detail in the following 
10–15 pages . This is where , among other things , you lay down the 
company ’ s mission statement – a few sentences encapsulating what 
the business does for what types of client , your aims for the company 
and what gives it its competitive edge . That is , the mission statement 
should combine the business ’ s current situation with your aspirations . 
As with the main part of the business plan , the executive summary 
! TOP TIPS
CHAPTERS TO INCLUDE IN YOUR 
BUSINESS PLAN 
! Executive summary ( including mission statement )  
! Products and services ( detail on your off er )  
! The market ( customer and competitor analysis )  
! The proposition ( why customers will buy from you )  
! Marketing strategy ( how you will get your message across )  
! Sales strategy ( how you plan to convert interest into sales )  
! Financial data ( sales forecast , cost base , profi t estimates )  
! Management and personnel ( profiles of key people behind the business )  
! SWOT analysis ( strengths , weaknesses , opportunities , threats )  
! Ownership and legal structure ( shareholders and whether limited , partnership or 
sole trader )  
! Summary ( brief overview and roundup ) 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 113 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
114
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Sales should 
close the 
deals that 
marketing 
opens
should be clearly written and powerfully persuasive , yet it should 
balance sales talk with realism in order to be convincing . It should be 
no more than 1 , 000 words and should also state your company ’ s legal 
status . Both these are discussed in more detail later in the chapter . 
Forecasting your sales
Preparing a sales forecast
Developing your sales forecast isn ’ t as hard as most people imagine . 
Think of your sales forecast as an educated guess . It requires good 
working knowledge of your business but is much more of an art than a 
science . Remember that even if you don ’ t have business training , you 
can guess your own business ’ s sales better than any expert device , 
statistical analysis or mathematical routine . Experience counts more 
than any other factor . 
A business plan should usually project sales by month for the next 
year , and annual sales for the following three years . This doesn ’ t mean 
businesses shouldn ’ t plan for a longer term than just three years , it 
simply means that the detail of monthly forecasts doesn ’ t pay off 
beyond a year , except in special cases . It also means that the detail 
in the yearly forecasts probably doesn ’ t make sense beyond three 
years . It does mean , of course , that you still plan your business for 
fi ve , 10 , and even 15-year time frames , but you just don ’ t do it within 
the detailed context of business plan fi nancials . Break your sales down 
into manageable parts , and then forecast these different elements . 
Estimate the fi gures based on line of sales , month by month , then add 
up the sales lines and add up the months , presenting your estimate 
graphically in a table or chart ; remember that you still need to explain 
them . A complete business plan will usually include some discussion 
of your sales forecast , sales strategy , sales programmes and related 
information . The text , tables , and charts together will provide some 
visual variety and ease of use . Remember to position the tables and 
charts near the text covering the related topics . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 114 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
115
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
Drawing up a sales strategy
Near the sales forecast you should describe your sales strategy , 
which should deal with how and when to close sales prospects , how 
to compensate sales people , how to optimise order processing and 
database management , and how to manoeuvre price , delivery and 
conditions . It should answer questions such as : 
• How will you sell ? Through retail , wholesale , discount , mail order or 
over the phone , for example . 
• Will you maintain a sales force ? 
• How will you train your sales people , and how will they be 
compensated ? 
Your business plan text should summarise and highlight the 
numbers you have entered in the sales forecast table . Make sure you 
discuss important assumptions in enough detail , and that you explain 
the background suffi ciently . Try to anticipate the questions your readers 
will ask . Include whatever information you think will be relevant and 
that your readers will need . Details are critical to implementation and 
your business plan should include specifi c information related to sales 
programmes . 
• How is this strategy to be implemented ? 
• Do you have concrete and specific plans ? 
• How will implementation be measured ? 
Business plans are about results , and generating results depends 
in part on how specifi c you are in the plan . For anything related to a 
Make sure 
you discuss 
important 
assumptions 
in enough 
detail , and 
that you 
explain the 
background 
suffi ciently
MARKETING VERSUS SALES STRATEGY
Don ’ t confuse sales strategy with your marketing strategy . Sales should close the deals that marketing 
opens . To understand the difference between marketing and sales strategies , think of marketing as the 
broader effort of generating sales leads on a large scale , and sales as the efforts to bring those sales 
leads into the system as individual sales transactions . Marketing aims to build the business ’ s image , 
customer awareness and propensity to buy , while sales involves getting the order . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 115 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
116
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
SWOT is 
an easy , 
understandable way of 
identifying 
key issues 
and communicating 
them to 
others
sale that is supposed to happen , include it here and list the person 
responsible , dates required and budgets . All this will make your 
business plan more real . 
SWOT analysis
SWOT analysis is a method of describing your future company in 
terms of those factors that will have the most impact on the business . 
Strengths and weaknesses are internal factors , such as the quality of 
your product or the skills of your management , whereas opportunities 
and threats are external factors , which may include the development 
of a whole new market ( opportunity )  , the arrival of a clutch of new 
competitors , the impact of the recession ( threat ) or the eventual 
economic recovery ( opportunity )  . SWOT is an easy , understandable 
way of identifying key issues and communicating them to others . To 
make things even simpler to grasp , the typical SWOT analysis is done 
on a four-cell grid : 
Strengths Weaknesses
Opportunities Threats
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 116 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
117
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
Sometimes it helps to start without the grid and list any issues 
at all that might affect the business – internal or external , real or 
perceived . Then , when the fl ow starts to dry up , organise the chosen 
items into the SWOT categories . Here ’ s a guide to help you complete 
the categories . 
Strengths
In the fi rst box list all the strengths of your company : 
• Why should you succeed ? 
• What will you do well ? 
• Why will customers do business with you ? 
• What distinct advantages does your company offer ? 
The important consideration is honesty . Avoid being too modest 
or too optimistic . Any SWOT analysis is essentially subjective , but 
try for a third-party viewpoint : what strengths does the outsider 
see ? A jump-start trick , especially for a group SWOT session is to 
begin by brainstorming adjectives that characterise your business , 
writing them down as quickly as people say them , and then using those 
words to construct a more considered profi le of your company ’ s 
strengths . If you are the sole proprietor or the prime mover in the 
business , try starting with a list of your own positive personal 
characteristics . 
Weaknesses
A weakness is something that could seriously impede your 
company ’ s performance – a limitation or defi ciency in resource , skills 
or capabilities . These could be factors that you will be able to address 
on launch . For example , a weakness could be a lack of awareness in 
the marketplace compared with your competition , which means you 
will need to promote your company heavily to raise its profi le , ideally 
before you launch the business or immediately after . Also , although 
you may list your personal knowledge of the market as a strength , 
the fact that the company will initially be heavily reliant on you could 
be seen as a weakness . If you can spot the key weaknesses of your 
The important 
consideration 
is honesty
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 117 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
118
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
proposed venture now , you can address them in time for the launch , 
and it shows investors that all-important element of realism in your 
approach . So don ’ t try to disguise weaknesses , simply acknowledge 
them and ensure you have a strategy in place to tackle them . 
Opportunities
Under opportunities think about where the openings are for your 
business , or the customer needs not being met by your competitors . 
You will probably start with marketing issues , presumably because 
your business fi lls a niche or can compete effectively , but do include 
all the possibilities . For instance , think of the interesting trends in your 
business sector – in terms of not only markets but also in technology 
changes , the legislative and regulatory environment and social 
patterns . 
Threats
Threats are key impediments that your company will face on launch . 
What are the more apparent obstacles in your way , both actual 
and potential ? Obvious candidates would include the economic 
downturn , a sudden rush of bad debts or a slack sales period leading 
to cashfl ow problems . But try to think further than that : 
• What is your competition doing that could take business away from 
you or stunt your company ’ s growth ? 
• How might your competitors react to any moves you make ? 
• What trends do you see that could wipe you out or make your 
service or product obsolete ? 
• Might technology changes threaten your products or services ? 
• What happens if a key customer goes under before paying a 
sizeable invoice ? 
It ’ s important to include a couple of worst-case scenarios . Weighing 
threats against opportunities is not a reason to indulge in pessimism , 
but rather a question of considering how possible damage may be 
overcome , bypassed or restricted . 
It ’ s important 
to include a 
couple of 
worst-case 
scenarios… 
to consider 
how possible 
damage 
may be 
overcome
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 118 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
119
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
Using SWOT data
Once you have the results of your own SWOT analysis and at least 
one ( but preferably more ) from another source , combine them on 
the grid . Then sort each category fi rst by relative importance . Then 
re-sort them in terms of reality – this an interesting exercise , which 
might well require some soul-searching . For example , ask yourself 
what evidence you really have for saying that customers will choose 
your product over your competitors ’  . Finally trim the categories to 
around no more than fi ve or six items each per category , homing 
in on the really critical issues . You can use this as the basis for 
some strategic planning . This cut-down SWOT summary and a 
description of your sound strategic approach to address the points 
listed should appear in your business plan . This will cover how you 
plan to : 
• Build on the strengths
• Minimise the weaknesses
• Seize the opportunities
• Counter the threats . 
A SWOT 
analysis 
helps identify 
the critical 
issues in any 
situation and 
organises 
them in a way 
that enables 
you to come 
up with a 
sound 
strategic 
approach
USING SWOT ANALYSIS TO CLARIFY YOUR BUSINESS GOALS
After a SWOT analysis you might see things in terms of answers to these four questions : 
• How can strengths be used to take advantage of opportunities ? 
• How can strengths be used to avoid or defuse threats ? 
• How can weaknesses be overcome to take advantage of opportunities ? 
• How can weaknesses be overcome to counteract or minimise threats ? 
• Remember to try to be objective at all times when writing your strategy approach . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 119 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
120
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
The people
Anyone who runs a business knows that none of the areas covered 
by a business plan can be tackled without people . Why then do so 
many business plans feel that it ’ s suffi cient to insert an appendix with 
the CVs of the managers ? This token gesture does not give any feel 
for how the business will be run , what the potential gaps in expertise 
may be or what essential skills will be needed in the future . It all comes 
back to strategic planning versus day-to-day fi re-fi ghting . 
If you are launching solo , the people section will initially revolve 
around your skills and experience . But this model can still help you 
to draw up a list of the kind of people you will need to meet your 
projections for the business , either at startup or beyond , which will 
show that you have a clear understanding of what is required to 
realise your vision . Here is a model that might help you to analyse the 
 ‘ people ’ section of the plan . 
ACTION POINT
FOUR KEY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
A FLAWLESS SWOT ANALYSIS
Be comprehensive : This means picking up small details . A minor weakness could be too few fi ling 
cabinets , while a major threat could be a decline in the value of sterling following an election . Of course , 
this could also be an key opportunity if there was a rise in currency value instead . 
Be prepared : Put real effort into background preparation and gathering information . Be self-critical , but 
don ’ t be too defensive . SWOT analysis is there to stimulate ideas and not stifl e them . 
Include others : SWOT works well in group sessions . To get a real brainstorm going you need more than 
four people , but to keep it manageable limit numbers to around 10 . 
Test your analysis : Ask an outsider ( your accountant , perhaps , or family member ) to conduct the same 
exercise and compare their views with your fi ndings . The more people who look at your SWOT analysis , 
the more ideas you are likely to get . 
If you are 
launching 
solo , the 
people 
section will 
initially 
revolve 
around your 
skills and 
experience
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 120 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 24 PM
121
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
1 . Draw up a table with four columns :  ( a ) people ,  ( b ) experience ,  
( c ) skills and ( d ) functions . 
2 . Make a list of all the people who are involved in your business in 
column ( a ) and summarise their experience and skills in columns 
( b ) and ( c )  , so that you can clearly see who you have on board and 
what they each bring to the business . 
3 . Make a list of the areas of sector and functional expertise required 
for the business and see who is ideally placed to fill each of these 
roles . Are there any functions that can ’ t be undertaken by the 
people who are within the team and , if so , how do you propose to 
fill these gaps ? 
4 . Draw up another table showing the business in three years ’ time . 
How will the management team be different ? What steps will you 
need to take to both keep existing staff satisfied and recruit new 
staff of sufficient calibre to deliver your ambitious future plans as 
described in other sections ? 
Businesses change over time , and it is unusual for an early-stage 
company to have a full management team . Generally an entrepreneur 
will endeavour to fi ll many roles , some of which they will be particularly 
unsuited to . Why not explore in the business plan what roles could be 
performed better by others , such as a fi nance director , sales director 
and even the chief executive ? How are you going to afford people 
of suffi cient calibre to deliver what you want ? Perhaps you will need 
to raise some further fi nance to cover this at a later date . One of 
the most valid reasons for raising equity capital is to pay for people 
who are good enough to take a company to a higher level , and yet 
generally entrepreneurs leave such recruitment too late . 
The mission statement
An effective mission statement should be able to tell your company 
story and ideals in less than 30 seconds , and , as such , it can be one 
of the more challenging elements of your business plan . The readers 
should be able to gain a clear understanding of what your company ’ s 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 121 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
122
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
about from the mission statement , so it ’ s vital to think it through very 
carefully . Essentially , it should only be around three to four sentences 
long , defi ning what your company is , what it does , what it stands 
for and why , and it is often best developed with input from everyone 
involved in the launch . 
It can help to examine other companies ’ mission statements , 
but don ’ t be tempted to copy any , because it ’ s vital that the mission 
statement is original and accurately refl ects your business , not 
someone else ’ s . You should also make sure that you believe in your 
mission statement , as it will provide the basis for your business going 
forward , inspiring both you and your future employees to success . 
Therefore , if it ’ s a lie , it can be demotivational for your employees and 
put off customers once this becomes apparent . 
It ’ s vital that 
the mission 
statement is 
original and 
accurately 
refl ects your 
business
MISSION CONTROL : EXAMPLE MISSION STATEMENTS 
FROM FAMOUS COMPANIES
IBM
 ‘ At IBM , we strive to lead in the invention , development and manufacture of the industry ’ s most advanced information technologies , including computer systems , software , storage systems and microelectronics . 
We translate these advanced technologies into value for our customers through our professional solutions , services and consulting businesses worldwide .  ’ 
Amazon . com
 ‘ To be the most customer-centric company in the world , where people can fi nd and discover anything 
they want to buy online .  ’ 
Apple Computers ( 1984 ) 
 ‘ To produce high-quality , low cost , easy-to-use products that incorporate high technology for the individual . We are proving that high technology does not have to be intimidating for non-computer experts .  ’ 
Sainsbury ’ s
 ‘ Our mission is to be the consumer ’ s fi rst choice for food , delivering products of outstanding quality and 
great service at a competitive cost through working faster , simpler and together .  ’ 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 122 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
123
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
The executive summary
The executive summary presents the highlights of your business plan , 
and even though it opens the document , it ’ s often the fi nal part to 
be completed – for obvious reasons . The executive summary is the 
doorway to your business plan , so it ’ s important to get it right or your 
target readers will go no further . As a general rule , for a standard plan , 
the fi rst paragraph should include : 
• Business name
• Business location
• What product or service you sell
• The purpose of the plan . 
Next , highlight important points , such as projected sales and 
profi ts , unit sales , profi tability and keys to success . Essentially , you 
should include the news you don ’ t want anyone to miss . This is a good 
place to put a ‘ highlights ’ chart – a bar graph that shows prospective 
sales , gross margin and profi ts before interest and taxes for the next 
three years – as well as drawing attention to them in the text . As you 
are starting up , one of the main purposes of your plan is likely to be 
to secure investment , so say this in your executive summary , and 
specify how much investment is required and the amount of equity 
ownership offered in return . It ’ s also a good idea to add highlights of 
your management team and your competitive edge . 
If you are looking for a loan , say so in the executive summary , and 
specify the amount required ( but leave out other details about the 
loan )  . 
Investors are 
looking to be 
inspired
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 123 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
124
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Getting people to read 
your plan
Although many people work hard to produce business plans that 
are technically perfect , because they recognise the importance of 
the document in securing essential fi nance and other support vital to 
getting a business off the ground , many business plans still fail . This 
is because often they need to show more than technical excellence . 
Remember that potential investors receive lots of business plans 
and so are looking to be inspired by those that offer more than the 
ordinary . So while you should include the necessary sales forecast , 
SWOT analysis and mission statement , here are some tips that could 
provide the key to unlocking a target reader ’ s interest and encourage 
them to venture beyond the executive summary .  
! TOP TIPS
WRITING YOUR PLAN 
! Write from the audience ’ s perspective – tell them what they need to know 
! Research the market thoroughly – it proves the viability of your business 
! Understand the competition – and how you will beat it 
! Pay attention to detail – it shows you really care 
! Focus on the opportunity – talk it up , but be realistic 
! Ensure all key areas are covered – be comprehensive 
! Make sure your figures add up – they won ’ t take it seriously otherwise 
! Write a killer executive summary – it ’ s the bit that gets them interested 
! Get it reviewed – ideally by an experienced independent source 
! Implement the plan – don ’ t leave it on a shelf and forget about it
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 124 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
125
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
Research your target reader
The more you know about the reader and their requirements , the 
better equipped you will be to give them what they want – and so 
get what you want . The bank manager , the equity provider and 
whoever else you may be pitching your business plan to are likely 
to all have different needs and concerns , but will probably have one 
thing in common : they are busy , short of time , impatient and hassled . 
So spoon feed them . Make their lives easier and they will appreciate 
it . Once you have excited the fi nance provider with your vision , give 
some background about the business . Don ’ t make assumptions 
about what they know about your potential company , your ambitions 
and your plan . Tell them who you are , how you got into this position of 
writing the plan , and engagingly unfurl your vision for the business . In 
short , put it all in perspective . Frame the plan , and the reader will have 
some reference points straight away . 
Explain your proposition succinctly 
yet comprehensively
Once your readers know two things – where you came from and 
where you are going – next comes the crucial bit : can you explain 
what your value proposition is to your customers in no more than 
30 seconds or a few lines of text ? If you can , you will be in a very small 
minority of entrepreneurs – even some of the successful ones have 
never managed it . Succinctly summarise : 
• Who will buy your product or service and why they will buy ? 
• How many will they buy ? 
• Why will they continue to buy over time ? 
• Why will they buy from you rather than someone else ? 
• In short , what value are you really delivering to your customer ? 
It can often help to test yourself . For example , bore your friends 
with your proposition , or if you get the chance , try it out on prospective 
Tell them who 
you are , how 
you got into 
this position 
of writing the 
plan , and 
engagingly 
unfurl your 
vision for the 
business
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 125 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
126
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
customers , and once you have it off pat , write it down . It will be one 
of your most valuable assets . If all this sounds quite simple on paper , 
remember that many have found it impossible to achieve in practice . 
But after all the time spent researching your market , working through 
your sales forecasts , constructing your SWOT analysis and other 
relevant details and then committing them to paper , you may just 
crack it . Working on producing a killer executive summary will be well 
worth the effort , as it could prove decisive in gaining the investment 
you need to launch your company . 
KIRSTY ’ S STORY
I prepared a fantastic business plan
Co-founder of the website Entertainthekids . com , Kirsty McGregor was 10 months into the planning 
process with fi ve months left before launch when she got a pleasant surprise…
 ‘ The process took this long because we still had “ day jobs ”  , family life and other commitments , and 
wanted to give ourselves the best chance of surviving the rocky road that most startups face in their 
fi rst few years . So we took our time , did lots of research and planning , and used the most professional 
approach we could . 
 ‘ Once I had the idea for the site , I discussed it with my brother Ross who was just fi nishing a degree in 
e-business . He thought it was great too , but we needed to put some numbers down – I had no idea if it 
was fi nancially viable . The two biggest costs I thought we would have were the website development 
itself , and the marketing costs to promote the website address to the general public – or more particularly to our target market of parents and carers . We drew up a shortlist of some website designers and 
asked them to quote for the work to get a ball-park fi gure . 
 ‘ Then we started thinking about marketing . My old employer had an in-house marketing company that I 
knew well and respected , so we got talking to them . 
 ‘ We ’ d pretty much resigned ourselves to the fact that we weren ’ t going to get funding , but thought we ’ d 
approach banks just in case . We looked at the likely costs , and I prepared some draft projections . I 
wrote a fantastic business plan ( if I do say so myself ) and enclosed three sets of projections , worst case , 
most likely case and best case , and we submitted it initially to three major banks .  ’ The fi rst two turned 
her down – however , her luck turned and the third agreed to provide a loan . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 126 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
127
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
ACTION POINT
COMMON BUSINESS PLAN MISTAKES
While including the necessary items in a business plan , make sure you don ’ t commit any of the following 
common business plan mistakes . 
Putting it off : Too many businesses make business plans only when they have no choice in the matter . 
Unless the bank or the investors want a plan , there is no plan . Don ’ t wait to write your plan until you 
think you will have enough time . It should play a key role in the development of your business , creating a 
strategic framework to build your company around , and not just created in response to a specifi c need , 
such as securing funding . This is why it is essential to review your plan regularly – it should be an organic 
document that develops as the business grows and as the infl uences on it change , such as marketing 
conditions . 
Cashfl ow casualness : Most people think in terms of profi ts instead of cash . When you imagine a new 
business , you think of what it would cost to make the product , what you could sell it for , and what the 
profi ts per unit might be . We are trained to think of business as sales minus costs and expenses , which 
equal profi ts . Unfortunately , we don ’ t spend the profi ts in a business . We spend cash . So understanding 
cashfl ow is critical . If you have only one table in your business plan , make it the cashfl ow table . 
Idea infl ation : Don ’ t overestimate the importance of the idea . You don ’ t need a great idea to start a business ; you need time , money , perseverance and common sense . Few successful businesses are based 
entirely on new ideas . A new idea is harder to sell than an existing one , because people don ’ t understand 
a new idea and they are often unsure if it will work . Plans don ’ t sell new business ideas to investors , 
people do . Investors invest in people , not ideas . The plan , although necessary , is only a way to present 
information . 
Fear and dread : Although preparing a business plan can seem daunting , if you approach it carefully and 
strategically , and have carried out the necessary research into the viability of your business beforehand , 
there is no need to fear anything – in fact fear and dread could mean you put it off until the last minute 
and then don ’ t dedicate the time and energy to it that it deserves . There are also plenty of resources 
available to help you get it right . 
Spongy , vague goals : Leave out the vague and the meaningless babble of business phrases ( such 
as ‘ being the best ’  )  , because they are simply hype . Remember that the objective of a plan is to secure 
results , and for results , you need tracking and follow up . You need specifi c dates , management responsibilities , budgets and milestones . Then you can follow up . No matter how well thought out or brilliantly 
presented your business plan may be , it means nothing unless it produces results . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 127 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
128
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Presenting your plan
When the business plan has been prepared and it has received input 
from a fi nancial adviser , the next step is to put it in front of investors . 
If you are using a business angel network , which match young 
businesses with private investors , there should be plenty of advice 
on offer as they will know exactly what a business angel is looking for . 
Local agencies such as Business Link can provide advice on how to 
structure and present your plan . Try to also run through the plan with 
any business contacts that you have , as they may spot something 
that you hadn ’ t noticed . Asking friends and family to help can also 
be useful . 
At this point , you may send just a copy of the executive summary . 
This has the advantage of saving costs and increasing the chances of 
receiving attention . Response times to the business plan will vary , but 
can take as little as a week . If the answer is ‘ No ’  , you should fi nd out 
the reasons why and then consider incorporating those ideas into a 
revised business plan , changing and strengthening the management 
team or carrying out further market research before approaching other 
potential investors . 
And remember , the business plan is a living document . Don ’ t think 
of it as a fi xed route and be prepared to adapt it to suit your audience . 
Even if you are in an established business , you must be prepared 
One size doesn ’ t fi t all : Tailor your plan to its real business purpose . Business plans can be different 
things : sales documents to sell an idea for a new business ; or detailed action plans , fi nancial plans , marketing plans or even personnel plans . They can be used to start a business , or just run a business better . 
Diluted priorities : Remember , strategy is focused . A priority list with three to four items is focused . A 
priority list with 20 items is certainly not strategic , and rarely , if ever , effective . The more items on the list , 
the less the importance of each . 
Hockey-stick shaped growth projections : Sales grow slowly at fi rst , but then shoot up boldly with 
huge growth rates , as soon as ‘ something ’ happens . Have projections that are conservative , so you can 
defend them . When in doubt , be less optimistic . 
CONTACT
Business Link
www . businesslink . 
gov . uk
0845 600 9 006
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 128 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
129
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
to adapt the plan as your market or customer base changes or if 
disaster strikes . 
Raising fi nance
If the primary function of your plan is to raise fi nance , you must clearly 
state how much money you need and why , based on the details you 
are presenting . Although banks remain the most common source of 
initial fi nance , it pays to bear in mind all the options available , and 
adapt your plan accordingly . For example , you may arrange fi nance in 
return for a stake in your business – known as ‘ equity ’ – rather than it 
simply securing a loan . In such a case , you need to include how big 
a stake of your company you are prepared to forfeit for the amount 
of funding you need . The range of fi nance options open to you are 
described below . 
Debt fi nance
Debt fi nance is simply borrowing money to buy the things you need 
to launch your business , and then paying it back in some way . 
Although many small companies are now fi nanced by the founders 
themselves , when people think about raising money , their fi rst port of 
call is generally the bank , from which a loan is the most typical form 
of debt fi nancing . Generally it has to be repaid at an agreed interest 
rate and within a specifi ed period of time . The interest rate can either 
be variable or fi xed . 
Typically the loan is secured against an asset . This means that 
if the business fails to repay the loan , the lender has the right to 
claim the asset . An asset could be a house or other premises or 
some equipment owned by the business . If you are unwilling to put 
personal possessions like your house on the line and your company 
has insuffi cient assets , a bank is unlikely to lend you money . Often a 
bank will also expect some fi nancial commitment from you personally , 
Banks are the 
commonest 
source of 
initial fi nance 
but there 
are other 
options
As the loan is 
secured , the 
cost is usually 
less than 
other more 
risky types of 
borrowing
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 129 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
130
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
There is a 
vast range of 
different debt 
fi nancing 
tools and 
each business 
should fi nd 
the one that 
is right for 
them
such as a percentage of the amount you are requesting . As the loan 
is secured , the cost is usually less than other more risky types of 
borrowing . However , a bank loan also locks companies into a payment 
schedule , which may cause cashfl ow problems for small businesses . 
You will have to show how the money will be repaid , and details from 
your business plan should help . 
The straightjacket of making a set payment at what may be a 
fi xed interest rate can also cause a lot of problems for fast-growing 
companies that consume capital very fast . For these reasons , loans 
are more suited to tried-and-tested business models that offer good 
prospects for profi tability . 
Following the credit crunch , banks have become very risk averse , 
making securing fi nance from them more diffi cult , particularly if you are 
launching a startup and have no track record of running a company . 
That ’ s not to say , however , that it isn ’ t available . Banks are still providing 
fi nance , but the terms are likely to be tougher , such as higher interest 
rates . This makes it more important than ever to shop around for the 
best deal , as it could save you money in the long term . 
You can also use a fi nancial broker to suggest the best terms 
on offer for the type of fi nance that your business needs . This can 
save you time and money , and can also increase your chances of 
getting a loan by presenting your proposal in the best way to the most 
appropriate lenders . Before enlisting the help of a broker , however , 
fi nd out what they are going to charge you . 
With loans harder to come by , there could be a tendency to be 
so relieved you ’ ve secured one that you rush into it . However , try to 
negotiate the best terms you can , as this can have a direct impact on 
the health of your business once you launch . Aside from discussing 
obvious issues , such as the due date of the loan and the interest rate , 
you also need to establish the amount of the loan fees . It ’ s important 
to make sure that you will have the fl exibility to pay off your loan 
earlier than the due date and , if possible , try to avoid any penalty for 
early settlement . Try to negotiate for a grace period for your payment 
schedule and check to make sure that late payment charges are fair . 
Make sure you have scrutinised the small print before you put pen to 
CONTACT
National 
Association of 
Commercial 
Financial Brokers
www . nacfb . org
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 130 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
131
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
paper . It can help to ask an expert , such as a solicitor , to review the 
terms . 
As shown in the box , there is a vast range of different debt 
fi nancing tools and each business should fi nd the one that is right 
for them . Using them creatively and wisely can help to reduce the 
reliance on a bank . So , if your business needs some working capital , 
but the amount fl uctuates , an overdraft is probably best for you . The 
interest rate is agreed in advance and you only pay interest for the 
time and amount that you are overdrawn . But if your business needs 
longer-term fi nance , in particular for a specifi c purchase or planned 
expenditure , you should look to take a loan that can be repaid over a 
set period . There are many reasons why debt fi nance could suit your 
business – it is accessible , fl exible and tailored . Debt fi nance will be 
the fi rst option for most small businesses , and whether it is loans , 
overdrafts , leasing or invoice discounting , the company is borrowing 
against reserves rather than giving someone ownership of shares . 
One key reason that most businesses will borrow money rather than 
DIFFERENT TYPES OF DEBT FINANCE
Debt fi nance can also take the form of an overdraft , term loan , leasing , factoring and invoice discounting . 
• An overdraft is generally used to fund working cashflow rather than capital expenditure , and is repayable on demand , while exceeding the agreed limits can be expensive . 
• Increasingly banks are offering term loans to small businesses as an alternative to using an overdraft 
facility . In particular , it allows the banks to impose a regular repayment schedule over a fixed period of 
time and to see the amount of credit gradually reducing . 
• Leasing , which is a way of borrowing to buy specific equipment or machinery , is also gaining popularity . 
• Factoring and invoice discounting is where the small business borrows against sales as a means of 
freeing up cash . Invoice discounting involves a company loaning you a large percentage of the money 
for each invoice as soon as it is raised , which is then repaid plus a commission fee when payment is 
received from your customer within a specified time period . Under factoring , the company will also 
chase the debt for you , for a slightly larger commission payment . 
Each method provides a way around cashfl ow problems for new or small companies , and they can 
prove particularly useful for those businesses that have a large outlay for each job or if they use a lot of 
suppliers . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 131 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
132
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
sell shares in their business is that debt fi nance is usually available 
from organisations in smaller amounts than equity , and unless the 
company is very large it will be too small for formal equity . 
Asset-based lending
With traditional bank loans being particularly diffi cult to come by at 
the moment , offering the assets of your business as security may 
help to persuade reluctant lenders . This is called asset-based lending , 
and has been slowly growing in popularity for some time now , and 
certainly long before the recession hit . Under the system , a bank will 
lend on items with high sell-on values , such as stock , machinery , 
premises , invoices , even brands or trademarks . The borrower usually 
has access to a revolving credit facility , where there ’ s an upper limit , 
and the amount loaned changes as it does with an overdraft . Lenders 
retain security over the assets for the length of the contract . 
To get the most from asset-based lending , it helps if your business 
is asset-rich , which could cause problems for startups . However , if 
you have machinery or property to use as assets you can expect 
advances of up to 80% of their value . For stock and raw materials , 
this reduces to 30%–70% . Typically , the annual cost of borrowing 
on a revolving credit facility is around 1 . 75%–3% above the Bank of 
England base rate , plus an annual and / or closing fee of around 0 . 5%–
1 . 5% of the total borrowed . 
Before agreeing to an asset-based loan , which could take up to 
six weeks to secure , a lender may consult a specialist valuer . As part 
of the assessment process , an in-depth evaluation of your business 
will be carried out , in which your proposed assets will be valued and 
cashfl ow and budget projections reviewed . 
Equity fi nance
Equity fi nance is where you give up a stake in your business in return for 
money . Many small businesses actually use equity fi nance without even 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 132 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
133
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
realising it . As Bank of England fi gures show , some 61% of businesses 
are launched with either personal capital or that of friends and relatives . 
That can be an equity arrangement where friends and family take a 
stake in the business in return for their funds . The big advantage of 
equity fi nance is that it never has to be repaid and there is no interest 
rate paid on the money . Equity investments are true ‘ risk capital ’  , as 
there is no guarantee of the investor getting their money back . The 
investment is not tied to any particular assets that can be redeemed 
from the business and , should the business fail , an equity investor is 
less likely to get their original investment back than other investors . 
The return from an equity investment can be generated either 
through a sale of the shares once the company has grown or through 
dividends , a discretionary payout to shareholders if the business does 
well . However , the reason that fi rms will give you cash in this form is 
that they will take a share of the business in return , therefore gaining 
some infl uence over it . Formal equity fi nance is available through 
a number of different sources , such as business angels , venture 
capitalists ( see box ) or the stock markets . Each varies in the amount 
of money available and the process of completing the deal . 
However , because all equity investors are prepared to put up risk 
capital in return for a share in a growth business , if your business 
cannot support growth rates of at least 20% a year , you may not be 
able to attract equity funding . It is this control and the prospect of 
a high return if your business is successful that attracts this type of 
investor . It is also these factors that many owner-managers are wary 
of – they are reluctant to give up control of their company . Those 
The big 
advantage of 
equity fi nance 
is that it never 
has to be 
repaid and 
there is no 
interest rate 
paid on the 
money
THE MONEY LENDERS
Business angels are usually individuals who invest in companies they think have the potential to make 
them money , and are typically looking to write a cheque for a minimum of around £25 , 000 – any smaller 
amounts are not usually appropriate because the fi xed costs are too large . Venture capitalists are organisations set up to invest in companies , and prefer to deal in fi gures higher than business angels . 
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 133 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
134
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
businesses that have fast growth potential , such as IT or internet 
companies , are often reluctant to give away equity as it is likely they 
will need further cash injections as they grow , which would further 
dilute their stake in the business . 
However , you can gain more than just money from the deal . 
Companies also sell the equity for ‘ valuable consideration ’  ( or expert 
advice ) – in return they will usually get expert help , as investors are 
keen to make sure the business is a success . And many companies 
are giving up effective control if they rely on an overdraft as a major 
source of fi nance , as paying back the loan can heavily infl uence how 
the business is run . 
Attracting equity investment
Although you are more likely to secure fi nance from a lender to fund 
your startup , if you have a particularly innovative idea that has rapid 
growth potential , and are prepared to give up some control of your 
business , it could be worth looking for equity fi nance . 
First you have to track down the relevant individuals or organisations . The way to fi nd a business angel is to use a business angel 
network , which specialises in selecting suitable companies to present 
to their members . You should be able to get details of angel networks 
in your area from your local government ’ s Business Link offi ce . A good 
source of venture capitalists is the British Venture Capital Association 
( BVCA )  , which has a full list of members on its website ( see contact 
box )  , along with details of what they ’ re looking for in businesses . It ’ s also 
possible to get introductions via accountants , lawyers , and corporate 
fi nance and business advisers . It ’ s also worth looking out for events 
that match investors to businesses , as well as ‘ investment-readiness ’ 
programmes run by venture capitalists themselves , which provide tips 
on how companies should prepare for equity investment . 
Once you have identifi ed potential equity investor targets , don ’ t 
pin your hopes on securing fi nance from them , because , although 
you have the potential of raising far more than from a lender , only a 
fraction of the proposals that business angels and venture capitalists receive any interest at all – let alone any actual funding . And under 
Explore 
the many 
different 
options that 
are available 
and investigate each one 
so that you 
can fi nd the 
right fi nance 
to suit your 
purpose
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 134 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
135
4 . 0 WRITING A BUSINESS PLAN AND FINANCE ISSUES
the prevailing economic circumstances , equity fi nance is even more 
diffi cult to attract , as investors simply have less to invest . This means 
that to stand any chance of success , you need a very strong business 
proposition , along with a business plan that describes it clearly and 
thoroughly . 
To gain the interest of investors , you will need to give details about 
how they will benefi t from fi nancing your operation . As many will be 
looking to see a return on their investment within a set period – say 
around three to fi ve years – suggest a potential exit strategy and 
what they can expect to make . As with lenders , it ’ s wise to point 
out how you plan to get through the current tough trading conditions 
and outline how you plan to take advantage when economic recovery 
begins . Some equity investors specialise in certain sectors , location , 
business stage and fi nance range , so it pays to do your homework 
before pitching to an investor , as you may be wasting your time if they 
generally don ’ t deal with startups , your chosen business area , or with 
companies in your part of the country . 
The strength of your management team will play an important part 
in helping you to secure equity investment . Investors will be looking for 
personal qualities . If neither you nor your team , if you have one , has 
run a business before , then focus on the skills you bring to the table 
and why you are confi dent of success . They will also , ideally , want to 
see that you have taken the time to build key contacts in your sector 
and will be looking for commitment from you to put in the necessary 
hours , as well as investing some of your own money . 
Another key consideration is that you need to decide well in 
advance how much control of your company you are prepared to give 
up . You need to retain a big enough share for you to be motivated to 
make your company a success . 
Government help
With the aim of spurring banks on to start lending more to businesses , 
the government has introduced a new scheme called the Enterprise 
CONTACT
British Business 
Angels Association
www . bbaa . org . uk
020 7089 2305
British Venture 
Capital Association
www . bvca . co . uk
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 135 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
136
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Finance Guarantee ( EFG ) as part of its new Solutions for Business 
range of initiatives . Essentially , the government is pledging to underwrite 
bank loans to businesses it considers viable , in order to reduce the 
risk involved on the part of lenders . Up to £1bn of guarantees will be 
provided for £1 . 3bn of lending , expressly to new and small businesses . 
The good news is that there are already a number of lenders that have 
joined the scheme , and they are currently offering loans ranging from 
£1 , 000 to £1m covering repayment periods of between three months 
to 10 years . To fi nd out which lenders are involved , visit the Department 
of Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Reform website . The scheme 
is available for companies with a turnover of under £25m . 
Other ways to fund your business
Your own money
This is one of the most common ways of funding a business and if you 
have the money readily available it can be benefi cial . There is no waiting 
around and virtually no red tape involved . However , if something goes 
wrong and you have nothing to fall back on , you could face a severe 
knock-on effect . Your business ’ s fate is in your own hands . 
The four Fs
The four Fs are : founder , family , friends and foolhardies . If your own 
money is not quite enough , you may choose to seek help and nextstage funding from friends and family . Those involved may ask for 
something in exchange , such as a stake in the company , but this is up 
to your own discretion . Written guarantees and / or legal documentation 
may also have to be drawn up . 
Whatever you do , make sure that you plan for every eventuality . 
Unfortunately , most people don ’ t enter a business partnership thinking 
about what can go wrong , but just like a marriage , divorce can happen 
to anyone and at any time . 
CONTACT
Enterprise Finance 
Guarantee
www . businesslink . 
gov . uk / realhelp
Department 
of Business , 
Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform
www . berr . gov . uk
04SYOB_CH_04 . indd 136 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 45 : 25 PM
139
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ There are essentially three legal or accounting 
structures recognised for starting a business . You 
can be a sole trader , team up to form a partnership 
or operate a limited company . Before you launch , you 
need to decide which is the best structure for you , 
then go through the necessary processes to offi cially 
register your business . If a partnership or limited 
company is for you , you are also likely to need to 
open a business bank account , and the relationship 
with your bank manager could be crucial to your 
success . Read on to fi nd out the pros and cons of the 
various business options , how to set up each one and 
the best way to deal with your bank…
5 . 0
SETTING UP
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 139 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
140
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Limited company
There are two types of limited company – those that are publicly 
traded on the stock market ( known as a public limited company or 
 ‘ plc ’  ) and those that are privately owned ( identifi ed by the abbreviation 
 ‘ Ltd ’ at the end of their name )  . Most small- to medium-sized startups 
don ’ t start life on the stock exchange , so this chapter will focus on 
limited companies that are privately owned . 
A limited or limited liability company is very different from a sole 
trader business . Registering and running a limited company requires 
more legal administration than a sole trader business or a partnership . 
However , if you are a sole trader or partner , you can be held personally 
liable for your business , which means that any outstanding debts 
can be met from your personal assets . In a limited company , it is the 
business itself that shoulders the liability as opposed to the individuals 
who run it . This is because a limited company is a separate legal 
entity to the company directors ( discussed below )  . Profi ts and losses 
belong to the company , and the business can continue regardless of 
the death , resignation or bankruptcy of the shareholders or people 
who run it . 
Limited companies pay corporation tax on their profi ts and company directors are taxed as employees in the same way as any other 
people who work for the company . Your personal fi nancial risk is 
restricted to how much you have invested in the company and any 
guarantees you gave when raising fi nance for the business . However , 
if the company fails and you have not carried out your duties as a 
company director , you could be liable for debts , as well as being 
disqualifi ed from acting as a director in another company . 
Before you can start trading , you need to offi cially register your 
limited company , decide on the company offi cers and choose a name 
for your business . Then , once you ’ ve fi led the correct documents with 
Companies House , you are ready to start trading . Here ’ s a guide to 
each step . 
In a limited 
company , it is 
the business 
itself that 
shoulders 
the liability 
as opposed 
to the 
individuals 
who run it
CONTACT
Companies House
www . companies
house . gov . uk
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 140 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
141
5 . 0 SETTING UP
Registering your company
Doing it yourself versus taking help
Although you can register a limited company yourself , unless you ’ ve 
done it before you may need to engage the services of a solicitor , 
accountant , chartered secretary or a company formation agent . 
Formation agents , such as the National Business Register ( see also 
Introduction )  , use their own software that works directly with the 
Companies House systems . If you want to register your company 
electronically ( most are registered this way ) you will need to have the 
specifi c Companies House electronic interface – hence the need for a 
formation agent . However , you can still deliver the physical documents 
directly to Companies House without the need of a formation agent or 
specifi c electronic interface . 
Fees for formation agents can be up to £200 depending on the 
level of service you require . A key advantage of using a formation 
agent is the advice they can give you on the compiling of the 
necessary documents and the right structure for your business . 
Companies House does not provide this service when registering , so 
if you are unfamiliar with the process it ’ s advisable to get help to avoid 
errors . Going through the registration process yourself can be timeconsuming , especially if you make a mistake . In addition Companies 
House staff will not advise you about specifi c matters , such as the 
content of the required memorandum and articles ( more about these 
later )  . Alternatively , you could also get assistance from an online 
registration company . The standard service usually costs £80–£100 
including fees , but since some documentation needs to be posted , 
registration takes three to eight days . This option is usually cheaper 
than using a formation agent , although you won ’ t receive the same 
level of personal service . 
Finally , you can buy an ‘ off the shelf ’ company , receiving a readymade limited company that has designated company offi cers listed 
on the paperwork . You simply transfer your name , and the names 
of any other company directors , to the company once you receive 
your documentation . The process can be completed on the same 
Formation 
agents can 
give you good 
advice on the 
compiling of 
the necessary 
registration 
documents 
and the right 
structure 
for your 
business
Contact
National Business 
Register
www . start . biz / 
home
0870 700 8787
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 141 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
142
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
day , and many accountancy fi rms have several ready-made limited 
companies that they can sell to you . This is the quickest option , and 
with the exception of registering the company yourself , can often be 
the cheapest too . 
Recent developments in the registration process
It has never been easier to register a limited company due to recent 
key developments , according to Simon Harrison at Complete 
Formations , one of the UK ’ s leading online company registration 
agents .  ‘ While accountants and solicitors still play a role in registering companies , particularly for their corporate clients , their involvement in incorporations for individuals has undoubtedly reduced ,  ’ 
he explains .  ‘ A typical modern scenario might be where a private 
individual uses an accountant for advice on what type of company 
to incorporate , based on an assessment of tax position and plans for 
the future . The individual might then go away to form the company 
themselves through a formation agent and save themselves money 
in the process .  ’ 
The costs of incorporating a company have also reduced 
due in part to greater competition between formation agents , and 
their development of more effi cient internal systems , which have 
automated some of the manual tasks .  ‘ Examples of this include batch 
printing of incorporation documents and providing more controls and 
guidance over what customers can and should enter on the online 
registration forms ,  ’ says Harrison .  ‘ This , in turn , results in less support 
costs dealing with repetitive issues . It is now possible to purchase an 
electronic company formation for as little as £24 . 99 plus VAT .  ’ 
Another signifi cant change in the way in which companies 
are registered today is the manner in which the eventual directors , 
secretary ( if the option is taken to have one ) and the subscribers 
are appointed .  ‘ Previously , accountants , solicitors and company 
formation agents typically used nominees to act as the shareholder 
and company offi cers at the time a company was incorporated ,  ’ says 
Harrison .  ‘ Once the company was successfully formed , the purchaser ’ s 
offi cers would be appointed and the nominees would resign . This 
A signifi cant 
change in 
the way 
companies 
are registered 
today is the 
manner in 
which the 
eventual 
directors , 
secretary and 
the subscribers are 
appointed
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 142 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
143
5 . 0 SETTING UP
practice often caused issues when the purchasers then went to open 
a company bank account and the nominees were still shown on the 
Companies House register , which might not have yet been updated to 
refl ect the new ownership and management appointments . 
 ‘ With the exception of ready-made companies , where the use of 
nominees is still commonplace , the expectation for most companies 
incorporated today is that the fi rst appointees will be those which 
the purchaser requests . This does mean that more time must be 
spent by the purchaser at the pre-formation stage , entering details 
of their directors and shareholders . Once the company has been 
set up , however , there is not then the requirement for this task to be 
undertaken in order to take ownership of the business .  ’ 
The necessary documents
If you get professional help to register your company , which will save 
time and avoid errors , you are unlikely to be dealing directly with these 
documents ; however , it ’ s still useful to know them . When registering 
a limited company , four documents must be provided to Companies 
House . These are described in the box below . 
1 . Memorandum of Association
This document sets out : 
• The company ’ s name
• Where the company ’ s registered office is located in England , Wales 
or Scotland
• What the company will do . This can be as simple as :  ‘ to conduct 
business as a general commercial company ’  . 
2 . Articles of Association
In this document you set out the rules for running your company . 
You must state how shares will be allocated and transferred , how 
the directors , the secretary and your meetings will be governed . The 
standard document used is Table A of the Companies Act . However , 
When 
registering 
a limited 
company , 
four 
documents 
must be 
provided to 
Companies 
House
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 143 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
144
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
if you choose an amended version of Table A , you must submit this 
version when registering . Once your company is incorporated you 
can only make changes if the holders of 75% of the voting rights in 
your company agree , so it pays to get this right at the outset . 
3 . Form 10
This document gives details of the fi rst director or directors , company 
secretary and the address of the registered offi ce . Company directors 
must also give their name , address , date of birth , occupation and 
details of other directorships held in the past fi ve years . Companies 
based in Northern Ireland should use Form 21 . 
4 . Form 12
This document is the statutory declaration of compliance with all the 
legal requirements of the incorporation of a company . It must be signed 
by one of the company directors or the secretary named on Form 10 
or the solicitor forming the company . The signing of the document 
must be witnessed by a solicitor , a commissioner for oaths , a justice 
of the peace , or a notary public . Companies based in Northern Ireland 
should use Form 23 . Form 12 must not be signed and dated before 
any of the other documents are completed , signed and dated . 
Obtaining the documents
Form 10 and Form 12 can be obtained for free from the Companies 
House website . The Memorandum and Articles of Association can 
be obtained from legal stationers , accountants , solicitors or company 
formation agents . They cost around £20–£30 . 
Cost of submitting the documents
The standard fee to register a limited company is £20 , but a sameday service costs £50 . If the registration documents are fi led using the 
Companies House software fi ling service , the fee is £15 for standard 
and £30 for same-day registration . However , to fi le electronically you 
must either purchase the suitable software , develop your own or go 
through an agent . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 144 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
145
5 . 0 SETTING UP
Company offi cers
If you set up a limited private company , you appoint company offi cers , 
who are simply the formally named directors and company secretary , 
as stated in the Articles of Association described previously . Usually , as 
the founder of the company , you would be one of the directors , along 
with the people with whom you may have launched the company . 
One of the directors could also be appointed company secretary , 
although this could be someone who is not a director . All companies 
used to have to appoint a company secretary , but this is no longer the 
case . It is a legal requirement for company offi cers to be in place at 
all times and for their names and current addresses to be written on 
the registration documents . If there is a change in company offi cers , 
you must inform Companies House straightaway . All private limited 
companies must have at least one director . The following sections 
provide a rundown of the offi cial roles of your company offi cers . 
Directors
Company directors must manage the company ’ s affairs in accordance 
with its Articles of Association and the law . At least one director must 
be a natural person ( i . e . an individual )  . The post does not require any 
formal qualifi cations , but you cannot become a company director if : 
• You are an undischarged bankrupt or disqualified by a court from 
holding a directorship
• You are under 16 . 
Company directors have a responsibility to make sure that certain 
documents reach the registrar at Companies House . These are : 
• Accounts
• Annual returns
• Notice of change of directors or secretaries
• Notice of change of registered office . 
Directors who fail to deliver these documents on time can be 
prosecuted and are subject to fi nes of up to £5 , 000 for each offence . 
An average 1 , 000 directors are prosecuted each year for failing to 
It is a legal 
requirement 
for company 
offi cers to be 
in place at all 
times and for 
their names 
and current 
addresses to 
be written on 
the registration documents
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 145 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
146
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
deliver accounts and returns to the registrar on time . So unless you 
are particularly knowledgeable about company facts and fi gures , 
it ’ s a good idea to appoint an accountant to help you prepare these 
documents . Your accountant will also advise you on the necessary 
information you need to keep hold of , and prepare , such as invoices , 
receipts , etc . 
Company Secretary
The duties of a company secretary are not specifi ed by law , but 
are usually contained within an employment contract . For private 
limited companies , the secretary is not required to have any special 
qualifi cations , but this is not the case if you decide to change your 
company to a public limited company . The main duties of a company 
secretary are to : 
• Maintain the statutory registers , which means updating the details 
on the business held at Companies House when necessary . For 
example , if you relocate or appoint or lose a director
• Ensure statutory forms are filed promptly
• Provide members and auditors with notice of meetings
• Send the registrar copies of resolutions and agreements
• Send a copy of the accounts to every member of the company
• Keep or arrange minutes of meetings . 
With limited companies now no longer needing to appoint a 
company secretary by law , few will probably do so when launching , 
with the administrative duties being covered by the directors . These 
do not take up much time at all . In fact , once your company has 
launched , there is unlikely to be much to do on this front for a couple 
of years at least , barring submitting accounts and annual returns 
and recording the content of director meetings , unless you relocate 
or change directors over this period . Your accountant will help with 
accounts and returns , and can also offer general advice on the offi cial 
roles of company offi cers , as can your solicitor . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 146 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
147
5 . 0 SETTING UP
Sole trader
Sole trading is defi ned as when an individual is the only owner of 
the business and has complete control over the way it is run . The 
law makes no distinction between the business and a sole trader . As 
mentioned in the previous section , this unlimited liability means that 
any business debt can be met from the owner ’ s personal wealth if 
the business fails , and the business usually ceases on the owner ’ s 
retirement or death . 
A sole trading business is usually small in size , with a low turnover , and few , if any , employees . If you want to literally go it alone 
in business – remember you won ’ t actually be alone ! A massive 
71% of all British businesses have no employees , according to 
Department for Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Reform fi gures 
( BERR Directorate Analytical Unit – Enterprise Directorate : Small and 
Medium Enterprise Statistics for the UK and Regions )  .  ( There are an 
estimated 3 . 7 million active businesses in the UK , according to the 
latest government statistics , and more than 2 . 3 million of these are 
class zero businesses – that is without employees .  ) So you could say 
that sole traders pretty much drive the UK economy . The popularity of 
this type of business refl ects the ease with which you can start sole 
trading : registration is straightforward , record keeping is simple and 
you get to keep all the profi ts after tax . Starting small by sole trading 
is a way to test your chosen market , and many companies are born 
this way ; however , there are pitfalls . 
Most sole traders operate in the service sector , such as photography , plumbing , hairdressing , shops , real estate agencies and 
bed and breakfast hotels . Some 24% of the UK ’ s 2 . 3 million class 
zero businesses are in the construction sector , with 18% in businessrelated services ( BERR Directorate Analytical Unit – Enterprise 
Directorate : Small and Medium Enterprise Statistics for the UK and 
Regions )  . 
Sole traders 
pretty much 
drive the UK 
economy
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 147 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
148
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Getting down to business
You need to fulfi l certain legal requirements before you can open for 
business . If you are going to trade under a name different from your 
own personal name , you must display the business name or names 
of the owners and an address where documents can be served on all 
business stationery and at your premises . So you will need to design 
letterheads , business cards and signage accordingly . 
Issues regarding business name
A business ’ s name is a lot more than just a name and the whole of the 
next chapter will cover this in detail . Here we deal with the legal issues 
concerning business names . 
It is not compulsory to register a business name , but you can do 
so with the National Business Register . You need to be careful about 
choosing a name , because an incorrect name can cause trouble . 
Certain words and expressions such as ‘ international ’  ,  ‘ federation ’ and 
 ‘ registered ’ are restricted under the Business Names Act 1985 and 
the Company and Business Names Regulations 1995 . Companies 
House and the National Business Register have lists of these words 
and details of how to obtain approval to use them . In addition , your 
business name cannot be the same or too similar to that of another 
business , trademark or company . If it does confl ict , you could face 
legal action from its owner . Check phone books , trade journals and 
magazines to ensure against clashes , and you can run free name 
checks against all these via the National Business Register , as well 
as the limited companies names index at Companies House . To be 
absolutely sure that you can use a name , contact a solicitor to perform 
the checks or register your name with the National Business Register , 
which will then do the checks for you and ensure no one copies it in 
the future or passes it off as their own . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 148 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
149
5 . 0 SETTING UP
Registering with HMRC
You must register as self-employed with Her Majesty ’ s Revenue and 
Customs ( HMRC ) within three months of starting up or you will have 
to pay a fi ne . The three-month limit starts from the last day of your fi rst 
month of trading . 
Legal issues
A sole trader business is simple to set up legally , although certain 
trades may need a licence . These include nightclubs , taxi and car 
hire , restaurants , pet shops , indoor sports venues , adult shops , street 
trading , hotels , pet kennels , nursing homes , waste management , 
weapons sales and money lending . You can get a licence from the 
relevant local authority for most of these . To make sure you are on the 
right side of the law , refer to the relevant Acts of Parliament . 
• The Trade Descriptions Act 1972 – it is a criminal offence to knowingly 
make false or misleading claims – verbal or written – about goods 
or services you offer . This covers areas such as ingredients , place 
of manufacture and customer testimonials , as well as associating 
yourself with a brand without being entitled to . 
• The Sale of Goods Act 1979 – this dictates that the goods you sell 
must be of satisfactory quality , match your promises of performance 
and be as you describe them . 
• The Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 – this commits you to 
undertake the services you offer with reasonable care , skill , time and 
cost . 
• The Data Protection Act 1984 – this directs you to register the 
source , nature and purpose of any personal data you keep about 
individuals , except data used for internal administration such as the 
payroll . Registration forms are available at post offices . 
• The Consumer Protection Act 1987 – this holds you liable if you 
supply a faulty product causing damage or injury , unless you can 
show that not enough was known about its dangers at the time of 
To make sure 
you are on the 
right side 
of the law , 
refer to the 
relevant 
Acts of 
Parliament
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 149 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
150
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
WHO IS AN E-TRADER ? 
You are an e-trader if you : 
• Sell goods that were bought with the intention of re-selling them
• Sell items you made yourself for a profit
• Sell or buy on behalf of others for financial gain
• Receive payment for a service . 
If you do any of the above , then you must register as self-employed with HMRC within the three-month 
deadline mentioned earlier . With regards to eBay , it is extremely unwise to delay registering , as HMRC carries out checks on online auction sites to root out members who process a high number of transactions . 
supply . To protect yourself under this Act , offer an estimate first and 
a written quote only when you have properly assessed costs . 
• The Price Marking Order 1991 – this makes it compulsory to put 
the price of goods offered for sale in writing . 
You should also consider any legislation relating to environmental 
and health and safety requirements , as well as checking the planning 
and building regulations relating to your premises . Local authorities 
and the Department for Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Return 
should be the fi rst ports of call for this . 
Tax and sole traders
As a sole trader , your profi ts are taxed like any other income by 
HMRC , and as you are self-employed , your tax will be self-assessed . 
The amount you owe is calculated after business expenses and 
personal allowances have been deducted . Your income will fall under 
tax Schedule D , and as you will be paying income tax twice a year , it 
makes sense to put money aside . As a self-employed person , many of 
your business expenses can be deducted from your taxable income , 
such as overheads on your premises , travel , delivery costs and trade 
association subscriptions , but you will have to pay capital gains tax 
if you sell or give away any assets . You will also be paying National 
Insurance Contributions ( NICs )  . 
CONTACT
National Business 
Register
www . start . biz / 
home
0870 700 8787
The Department 
for Business , 
Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform
www . berr . gov . uk
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 150 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
151
5 . 0 SETTING UP
ACTION POINT
KEY THINGS TO DO AFTER SETTING UP 
AS A SOLE TRADER
Once you ’ ve set up as a sole trader there are a few other things to consider that will help you and your 
new business . 
Banking : You can operate your sole trading business from your personal bank account . You must , however , be able to distinguish your personal spending from that of your business for tax purposes . You can 
also run separate bank accounts and major banks are keen to get you on board for the future custom 
you may bring . Shop around for a bank that best suits your needs . 
Insurance : Ensure your business will keep working even when you are not by insuring it . As a sole trader , 
unless you employ staff or make alternative arrangements , your business will come to a standstill if you 
fall ill , have an accident or go on holiday . So shop around for health and medical insurance tailored to 
small businesses with self-employed owners . Check to see if subsidised insurance schemes are offered 
by your trade association or local chamber of commerce . You should also consider taking out disability 
insurance to cover you for time off through illness or injury . But check the qualifying period – some policies with lower premiums won ’ t pay out until after an excess period of three months . 
Pensions : Although putting aside money for the future may be hard for you right now , a pension plan is 
well worth considering . And not just for the fi nancial security it will offer you in retirement – investing in a 
pension scheme can be tax-benefi cial too . Everyone in the UK can get a basic state pension if they have 
built up a record of NICs for a quarter of their working life . But only those with a record of NICs for ninetenths of their working lives are entitled to a full state pension , so self-employed people need to make 
further arrangements . Sole traders should also contribute to a private pension scheme . Many pension 
schemes on the market are designed for the self-employed , and several of these allow you to pay a lump 
sum , take a break from payments for a year or even make withdrawals . 
Taking on staff : As a sole trader you might want to take on employees to help with your growing business . There are no restrictions on staff numbers , but you will have to deduct pay-as-you-earn ( PAYE ) tax 
from wages and pay it to HMRC each month . You will also need to make some summaries for employees 
and HMRC annually , as well as when a staff member leaves your employment . As a sole trading employer 
you will be responsible for your employees ’ Class 1 NICs and your employer contributions . These are 
calculated as a percentage of an employee ’ s wage . See also Chapter 9 for more details about this . You 
will also need to consider statutory sick pay , equal opportunities and health and safety conditions , as well 
as employment terms and contracts . And remember that if you have taken over a business , you must 
uphold employees ’ existing terms of employment . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 151 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 47 PM
152
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
One of the 
fundamental 
issues is to 
draw up a 
partnership 
agreement
If your income rises above a certain level ( currently £68 , 000 )  , you 
will have to apply for value-added tax ( VAT ) registration . This means 
you will be collecting VAT from your customers and paying it to HMRC 
less the VAT you have paid out in the course of conducting your 
business . You can talk to your local HMRC offi ces for advice , Make 
an appointment and explain the details of your business plan and ask 
them exactly what you need to do . They will provide you with advice , 
relevant leafl ets and a selection of forms – such as VAT registration 
– which you should complete before beginning trading . This is vitally 
important . If you start off with all the necessary information , it will 
make the bookkeeping process much easier . It also helps to have a 
contact within the local offi ces whom you can call should you run into 
any diffi culties . Bookkeeping is covered in more detail in Chapter 9 . 
The increase in popularity of online businesses had led to an 
increasing number of people setting up part-time businesses for 
additional income to their main job . As a result , many are unsure what 
they have to declare for tax purposes and at what point they should 
register as self-employed . HMRC rules stipulate that all e-traders must 
be registered with it so that their income can be taxed . 
Business partnerships
Collaboratively owned or acquired fi rms are probably more successful 
and grow faster , and in certain important sectors , such as hi-tech , 
collaborative ventures may actually predominate . This is when two or 
more people combine to form a business unit . Each partner receives a 
percentage of the return of the business , depending upon how much 
they invested . As with sole traders , all partners are also responsible 
for all the debts incurred by the business . This doesn ’ t only apply to 
debts you have incurred as a partner but to those of any partner . This 
means in a partnership you need to pay particular care to the conduct 
of your fellow partners , because creditors will take your personal 
assets to pay off debts incurred by any of the others if necessary . 
When considering what format the business should take , partnerships need extra attention . One of the most fundamental issues 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 152 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
153
5 . 0 SETTING UP
is to draw up a partnership agreement .  ‘ We require all business 
partnerships to visit a solicitor ( through our pro bono legal advice set 
up ) and have a legal partnership agreement in place before we can 
fi nalise funding ,  ’ says Elaine Thatcher , business support manager 
for the Prince ’ s Trust in London . 
Such an agreement forces partners to think about issues such as 
the structure and roles of each person involved , as well as the likely exit 
routes for the partners , according to Thelma Quince , who recently 
completed a study into 390 businesses in East Anglia . This can ensure 
that there is a mechanism for valuing and buying one partner ’ s shares . 
 ‘ It is a bit like a marriage and divorce . No one wants to think about the 
fact that it could go wrong ,  ’ says Quince . But partners can address 
the issues in less confrontational ways by asking what each partner 
wants to do when they are bored of the business . One of the common 
factors with collaborations that weren ’ t successful in Quince ’ s study 
was mutual respect .  ‘ If you lose confi dence in the competence of your 
partner and start to worry about whether they can do the job , that can 
be fatal ,  ’ she warns . A number of threads ran through the accounts 
co-owners in the study gave as to why collaboration had failed ( see 
box below )  . Quince found that mostly the collaboration failed when 
personal , individualistic or selfi sh goals started to take precedence 
over the collaborative , shared goals .  ‘ One partner attempted to take 
control and focused on personal gain rather than long-term growth of 
the business ,  ’ was one comment . 
According to Quince , partnerships can be highly successful , 
but a high proportion of co-owning teams are likely to experience 
confl ict leading to the departure of one or more of the original owning 
team . When this happens it can have severe effects not only on the 
business , but on partners ’ personal lives . Quince ’ s research revealed 
that in 42% of the fi rms founded collaboratively by people who were 
not related or married to each other , the original owning team had 
fragmented , leaving only one of the original co-owners . Meanwhile , 
41% of the 106 co-owners taking part in the study reported that they 
had prior experience of an unsuccessful collaborative relationship . 
CONTACT
Prince ’ s Trust
www . princes-trust . 
org . uk
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 153 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
154
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
In their accounts of failed relationships the co-owners described 
three main adverse effects of the confl ict . Only three claimed the 
confl ict had not adversely effected themselves or their business , 
with just two of these feeling that , in the long term , the outcome of 
the confl ict had actually been benefi cial . Most , however , told a very 
different story . For nearly 40% , partner confl ict had hit their businesses 
badly in a number of ways , including : lost revenue , which in eight 
cases sunk the fi rm ; poor morale among employees ; suspicion and 
lack of cooperation between co-owners ; and even personal effects 
on partners , such as fi nancial loss , lack of self-worth and marriage 
break-ups . 
So although many partnerships work , they can be prone to confl ict , 
which anyone thinking of starting up this kind of business must bear in 
mind . Meanwhile , a carefully constructed partnership agreement can 
help increase the chances of a harmonious and successful long-term 
relationship between partners . 
The consequences of confl ict
As further evidence of the need to approach partnerships with caution , 
here are personal comments on the fallout from partner disharmony 
WHY PARTNERSHIPS FAIL
The reasons that collaborations don ’ t work include : 
• Differences in personal values
• Differences in personal objectives
• Differences in objectives and visions for the firm
• Loss of respect for the competence of the other
• Failure to communicate effectively
• Failure to reward effort justly
• Loss of trust in the other
• The price of conflict . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 154 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
155
5 . 0 SETTING UP
by a number of people who contributed to Thelma Quince ’ s study of 
390 businesses in East Anglia : 
• ‘ Disharmony at board level led to unnecessary risk and confusion of 
direction ’ 
• ‘ Challenged my reason to go on ’ 
• ‘ Staff morale declined ’ 
• ‘ The board was unable to make decisions about things that 
mattered – views were too diverse . Performance suffered through 
HOLROYD HOWE AND THE 
JOINT EFFORT
Company : Holroyd Howe Independent
Owner-managers : Rick Holroyd and Nick Howe
Being a successful entrepreneur is often viewed as essentially a solo experience , with the hard decisions , 
particularly in the formative days of a business , agonised over by the man or woman at the top . The 
idea of forming a partnership is often dismissed by budding owners-managers . Even those that take the 
plunge with a co-founder can fi nd that ideas and personalities clash to the point of breakdown . 
However , Holroyd Howe Independent is a business that could be used as a living and breathing example 
of how partnerships can , and do , work . Founders Rick Holroyd and Nick Howe ’ s eponymous fi rm is 
well on its way to becoming the premier independent contract caterer in the UK . 
Holroyd freely admits that he probably could not have done it without Howe , underlining the joint effort 
that has gone into building the venture .  ‘ I don ’ t think that either of us would ’ ve wanted to embark upon 
setting up the business alone , that ’ s probably been one of the strengths of the business ,  ’ Holroyd explains .  ‘ It was always my intention to start with someone else because I probably wasn ’ t the full ticket in 
terms of running all aspects of the business . It was important to have someone who complemented me 
in terms of skills .  ’ 
Holroyd rejects the idea that compromise has played a vital role in their relationship , insisting that the 
duo arrive at the best approach after discussion , rather than fudging the issue .  ‘ It ’ s amazing how the 
vision has been almost identical ,  ’ he says .  ‘ But the way we see things are at the opposite ends of the 
spectrum – we ’ re very different characters . 
 ‘ It ’ s very important to put your individual views to one side . Every decision we ’ ve made has been for the 
good of the business , and not for ourselves individually . We ’ ve seen startups that have lasted six months 
or a year and I think it ’ s because egos get in the way – you can ’ t afford to let that happen .  ’ 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 155 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
156
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
PROS AND CONS OF PARTNERSHIPS
These are the advantages and disadvantages of collaboration cited by almost all of the 106 co-owners in 
Thelma Quince ’ s East Anglian study . 
Why you should collaborate…
• Being able to share the burden
• Having access to more skills , knowledge and experience
• Better , more effective decision-making
• Being able to look at problems from different perspectives
And why you shouldn ’ t 
( These were the most important disadvantages of collaboration seen by the co-owners in Quince ’ s 
study .  ) 
• Less autonomy and not always getting your own way
• Differences in personal aims and objectives for the firm
• Decision-making can be slower
• Collaboration often means a loss of spontaneity 
! TOP TIPS
FOR A SUCCESSFUL PARTNERSHIP , 
CO-OWNERS NEED TO :  
! Have the same shared visions , aspirations and objectives for their fi rm 
! Have similar or compatible personal values 
! Have clearly defined responsibilities and roles 
! Have complementary skills and knowledge 
! Have mutual respect for the other ’ s competence 
! Have mutual trust in the other and for the other ’ s honesty 
! Be good at working as a team 
! Be tolerant of the other ’ s weaknesses
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 156 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
157
5 . 0 SETTING UP
inertia and the company became loss making . The team collapsed 
and this came close to causing the collapse of the company ’ 
• ‘ It caused an early sale of the company at the wrong time and at a 
disadvantageous price ’ 
• ‘ The additional financial commitment was difficult to sustain ’ 
• ‘ My marriage broke up shortly after the break up of the company ’ 
From the owners who had once collaborated , but now found 
themselves in sole ownership came other stories of attempted 
suicides , nervous breakdowns , divorce , attempted assaults and one 
sad case of attempted murder . 
Banking on success
Whether you decide to be a sole trader , set up a partnership or run 
a private limited company , you will need a good relationship with 
your bank . And although it has never been easier to switch banks , 
taking time to decide on the right one ( and bank manager ) for you at 
the outset can save problems later that could adversely affect your 
business . If you are a sole trader you can keep a personal account , 
but need to make it clear what incomings and outgoings relate to 
your business . If you launch a partnership or limited company , you will 
need to set up business bank accounts . 
There are many factors to consider when choosing a bank . 
Interest rates and charges will obviously play their part , but it ’ s also 
essential to look at the quality of service you will receive from your 
bank manager . After all , this is the person who you will deal with on 
a regular basis and the person you will need to approach for funding . 
So you need a manager who will understand your business and one 
whom you can trust . 
When looking at banks , don ’ t hesitate to ask to speak to the 
manager who will be dealing with your account , and when you do , 
make sure your needs are met . 
There are 
many factors 
to consider 
when 
choosing a 
bank
You need a 
manager 
who will 
understand 
your business 
and one 
whom you 
can trust
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 157 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
158
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
To help you fi nd the right bank manager , Allied Irish Bank ( GB ) 
has put together a list of questions that you should be asking : 
• Do you really understand my business and industry ? 
Every industry has slightly different needs and you want to be sure 
your bank understands what ’ s important in your industry . 
• How long have you been in your job ? 
Ideally , you don ’ t want to keep having to build relationships with 
different bank managers ; continuity is key . 
• Can I reach you whenever I need to ? Or will I speak to someone 
working in a call centre whom I have never met ? 
There is no substitute for having a contact who intimately 
understands your business and what you want to achieve . Not so 
easy to do over the telephone . 
• Are you able to make a quick decision when I need one ? 
We all know that if you really need to extend your overdraft for a 
short period you need a quick decision . Having to jump through 
lots of ‘ hoops ’ just eats up your valuable time , and few businesses 
can afford that . 
• Will I have one point of contact who understands who I am and , as 
importantly , knows about my business ? 
The Model-T Ford approach to service is no longer good enough–
one colour does not suit everyone . 
• Can I speak to companies you currently work with in a similar 
industry for a reference ? 
There is no substitute for third-party endorsement . All banks say 
they deliver great service , but do they really ? You need to find out . 
• Will you provide more general business advice when I need it ? 
Getting the basics such as a cheque account , credit card , etc is 
simple , but businesses require far more . They want a bank that will 
deliver much more value . 
• How are you rated in the industry ? 
Have they won any awards recently , for instance ? Again , third-party 
endorsement can be a powerful method with which to judge the 
success of an organisation . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 158 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
159
5 . 0 SETTING UP
• Do you have the name of a company in your patch that you helped 
to grow ? 
Most businesses have similar aspirations–to grow and to improve 
profitability . Banks play a major role in helping to turn ambition into 
reality . You need to know that the bank you select can help you 
achieve your business objectives . 
Remember , when it comes to choosing a bank , the more questions 
you ask , the more likely it is that you will enjoy a long and fruitful 
relationship . 
What banks offer businesses
Before you start comparing different business bank accounts , it ’ s worth 
knowing what products and services they may offer , what they involve , 
and deciding on the ones that are most critical to your business . 
Bank facilities
• Deposits : paying in cash and cheques
• Withdrawals : taking out cash through an ATM or at a branch
• Payment by cheque : use of a business chequebook , which can 
sometimes be personalised with your company logo
• Automatic money transfers : direct debits and direct credits
• Night safe : for depositing money when the bank is closed
• Balance enquiry and statements : for keeping track of your 
finances
• Payment cards
• Company debit card : this will debit an amount immediately from 
your business account . In most cases the transactions are free 
and there is no annual fee . 
• Company credit card : a charge card ( such as Barclaycard 
or MasterCard ) that can be issued to key members of staff . 
Repayment is made monthly from your business current account 
( usually interest-free credit )  . There is usually a fee per transaction , 
an annual fee or both . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 159 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
160
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
• Borrowing
• Overdraft and loan facilities : short-term financing , subject to 
an application procedure . May also provide access to the 
government-backed Small Firm Loan Guarantee scheme . 
• Asset finance : leasing and hire purchase facilities to enable you 
to buy equipment
• Factoring and invoice discounting : short-term borrowing against 
the value of unpaid invoices
• Commercial mortgage : funding to help buy a business . Often up 
to 80% of the purchase can be financed by the bank . 
See Chapter 4 . 0 for a detailed discussion about ways to borrow 
money or arrange funding . 
Other features
• Deposit accounts : a lot of banks have business deposit accounts 
with higher interest than a current account for any reserve funds 
your business may have . 
• Merchant services : if you want to accept credit and debit card 
payments from customers , you will need a merchant account . This 
is provided by a bank but to get one you will often need two years ’ 
trading history and audited accounts . Once set up , you will be 
charged an annual fee plus a percentage of every transaction . 
• Insurance : larger banks often offer their customers insurance cover 
for business interruption , health , loan repayment and more . 
• Support : most of the larger banks offer resources and support to 
help you run your business . For example , you may be assigned 
a relationship manager who will offer business advice . The bank 
may also provide seminars , educational literature or bookkeeping 
software . 
• Introductory offers : many banks offer special introductory offers 
to startups . This is usually a period of free banking for 12–24 
months . 
The British Bankers ’ Association ’ s Business Account Finder offers 
independent advice on what various banks offer small businesses . 
CONTACT
British Bankers ’ 
Association
www . bba . org . uk
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 160 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
161
5 . 0 SETTING UP
Dealing with banks in a downturn
It was less than careful lending by banks and other fi nancial institutions 
that caused the credit crunch and the ensuing economic downturn in 
2008 , so it ’ s logical that they will be a lot more cautious when handling 
their customers , whether they are individuals or businesses . 
Before the boom fi nally collapsed in 2008 and the recession 
began , banks couldn ’ t lend enough money , and that included 
overdraft facilities for new businesses . But the credit crunch has sent 
shockwaves through the fi nance industry that haven ’ t been seen since 
the Great Depression of the 1930s – in fact , many commentators 
have suggested that the current recession could actually be worse . 
With some of the more established institutions going out of business 
or having to be propped up by the state , fear has gripped the banking 
community , resulting in a highly risk averse approach . In the wake 
of such a massive turnaround , it ’ s no surprise that businesses ’ 
relationships with their banks have been affected . 
Many companies have found that their banks have become more 
stringent with respect to existing overdraft and loan arrangements . In 
some instances , agreements have been tightened putting additional 
fi nancial pressure on companies , and in extreme cases overdraft 
facilities have been withdrawn and loans called in . This has resulted 
in a number of businesses simply not having the cash reserves to 
continue trading – and it ’ s the younger and smaller operations that 
have been hit the hardest . 
If you are starting up , of course , you probably don ’ t have an 
existing relationship with a bank . What this means for you is that banks 
will require stronger assurances than previously of the viability of your 
business simply to secure a business bank account , never mind a 
loan . So a well-thought out business plan and professional approach 
are more important than ever ( see Chapter 4 . 0 for more on this )  . 
You may also fi nd it diffi cult to secure as large an overdraft as 
previously , while bank loans are likely to be far more diffi cult to come 
by . However , the good news is that if you do get an overdraft or 
loan , the current low interest rates mean that your monthly charges 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 161 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
162
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
or re-payments are likely to be lower than they were previously . But 
you should also be prepared for your bank to tighten any agreements , 
particularly if the recession deepens . 
If you are offered a bank account along with an overdraft facility , 
you can be confi dent that your business idea has a good chance of 
success and that you have put together a strong business plan , which 
will stand you in good stead when looking for more fi nance , should 
you need it . Banks and other lenders are still open for business , but 
are only tending to invest in those businesses that they consider to 
have an excellent chance of success . 
As banks are still actively looking for new business customers , it 
remains important for you to shop around and fi nd the one with the best 
offer for your company . Then , to get the most out of your relationship , 
it ’ s more important than ever to handle your bank manager with care 
and respect , as described in the following Action Point . 
ACTION POINT
MANAGING YOUR BANK MANAGER
Although it is important to ensure you have a bank and a bank manager capable of giving you what you 
want , it is a two-way relationship and there are a number of things you can do to get the most out of 
it , as Christopher Jenkins , managing director of Wingrave Yeats , a leading London accountancy and 
management consulting fi rm , points out . 
Keep business and personal accounts apart : It ’ s not always a good idea to keep your business 
account at the same bank as your personal account . Resist the temptation of the one-stop borrowing 
concept . You don ’ t invest without spreading risk , so don ’ t borrow without doing the same . 
Keep your bank regularly informed : Don ’ t go and see the bank only when you need something – no 
one likes to be constantly confronted with tales of doom and gloom , or even worse , thinly veiled gestures 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 162 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
163
5 . 0 SETTING UP
of optimism . Get in contact or make an appointment to visit when you have good news and when you 
don ’ t need to borrow more money . Get them excited about your business , enthuse about it and go away 
without asking them for more cash . Equally , if you are having any problems that could affect your ability to 
make a loan payment or stay within your overdraft limit , give your bank manager plenty of warning . You 
will fi nd your bank far more receptive and willing to help you out of your predicament if you let them know 
of any issues as far in advance as possible . 
Be professional : Make sure any fi gures or information you present is correct and consistent with the 
story you told last month . Remember that everything goes on fi le and will come up again – often when 
you least expect it . Don ’ t let your accountants / fi nancial advisers do it all for you , but don ’ t go anywhere 
without them . Bankers can spot a report that has been written by a professional but signed off in your 
name . They want to know that you as the borrower understand and believe what you are telling them . 
However , don ’ t try to forecast for the bank without professional help . A profi ts and losses forecast and 
cashfl ow estimate that hasn ’ t been reconciled to a balance sheet and which would show negative debtors in year two will not go down well with a banker . 
Consider what the bank wants to see : If you don ’ t feed your bank regular information , it can only 
resort to what can be gleaned from your account . Bankers examine average balance calculations from 
your statements and also highs and lows on the account .  ‘ Hardcore borrowing ’  ( where the account is 
constantly up against the limit ) makes them twitchy , but they appreciate wide swings from full utilisation 
of the facility to occasional credit balances . They also compare your company statistics with comparable 
industry standards . So look at the trend of your own account before you present it to them , and have 
prepared answers in your mind to the questions they are bound to ask . 
Lending usually comes with covenants , which are certain fi nancial limits that your company must adhere 
to . For example , not allowing particular balance sheet items or ratios to fall below or go over an agreed 
fi gure . It is easy to monitor these covenants and rather than letting the bank do so , include a calculation in 
your monthly management accounts that you send it . 
Manage your total borrowings : Be careful with your capital expenditure . Try out asset fi nance ( leasing 
and hire purchase facilities to help you to buy equipment , leasing and rental deals rather than outright 
purchase of equipment and technology goods . While they may look expensive , they are ‘ off-balance 
sheet fi nancing ’  , which does wonders for your covenant calculations . Also consider other forms of maintaining cashfl ow , such as using a factoring company to collect and manage your invoices . 
At all times , try to minimise the bank ’ s perception of risk in lending to you , and increase its confi dence 
and enthusiasm to lend by promising no more than you know you can achieve . Understand what they 
can and can ’ t offer and then structure your request so that it ’ s watertight in banking terms . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 163 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 48 PM
164
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
DESIGN AND PRINT CENTRE 
AND THE UNEXPECTED BONUS
Company : Design and Print Centre
Owner-manager : David Miller
Building a strong relationship with his business bank has helped David Miller through the tough couple 
of years of starting Design and Print Centre . Although launching a design and communications agency 
into a crowded marketplace , a strong business plan , incorporating the benefi ts of working virtually from a 
cost and billing perspective , helped secure the necessary investment . 
Managing to attract an unsecured loan for £40 , 000 to launch his business from Lloyd ’ s Bank , meant 
that Miller and his fellow directors did not have to secure their homes or any other personal assets 
against the borrowing , Miller was determined to run a tight ship to avoid further borrowing that might 
need securing . 
 ‘ This was diffi cult initially as cash was tight , but if we were approaching our agreed overdraft limit I simply 
told my bank business adviser , who was prepared to let us exceed it for a limited period if necessary ,  ’ he 
explained .  ‘ Keeping him informed was key .  ’ 
What ’ s more , regular meetings with his bank manager meant that his adviser understood his business 
and its market .  ‘ This led him to putting us in touch with some of his clients who might be able to use our 
services , which I never expected ,  ’ said Miller . 
05SYOB_CH_05 . indd 164 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 48 : 49 PM
167
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ Choosing a business name is one of the fi rst and 
most important things that you will do when starting 
a business . There ’ s a lot more to it than simply going 
for something you like , from practical reasons of 
recognition to legal factors . and before you submit a 
business plan to anyone , you should get it right . Read 
on for tips and examples that should help you choose 
the right name for your business…
6 . 0
FINDING A NAME 
AND CREATING 
A BRAND
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 167 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
168
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
What ’ s in a name ? 
In a rational world , a company with a strong product , service , or 
niche idea could expect to make a healthy profi t . However , it takes 
more than that to get across to customers the benefi t of using your 
business instead of your competitor ’ s . The name is the fi rst thing that 
any potential buyer is going to encounter about your business and , in 
this respect , is more important than your sales pitch or even your end 
product . You might have the best idea in the world , but if people are 
going elsewhere because your competition ‘ looks ’ more attractive , 
then no one will ever know . 
As the name is the entry point to your business and , superfi cially , the 
only differentiator between you and your competitors , customers will 
make instant judgements on where they want to buy from . Therefore , 
it ’ s essential that you strike the right tone with your business ’ s name . 
However , in today ’ s world , you also need to take it one step further 
– successful companies do not just have good names , they develop 
a brand . And , in time , brands can literally sell themselves . Company 
branding specialist , Jim Fowle , of Red Mullet Design , says :  ‘ When 
starting a company , your brand is of vital importance . Branding is not 
just a memorable logo , but also an effective , memorable name that 
can really help people remember you . This can be portrayed strongly 
visually as well . In the initial stages , we fi nd it ’ s good to envisage your 
name and branding , making sure it ’ s recognisable , simple and refl ects 
your business .  ’ 
It ’ s easier said than done . You want not just to stand out from your 
competition , but you also need to be taken seriously . When you are 
choosing a business name it ’ s essential to remember that this is a name 
that you will have to say dozens of times each day and it is something 
you will be known by . Make sure that you like how it sounds and how 
it looks before committing .  ‘ Initially , in the early stages , the best option 
is to be experimental ,  ’ suggests Fowle .  ‘ Sometimes it ’ s easy to get 
too clever and lose sight of what you are trying to achieve . It is about 
getting the balance of a good name and having good branding at the 
same time . This encapsulates the perfect package .  ’ 
Names should 
be snappy , 
original and 
instantly 
informative as 
to what your 
business 
does
The right 
business 
name can 
offer a real 
advantage in 
the battle for 
customers
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 168 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
169
6 . 0 FINDING A NAME AND CREATING A BRAND
It ’ s tempting to incorporate your own name into your business ’ 
moniker but remember it won ’ t add any information about the 
company . A safe and trustworthy method is to link your business ’ s 
name to the area in which you operate – customers associate such 
fi rms with strong local roots and a friendly approach to the public . 
Therefore , the Acton Sandwich Shop or Govan Records would be 
perceived to be well-established , reputable businesses . Humour or a 
nice play on words is an effective way to stand out from the crowd . 
While a fi sh and chip shop called Your Plaice or Mine or a hairdressers 
named Hair Today , Gone Tomorrow would elicit predictable groans 
from passers-by , puns can be used for good effect , as long as they 
are not overly cheesy or digress from what image you are trying to 
convey for your fi rm . Ideally , names should be snappy , original and 
instantly informative as to what your business does . 
THERE ARE ESSENTIALLY THREE KINDS OF BUSINESS NAME : 
Descriptive – these describe what the business does , or may be named after the owner . For example : 
Design and Print Centre . 
Pros : Provides information about your business or who runs it
Cons : Can lack creativity and be less memorable
Associative – these aim to create positive associations in customers ’ minds . For example : Ocean 
Fish Bar . 
Pros : Can help to generate a positive image of your company
Cons : If not original or creative , they can come across as clichéd
Abstract – these may have no meaning at all , and could be just words joined together . For example : 
Shoon ( shoe shop )  . 
Pros : Easier to be original and can attract attention
Cons : Provide no information about the company
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 169 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
170
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
What you can and can ’ t 
call your business
Words or expressions deemed to be offensive are not allowed by 
Companies House . You will have to exercise your own judgement 
as to what such words include , but chances are that swear words 
or phrases generally considered insulting will not be not permitted . 
There are also phrases that are deemed to be ‘ sensitive ’ and you will 
have to gain permission to use them . These phrases can be classifi ed 
into fi ve main groups , and include words that : 
• Suggest your business is of national importance , such as British , 
Scottish , national or international
• Depict a special status or authority such as association , chamber 
of commerce , council
• Describe a particular function , such as a charity or trust
• Refer to a specialised activity , such as surveyor or chemist
• Give the impression that your business is connected to the 
government or the Royal Family . 
Limited companies
If you are starting a limited company , your company name must end 
with Limited ( or Ltd )  . Also , this word must not appear anywhere else 
in your name , so ‘ Limited Ltd ’ is not allowed . Once you have chosen 
your name and made sure that it complies with the rules , you can 
apply to have it registered at Companies House . 
Sole traders
If you are a sole trader , you can trade under your name and / or 
your business partner ’ s name if you have one . However , this is not 
obligatory and you can be far more creative if you wish . Sole traders , 
CONTACT
Companies House
www . companies
house . gov . uk
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 170 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
171
6 . 0 FINDING A NAME AND CREATING A BRAND
however , are not allowed to use Ltd or plc ( private limited company ) in 
their name , as it describes the business incorrectly . Sole traders don ’ t 
have to register their business ’ s name with Companies House . 
Checking for originality
The Companies House website is one good way to check if the name 
you have chosen isn ’ t already being used – just go to the CheckSURE 
website and see what ’ s available before choosing a business name . 
However , as stated above , sole traders do not have to register with 
Companies House , so they will not show up on this search . So you 
should also check local phone books and business directories and 
! TOP TIPS
YOUR BUSINESS NAME CHECKLIST
When you choose a name for your business , make sure it :  
! Is not already taken 
! Has no negative connotations 
! Reflects what your business stands for 
! Is appropriate and appealing to your audience 
! Has the potential to be memorable 
! Won ’ t be able to limit your business in any way 
! Has a meaning that can be transferred overseas if necessary 
! Is easy to say and spell 
! Can be owned and protected as your trademark 
! Can be registered as an internet URL or web address 
( Source : More Th > n Business ) 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 171 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
172
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
run some internet searches on your chosen name . If you fi nd there is 
a sole trader on the other side of the country who is using your name , 
then this may not be a problem , but if the company is local or national 
then you will have to choose again . 
You also need to check if your proposed name isn ’ t too similar to 
a name that someone else has registered as a trademark . The easiest 
way to do this is via the Intellectual Property Offi ce website – such 
simple checks now will save you time and money later . 
If you are setting up your own website , checking out available 
domain names is also well worth your time . Many companies pick a 
different name for their website than the name they use to do business . 
But this isn ’ t the best scenario if your company is going to be webbased . See the section on domain names below for more details . 
A great name is 
good marketing
The small business insurance company More Th > n Business conducted a survey into the impact of business names on potential 
customers . First , the company asked for nominations for the most 
creative company name , with entries coming not only from the 
companies themselves , but also their customers , giving a clear 
indication of just how much attention a great company name can 
attract . Once a list of the best names had been compiled , they were 
then tested on the general public . Three-quarters of those surveyed 
admitted to being infl uenced by a catchy name , while 58% said it 
would make them remember the business . In fact , they were found 
to be most important to the younger people , with three-quarters of 
18–24-year-olds stating they would notice and remember a shop 
with a humorous name .  ‘ Our research confi rms what the UK ’ s most 
creative business owners already knew – that the right business name 
can offer a real advantage in the battle for customers ,  ’ says Mike 
Bowman , head of insurance at More Th > n Business .  ‘ With over 
CONTACT
CheckSURE
www . checksure . biz
Intellectual 
Property Offi ce 
www . ipo . gov . uk
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 172 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
173
6 . 0 FINDING A NAME AND CREATING A BRAND
400 , 000 new startups each year , it is becoming increasingly diffi cult 
for business owners to settle on a catchy yet original name , but the 
research shows that it ’ s defi nitely worth putting in the time and effort 
to get the right name .  ’ 
Citing the great marketing potential of a good , creative business 
name , Bowman , adds :  ‘ A creative name plays a huge role in setting 
a small business apart and getting it noticed . Small businesses and 
independent high street retailers may not have massive marketing 
budgets , but this doesn ’ t mean there is a lack of creative fl air .  ’ More 
Th > n Business awarded the title of most creative British business 
name to Aisle Alter Hymn , a wedding shop for gay and lesbian couples 
in South Shields , Tyne & Wear . However , remember that you don ’ t 
have to use a pun to achieve a memorable name , but if you are in an 
industry where it ’ s hard to market your unique selling point , it may just 
A creative 
name plays 
a huge role 
in setting a 
small 
business 
apart and 
getting it 
noticed
ACTION POINT
WHERE TO START LOOKING 
FOR A NAME
Get friends and family together for a brainstorm : It helps to canvass opinion and your nearest and 
dearest is as good a place to start as any , according to small business insurance company More Th > n 
Business . 
Examine what competitors are called : Do you think the names of your competitors work ? By checking them out you should know the standard you are up against , and although you can ’ t copy any and 
would be ill-advised to choose a similar name , you may be inspired by good ones . 
Think of good business names that stand out in your mind : Beyond your competitors , you can also 
get inspiration from famous companies without directly copying them . 
Use the internet , phone book , magazines and business directories to research : You can pretty 
much carry out all necessary investigation from home using handy sources of information . 
Choose at least 10 names : Then you can whittle these down to a shortlist of three or four by checking 
which of your possible names are available – remember that many will already be taken . Once you have 
your shortlist of available names , use family and friends in the elimination process and make sure each of 
the names generated stands up to the checklist on page 171 . 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 173 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
174
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
help you stand out from the crowd , as William the Concreter would 
probably agree . 
The top 20 creative business names
Here ’ s a rundown of the best business names in the UK , as found in 
the survey by small business insurer More Th > n Business : 
1 . Aisle Alter Hymn ( UK ’ s first wedding shop for gay , lesbian and 
heterosexual couples in South Shields , Tyne & Wear ) 
2 . Battersea Cods Home ( fish and chip shop in Sheffield , South 
Yorkshire ) 
3 . Mad Hakkers ( hairdressers in Leven , Fife ) 
4 . Mr Bit ( window cleaners in Derby and Coventry , West Midlands ) 
5 . Only Foods and Sauces ( takeaway in Walsall , West Midlands ) 
6 . Spruce Springclean ( window cleaners in West Byfleet , Surrey ) 
7 . Tree Wise Men ( tree surgeons in Wallington , Surrey ) 
8 . Vinyl Resting Place ( second-hand records shop in Croydon , 
Surrey ) 
9 . Walter Wall ( carpet sales in Exeter , Devon ) 
10 . Plaice Station ( fish and chip shop in Manchester ) 
11 . William the Concreter ( concrete suppliers in Hastings ) 
12 . Carter , Whey and Tippet ( refuse collection service in London ) 
13 . Dustin Often ( cleaning service in Leicester ) 
14 . C Thru Cleaning ( cleaning service in Middlesex ) 
15 . Give Us A Break ( window fitters in Leicester ) 
16 . R Soles ( Bootmaker in London ) 
17 . Floral and Hardy ( gardeners in Hayes , Kent ) 
18 . Sarnie Schwarzenegger ’ s ( sandwich shop in Liverpool ) 
19 . Abra-Kebab-Ra ( kebab shop in Dublin ) 
20 . Wok This Way ( Chinese takeaway in Glasgow ) 
There are also some other serious contenders , including northeast entertainers Amps and Decks and arborists Tree Amigos , and 
Pimp my Pet , Fishcoteque , Pain in the Glass , Junk and Disorderly , 
Curl up and Dye , Spice Boys , Bubble n Chic and The Head Gardener . 
Can you guess what these businesses do ? 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 174 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
175
6 . 0 FINDING A NAME AND CREATING A BRAND
Your domain name
Today , the vast majority of companies need a website , and the name 
you choose for your web address is just as important as your main 
registered name . That ’ s because your website should lie at the heart of 
your marketing strategy , and attract as many customers as possible . 
If it is isn ’ t doing this , you are missing out on a major online marketing 
opportunity , particularly at a time when more and more people are 
using the internet to research the businesses they want to buy from . 
Of course , if your business exists solely online , your web address 
could be your registered company name as well , but sometimes it can 
be useful to have a separate registered name – in which case it ’ s back 
to the start of this chapter for you . 
Just like your registered name , your domain name should describe 
the nature of your business or refl ect your main one to create brand 
awareness and encourage repeat hits – that is the number of times a 
customer clicks onto your website – and online sales . It is the central 
ingredient for successful online marketing and , if appropriate to the 
market , your name could be spread without you even having to do 
anything . Names can include letters , numbers and hyphens , so there 
are a several ways to distinguish yourself from the competition . For 
example , if your company is called John Smith Printers and the . com 
and . co . uk names are already taken , think of an alternative . This 
could be perhaps jsprinters . com or jsprint . com . Although johnsmithprinters . com would be the obvious choice in this case , often the 
shorter the web address the better , as it can be easier to remember 
and be keyed in more quickly , while still refl ecting the company and 
what it does . 
You don ’ t always need a name that directly states what you 
do . Having a unrelated catchy name can sometimes work to your 
advantage . Take Amazon . com , for example . The name is not directly 
linked to the products the company sells . However , Amazon has built 
a reputable brand around a totally new name that stands out from the 
crowd . 
There is no 
standard in 
the length of 
a domain , but 
the rule of 
thumb is the 
shorter the 
better
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 175 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
176
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
What makes a successful 
domain name ? 
Before attempting to buy any domain name , you need to think 
about : 
• How easy is it to recall the name ? 
• What about the visual appearance of the name , and how it will 
appear on any documentation you produce ?  ( The name needs to 
be there along with your main registered name ( if it ’ s different ) and 
all you other contact details .  ) 
• How will this affect your personal business email address , which , of 
course , is a key way for people to contact you . 
CREASE LIGHTNING 
AND THE NAME GAME
Arguably , there ’ s no better way to attract a potential customer ’ s attention than putting a smile on their 
face . Make someone laugh and they ’ ll automatically have positive associations with your company , and if 
the amusing name also cleverly says what you do , you could be on to a winner . Judy White runs a onewoman ironing and laundry business in Bristol and won an award from Yellow Pages for the name of her 
company Crease Lightning , which was inspired by the popular song from the musical Grease .  ‘ I came 
up with the name because I am a massive Grease fan ,  ’ she says .  ‘ I even wear my hair like Olivia Newton 
John does in the movie .  ’ 
Not everyone takes the naming of their business to such extremes , but the clever thing about Crease 
Lightning is that it ’ s not just amusing , it also reminds people of a popular movie that ’ s both funny and 
entertaining . Although humour is a good trick for getting your business noticed and loved even before 
anyone has even bought anything from you , it only works if its appropriate and positive . There is a funeral 
directors in Twickenham , south-west London , called Wake and Paine , but presumably that ’ s simply the 
names of the proprietors , as humour is certainly not the right route to take when naming such a business . The professions from legal to architectural also need a more serious approach , as often do many 
tradesmen , especially builders , who need to engender a feeling of trust . So remember that humour is not 
for everyone . 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 176 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
177
6 . 0 FINDING A NAME AND CREATING A BRAND
As your domain name needs to make an instant impression on the 
customer , keep it short , recognisable and consistent with the brand 
you plan to establish . 
If in doubt , remember the acronym RAIL : 
Recall : How easy is it to recall the name ? 
Aesthetics : How does the name look and how will it appear on 
business cards and company literature ? 
Impressions : First impressions are crucial , so choose your name 
carefully
Length : Web addresses are limited to the 26 letters of the English 
alphabet , 10 numerals and a hyphen – 37 characters in all . When 
picking a name , less is more . A short name is preferable to a long 
one . 
Lesley Cowley , operations director at Nominet , the internet registry 
for . uk domain names , confi rms the length of name is crucial in 
customer retention .  ‘ There is no standard in the length of a domain , 
but the rule of thumb is the shorter the better ,  ’ he says . As it is 
becoming increasingly diffi cult for customers to fi nd what they are 
looking for , your name will also have to be easily picked out by search 
engines , which is an increasingly popular route people take to locate 
a specifi c website or a selection that offer the service required . If you 
keep your domain name short , simple and catchy , it can be found , 
accessed and remembered more easily . 
As briefl y touched on earlier , another key consideration when 
selecting a name is your email address , which should be memorable 
and descriptive . It is a means by which you are remembered , contacted 
and will gain repeat hits or sales , not just a name . 
Choosing a domain ending
Once you have chosen a domain name you will have to think about 
the ending . Will it be . com ,  . org ,  . net or something more unusual ? 
If you keep 
your domain 
name short , 
simple and 
catchy , it can 
be found , 
accessed and 
remembered 
more easily
When 
choosing a 
name it is 
vital to 
consider the 
email address 
you will have 
as well
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 177 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
178
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
The best and 
most highly 
regarded 
name is still 
. com
This depends on many factors , including the nature of your business , 
whether you are national , international or both , and what is important 
to you and your customer base . The suffi x . com is the broadest 
option , but as Nick Saalfeld , group editor of CompuServe UK , 
says , if you can ’ t register . com , then simply go elsewhere .  ‘ You have 
two big choices ,  . com and . co . uk ,  ’ he explains .  ‘ These are the most 
desirable . However , with the uptake of alternative names , such as . net 
and . uk ,  . com is slowly becoming less desirable .  ’ 
Whatever the experts say , though , the best and most highly 
regarded name is still . com . It is globally and universally recognised , 
so if you can register it , as well as . co . uk , do it sooner rather than 
later . Even if you don ’ t use the UK name , by registering it you will 
keep others from copying your name and it will protect you from the 
competition . In theory , the more names you own , then the better 
the chance you have of maintaining that brand as yours and yours 
alone . Unfortunately , today – with websites launching pretty much 
at the same rate as companies , and with some businesses having 
more than one website to perhaps target a specifi c sector – the short 
DOMAIN NAMES AND SEARCH OPTIMISATION
There are companies you can pay to make your business more attractive to search engines , and they 
provide a service called web optimisation or search engine optimisation . But this can be expensive and , 
these days , it ’ s not really possible to fool search engines like it was in the past , so be wary of companies 
that offer a foolproof service , as websites that are spotted by search engines as trying to use underhand 
means to jump up the rankings are blacklisted – a marketing catastrophe . Some companies offer a kosher service , which will involve them helping you to track down keywords and phrases that your potential 
customers would use to locate your service , and then cleverly build them into the content of your site , 
perhaps donating a page each to the main keywords and phrases . Your domain name can help here 
too , as it will be a little more attractive to search engines if it is descriptive – although this is only a minor 
factor compared with keyword association . 
Ultimately , search engines want to be sure that when someone searches for a particular service , they 
deliver relevant company websites . So if your company has lots of appropriate content about what you 
do , including perhaps advice and other relevant information , and is full of the necessary keywords , then 
this will help greatly . 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 178 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
179
6 . 0 FINDING A NAME AND CREATING A BRAND
names are becoming scarce and fading fast . This means it ’ s even 
more important to think as creatively as possible when deciding on 
both your main company name and that of your web address . 
 ‘ A British company should aim to own . co . uk and . com addresses , 
both of which imply a corporate entity , with . co . uk specifi cally identifying 
you as British ,  ’ says Saalfeld . 
Throughout this chapter , you will notice an emphasis on the 
originality of your domain name . Obviously this is to avoid confusion 
with other companies , and because you can ’ t register exactly the 
same name as another business . However , you may fi nd that the 
company that has registered the name you want doesn ’ t actually do 
anything like what your business does . If that is the case , then it ’ s 
probably because its function is to register and sell domain names . 
As more companies go online , the demand for particular words or 
phrases is only going to increase . And cashing in on that demand are 
the clever people who have already snapped up the popular domains 
to sell for a profi t later on . 
Registering a domain name
Anyone can register a domain name as long it hasn ’ t been used 
already . Nominet encourages companies and individuals to register a 
domain via an internet service provider – or ISP , the majority of whom 
are Nominet UK members and can register on your behalf . Once you 
have registered with an ISP , they will submit the application to Nominet , 
ensuring a more thorough and secure process . However , contractual 
terms , charges and service levels of ISPs vary greatly , so it ’ s worth 
shopping around to fi nd the best deal . Some companies offer domain 
registration , while others include free webspace and email addresses 
or more specialist options . As with every business agreement you 
enter into , do read the small print , and ask to see copies of the terms 
and conditions for domain name registration and clarify your right to 
move across to another ISP if you are unhappy . Besides ISPs , there 
are around 6 , 000 companies who have domain registration facilities . 
As with every 
business 
agreement 
you enter into 
do read the 
small print
CONTACT
Nominet
www . nominet . 
org . uk
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 179 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
180
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
If you ask 
many 
companies 
how much 
they paid for 
their domain 
name , many 
will say £5 , 
perhaps £15 
or a little 
more
Once you have decided upon which company is going to register 
your domain name , the process is generally swift and painless . First , 
you will be asked to pay a fee to secure your domain . Second , the 
company will send you a template of your registered domain name to 
the network information centre ( NIC )  . Each country has its own NIC , 
which is where all the details of registered domains are held . Third , 
if your registration is accepted , the company you have chosen will 
set up a domain name system ( DNS ) entry . Essentially , this means 
assigning your name to a name server that collates and keeps all 
registered names , so that your domain can be found on the internet . 
The process takes between two and three days . Once these stages 
are complete , you will be live on the internet and can use your name . 
Cost of registering a domain
As mentioned above , there are a variety of packages on offer when 
it comes to registering a domain name for your business . Some are 
cheaper than others and it often depends on what other services are 
included , such as whether you go for simple registration or choose 
any additional support services . Nominet ’ s Cowley has seen a great 
deal of variation in the cost of domain names – from free of charge 
to £200 for . co . uk names – but this depends on levels of service and 
support . Prices will vary , depending on what your business needs , 
but there is an average price you will pay for single domain name 
registration , which is around £10 . 
If you ask many companies how much they paid for their domain 
name , many will say £5 , perhaps £15 or a little more . But if you thought 
that the name you had chosen was absolutely key to your business , 
perhaps because you only planned to trade online , and found that it 
was being sold , just how much would you be prepared to pay ? Would 
you go as far as spending £560 , 000 ? That price tag doesn ’ t cover 
the cost of creating the website , nor does it include the cost of web 
hosting . For a cool half million , all you get is a domain name – a highly 
popular one , of course , but , that ’ s right , just a name . And the domain 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 180 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 11 PM
181
6 . 0 FINDING A NAME AND CREATING A BRAND
name in question , according to web hosting site 123-reg . co . uk , is 
cruises . co . uk . Apparently , it was bought by website cruise . co . uk , and 
is going to be used to host ‘ the UK ’ s largest cruise community ’  . 
So what about the most expensive domain name ever purchased ? Well poker . com has got to be up there , which allegedly went 
for a around US$20m , according to Melissa Chang , the president 
of Pure Incubation , a US internet incubator company based in 
Massachusetts . On her personal blog website www . 16thletter . com , 
she says :  ‘ The domain was for sale by moniker . com at a silent auction 
in Amsterdam , but I can ’ t fi nd a confi rmation of who bought it or 
CONTACT
123-reg . co . uk
www . 123-reg . co . uk
THE WORLD ’ S MOST EXPENSIVE DOMAIN NAMES
The most expensive . com domain names : 
poker . com ( $20m ) 
sex . com ( $12m ) 
porn . com ( $9 . 5m ) 
business . com ( $7 . 5m ) 
diamond . com ( $7 . 5m ) 
beer . com ( $7m ) 
casino . com ( $5 . 5m ) 
korea . com ( $5m ) 
asseenontv . com ( $5 . 1m ) 
seo . com ( $5m ) 
shop . com ( $3 . 5m ) 
altavista . com ( $3 . 3m ) 
loans . com ( $3m ) 
vodka . com ( $3m ) 
creditcheck . com ( $3m ) 
wine . com ( $2 . 9m ) 
creditcards . com ( $2 . 75m ) 
Pizza . com ( $2 . 6m ) 
autos . com ( $2 . 2m ) 
computer . com ( $2 . 2m ) 
express . com ( $1 . 8m ) 
seniors . com ( $1 . 5m ) 
tandberg . com ( $1 . 5m ) 
cameras . com ( $1 . 5m ) 
vip . com ( $1 . 4m ) 
scores . com ( $1 . 18m ) 
chinese . com ( $1 . 12m ) 
invest . com ( $1 . 015m ) 
topix . com ( $1m ) 
wallstreet . com ( $1m ) 
rock . com ( $1m ) 
guy . com ( $1m )  
( Source : www . 16thletter . com ) 
The most expensive non . com name : 
poker . de ( $957 , 937 ) 
The top fi ve most expensive . co . uk domain names : 
1 . Cruises . co . uk ( £560 , 000 ) 
2 . Recycle . co . uk ( £150 , 000 ) 
3 . Ink . co . uk ( £130 , 425 ) 
4 . Mobile . co . uk ( £120 , 000 ) 
5 . Taste . co . uk ( £110 , 000 )  
( Source : www . brandrepublic . com ) 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 181 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 12 PM
182
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
EASYJET AND THE SIMPLE 
APPROACH
Company : easyJet
Owner-e Stelios Haji-Ioannou
Startups . co . uk has several interesting video interviews with successful entrepreneurs , and one of the 
shortest and most interesting is the owner of easyJet ’ s account of where the name of his company came 
from . 
In classic abstract style , Stelios Haji-Ioannou called his company Stelmar , which was an amalgamation of Stelios Maritime . The reason he wanted to incorporate his name was to stamp his own personal 
credentials on the company .  ‘ I wanted to achieve something specifi c and for it to be known as Stelios ’ 
company and not my father ’ s ,  ’ he says . In the same vein , Stelair was the working title for the airline he 
planned to set up , once again trying to involve his name in the business . But then he changed his mind . 
 ‘ I decided that I shouldn ’ t be so self-centred ,  ’ he says .  ‘ And it was also diffi cult to pronounce… I also 
decided that the brand had to be extendable over several industries .  ’ There were also considerations of 
longevity behind his decision to call this business easyJet , as well as consideration for his shareholders . 
 ‘ I ’ d like to think that the more mature easyJet companies can carry on independent of me ,  ’ he says .  ‘ I 
think people would still like to fl y easyJet , whether I ’ m in charge or not .  
[ exactly ] how much it went for . Rumours are more than $20 million .  ’ 
This provides an example of how prized domain names are and the 
lengths companies will go to keep their purchases under wraps . And 
there are lots of alleged examples that similarly dwarf the offi cial . co . uk 
domain name purchase record ( see box )  , proving just how important 
a name can be . 
06SYOB_CH_06 . indd 182 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 12 PM
183
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ Once you have decided on the business you want 
to run , carried out the necessary research into its 
viability and put together your business plan , perhaps 
also having secured early-stage fi nance , it ’ s time 
to make sure you have the necessary elements in 
place to be able to launch effectively . Depending on 
your business , this can range from fi nding the right 
premises to recruiting staff , looking at key issues such 
as pricing and insurance along the way . Read on to 
fi nd out the areas you need to consider addressing 
before you are ready for the off . This is the largest 
section of the book , because there ’ s a lot to cover…
7 . 0
PRODUCT 
PREPARATION
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 183 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
184
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Searching for the 
right premises
Finding the appropriate home for your business can be time consuming 
and , once you ’ ve found the right place , it can be a key expense for 
your company . It can , however , cost you very little if you can simply 
rent a desk in another company ’ s premises , or it can take up hardly 
any of your time in searching for the right space if you decide to 
work from home . So before you do anything else , decide the kind 
of premises you will need to launch your business . If your business 
dictates that you are going to need dedicated premises to operate 
from , knowing the type of property you need – offi ce , workshop , 
shop , etc . – is merely the beginning . You also need to consider the 
location and available transport links , and then ask yourself questions 
such as how important common areas are to you and what standard 
of facilities you need , such as bathroom , storage , meeting room , 
kitchen , delivery access and so on . 
Determining what you need
One overriding factor dominates the priorities of startup businesses 
looking for premises , and that ’ s cost . There is usually an overwhelming 
temptation to go for the cheapest property , but this is often a mistake 
that can take decades to rectify – and even bring a promising business 
to its knees . Ironically , some people swing too far in the other direction , 
committing themselves to a heavy initial outlay because they believe 
image is vital – and image doesn ’ t come cheap . So fi nding the right 
premises is the real secret . That can , and will , vary enormously 
according to the type of business . But there are some general rules 
that apply to any operation . 
One 
overriding 
factor 
dominates 
looking for 
premises , 
and that ’ s 
cost
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 184 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
185
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
Location
Location is an important consideration for all new businesses . A key 
factor when deciding where to locate your business is whether you 
need passing trade or will customers come looking for you . Rents 
fall quickly within yards of main roads . Offi ces are even more fl exible , 
particularly if most business is done on the phone . Manufacturing 
and storage relies heavily on access , so think about how vans and 
lorries will deliver and collect goods . Nearby parking can be important , but as traffi c restrictions tighten , public transport may be even 
more so . 
If you are starting up a retail shop , it ’ s crucial to get the location 
right , as it will determine your business activity , and can also defi ne 
your image . Should you head straight for the high street and aim to 
directly attract customers as they walk past , or should you locate on 
the edge of town or just off the main shopping avenue , because there 
are better parking facilities ? Alternatively , should you head out of town 
altogether and follow the larger stores into a retail park , but pay more 
rent ? When deciding , consider what sort of shop you are and the kind 
of customers you are going to be targeting , then research possible 
locations in terms of how accessible it is to your target market , how 
much competition exists there and how much it will cost you . For 
example , if you run a sandwich bar or café , are the customers in the 
high street the ones who will buy takeaway snacks ? Will they be able 
to afford your prices ? What is the footfall or number of passers-by 
that walk in or past your shop ? How visible is your store next to your 
competitors , and how easy is your business to get to ? 
Size
Size is another crucial factor . Health and safety laws provide basic 
guidance on how much space is needed per offi ce desk or manufacturing process , but it will pay you to allow for growth . After all , the 
whole point of business is to expand , so try to be fl exible . Although 
We studied 
what kind of 
people were 
shopping in 
the area
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 185 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
186
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
you may think this will cost more , bear in mind that today ’ s outgoings 
must be balanced against the prospects of tomorrow ’ s earnings . 
Growth
Almost every small business aims to become a big business , but this 
prospect can be choked from birth if the wrong decisions are made . 
Building in fl exibility at the start can be important . Can a building be 
physically altered internally , such as knocking down walls , extending 
outwards or upwards ? Is there spare land next door for expansion ? It 
can be important to make agreements with landlords from the outset 
about what will be allowed and how much extra will be charged on 
top of the cost of rebuilding or alteration . Demand for offi ce space 
has declined during the downturn , which should give you some room 
to negotiate with the landlord over what alterations you can make 
and any additional fees . Planning rules must also be considered , as 
PEOPLE AND PERFECT PLACE
Company : People
Owner-manager : Jo-Anne Bayliss
Jo-Anne Bayliss , joint founder of People , a fashion shop in Kings Heath , Birmingham , knows all about 
researching the ideal location for your business . She believes that knowledge of the area is crucial .  ‘ We 
had lived in the area for four years and were seconds from the location ,  ’ she explains .  ‘ We also knew 
that this area contained a lot of creative and young people , and that they would buy our products . This 
stretch of road also contains several gift shops , there is an existing customer base and shopping here 
saves a trip into town , even though this street is only a fi ve-minute walk into Kings Heath high street .  ’ 
When researching their location Bayliss and her co-founders used several methods and techniques .  ‘ The 
library was very useful and told us how many people lived in the area , where people were employed and 
what was going to be built in the near future , for example ,  ’ she says .  ‘ We also carried out a questionnaire 
in the street , asked friends , studied what kind of people were shopping in the area , as well as counting 
them as they passed by . What ’ s more , we consulted a business adviser who gave us more information 
on the area , such as bus routes and that Kings Heath is the second busiest area in the city .  ’ 
Building in 
fl exibility 
at the start 
can be 
important
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 186 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
187
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
local authorities are not always open to discussion about the future 
of premises . They may have rigid rules about increasing density of 
development , or buildings may be in a conservation area or near 
housing , in which case it will be much more diffi cult to consider 
changes . Even where no physical changes are required , you must 
consider restrictions on potential alterations in how premises may be 
used . Lease conditions and planning rules are usually quite specifi c 
about what goes on within a building . For example , you can ’ t change 
a shop to an offi ce , or vice versa , without permission from the local 
authority and landlord . In fact , even switching from one type of shop 
It is crucial 
to consider 
restrictions 
on potential 
alterations 
in how 
premises may 
be used
IGLU . COM AND THE 
INCUBATOR SAVIOUR
Company : Iglu . com
Owner-managers : Richard Downs and Emmanuelle Drouot
Richard Downs started to put together his business plan for Iglu . com while a fulltime MBA student at 
London Business School ( LBS )  . The original plan was based on selling property on the internet , but was 
quickly focused on the holiday ski market to take advantage of the correlation between skiers and internet users , as well as the fragmented nature of the market . Having met his partner , Emmanuelle Drouot , 
Iglu . com needed to be ready in time for launch at the impending Ski Show . As the countdown began , 
the company was lucky enough to fi nd a home in the newly created LBS incubator , which provides basic 
offi ce facilities for startup companies . This gave them the time to focus on the business rather than hunting for suitable offi ce space . The website was completed at 2am on the morning of the show , explains 
Downs , who notes that even half a week spent looking for offi ce space would have been disastrous .  ‘ If 
we had missed the ski season , we would have been marginalised . The market opportunity would not be 
there ,  ’ he says , noting that a 12-month delay would have seen competitors steal the top slot . 
The space offered by LBS is scaleable and is charged by the number of people . This makes the incubator relatively inexpensive for companies of two or three , but relatively expensive for larger groups .  ‘ If a 
company is successful and grows , there is an economic impetus to move out ,  ’ says Downs . Iglu . com , 
which currently consists of a team of eight , is preparing to do just that as it has outgrown its original 
needs . The company is moving as a private tenant to another part of the building and hopes to keep 
a close association with the incubator and be on hand to provide advice to other startups .  ‘ The other 
benefi t is the network – being in an area with people in the same industry to throw around ideas ,  ’ says 
Downs . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 187 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
188
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
to another can sometimes fall foul of planning restrictions . So you will 
need to cover all the options and regulations before signing on the 
dotted line . 
Other factors to consider
On top of your company ’ s specifi c requirements , there are some other 
issues you will need to consider before making a fi nal decision on the 
premises to go for . 
Use of premises
Most leases overfl ow with restrictions on how buildings can be used . 
This is partly to protect the landlord ’ s investment by , for instance , 
preventing dangerous or noisy activities . There may also be covenants 
from the original ground landlord on types of business activity , as well 
as local planning restrictions . Sub-letting is commonly denied without 
the permission of the landlord . If a lease contains too many of these 
caveats , it can restrict your ability to pass on the lease to another 
tenant when you want to move on . 
Redecoration and repair
Designating when , where , and how often redecoration and repair 
should take place , and who should do it can be a crucial factor , 
particularly for older premises , where hefty costs may be involved . 
Furthermore , many modern leases load most of these onto tenants , 
and landlords usually demand power to carry out the work at your 
expense if it is not done on time and to a required standard . Tenants 
also face what are called dilapidations schedules at the end of their 
lease term , where the landlord can demand payment where premises 
haven ’ t been kept in good condition . 
Alterations
Structural changes and extensions are usually restricted . Internal 
changes require negotiation and may need clearing when the lease 
ends . 
If a lease 
contains 
too many 
caveats , it 
can restrict 
your ability to 
pass on the 
lease to 
another 
tenant
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 188 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
189
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
A tradition has grown up in the UK for long leases . At one time , 
these ran for as long as a century , but the term has gradually been 
eroded to between 10 and 15 years . These generally apply to new 
buildings or those in high-demand city centres . Much shorter terms 
can be found – or negotiated – nowadays , as landlords are adjusting 
to conditions where tenants are unwilling to commit themselves 
for such long periods . Three to fi ve years is generally considered a 
good compromise between a landlord seeking security of investment 
and small businesses unsure of their future . For fi nancial reasons , a 
landlord may prefer to maintain the lease length at 10 years , but allow 
a break clause . This effectively means the tenant can leave after , say , 
three or fi ve years . On the other hand , it also means that the landlord 
can demand this break even when a tenant does not want to move , 
causing expense and disruption . 
Security of tenure
Many businesses may feel more secure with longer leases . They are 
usually assured of this by the 1954 Landlord and Tenant Act , which 
gives them the right to a new lease when the existing one expires . But 
sometimes these restrictions do not apply . Serviced premises are one 
example , along with a sub-lease situation or older buildings in temporary 
use pending redevelopment . Others may seek the freedom to get out of 
their commitment . Watch out for restrictions on sub-letting or assigning 
a lease , which are common , as landlords usually like to keep control 
of who is using their buildings . Be aware that this may involve you 
paying someone a premium to take on the responsibility for a lease . 
One crucial factor when taking on an assignment , which means paying 
a fee to the existing leaseholder to take over their lease , is whether that 
lease is subject to an archaic rule called ‘ privity of contract ’  . Until the 
law was changed in 1996 , a tenant remained responsible for rent and 
other charges even after assignment of the lease to a new tenant . 
Alternatives
There are options outside renting premises through a traditional 
lease . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 189 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
190
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
• Serviced offices – serviced offices are becoming common as more 
investors plough into this growing sector . This involves a contract 
rather than a lease , running for terms ranging from a few hours to 
several months . The charges may appear high compared with usual 
rents , but include all services such as heating , lighting , security and 
business rates . Offices sometimes come complete with furniture 
and carpets . 
• Serviced industry – the serviced industry sector is growing as 
landlords find it more difficult to attract tenants to older industrial 
space . The same terms apply as serviced offices , with an all-in 
monthly charge for rent and services . 
Before you start the search
Having decided on the building details , there are a few things to bear 
in mind before you should start your search . Although landlords used 
to give few choices , today ’ s business environment is less certain and 
the market has responded by providing a range of options to suit . 
Consider your business ’ s fi nancial model , and decide on your growth 
plans and the amount of money you want to spend . This will give 
you guidance on the services you want the landlord to include in the 
package , those you wish to pay for and the length of the lease term 
that suits you best . So before you start your research , calculate your 
budget , including one-off costs for items such as furniture and IT 
equipment , as well as ongoing costs such rates and service charges . 
Remember again that the current economic climate means that 
landlords are far more open to negotiating rates than they have been 
for a number of years , so be prepared to haggle as it could save your 
business valuable funds both now and in the future . 
Before you secure the space
There are many ways to fi nd potentially appropriate units – through 
commercial agents , online searches , local newspapers and even just 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 190 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
191
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
walking around . Then comes the really important stage – the viewings . 
At this stage try think about questions that go beyond the obvious : 
• Can you control the room ’ s temperature ? 
• Is the building well maintained and watertight ? 
Once you ’ ve found the property that meets all your criteria 
( including , of course , your budget )  : 
• Check out the landlord before you agree to take the space
• Talk to other tenants in the building to establish their reputation , 
and ask for a copy of their ‘ customer service charter ’  , as you need 
to know how responsive they will be if anything goes wrong . If they 
don ’ t have one , take that as a warning sign ! 
• Clarify what the monthly payment covers ( for example rent only , or 
are some utilities included ) 
• Confirm what services the landlord is contractually obliged to give . 
Before signing the fi rst offer that you are presented with , try to 
negotiate , because you may be able to achieve a rent-free period , for 
example . Lastly , rethink the whole process to help you fi nally decide if 
this is the right space for your business and for your customers . This 
will be your last chance to change your mind without it potentially 
costing you money , so ask yourself these key questions : 
• Are you sure you can afford both the direct and indirect costs ? 
• Are you happy with the landlord ? 
• Do you understand the deal and what you are committing to ? 
Once you ’ ve done your homework and you feel confi dent that you 
are getting a fair deal , you should move to secure the space . 
Getting the right help
The cost , time and plethora of potential problems means buying , 
leasing and selling property can absorb huge amounts of your time , 
and at worst , lead to bankruptcy before you are even off the ground . 
So it ’ s advisable to take specialist advice from a chartered surveyor 
CONTACT
Where to go for 
further help : 
Royal Institution 
of Chartered 
Surveyors ( RICS )  : 
information Centre
020 7334 
3838 / 3842 / 3819
Rent Review and 
Lease Renewal 
Helpline : 
020 7334 3806
Dispute Resolution 
Service
Surveyor Court , 
Westwood Way , 
Coventry , CV4 8JE
020 7222 
7000 / 01203 694757
Commercial 
Property Leases in 
England & Wales : 
Code of Practice . 
Available from the 
RICS Bookshop ; 
020 7222 7000 ; or 
by mail order from : 
RICS Books , Mail 
Order Department , 
Surveyor Court , 
Westwood Way , 
Coventry , CV4
www . rics . org . uk
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 191 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
192
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
or a valuer . Just as lawyers know the law , surveyors know bricks 
and mortar . There are different types of surveyor and valuer who can 
help . 
• One group are effectively agents and know all about availability , 
rents and prices . It may be worth employing one to find the right 
space . 
• Building surveyors specialise in the nitty-gritty of construction . They 
can organise a new-build or inspect existing buildings for potential 
faults . Another skill lies in analysing the average 40-page lease a 
landlord will expect . Or they can take over negotiations on rent 
reviews , rating appeals and planning applications . Use an expert 
with letters after their name . Professional organisations award 
these , such as the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors ( RICS )  . 
Ask in advance how much it will all cost . Then , after taking a deep 
breath , consider how quickly such fees will be saved in making the 
right choice or winning a cut in the asking rent . 
Equipping your offi ce
Once you ’ ve chosen your premises and completed the formalities , 
the next step will be preparing your workspace for business , making 
sure that it has the necessary equipment to allow you to be able to run 
your company . It ’ s also important to think carefully about the layout , 
as this will directly affect your ability to operate . Offi ce or workspacemaking can be as rewarding as home-making , but you are likely to 
have only a limited amount of time to do this as you will start paying 
rent from the moment you ’ ve signed the contract , so it can also be 
just as stressful . 
If you are manufacturing a product , then your workspace is 
likely to be your workshop , so you will need to get all the necessary 
equipment installed and make sure that you adhere to statutory health 
and safety guidelines . Your industry association should point you in 
the right direction for your specifi c requirements . If you simply have 
an offi ce – and if you have a workshop you may also have an area 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 192 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
193
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
set aside for this purpose – think carefully about the equipment you 
will need to keep your business running smoothly , from technology 
such as telephones and IT to desks and chairs . Health and safety 
should also be a priority , particularly if you are employing people , and 
the Health and Safety Executive will be able to provide you with the 
necessary guidelines – the last thing you want in the early stages of 
starting your business is to fi nd yourself liable for damages following 
a workplace accident involving one of your staff ( or customers for that 
matter )  .  ( Guidance on insuring your business is covered later in this 
chapter .  ) 
If you will be dealing with customers face to face , it ’ s vital to make 
sure that your offi ce refl ects the values of your business and doesn ’ t 
deter customers . So put some careful thought into décor – having 
spent time and effort thinking about the vision and values of your 
company for your business plan , your premises should refl ect them . 
Of course , if you are opening a shop or a restaurant , for example , 
this is one of the most important facets of your business . This also 
involves key elements such as signage , which must be consistent with 
your brand image and logo , and must complement your marketing 
materials . Positioning is also vital here , particularly if you are looking to 
attract custom to your premises . 
You may do some of the décor preparation yourself , as well as 
installing some of the equipment . However , to ensure your premises 
looks professional , it could well be worth using decorators , builders 
and offi ce installation companies . If you will be doing this , plan this 
well in advance , as you will not only pay for the work , but also for 
any delay in getting your business up and running . Recommendations 
from friends and other businesses , and reputable trade federations , 
are a good way of sourcing the best companies in your area . 
To prevent overspending or misjudging the equipment you 
will need , think carefully about this well in advance and make a 
comprehensive list of the items you will need . Then consider the 
best places to source what you need . Be as economical as you can , 
but go for quality as well . Decide for which items you need go for 
the ‘ Rolls Royce ’ option , because , say , they directly determine the 
CONTACT
Health and Safety 
Executive
www . hse . gov . uk
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 193 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
194
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
quality of product or service you offer , and for which you can choose 
the ‘ Volkswagen ’ – reliable . Always look for good value and never 
be tempted to go for poor quality , as this is likely to end up being a 
false economy , with an item letting you down at a crucial time . Check 
out what can be bought second hand and whether there are special 
online markets or exchanges for your particular sector . 
Security is an area you shouldn ’ t look to cut back on . If your 
premises doesn ’ t look impenetrable , it ’ ll just attract thieves . For 
recommendations on what precautions to take , call your local police 
station . The police will usually come and survey your premises , and 
will probably also recommend a good local security company to do 
the work for you – and testimonials don ’ t come better than that . 
Finally , although it may sound obvious , don ’ t overlook utilities , such 
as heating , lighting and water . Effective air conditioning , for example , 
can help make your working environment more pleasant throughout 
the year . 
Building the right team
As well as fi nding the right premises , staffi ng is a key area that 
small businesses can focus on , explains Nick Shrager , a member 
of the National Council of the Institute of Business Advisors .  ‘ It ’ s all 
about customer retention ,  ’ he says .  ‘ If staff make the customers feel 
welcome , they ’ ll come back – and it ’ s six times easier to sell to an 
existing customer than to a new one .  ’ 
You may feel that you can start and run a small business all by 
yourself . But there usually will be some areas you can ’ t handle – we ’ re 
not all salespeople , for example . The fi rst thing is to identify what 
skills and experience your company needs to grow and make it a 
success . Then you can start to work out who you need to recruit for a 
successful launch and what your requirements will be in the short and 
long term . Of course , you also need to honestly assess what you can 
reasonably manage without the expertise of others by relying on your 
own resources . This is something you should have addressed in your 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 194 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
195
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
business plan ( see Chapter 4 )  , along with defi ning the exact nature of 
your product or service and its marketplace , and how to recognise 
the problems of that market . All of this will help you to decide what 
additional people and skills you may require . It will also show you 
where your strengths lie . 
 ‘ It ’ s vital to be strictly honest about your strengths and weaknesses ,  ’ 
agrees Brial Steel of Business Link Berkshire and Wiltshire .  ‘ And it 
should be an ongoing process , continuous improvement comes 
through continuous monitoring .  ’ Practically speaking , you can learn to 
market your own product – after all you are the expert on it – and you 
can run the offi ce and develop new custom . But if , for example , on 
It ’ s vital to 
be honest 
about your 
strengths 
and weaknesses
GUIDELINES ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES LEGISLATION
Throughout the recruitment process , you should be fully aware of equal opportunities legislation . This 
means understanding how discrimination can occur – even unintentionally – during the recruitment 
process . 
Some job advertisements may discourage particular groups from even applying for the vacancy . For 
example , an advertisement calling for ‘ vibrant ’ or ‘ thrusting ’ personnel is implicitly ageist as it will deter 
older candidates who will associate these words with youthfulness . Also , untrained interviewers can form 
very subjective opinions on the basis of entirely irrelevant criteria – such as background or appearance . 
Unlawful discrimination
You are not allowed to express a preference in terms of the gender , age or race or colour of the candidate , as this is discrimination . 
Genuine occupational qualification
You are only allowed to state a preference for a man or woman if you can produce a genuine occupational qualifi cation ( GOQ ) saying why it must be a man or woman . For example , if you need a man for 
cleaning male toilets . Ideally , as your company grows , you should monitor the applications received 
to make sure that they attract applicants from a cross-section of society , with suffi cient numbers from 
diverse groups and sections . Also , the entire selection process should be monitored to ensure that 
selection occurs on the basis of criteria related to the job requirements – and nothing else . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 195 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
196
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Recruitment 
shouldn ’ t 
just cover 
immediate 
vacancies , 
but should be 
seen as part 
of an overall 
organisational strategy 
for sourcing 
personnel
top of this you are spending far too much time struggling to balance 
the books , it ’ s probably time to pay someone else to do this , most 
likely on a part-time basis . 
Finding the right people
If you get the recruitment process right , you virtually eliminate 
the risk of hiring the wrong person for the job . On the other hand , 
getting the process wrong means that you won ’ t attract applications 
from suitable candidates and will be much less able to spot them 
during the selection process . Recruitment is not just carried out to 
meet immediate vacancies , but should be seen as part of an overall 
organisational strategy for sourcing personnel . Once you fi ll one 
vacancy , you should be left with a list of candidates who you would 
consider for the same or other vacancies in the future . This makes the 
process much easier the next time round . 
A recruitment exercise exposes your company to a wide section 
of the public . These people could be current or potential clients , 
customers or suppliers . What ’ s more , people talk . If a job applicant has 
had an unfavourable experience with your company , you can be sure 
that they will tell others about it . Hence it ’ s vital that the recruitment 
process creates a positive impression of your company while at the 
same time you are able to fi nd the right person you have decided you 
need to launch your business effectively . 
The job profi le
Defi ne the role ( job profi le ) and the person required ( person specifi -
cation ) as accurately as you can in order to attract the right people . 
It also helps if you have a clear idea of the kind of person you 
need and the actual work involved . When listing skill requirements , 
only mention those actually related to the position . Similarly , when 
stating prior experience needs , think about how much is strictly 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 196 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
197
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
necessary for the candidate to do the job well . You may ideally 
want your new employee to be an offi ce whizz and highly trained in 
all things , but consider the competencies they actually need for the 
position offered . 
The advertisement
Once you have prepared a profi le , draw up a clear but brief recruitment 
advertisement . This should include : 
• The job requirements
• The criteria for applicants
• The salary package
• The length of the contract
• A short description of your organisation
• The job location
• The application procedure ( do people apply in writing , by phone , or 
fill in an application form ?  )  . 
Where you advertise will depend on the type of position offered . 
Surveys show that specialist and trade publications work best for 
managerial and professional posts . Meanwhile , advertisements for 
skilled workers give best results when placed in the local press . The 
internet as a recruitment tool is also becoming more and more popular , 
and can be very cost-effective , so it will pay for you to research the 
online options available . Some trade magazines , for example , will offer 
to put your vacancy online as part of the recruitment advertisement 
package . There is more on where to place your advertisement later 
in this chapter . 
Where to look for staff
When you ’ ve drawn up the profi le of the person you are looking for 
and written a draft of the advertisement , there are four main routes to 
making contact . Each has its pros and cons . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 197 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
198
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Local newspaper
Everyone looking for a job knows the day the job pages come out . 
It ’ s the one day that is guaranteed to be a big seller for a local paper 
as everyone from national to one-man-band companies vie to 
attract new staff . It isn ’ t the cheapest form of recruitment , but you 
are guaranteed to get a sizeable response . Most locals told startups . 
co . uk that smaller companies didn ’ t need to put an advertisement 
in for more than one week to get a more than adequate choice of 
applicants . 
Prices vary from region to region , but the procedure is largely 
the same . You fax or email through the text of your advert ( over the 
phone there is too much risk of misspelling )  , and the recruitment 
classifi ed desk will call you back to discuss options . If you ’ ve never 
placed an advertisement before , don ’ t worry , they will go through 
with you how big the advertisement should be and how long it should 
appear to attract a certain response , and then calculate the cost . 
The simplest advertisements might be charged by lineage , for example £17 per line plus VAT , where each line will fi t three or four 
words . You wouldn ’ t be able to say a great deal or have a company 
logo , but it would get the message across . So typically , a small 
advertisement in a local paper will cost in the region of £300 . Many 
local papers are part of a wider syndicate , so you might also be 
able to get your advertisement in more than one paper . For example , 
some local papers have a more business-orientated journal , 
which can be helpful if you are looking to reach that market . This is 
again something the classifi ed department will be able to help you 
with . 
Pros : This is possibly the best way to access your region , as the local 
paper on job day is still the fi rst port of call for many people . 
Cons : This is not a very targeted approach , as the paper goes to 
everyone and unless you make your advertisement specifi c , you might 
have to wade through lots of unsuitable applicants . 
Check with your local newsagent which paper people buy for jobs 
in your area and which day is job day – it ’ s usually Thursday . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 198 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
199
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
Job centres
The Employment Service has over 1 , 000 job centres nationwide that 
can help you fi nd people for a whole range of positions and sectors , 
either locally or nationwide in some cases . It doesn ’ t cost anything 
to post a vacancy with them and you can benefi t from support both 
before and after the position is fi lled . Services offered by Jobcentre 
Plus include advice on recruitment methods and procedures , 
information about the local labour market such as employment levels , 
availability of candidates and wage rates , and advice on any diffi culties 
or barriers to fi lling your vacancies . It is also important to fi le any other 
details , such as whether a driving licence will be required to avoid 
wasting your and your candidates ’ time later on . The details of the 
job are entered into a computer system that job seekers can either 
access themselves or through a consultant . If you then agree your 
expectations with your contact at the job centre , they can let you 
know when there are enough suitable applicants . 
You can now create , view and update your jobs yourself through 
Employer Direct online . You can also email your vacancies at any 
time . 
Pros : You can use the job centre as a base for interviews and the 
consultants are always on hand to help . It is also free . 
Cons : It can be a time-consuming process as you are relying on 
people coming into the job centre to see your advertisements . 
Online recruitment
You don ’ t have to be an online company to think about recruiting 
online . Often if you place a newspaper advertisement with a local 
paper , they will have a package to post your advertisement on an 
affi liated website . But there are also dedicated websites : Monster . 
co . uk , Stepstone and easyJobs are some of the ones available , 
where both potential employees and employers can search online . 
The idea is that you save time by cutting out the middleman , using 
the website instead . With Monster , for example , you can potentially 
deal with the whole process online . You log on , post your vacancy 
CONTACT
Employer Direct 
Online
www . jobcentre
plus . gov . uk / key
employerdirect ; 
vacancies @ job
centre ; gsi . gov . uk
Fax : 0845 601 2004
CONTACT
Gojobsite
www . gojobsite . 
co . uk
0870 774 8710
Monster
www . monster . co . uk
0800 169 5015
Stepstone
www . stepstone . 
co . uk
020 8762 6700
easyJobs . com
www . easyjobs . 
co . uk
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 199 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
200
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
and pay for it using your credit card . For a small business , you will 
probably choose the one-off option , which costs £270 and will post 
your advertisement for up to 60 days . 
Pros : Once you are registered you can control the job advertisements 
yourself , taking them down when you have enough applicants . There 
is also the added bonus of a team on hand to help you out with any 
problems . Moreover , you can reach a much wider audience , nationally 
and possible Europe-wide , without going through agents . 
Cons : People are unlikely to see the job as easily as they might in 
a newspaper when scanning the advertisements . Websites rely on 
people searching . 
Recruitment agency
There are a lot of recognisable high-street recruitment agencies , 
including Select , Travail , Manpower , Hays and Reed , which can provide you with both part-time and permanent staff . In theory , they all 
deal with every level of company , from small operations to national 
businesses . There are also many industry-specifi c recruitment agencies . With most agencies you can choose how to contact them initially 
– by phone , email or in person at your local branch . You will then need 
to provide details of what type of staff you are looking for and the kind 
of salary you plan to pay . Agency staff will advise you on the current 
employment rates if you are not sure , or indeed if your estimate is over 
or under the odds . It is also likely that you will have to undergo some 
kind of credit check just so the agency knows you can pay the bill . 
If you don ’ t have premises , you can hold your interviews at the 
agency , but they will need to come and view your offi ces to check 
they are suitable for the potential employee . It also helps for them 
to see the culture of your company , the people and environment to 
help match the applicants . Once you have agreed exactly what the 
job description is and what the conditions and the salary are , you 
will have to sign an agreement . This just ensures that the candidate 
is getting the job they have applied for . But it is important from your 
point of view that you have the position clearly defi ned at this stage 
to avoid diffi culties later . This is also important when the agency fee is 
CONTACT
Hays
www . haysworks . 
com
Manpower
www . manpower . 
co . uk
reed . co . uk
www . reed . co . uk
Select
www . select . co . uk
Travail
www . travail . co . uk 
( all websites have 
nearest branch 
fi nders ) 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 200 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
201
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
set . They may take a percentage of the candidate ’ s annual salary , say 
20% . However , the amount will vary according to the level the person 
is coming in at and how hard they were to fi nd . 
After you have recruited someone , there will probably be a period 
during which the fee is refundable – but only a few months . So it is in 
your interests not only to choose carefully but also to work with the 
agency to ensure you and your new staff member is happy in the fi rst 
three months . That way , it will be money well spent not wasted . 
Pros : If the agency wants your fee , it is in their interests to fi nd you 
someone good , therefore you should receive decent support and 
guidance . 
Cons : As part of the process your fi nances and premises will be 
investigated and questioned if not up to standard . 
The response
All applications to job advertisements should be replied to . Remember 
they could well be or know clients . The sooner the response , the 
better , as this shows your company is effi cient and interacts well 
with the public . Remember too that all applications – even unsolicited 
ones – are confi dential . 
The criteria
Even if the response to your advertisement is overwhelming , don ’ t 
eliminate candidates on the basis of certain self-selected criteria 
such as geographical proximity to your offi ce . You could easily miss 
the application from your ideal employee . Instead , use a checklist of 
essential criteria , based on the job profi le and person specifi cations 
you compiled earlier . It ’ s surprisingly easy to let personal prejudice slip 
in , so it ’ s best to be aware of this possibility at all times . 
Stay objective . You could try using a points system to screen 
applications based on every core skill requirement spotted . This lends 
a broad and more objective method to the process . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 201 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
202
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
ACTION POINT
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE THE PEOPLE 
AND THE SKILLS TO LAUNCH 
SUCCESSFULLY
Identify the skills your company needs to succeed : Carefully look at the various functions required 
for the successful running of your business from administration to sales and marketing . 
Assess which of these you and your existing workforce can realistically cover : If you already have 
staff on board , honestly assess who can handle the various functions and the skills necessary . 
Work out the skills gaps : Make a list of the remaining functions to gauge where help is needed . 
Decide on how many people you will need to take on : Look at the functions and skills needed and 
assess how many people will be required to plug the gaps and whether they ’ ll be recruited on a freelance , 
part-time or full-time basis . 
Kick-off the recruitment process : Draw up the necessary job descriptions and decide how to reach 
the people you need . 
Once you are an employer
Part of the process of building your team is recognising your obligations as an employer . This involves making sure that you are up to 
speed on all the relevant employer legislation , so that you avoid any 
legal problems – which can be quite severe – and treat your staff fairly . 
Gaining a reputation for being a good employer will pay dividends 
in the long run as it will help you attract the best talent . Here are 
some pointers ( for more details , contact the Department for Business , 
Enterprise and Regulatory Reform )  . 
Equal opportunities
Just as when you are recruiting , your workforce should be treated 
equally , regardless of colour , race , nationality , ethnic or national origin , 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 202 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
203
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
sex , age or marital status . Also you shouldn ’ t discriminate against a 
disabled person because of their disability either directly or by failing 
to make ‘ reasonable adjustments ’ for a disabled person . For free 
information about equality at work , contact ACAS Equality Direct ( see 
contacts below )  . 
Terms and conditions of employment
Within the fi rst two months of their employment , an employee must 
receive a written statement of main employment information , covering 
main terms and conditions , including pay , holidays , details of notice 
and disciplinary procedures . 
Transfer of an undertaking
Employees ’ terms and conditions are preserved when a business ( or 
part of one ) transfers to a new employer . 
Fair and unfair dismissal
If an employee has at least one year ’ s service , they have the right to 
complain of general unfair dismissal . 
Unions
Employees have the right to belong or not belong to a union , and the 
right not to be refused employment on the grounds of trade union 
membership or non-membership . 
PERIOD OF NOTICE
• For continuous employment of more than one month , but less than two years , one week ’ s notice of 
termination of employment must be given unless a longer period is stated in the employment contract . 
• After two years or more , at least two weeks ’ notice must be given . 
• After two years employment , one additional week ’ s notice for each further complete year is required . 
• After 12 years continuous employment , a minimum of 12 weeks ’ notice is required . 
• An employee is required to give his or her employer at least one week ’ s notice that they are leaving if 
employed continuously for one month . 
• This minimum is unaffected by longer service , but you may ask for longer in their contract . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 203 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
204
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Redundancy
If you have fewer than 20 employees , you are under no obligation to 
notify any staff about redundancy . However , failure to do so could 
result in a claim being made for unfair dismissal . Companies with 
20–99 employees must give at least 30 days ’ notifi cation , while 
those with more than 99 employees need to provide at least 90 days ’ 
notifi cation . What ’ s more , an employer who proposes to make at 
least 20 employees redundant at one establishment over a period 
of 90 days or less is required to consult either representatives of a 
recognised independent trade union or other elected representatives 
of the affected employees . 
Illegal workers
You can face a criminal prosecution if you employ illegal workers and 
haven ’ t made certain checks on new employees , such as seeing a 
P45 , P60 or payslip showing a National Insurance ( NI ) number – or 
one of a range of other specifi ed documents . Copies need to be 
retained in most cases . 
National minimum wage
All employers must adhere to the UK minimum wage , which is £5 . 73 
an hour ( £4 . 77 an hour for 18–21-year-olds )  . 
Pay and tax
You must inform Her Majesty ’ s Revenue & Customs ( HMRC ) when 
you take on your fi rst employee . HMRC will set up a PAYE ( pay as 
you earn ) scheme and send you a new employer ’ s starter pack . You 
should complete a P45 form for each employee or complete a P46 , 
making the necessary tax deductions and send them in monthly . 
All employees must be given itemised pay statements showing 
deductions . National Insurance is payable for employees aged 16 or 
over earning more than £110 per week ( as of April 2009 )  . 
Statutory sick pay
If an employee is sick for less than four consecutive days , no action is 
needed . If the employee is sick for more than four days , and is entitled 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 204 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 43 PM
205
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
to statutory sick pay ( SSP )  , you are obliged to pay it in the same 
way as wages and keep records of payments made and dates of 
sickness absence . If the employee is sick for more than four days , and 
not entitled to SSP , the employee may claim state incapacity benefi t 
instead . 
Statutory maternity pay
Employees can claim statutory maternity pay ( SMP ) if on the 15th 
week before their baby is due they have been employed by you for 
more than 26 weeks . They can choose to take SMP from the 11th 
week before the baby is born . Employees must tell you at least 28 
days before they intend to stop work , and you should get them to 
make this request in writing . They must also provide you with evidence 
of when their baby is due . This is normally on the maternity certifi cate 
MATB1 . The earliest that this certifi cate may be issued by their doctor 
or midwife is 20 weeks before the week in which their baby is due . 
You should receive this no later than three weeks after the date their 
SMP begins . 
Hours
Working hours are limited to an average of 48 hours a week , although 
workers can choose to work more if they want to . Night-workers ’ 
hours are limited to an average of eight hours work in a 24-hour 
period , and they have a right to receive free health assessments . All 
employees have a right to 11 hours ’ rest a day , a day off each week , 
and an in-work rest break if the working day is longer than six hours . 
Insurance
If you employ staff you must take out Employer ’ s Liability Insurance 
and display the necessary certifi cate . 
Health and safety
You must register your business with either the Health and Safety 
Authority ( most factories , workshops , etc .  ) or the local authority ( most 
offi ces , shops and catering businesses )  . 
CONTACT
Department 
for Business , 
Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform
www . berr . gov . uk
ACAS Equality 
Direct
0845 600 3444
Health and Safety 
Authority
www . hse . gov . uk
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 205 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
206
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Finding and dealing 
with suppliers
Many businesses are built around selling goods , and as such are 
reliant on getting these items at the best possible prices , so that they 
can make more profi t on a sale . This is where suppliers or wholesalers 
come in . If you ’ ve never dealt with these kind of businesses before , you 
could be surprised as sometimes it can even be diffi cult to track down 
the right one . However , this is a relationship that is worth nurturing , as 
it is key to the success of your new business . 
Finding wholesalers
It ’ s not just large fi rms who make use of wholesalers , but how do you 
fi nd them in the fi rst place ? Thumbing through your Yellow Pages
or calling a directory service might yield results , but for the modern 
small business the lack of wholesaling presence on the internet is a 
cause of great frustration . Wholesalers tend to stick to traditional tried 
and tested methods – and this includes attitudes , or a lack of them , 
towards technology such as the web and email . 
Relationships between wholesalers and their customer base are 
often built up over years of loyal service , so suppliers often rely on word 
of mouth and local knowledge to attract new clients . You are unlikely 
to come across attention-grabbing advertising from wholesalers in 
comparison with large retailers .  ‘ It can be very hard for people new 
to trading to fi nd wholesaler contact information and thus it makes it 
hard to shop around ,  ’ admits wholesaling specialist Richard Grady . 
 ‘ One of the reasons for this is that very few UK wholesalers have 
decent websites and even fewer have taken any time to ensure their 
sites are ranked well in internet search engines . This means that if 
you are looking for suppliers on the internet , it will take ages and you 
probably won ’ t have much luck ,  ’ he warns . 
Luckily , this gap in the market has been belatedly acknowledged 
with several websites and books that point you in the direction of 
If you are 
looking for 
suppliers on 
the internet , it 
will take ages 
and you 
probably 
won ’ t have 
much luck
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 206 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
207
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
your nearest wholesalers . However , entrepreneurs will still have to do 
most of the legwork in researching the quality of wholesale products 
and getting the best value for money . Grady has compiled an online 
resource to accompany his sought-after e-book , UK-Trader ’ s UK 
Wholesale Guide . Visitors to his website ( see contact box ) can get 
details on over 700 wholesalers and gain other relevant information . 
Alternatively , www . thewholesaler . co . uk has a large wholesale directory , 
with details on products ranging from fi reworks to toiletries . 
As websites like these may charge you for membership and 
access , it can be worth sticking to print publications when looking 
for your wholesalers . Therefore , a quick fl ick through The Trader
magazine ( monthly at most newsagents ) will reveal plenty of wholesale 
advertisements , as well as a list of contacts . 
Sourcing overseas suppliers
Many companies look abroad to source cheaper products or raw 
materials . This approach is defi nitely worth considering , particularly 
at the moment when every penny counts . The breaking down of 
global trade barriers also means that this may be necessary to stay 
competitive . 
If you fi nd a willing supplier selling the product you need at the 
cheapest possible price , you have to consider the following : how 
far away the country is ; whether there might be compromise on 
levels of regulation and protection ; and how well you will be able to 
communicate with your chosen supplier should any problems arise . 
Issues of creditworthiness and reliability are even more important 
when your supplier is based abroad . 
As a general rule , developed countries are easier to trade with than 
developing ones . If your supplier is from a country in the European 
Union , for instance , many key regulations and standards will be similar 
to those in the UK . If a country has high volumes of existing trade with 
the UK , it probably means other businesses have been successful in 
establishing relationships with traders there . If this is the case , enquire 
CONTACT
The UK-Trader
www . theuktrader . 
co . uk
The Trader
www . thetrader . 
co . uk
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 207 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
208
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
after good suppliers in your target country from other traders in your 
sector , or go on an overseas trade visit , or attend some foreignfocused trade exhibitions . 
In fact , trade shows and expos are among the best places to fi nd 
new suppliers , but make sure that the event is relevant to your needs , 
as they can be time-consuming and expensive . To fi nd the appropriate 
fairs and expos , check out the trade publications associated with 
your sector , and look online . Websites such as www . exhibitions . 
co . uk , www . tradeshows . esources . co . uk , www . biztradeshows . com 
and www . expocentral . com will point you in the right direction . For 
international tradeshow listings , visit www . FITA . org . 
For an overview on international trade , visit the Business Link , 
while for information on potential suppliers , your local UK Trade and 
Investment ( UKTI ) team should be your fi rst port of call . The UKTI 
website also includes an online test to see whether your company 
is ready to trade with businesses abroad and tips from international 
trade advisers . It ’ s also worth trying your supplier country ’ s embassy in 
the UK – you will fi nd contact details on the Foreign & Commonwealth 
Offi ce website . Furthermore , contact information for your target 
country ’ s chambers of commerce can be found on the British 
Chambers of Commerce ( BCC ) website . Trade associations for your 
sector will most likely have information regarding suppliers for your 
industry too . You should be able to fi nd details of trade associations 
for your industry sector on the Trade Association Forum website . 
Once you fi nd your supplier , make sure you research their reliability . 
Speak with experienced UK importers or trade associations in your 
sector so that you have an idea of what to expect . Find out if your 
supplier has any UK references they can provide and try to visit them , 
so that you can check out their work and their production systems 
fi rst hand . 
Make sure to carry out fi nancial checks too . If your supplier cannot 
furnish you with a credit history , your bank ’ s international trade team 
may be able to carry out a ‘ status query ’  , which will investigate the 
company ’ s fi nancial standing for you . But no matter how clean your 
supplier ’ s bill of fi nancial health , don ’ t sign a long-term contract 
CONTACT
Business Link
www . businesslink . 
gov . uk
UK Trade and 
Investment
www . uktradeinvest . 
gov . uk
Foreign & 
Commonwealth 
Offi ce website
www . fco . gov . uk
British Chambers 
of Commerce 
( BCC ) website
www . british
chambers . org . uk
Trade Association 
Forum
www . taforum . org
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 208 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
209
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
straight off or agree to any advance payments until you have built up 
a relationship of trust . 
Approaching wholesalers
As long as you have proof of trading , which can be as little as a 
letterhead or business card , you are entitled to deal with a wholesaler . 
Suppliers need business just as much as you do , so there ’ s little chance 
you will be turned away . So be confi dent when approaching them and 
focus your concerns on getting a good deal for your business . It is 
important that you actually visit the wholesaler in person because as 
mentioned above , wholesalers are quite traditional in their practices , 
and the chances of getting hold of an email address to contact them 
are slim . 
There is , similarly , a limited amount you can do over the telephone . 
Your supplier will be happy to send you a list of stock and the relevant 
prices , but to gain a proper understanding of what you are ploughing 
your wholesaling budget into , it is vital you have a face-to-face 
meeting . 
The time that you actually visit is up to you , but be aware that 
the busiest time for a wholesaler will be around midday , when shop 
owners converge to purchase stock for their stores . If you arrive 
around 4pm , you will have a less frantic search for your goods , as 
PHONE BEFORE YOU GO
Do phone ahead before your visit to save yourself from a wasted journey , as it is best to fi nd out in 
advance if your wholesaler has the goods you require . Stock changes every day at a wholesaler , so lists 
you receive a week in advance will be out of date by the time you turn up to purchase the items that you 
need . Many wholesalers also like to assign certain visiting times for customers to look at stock – this is 
particularly the case with larger and more popular suppliers . Wholesalers with valuable items that require 
supervised visits will also need you to call ahead . Policies vary according to the supplier , so check out 
their procedures before you turn up . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 209 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
210
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
this is the wholesaler ’ s quietest period . You will also benefi t from more 
attention from the wholesale staff , as they will have fewer customers to 
deal with . The downside is that stock you have turned up to buy may 
have already gone , so , again , it is vital that you call ahead to check on 
what stock is still available . Striking the right balance is important , so 
don ’ t be put off if it takes a few visits before you get it right . 
Choosing a good wholesaler
As is common when you are starting up a business , for all the 
calculations and careful planning , sometimes a good or bad gut 
instinct can serve you best of all .  ‘ Most people will get a feel for 
whether they are comfortable with an individual quite quickly and this 
is often very accurate ,  ’ explains Grady .  ‘ I would tend to be happier 
dealing with a large wholesaler with pleasant premises and a friendly 
atmosphere , although , that said , I have also traded with some very 
good suppliers that have operated from very unpleasant lock-up units 
on rough industrial estates !  ’ 
Generally speaking , a good wholesaler will take the time to talk to 
you and listen to your needs . The more they are prepared to do for you 
suggests that they are reliable and their stock will not let you down – 
customer service , after all , is essential to wholesalers who rely heavily 
on repeated visits from shop owners and small fi rms . On the other side 
of the coin , if you turn up to a derelict garage and are confronted by 
a nervous looking ‘ wholesaler ’ who thrusts a box of pickles into your 
hands before snatching your money and speeding off in his GTi to 
the sound of wailing police sirens , you should maybe consider looking 
elsewhere for your supplies in the future . So trust your fi rst impressions . 
If you are not happy you can always change your wholesaler until you 
fi nd someone you are comfortable dealing with . 
A good 
wholesaler 
will take the 
time to talk 
to you and 
listen to your 
needs
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 210 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
211
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
How much should you spend 
on stock ? 
Before you set off to visit your wholesaler , make sure you have worked 
out a budget to suit your business ’ s needs and means . Although the 
need to budget carefully is essential in almost all aspects of business 
startups , it is particularly important when it comes to buying stock . 
Working out how much you need of a certain product and how much 
money to set aside can be a tricky balance to strike . Purchasing too 
few supplies to satisfy customer demand or keeping your business 
running smoothly , means you could end up losing out fi nancially . 
Buying too much stock also means not only will you have a room full 
of unsold items , but you will also be hit fi nancially . It ’ s also wise to keep 
some money back , because if you don ’ t , you might miss a bargain or 
neglect other essential areas of your business . Of the two scenarios , 
over-spending is the least preferable , as you won ’ t be able to correct 
your order next time if your fi rm suffers serious fi nancial damage . So , 
when working out your budget , err on the side of caution . 
 ‘ How much you buy in one go depends on what you are purchasing 
the stock for ,  ’ says Grady .  ‘ If you have a large high-street outlet , then 
you are going to need to buy far more stock than an individual trading 
part-time from home . Most wholesalers have fairly low minimum 
orders , say from £50 to £300 , and this means that traders can buy in 
small quantities initially . This is recommended so that you can check 
that you can actually sell the products . There is nothing worse than 
being stuck with a large quantity of stock that you can ’ t sell , especially 
if you have invested all of your capital into it . 
 ‘ Wholesalers will expect payment with order unless you have a 
credit account with them . It is not usually appropriate to fi nance stock 
purchases with other fi nance deals or instalments as the purchases 
would normally be too regular – every couple of weeks or monthly .  ’ 
There is 
nothing worse 
than being 
stuck with a 
large quantity 
of stock that 
you can ’ t 
sell
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 211 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
212
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Don ’ t forget about VAT
Unfortunately , we all have to pay VAT and wholesalers are no different 
– in fact it is the most common tax you will come across when dealing 
with your wholesaler . VAT is charged by suppliers of goods and 
services , and wholesalers certainly fall into the former category . As they 
are not entitled to any exemptions or a reduced VAT level , wholesalers 
will charge the standard rate of 15% on your purchase – which was 
reduced from 17 . 5% in 2008 to help stimulate business during the 
recession . What you must be aware of is that many wholesalers price 
their goods without VAT , so you may be under the impression that you 
have a brilliant deal when , in fact , you will have a 15% charge slapped 
on top of it . So the four widescreen televisions you buy for just £1 , 000 
will in fact set you back £1 , 150 . 
 ‘ From my experience , it ’ s fair to say that many new traders do 
forget that the prices displayed by wholesalers won ’ t include VAT ,  ’ 
says Grady .  ‘ I know of a couple of people that got very excited at 
the incredibly low deals on offer and got a shock when they got to 
the till and found another 15% added to the cost .  ’ Although you are 
obliged to pay the VAT on these , and indeed any other goods , you are 
entitled to claim the money back if your fi rm is VAT registered . Input 
tax ( the VAT you pay on raw goods ) can be claimed back as part of 
the legitimate expenses that your business runs up – if you regularly 
pay more VAT than you collect you can claim this money back on a 
monthly basis by fi lling in a return . 
WHOLESALER CREDIT ACCOUNTS
As a new startup you shouldn ’ t expect a wholesaler to offer you a credit account with them . You probably will have to make some straightforward purchases with them fi rst . This is generally what wholesalers 
will expect from you . It may be cheaper to set up a credit account , when you ’ ve established yourself 
with suppliers , than get involved in any fi nance deals with your bank , and it is best to avoid getting into a 
never-ending circle of loans and deals to fund your stock purchases . 
CONTACT
For the most upto date fi gure on 
VAT visit
www . hmrc . 
gov . uk / vat / 
vatregistering . htm
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 212 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
213
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
To become VAT registered , your fi rm ’ s turnover must exceed 
£68 , 000 a year , although this fi gure has risen considerably in the 
past few years . These increases have been aimed at helping new 
businesses that cannot deal with the burden of fi lling out continual 
VAT forms . However , although small fi rms often grumble about VAT , 
you can often save money by registering for it and many businesses 
voluntarily put their name forward even if they are under the threshold . 
So , if you are VAT registered and you keep in mind the charge when 
purchasing , you will be able to shape your budget accordingly to 
ensure that your cashfl ow is unaffected . 
Are you guaranteed ? 
There are no specifi c guarantees that wholesalers use , although the 
goods you buy will usually have a manufacturer ’ s warranty , which will 
be passed to you from the supplier once the transaction is made . A 
wholesaler should be happy to replace faulty stock , although , legally , 
they are not bound to do so , unlike high-street stores . Signifi cantly , 
the regulations that amended the Sale of Goods Act in 2002 did 
not cover wholesalers . This means that although shops are dutybound to give refunds or exchanges for faulty goods , wholesalers 
are not .  ‘ The regulations only cover business-to-consumer transactions , so wholesalers wouldn ’ t be relevant ,  ’ says Martyn Rapley
of the Department for Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Reform . 
 ‘ However , the main requirements of the Sale of Goods Act … are 
certainly relevant .  ’ 
So it ’ s not all bad news if you have , for example , bought 100 
solar-powered torches . The original Sale of Goods Act makes it clear 
that all products sold should be of satisfactory quality and serve the 
purpose for which they are intended . Most reputable wholesalers 
offer exchanges or refunds for faulty items , so just because the law 
now only recognises this right in retailers , this shouldn ’ t damage your 
chances of getting your money back or getting a decent replacement . 
However , a word of warning : the new regulations shift the onus of 
New traders 
often forget 
that the 
prices 
displayed by 
wholesalers 
don ’ t include 
VAT
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 213 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
214
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
When buying 
online , make 
sure you 
know exactly 
what you are 
purchasing
proving the goods were faulty at the time of purchase to the seller – 
but only in regard to shops . Wholesalers will still be able to demand 
that you prove the products were inadequate when you fi rst bought 
them . Also , if you buy untested goods from a clearance warehouse , 
they will have no warranty at all and you will run the risk of having a 
damaged bank balance as well as damaged stock . 
Buying online
As befi ts their traditional image , wholesalers generally prefer to do 
their trading on the fl oor of a warehouse rather than in cyberspace . 
Consequently , there are few UK websites dedicated to wholesaling , 
and even fewer for individual suppliers themselves . However , this is 
slowly beginning to change and several websites have been created 
to allow you to purchase goods online , the most common being sites 
dedicated to selling pallets of items at knockdown prices .  ‘ When 
buying online , make sure you know exactly what you are purchasing 
– read the description thoroughly and study any pictures ,  ’ says 
wholesaling specialist Grady .  ‘ If you are not sure , contact the supplier 
for additional information . Nothing beats a visit to the supplier so that 
you can see the products before making a purchase . Also , use a credit 
card to make your payment , that way you have a right of recourse via 
the credit card company if things go wrong .  ’ 
Buying batches or pallets of goods online from wholesalers is 
different from buying on Amazon , for example , as you may not be 
entirely sure what you are being sold due to the varied goods on offer 
in a single purchase . Make sure you have a detailed list of what is on 
offer and contact the wholesaler if you have any queries . Although it 
is wise to exercise caution when purchasing online , you can make big 
savings as internet sales can often be much cheaper , due to lower 
overheads , than traditional warehouse buying . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 214 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
215
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
Making a profi t
There are several simple steps you can take to make a profi t on your 
wholesale stock . 
Cash payments
Simple cash payments may be the most benefi cial for your business , 
as many wholesalers give discounts ( see more on this below ) to 
customers who pay upfront in this way . The method of payment , 
however , depends greatly on the cashfl ow situation of your company , 
and it is important not to risk over-stretching your business by making 
large cash purchases early on . Try to build up the amount of stock 
from a low level to begin with , to ensure you can sell all of it on and to 
save valuable funds for the future . 
Price matching
Once you have a fi rm idea of the amount of stock your business can 
sell on , you can ‘ price match ’ wholesalers against each other on large 
orders . Don ’ t be afraid to ask your supplier to compare prices with 
someone else for you – wholesalers are generally , contrary to their 
image , approachable and happy to see your business fl ourish ( as well 
as keen to keep your custom )  , and will often knock down their prices 
to a competitor ’ s level . 
Getting discounts
Discounts are given roughly in proportion to the amount of money 
you spend , much like many other trades that offer such incentives to 
encourage you to place large orders . Therefore , orders under £200 
are generally not going to attract discounts from wholesalers . But 
don ’ t forget that if you buy goods for the sake of a discount and are 
left with excess stock and a big hole in your budget you could end 
up in trouble . So make sure you strike the right balance , meeting your 
customers ’ needs without buying too much stock . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 215 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
216
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010 
! TOP TIPS
DEALING WITH WHOLESALERS 
! Get to know the wholesalers that you deal with – this will help you fi nd out when new 
products are in stock and get the best deals on price 
! Don ’ t be afraid to ask one wholesaler to ‘ price match ’ another , especially if you are 
placing a particularly large order 
! Don ’ t expect huge discounts unless you are buying in huge quantities 
! Startups are unlikely to get an instant credit account . Pay cash up front for a couple of 
months before requesting credit 
! Don ’ t be intimidated – as most suppliers will be more than happy to help you as much 
as they possibly can
Give it time
Don ’ t be frustrated if you don ’ t see instant profi ts on your wholesale 
goods . If you continue to stick to an appropriate budget , shop 
around for value and strike up a good working relationship with your 
wholesaler , you should start to see results within a few months . Of 
course , much of this depends on the size and circumstances of your 
business , but by sticking to this formula you will be on course to meet 
the potentially large profi ts that buying wholesale goods provides . 
Insuring your business
Making sure your company is protected against as many disasters 
as possible could ultimately save it and protect all the time and effort 
you are likely to put in to making it a success . However , fi nding the right 
business insurance can be a diffi cult and complex process . There is a 
certain amount of jargon associated with the area , which can put off 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 216 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
217
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
many small fi rms . As an entrepreneur you might see your insurance 
as one of those unavoidable costs – you don ’ t much like it but you 
will go along with it . However , for many fi rms it ends up being their life 
support . You never know if disaster is lurking around the corner , but it 
is too late to get cover after the incident has happened . 
Insurance is also not an area where one size fi ts all , so don ’ t buy 
a policy unless you really need to . However , don ’ t fall into the trap of 
scrimping on costs , as you might fi nd out that you are not covered 
when the worst happens . Essentially , it is important to understand 
your own risks , know what the insurance market has to offer and to 
thoroughly read and understand any policy before committing to it . 
Why you need insurance
Aside from legal requirements and demands from customers to 
have a certain level of liability , you might well think that there is little 
point to your insurance policy . However , there are many examples 
of businesses going to the wall following a disaster for which they 
weren ’ t covered . Similarly there are many instances when a company 
has bounced back after it looked like it had passed the point of no 
return , all because it was insured to the very hilt . 
You might consider the risks that your business faces to be small 
or even affordable , but if this is the case , then you are probably 
underestimating them . The chances of your business being hit by a 
fl ood or destroyed by a fi re might seem low , but disruption to your 
work can come from many quarters . For example , a crime in your 
street could lead the police to cordon off the area for a period of time . 
Despite not being able to trade , you will still have to pay your staff , 
rent and other costs , and you could lose a very signifi cant amount 
of business or incur heavy costs while attempting to maintain it . 
However , all of this could be prevented with a business continuity 
insurance deal . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 217 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
218
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
As mentioned earlier , some of your clients might ask about your 
insurance details before they are prepared to do business with you . 
Public liability is important for many clients , particularly in the public 
sector . In a business-to-business setting , an insurance policy acts 
almost like a credential . By having a high level of cover , you are 
demonstrating that you are a respectable business , which takes health 
and safety very seriously , and that you fully understand your own 
responsibilities . So paying for insurance is far from just dead money , 
but a way of accessing opportunities that you wouldn ’ t otherwise be 
able to gain . 
Essential cover
There is some insurance that you must have , and this is covered 
below . 
Liability insurance
Nearly all businesses need some level of liability insurance , and 
employer ’ s liability insurance is the most common one . If you are about 
to take on staff then you should ensure you have this fi rst . Also , if you are 
thinking of setting up a limited company then it is a legal requirement , 
as technically the company is the employer . If any member of your staff 
is taken ill , suffers injury or dies and this is deemed to be as a result 
of their work , then you are potentially liable . Therefore , the law states 
that you must have cover in order to cope with this eventuality . By law , 
employers must have at least £5m of liability , although many policies 
offer £10m . There are just under 400 deaths and nearly 30 , 000 major 
injuries at work each year in the UK , so you are well advised not to 
make any savings in this area . 
Motor insurance
As any driver knows , motor insurance is a legal requirement , but 
many come unstuck when using vehicles for work-related activities . 
You might think that your current insurance covers you , but unless 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 218 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
219
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
your policy includes work use then you are mistaken . The good news 
is , however , that this isn ’ t usually expensive and some insurers offer it 
for free . If you are employing someone who is using their own vehicle 
for work purposes other than travelling to work , then you have a 
responsibility to ensure they are fully covered . A work purpose could 
be as innocent as dropping you off at a meeting – it doesn ’ t matter 
how minor this seems , they still require business insurance . It is also 
highly advisable to check with the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency 
( DVLA ) that your staff are legally able to drive and take copies of their 
insurance and MOT documents , as well as their driving licences . 
Public liability
Public liability insurance , though not compulsory , is something only 
the most cavalier business would cut back on . It covers you for 
damage against property or persons that you might encounter 
during your work . Many clients won ’ t deal with you or can ’ t legally 
work with you unless you have it , so you might consider it to be 
obligatory . 
Pricing
One of the most important decisions to be made when you start a 
business is the pricing of your products or services . Customers buying 
standard products that are available from numerous sources will look 
for the supplier with the cheapest prices . This makes it diffi cult , if 
not impossible , for the small fi rm to compete with major suppliers 
who have the advantage of bulk purchasing or mass production . 
Fortunately , there are niches you can occupy where price is not the 
most signifi cant consideration , being outweighed in the eyes of the 
customer by quality , service or uniqueness . 
 ‘ Small companies often make the mistake of charging very low 
prices because they feel they must compete on a price-only basis ,  ’ 
warns marketing consultant Annmarie Hanlon .  ‘ But there will always 
be a large company that can afford to drop its prices to squeeze 
CONTACT
DVLA
www . dvla . gov . uk
There are 
niches you 
can occupy 
where price is 
not the most 
signifi cant 
consideration
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 219 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
220
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
the small company out . Instead , you should compete on product 
or service quality . A small company can give an attention to detail 
which is diffi cult for a big company dealing with 20 , 000 customers to 
achieve .  ’ 
Pricing confi dence
Having spent fi ve years as a director of the Prince ’ s Youth Business 
Trust , Hanlon speaks from the experience of being midwife at the birth 
of numerous businesses .  ‘ There is less confi dence in a cheap service 
than in a more expensive one ,  ’ she says .  ‘ Hairdressing is a good 
example , where there is an idea that if you are paying your hairdresser 
more you are getting a better hair-do . I know a hairdresser in the 
Midlands who charges more than anyone else in the area . Customers 
receive a welcoming neck and shoulder massage on arrival and are 
given a hot towel to wipe their hands . With these added attentions , a 
premium price is perceived as appropriate .  ’ 
Location and environment
Hanlon points out that location and environment are also important . 
 ‘ If an establishment in a back street and with no reception area 
charged the same prices as a lush Mayfair location , its customers 
would feel they were being ripped off . It ’ s all about ensuring the price 
is appropriate for the service .  ’ 
This is illustrated by what she calls ‘ the salmon sandwich issue ’  . 
She explains :  ‘ If you buy a salmon sandwich from your local sandwich 
shop to take away in a paper bag you are happy with a price of £1 . 
If you go to a well-known department store , the sandwich is nicely 
packaged and you have a perception that the quality is better , so 
To maximise 
your profi ts , 
you will need 
to think 
creatively 
about your 
pricing 
structure
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 220 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
221
7 . 0 PRODUCT PREPARATION
£1 . 50 might be acceptable . Then there might be a premium product 
with fi nest Scottish smoked salmon and delicious trimmings . For that 
you might well accept a price of £2 . 10 because you think it is right for 
what is being offered . But if the same £2 . 10 sandwich was being sold 
for 45p you would wonder what was wrong with it .  ’ 
Offer a specialised service
In the retail sector , specialisation can sidestep price competition . Offer 
a wide selection in a narrow fi eld . Observe what is lacking in an area 
and not encompassed by the big chains . It ’ s a matter of fi nding a 
demand in your area that ’ s not catered for , where your customers will 
feel they are getting value for money as opposed to cut prices . Family 
convenience stores that buy from middlemen – wholesalers and cash 
and carries – cannot match the prices of supermarkets , which buy 
in vast quantities direct from manufacturers . But their strength can 
be their location . They usually serve a localised market , such as a 
housing estate , or they may be situated on a route used by people 
going to and from work . Open for long hours , they are handy for 
people calling in for newspapers , confectionery or snack foods , or an 
 ‘ emergency ’ purchase such as milk or sugar , aspirin or cigarettes – 
items that do not justify a trip to the supermarket . And people who call 
in for just one item often make other impulsive purchases . It ’ s a case 
of convenience outweighing cost . 
Ultimately , when you launch your business , to maximise your 
profi ts you will need to think creatively and strategically about your 
pricing structure to make sure , if possible , that you can charge the 
maximum by offering a premium product or service that is niche to 
your area . If there are larger companies offering a similar service , this 
will be a must . 
Compete 
on product 
or service 
quality . A 
small 
company 
can give an 
attention to 
detail which 
is diffi cult 
for a big 
company
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 221 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
222
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
INNERGY AND THE PRICE POINT
Company : Innergy
Owner-managers : Gez Walsh and Maurice Gardiner
It took a bit of convincing to persuade Gez Walsh he was entrepreneur material . Scared of failure and 
too comfortable in his day job , he was working as a national sales manager at a competitor of the energy 
business he would eventually go on to start with partner Maurice Gardiner . 
It wasn ’ t until a couple of years after leaving the energy industry before they plucked up the courage to 
start Innergy LPG , which supplies liquefi ed petroleum gas ( LPG ) to businesses and commercial users 
throughout West Yorkshire . 
Initial research consisted of phoning competitors ’ customers to ask about the level of service they were 
receiving , and what Innergy could offer to improve on it .  ‘ Unsurprisingly , price came out as the main 
concern ,  ’ says Walsh .  ‘ Secondly , many customers told us they couldn ’ t trust their current suppliers . LPG 
is subject to the same price fl uctuations as any other fuel . But customers felt that prices only moved 
upward and that their suppliers were abusing the movement in the price of product .  ’ 
As part of its focus on pricing , Innergy now provides a system on its website where clients can check 
prices against the competition . The company now has around 1 , 000 customers in the West Yorkshire 
area , and plans to expand into bulk LPG across the UK . Projected turnover for 2008 is £1 . 6m , but in 
order to expand some further borrowing is on the cards . 
07SYOB_CH_07 . indd 222 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 49 : 44 PM
223
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ With everything falling into place , from the completion 
of your business plan and working on the practicalities 
of where you will be based to considering the kind of 
people you may need to employ , it ’ s time to properly 
formulate and implement your pre-launch marketing 
strategy – basically tell the world about your company 
and why they should buy from you . This will ensure 
you are perfectly placed to get your business off to a 
fl yer . So it ’ s important that you have an understanding 
of what marketing is all about and the options open to 
you . Read on to fi nd out about the best approach to 
take…
8 . 0
TELLING THE 
WORLD
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 223 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
224
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
What is marketing ? 
Marketing is the means by which your business identifi es , anticipates 
and then satisfi es customer demand . If carried out effectively it will 
not only ensure that your business is seen and heard , but will also 
give it the fl exibility to adapt to fl uctuating customer demands and 
a changing business environment . Companies that really succeed 
are those where the owner has a vision for the fi rm and is dedicated 
to seeing it through . A marketing plan will help achieve focus and 
establish the vision . Marketing will help you understand who your 
potential customers are , place and price the product compared with 
the competition and also position the company in the marketplace . It 
will also help identify future opportunities for self-promotion . 
Although there are established guidelines to follow , marketing 
can be a diffi cult skill to develop . But in terms of successful impact 
on the future commercial effectiveness of the business , it is worth 
cultivating . It can offer improved returns and profi tability and a greater 
understanding of realistic business development opportunities . There 
are no hard and fast rules for timetables for your marketing . As 
general rule of thumb , it ’ s recommended that you think about what 
your business would like to achieve three years from now compared 
with where it would be if you didn ’ t employ a marketing strategy . 
With respect to how to set your marketing budget , there are several 
possible approaches , none of which can claim to be the right way . 
They include using a percentage of sales , the same spend as last 
year ( which is unlikely to be relevant to a startup )  , a similar spend to 
key competitors , and the dubious ‘ what we can afford ’  . Of course , 
in the end it will come down to what you can afford , but initially you 
need to plan your strategy to fi nd out how much marketing you think is 
necessary , identify the essentials and go from there . Also , as you see 
later in this chapter , there are some good marketing methods that don ’ t 
cost much at all . 
Sonja Garsvo , former public relations chief at Apple Computers 
and now a personal business adviser at Business Link London City 
Partners , recommends factoring the marketing budget into your 
Businesses 
that really 
succeed are 
those where 
the owner has 
a vision for 
the fi rm and 
is dedicated 
to seeing it 
through
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 224 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
225
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
business plan from the bottom up .  ‘ If you can ’ t afford a marketing 
budget , you have to ask yourself how viable your product is ,  ’ she says . 
One of the major problems for startups when considering marketing 
is quantifying in advance the expected result for a given spend . 
But consider Microsoft . While your ambitions may be more modest 
than those of Bill Gates , his company ’ s domination of the software 
industry is a testament to the power of successful marketing . Gates 
targeted potential competitors , undercutting rival Apple Computers , 
while launching a sustained marketing blitz to become one of the 
richest men in the world , with PCs dominating the home computer 
market . Industry observers attribute Microsoft ’ s success as much to 
its marketing prowess as Apple ’ s lack of it . Of course , in recent years , 
Apple has carved itself a lucrative niche in the technology sector 
thanks not only to wonderfully innovative and stylish designs , but also 
because of – yes , you guessed it – excellent marketing . What ’ s more , 
Microsoft is now a major shareholder in the company . 
Building a marketing plan
Any marketing plan should include the four Ps : 
• Product
• Pricing
SALES VERSUS MARKETING
Don ’ t confuse sales with marketing . It is a common enough mistake for any small business to lump sales 
together with marketing under the perception that the two disciplines are different heads of the same 
beast . This is because tactics can overlap . However , they are not the same . The mission of sales is to 
increase turnover through a number of tricks , such as margin reductions , discounts , two for the price of 
one , special offers and so on . The mission of marketing is to identify the market , build the company and 
promote the product . 
Marketing that attempts to embrace both the areas is a complex , expensive and resource-intensive 
activity . In the long run it is far more productive to have a dedicated marketing manager or assign the 
task to a marketing team . 
A marketing 
plan should 
be a 
statement of 
intent – where 
you are , 
where you 
want to go 
and how you 
are going to 
get there
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 225 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
226
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
• Position
• Promotion . 
Building a marketing plan also means drawing up a blueprint 
for effective marketing . It can also be a useful way of ironing out 
differences between colleagues about where the business is heading 
and creating a common goal . 
Product and pricing
The key to product and pricing is research . The more thorough your 
marketing plan is , the better . If your business is going to operate within 
a specifi c locality , will the market support it ? For example , if you plan 
to open a restaurant , how many already exist , what type of service 
do they offer and what are their prices like ? How do they position 
themselves – greasy spoon , haute cuisine or takeaway ? Will the locality 
support another restaurant , or is the area already saturated ? Check 
out your rivals ’ prices , too , and position your product accordingly . 
You need to check whether once you have started your business 
and want to introduce new products or expand into other markets , 
the prospects for growth are viable . Perhaps there is a niche for the 
product / service or the competitors have the market sewn up . Think 
about how you will sell the service – directly , mail order or via an 
agency , and the distribution method you will use , where your offi ce will 
be located and whether you will need to supply after-sales service . 
Position
Positioning means creating an identity for your business . You want to 
stand out from the crowd and be distinctive , so you need to develop 
a brand identity that is instantly recognisable . This will build a platform 
from which to launch your product . A business name is important and 
should refl ect the value of the product or the service . See Chapter 
6 for more on this subject . To create the brand identity , fi nd a good 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 226 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
227
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
local designer who can come up with letterheads , signage design , 
business cards and packaging . 
Although design is one those trades that many people think they 
can do themselves , a professional designer should be able to create 
a unique identity and appearance for your business . A good local 
designer need not be expensive and is likely to be a small business 
itself , sympathetic to your needs and ambitions . To make sure that 
your logo and brand identity refl ect the visions and values of your 
company , you will need to give the designer a clear brief about your 
company and what you want it to achieve , including the market you 
are targeting – as this should all infl uence the design they come up 
with . In fact , if a designer doesn ’ t ask for details about the values 
of your company , your market and your competition – and perhaps 
examples of logos and branding you admire – then think twice about 
commissioning them . Ultimately , they should be producing a look and 
feel for your company that is signifi cantly different from your rivals , 
appealing to your target audience and also right for your business . 
All of these considerations have to be factored into a marketing 
plan and will form the foundation on which the fourth P – considered 
to be the classic marketing tool – promotion , is built . 
Promotion
Customer targeting is the fi rst and most important step in planning any 
kind of promotional activity . Jeff Holden of the Chartered Institute of 
Marketing recommends asking the following questions to provide a 
clearly defi ned target audience : 
• What kind of people buy or will buy your product ? 
• What do your best customers tend to have in common ? 
• Can you reach all of your customers through the same communication channels ? 
• Do customers fall into different groups ? 
• Are there different buying circumstances , for example , planned , 
impulse or special occasion ? 
You will need 
to give the 
designer a 
clear brief 
about your 
company and 
what you 
want it to 
achieve
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 227 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
228
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
On answering these questions , you will recognise who your 
customers are . The next step is fi nding effective channels to 
communicate your message . These fall into three categories : media 
advertising ( above-the-line )  , non-media communications ( below-theline ) and public relations . Media advertising consists of television , 
radio , the press , cinema , outdoor and transport . Non-media consists 
of sales literature , direct marketing , sponsorship , sales promotion and 
point of sale . Public relations involves a range of activities that attempt 
to generate a positive attitude towards your company or products . 
Initially , you are unlikely to be able to sell to all the people or 
businesses you have identifi ed as potential customers , simply due 
to resources . This means that it ’ s important to look at your audience 
and hone your niche by identifying the best prospects – those you are 
most likely to get business from . They will not only be those prospects 
who are most likely to need your product or service , but also those 
you can reach most effectively and effi ciently in terms of both time 
and expense . 
Think carefully about how much time and effort you can afford to 
put into promoting your business and evaluate the most effective way 
of getting your message across to the most appropriate people . The 
internet means that you can reach more people than ever and you 
have greater potential to take your business to the global level . But 
the reality is that you need the resources to be able to service such a 
demand , so initially it ’ s worth scaling down ambitions . In some cases , 
if you are offering a service that requires your physical interaction 
with customers , geography will play a key role in delineating your 
audience , as you will be restricted to how far you can physically travel . 
So it ’ s best to start by focusing on marketing your business to a core 
group of prospects well , rather than overstretching yourself , as this is 
likely to affect the quality of the message you are delivering , with the 
consequence of reducing its effectiveness . 
Start by 
focusing on 
marketing 
your business 
to a core 
group of 
prospects 
well , rather 
than overstretching 
yourself
CONTACT
Chartered Institute 
of Marketing
www . cim . co . uk
01628 427120
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 228 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
229
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
Getting your message heard
There are three key points to remember when advertising : 
• Reach
• Frequency
• Impact . 
Reach means getting through to the right audience , in the right 
circumstances and at the right time :  ‘ Who wants to know about 
investment products when they are cleaning the kitchen fl oor and 
don ’ t have the money to invest ?  ’ asks Holden . So successful reach 
is about selecting the right media and scheduling advertisements 
for appropriate times . Frequency is about giving the audience a 
reasonable chance for the message to sink in amid the hubbub of 
everyday life , while impact pretty much speaks for itself . Your message 
must have impact to cut a swathe through the myriad of distractions 
that confront consumers every day , and it must be presented at the 
most appropriate time . 
Media advertising
The three major aims of above-the-line promotion are to inform , 
remind and persuade your customers about your products , services 
and the company itself . 
The measure of advertising cost is the amount of business that 
you can generate per pound spent on advertising . Cinema advertising 
can be ideal for a local restaurant bringing in late evening diners . A 
recruitment agency can benefi t by advertising on panels on local 
transport and can reach thousands of people in the right categories 
every day . Many small businesses are fi nding that local radio can 
also be a cost-effective medium . However , Garsvo warns against 
the scattergun approach .  ‘ Shout as loud as everybody else and get 
attention but be focused about it , don ’ t advertise for the sake of it ; 
A message 
must have 
impact to cut 
a swathe 
through the 
myriad of 
distractions 
that confront 
consumers 
every day
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 229 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
230
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
think about who you want to reach and the best way of reaching 
them ,  ’ she says . 
Non-media communications
Non-media communication takes a number of forms and its methods 
are within the reach of every startup business . Sales literature is a 
familiar tool , ranging from the glossy company brochure to the singlesheet product fl ier dropped through the letterbox , stuck behind the 
windscreen wipers of cars or direct mailed . It should be designed 
with a specifi c target audience in mind and should convey what the 
product ’ s key features and benefi ts are . Direct marketing can be the 
most effective means of communication , and it embraces all forms 
of promotion where the buyer is required to respond directly to the 
advertiser rather than through a retailer or dealer . It includes selling 
off the page as well as direct mail and telephone sales . Don ’ t forget 
Yellow Pages , and you may want to consider online information 
services such as Scoot . 
As mentioned in previous chapters , it ’ s also worth setting up a 
website for your company . Getting someone to design and programme 
a basic one shouldn ’ t be that expensive , and , anyway , keeping it 
simple is the best strategy as overly complex websites can actually 
deter visitors . You could also create one yourself , as there are lots of 
software packages around that can guide you through the process . 
However , if you are going to set up a website , you will need to let 
customers know that you are on the internet . 
One of the clear advantages of below-the-line marketing over 
media advertising is that responses can be measured . However , it 
is worth noting that a 2%–3% return rate is considered the average , 
5% is very good and 0% means something is seriously amiss . Sales 
promotion and point of sales can be used to offer something extra 
and build in loyalty , such as buy three curries and get one free during 
the following week . This also has the added advantage of blocking 
out the competition . Offers such as these can be made at the point of 
CONTACT
Yellow Pages
www . yell . com
Scoot
www . scoot . co . uk
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 230 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
231
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
sale or via mail drops , and are often a useful means of giving a startup 
business a leg up . 
Sponsorship can also be an effective tool . Is there a local nursery 
or community project that needs some equipment in your area ? You 
can provide it and in return work out a deal in which your company 
gets some promotion . If the cause is worthy it can generate positive 
word of mouth approval , too . However , do not make too much noise 
about the sponsorship and your generous donation , as this is often 
viewed cynically and considered opportunism . 
Public relations
PR takes a number of forms , with its purest form viewed as the means 
by which a company can communicate honestly and accurately 
DOSH SOFTWARE AND THE 
DIRECT APPROACH
Company : Dosh Software
Owner-manager : Jonathan van der Borgh
Dosh Software was set up by accountant Jonathan van der Borgh to develop new accounting packages for small fi rms ( and subsequently successfully sold to MYOB )  . Van der Borgh was keen to get a 
retail presence , but the company was fi ghting for space on the shelves at stores such as PC World . He 
quickly realised that direct marketing would be a quicker and easier way to establish the brand . As a new 
company , explains general manager Tony Trevillion , Dosh had to cut the cloth fi nely and any expenses 
had to be justifi ed . That is why direct marketing had so much appeal . Dosh could mail to discrete 
groups , targeting the recipients and honing in on their customer base of accountants and bookkeepers . 
One of its fi rst promotions was through an accountancy publication . Dosh placed an advertisement in 
the magazine ( which is distributed to 70 , 000 readers )  . In addition , it refi ned that list and placed a further 
10 , 000 trial copies of its software on the cover of the publication , but only to be received by smaller 
accountancy fi rms . The results of each campaign were tracked , and within just one or two weeks the 
company knew how successful each mailing would be . The mailings were then followed up by telephone 
calls , both to customers who responded as well as those who did not . 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 231 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
232
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
KIRSTY ’ S STORY
We decided to do the early PR ourselves
While the website and creative brand were being developed and then refi ned , Kirsty 
McGregor started concentrating on marketing her business Entertainthekids . com , 
designed to inspire parents . Deciding PR was key , she chose a specialist agency from a selection of four . 
 ‘ We had quite a few ideas for them , but we really didn ’ t get the supportive response we were hoping for 
from our chosen agency . In the end we decided we should just try to do this early PR work ourselves . 
After all we had the ideas and the enthusiasm , and we would do as much as we could with virtually no 
budget . So this is what we did and the results we achieved : 
• ‘ Approaching celebrities ( via their agents ) with children for an endorsement . Result : Kym Marsh provided us with a quote . 
• Approaching the monthly parenting magazines for a chance to show them our idea with a view to 
building a relationship with them in readiness for our launch . Result : We met two magazines whose 
editors were willing to review the site and have made personal contacts with several others . 
• Asking my son ’ s nursery , and begging our old primary school , to allow us to carry out some market 
research on their parents . Result : 320 questionnaires distributed , nearly 20% returned , all very positive 
and they proved we have priced the product accurately . 
• Writing a blog and getting it published by a business magazine . Result : You are reading the results 
which first appeared on the startups website . 
• Entering the inaugural Manchester Evening News Venture Award for young (  !  ) up and coming entrepreneurs , making it into the final three and getting great coverage in the newspaper .  ’ 
with its audience . It includes media releases , product launches and 
premises openings . To do it effectively , there are simple guidelines to 
follow . Send a press release to the local paper , or hold a launch event 
and target the appropriate trade journals . To fi nd out the relevant titles , 
consult the business section in your local library . Check out the media 
directories Pimms and PR Newswire , as both list trade journals , then 
call the title and fi nd out which journalist covers your area . 
Keep press releases simple . Journalists are bombarded with 
hundreds of press releases every week and have tight deadlines to 
meet . If your press release is too long , there is a very good chance 
it will end up in the bin before the third paragraph is reached . Do 
not make any grandiose claims , as these are usually seen through 
very quickly . Simply explain concisely and clearly who , what , where 
PR is 
generally a 
cheap form 
of communication
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 232 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
233
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD 
! TOP TIPS
SUCCESSFUL MARKETING STRATEGY
For successful marketing , bear these simple rules in mind :  
! Start by setting clear objectives for where you want your business to be , in say , three 
years 
! Define your target market and identify your audience 
! Decide on the brand and the values you want to transmit , which will be the platform 
for your business 
! Plan your promotion strategy 
! Set a budget 
! Devise a schedule 
! Decide how the strategy will be measured , such as through increased sales , direct 
responses , coverage received in local press , etc .  
! Implement the programme according to the schedule 
! Monitor and evaluate the results , so you can assess effectiveness and make more 
informed future marketing decisions
and when . Invite the reporter along to an opening , but make sure it 
doesn ’ t clash with press days because they will not turn up . 
Try to build a relationship – you may have other information that a 
reporter could turn into a story and in return you may get a free plug . 
Remember that the editorial content in newspapers and magazines 
carries a lot more weight with readers than the advertising . So make 
the time and effort to send out regular press releases , try to identify 
individual journalists to cultivate relationships with , offer your services 
to publications as an expert commentator , propose that you will write 
a free series of useful ( and short ) articles or sponsor newsworthy 
local events . Letters to the editor can also be a surprisingly powerful 
marketing tool , although its effectiveness may take time to develop . If 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 233 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
234
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Good 
business 
marketing is 
less about 
getting big 
bangs and 
more about 
producing 
smaller 
amounts very 
regularly
you have a local market , you probably read the same local newspaper 
as your target audience does – and both of you are likely to read the 
letters page , as it is often the most popular part of a newspaper . Don ’ t 
write in unless you have something constructive to say , but you can 
make sure that you have by reacting to news items , commenting on 
new government policies and legislation , and any local issues ( traffi c 
and the environment are good candidates for a business ’ s viewpoint )  . 
Your letter can apply a spin that refl ects your business ’ s concerns , 
and always ensure your business ’ s name is part of your signature . 
Low-cost marketing strategy
A good business marketing strategy doesn ’ t have to cost that much . At 
its simplest , a marketing strategy is all about improving your chances 
of making sales – usually by making more potential purchasers aware 
of your products or services , or by making them aware of its desirable 
qualities ( perhaps including its price )  . In any case it makes sense to 
optimise your budget . Given the choice between big-bang and littlebut-often , good business marketing is less about getting big bangs 
and more about producing smaller amounts very regularly . 
You don ’ t , however , need to spend big , as most of the ideas in 
your marketing strategy are likely to involve moderate costs . But it 
will require quite a lot of time and effort from you on a regular basis . 
The key is to choose the ones that best support your marketing plan , 
and mix them in with more expensive options to help keep your costs 
down . Most ( but not all ) take advantage of the fact that you have a 
computer and an internet connection . 
Build a mailing list
Collecting the names is the hard part , so give your prospects a reason 
for them to provide you with their name and address – competitions , 
an emailed newsletter , the promise of advance information and 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 234 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
235
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
discounts , maybe even a loyalty card . Work at keeping your list 
accurate and up to date . Try to get hold of email addresses as well 
as ( or even in preference to ) postal contact details . Email is cheaper 
and more versatile than postage , and it can be integrated more 
effi ciently with other aspects of your marketing , notably your website . 
If your database of names has been gathered in the normal course 
of business , you might not have to register under the Data Protection 
Act . This is a complex area , however , and you should check the 
situation with the Information Commissioner . 
Once you have your list , use it . Concentrate on customers more 
than prospects as they will be more valuable to you , both for repeat 
business and because they will act as a reference . Looking after 
your customers so that you retain their custom is actually cheaper 
than attracting new ones . So be personal . Remember birthdays 
and anniversaries . Say ‘ thank you ’ when they buy ( if only by email )  . 
Offer them the chance to comment and criticise . Give them special 
offers not available to anyone else . Make sure they know that your 
Christmas ‘ thank you ’ gift is going to a select few , and that they ’ re in 
this group . 
Ask them to check out new products or services , because they 
will appreciate being treated as special , and the risk is lower because 
they ’ re more likely to buy . Look at their past purchase history if 
possible , and tailor special promotions to them . Find out whether they 
prefer you to use their fi rst names or a more formal mode of address , 
and make sure all your mailings and other communications use the 
appropriate salutation . 
Use discount vouchers
A good way to bump up sales volume is to offer discount vouchers , 
but they can also send a message about your business . It could 
be customer care ( distribute them to favoured clients only )  , but 
coupons work better as a value-for-money fl ag . Distribute them in 
print advertising (  ‘ cut here ’  )  , by direct mail , by hand ( on the street 
CONTACT
Information 
Commissioner
www . information
commissioner . 
gov . uk
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 235 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
236
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
The aim is to 
boost sales 
and to tell the 
world that 
you are a 
generous , 
valueconscious 
supplier
corner , if appropriate , or at trade shows )  , and even by email or via the 
web (  ‘ quote this reference to get your discount ’  )  . You can also include 
 ‘ next purchase ’ coupons with customer orders . The coupon can be a 
fairly cheap production in terms of design and print , as its main selling 
point is usually the low price it offers . 
Distribute postcards
Postcards are also cheap and easy to produce , especially if you use 
colour on one side only . They can be mailed to prospects , stacked 
in help-yourself dispensers , and you can use them for a variety of 
marketing messages , such as ‘ see our new product ’  ,  ‘ gasp at our 
new prices ’ or ‘ look at our short-term cut-price promotion ’  , and ‘ enter 
the competition or the free prize draw ( and get two entries if you give 
us a friend ’ s name and address )  ’  . A reply-paid licence makes it easy 
for someone to return the card , and these are simple and economical 
to set up with the Post Offi ce . 
Run competitions and giveaways
People love competitions , even if someone else wins . They are an 
excellent way to garner mailing list names , while sending branding 
messages , as the kind of contest your run implies the kind of company 
you are . Contests can also make for good PR , especially if there ’ s a 
fun element that will attract media coverage . Of course , you can also 
simply give them something free , as people like to get gifts , even if 
they have to pay a premium price for a more expensive item to qualify 
for the freebie . This could be a free makeup purse with purchases , 
wine and fruit in your room if you book the weekend break , a CD of 
business tips with every seminar booking , or a pizza with every DVD 
fi lm rented . 
The aim here is both to boost sales and to tell the world that 
you are a generous , value-conscious supplier . It also improves your 
CONTACT
The Post Offi ce
www . postoffi ce . 
co . uk
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 236 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
237
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
competitive sell , since it becomes more diffi cult to compare like 
with like . 
Start a loyalty programme and a club
The customer gets a good deal from a loyalty scheme and you get 
a keen customer ( and their contact details )  . A simple approach is to 
give customers a card that is marked after each purchase and results 
in a free or reduced-price offering after a specifi ed number of regularpriced purchases . Easier to operate is a loyalty card scheme where 
regular customers get a discount on purchases on presentation of 
the card . 
You can extend the programme into a full-blown club , sending out 
newsletters , launching exclusive special offers ( great for shifting slowmoving stock )  , discounts on related products or services ( it ’ s generally 
easy to fi nd other suppliers willing to give your club members a 10%–
20% discount in return for capturing the buyer ’ s details for their own 
database ) and seminars and other get-togethers . 
Work on your elevator pitch
Every entrepreneur should prepare a short presentation that sums up 
the great things about their venture . As mentioned earlier in this guide 
this 20–30-second piece is called an elevator pitch , as you could 
potentially deliver it while ascending a building in an elevator before 
the lift stops at your fl oor . Work on this so that you can recite it in your 
sleep – but not as though you are delivering a canned presentation . 
When people say :  ‘ So , what do you do ?  ’ the question they ’ re 
really asking is :  ‘ How do you make money ’  , but actually saying that 
is regarded as impolite . So your elevator pitch should answer the 
unspoken question , but in such a way that identifi es the problems you 
solve or the benefi ts you can offer , and implies that your business is 
very successful because it ’ s so good at those problems and benefi ts . 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 237 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
238
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Make a fun screensaver
Try Xara Screenmaker 3D and give the screensaver away to customers , 
prospects or anyone who visits your website . All those PCs suddenly 
become advertising billboards for your business . Screenmaker is 
recommended because it ’ s cheap , very easy to use and good fun . It 
also produces pretty good screensavers from your text and / or images 
( logos , photographs and drawings )  . 
Make a mini CD
Instead of handing out a parcel of brochures and your business card , 
give your prospects and customers all they need on a single disk . And 
it doesn ’ t have to be a conventional CD-Rom , as you can get neat 
half-size mini-disks , and ‘ business card ’ CDs , which are rectangular 
but still fi t into a standard CD drive . Both have enough storage space 
to fi t at least 30MB of content , which will most likely be enough for 
your whole website and / or lots of product information . 
Work on your website
Search engine marketing has become a specialisation that commands 
fairly high prices but cannot guarantee success . Search engine 
 ‘ optimisation ’  ( SEO ) involves tweaking your website so that it ’ s more 
likely to appear early on in the list of results when someone enters a 
relevant keyword , but that ’ s as far as it goes . In fact , most websites 
( especially business-to-business ) get a minority of visitors from search 
engines and directories . Rather than spending time and money on a 
programme of promoting to them and buying keywords , you might be 
better to concentrate on your own mailing list and make sure that any 
other marketing materials reference your website – sign-written vans , 
business cards , promotional fl yers , Christmas cards , promotional gifts 
and so on . In any case , there ’ s quite a lot that you ( or your webmaster ) 
CONTACT
Xara
Xara Screenmaker 
3D
www . xara . 
com / products / 
screenmaker3d / 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 238 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
239
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
can do without calling in the expensive pros ( see box )  . See page 238 
for more on getting the most from your website . 
Work on your references
Marketing should focus on benefi ts rather than features , meaning 
what you can do for your customer rather than how you do it , so use 
SEO AND MAXIMISING YOUR WEB PRESENCE
Use META tags for keywords , title and description . All these should emphasise three or four key concepts using words that you also repeat in the text and the headings on the page . 
Make sure you are listed in all the relevant free directories . The operative word is ‘ relevant ’  , so don ’ t 
submit your website to every free directory , or you will be bombarded with junk mail and solicitations to 
buy further services . Once you ’ ve identifi ed the best ones , you might think it ’ s worth taking the inevitable 
offer of paid-for fast-tracking to get your listing in there sooner . 
Most visitors go to commercial websites for information , not for entertainment . Good web design starts 
with easy , obvious navigation and relevant , easy-to-use content , so avoid jarring colours and idiosyncratic typefaces , over-elaborate grammar and any humour unless it ’ s been thoroughly tested . Include ‘ click 
for more information ’ rather than over-long pages scrolling down to infi nity . 
Refresh your website regularly . Give the punters a reason for returning , with frequently updated information and tips they will fi nd useful that relates to your business , new products , downloadable freebies and 
competitions . Redesign it thoroughly once a year , and tell everyone on your mailing list about all major 
updates ( and most minor ones too )  . You could even send out a regular e-alert about what ’ s new on your 
site , but avoid doing this too frequently as it could prove annoying . 
Choose the right names for your website . That ’ s right , more than one name , with the separate domains 
all redirecting visitors to your main website . Many businesses will have a slogan or catchphrase , many 
will be known by contractions , abbreviations or initials , and most are prone to at least some misspelling . 
Get domain names for as many of the possibilities as you can , because registration is so cheap right 
now that you might as well cover all the bases ( see Chapter 6 for more details about this )  . 
For each name , set up a separate webpage that almost immediately takes your visitor to your main website . With judicious use of the right keywords in the webpage ’ s test and its HTML META tags , this will 
greatly improve your chances of appearing on Google and other search engines when someone enters 
the relevant search term . Why ? Because Google gives a lot of weight to ‘ site popularity ’  , the number of 
webpages that link to yours . The more links to your website , the higher you will be in the results list . 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 239 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
240
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
case studies and testimonials to prove your point . Ideally you need 
real clients . You can use a photograph and direct quotes to prove 
they exist . However , a startup could get by with some hypothetical 
situations , but make it clear that these are not real . Customer stories 
are good business-to-business website material , and you can use 
clickable links for specifi cations and other non-chatty material to 
prevent the reader being inundated with statistics or technicalities . 
You can also produce them as single-sheet case studies and include 
them in brochures , but they should be both relevant and up to date . 
Keep up with your email
People who use email expect a speedy response , and providing one 
is a simple marketing technique that supports lots of good messages : 
we ’ re alert , responsive , aware of customer concerns , professional , 
up to date and so on . If you can ’ t reply to incoming email within an 
hour or so , use an automated system to provide an instant response 
of some kind . This could be a simple :  ‘ Thanks , we ’ ll get back to you 
as soon as possible ’  . But if you ’ ve organised your email addresses 
correctly , a more targeted response should be possible , meaning that 
incoming mail addressed to products @ yourcompany . co . uk could elicit 
an automated response that includes a PDF document containing 
product details or an appropriate website link . You can do quite a lot 
with Microsoft Outlook rules , or check out some of the autoresponder 
packages on offer . 
Always use email signatures
A couple of lines at the bottom of a message identifying you and 
your company is a simple way for sending out your contact details . 
Make sure every email carries your ‘ signature ’  ( including replies to 
incoming messages ) and that everyone in your organisation uses the 
same signature format . It shouldn ’ t be too long , but should give two or 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 240 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
241
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
three alternative ways to contact you and your company , your website 
address and include a marketing message of some kind , such as 
 ‘ Sale now on ’ or ‘ Winner of the Best Company Prize 2007 ’  . 
Email marketing
This is among the simplest and least expensive marketing options . 
An email doesn ’ t carry the materials and overhead costs of a paper 
mailshot , and you ( probably ) don ’ t need the expensive and risky 
element of visual design . You know almost immediately whether 
the address is ‘ live ’ – still active , or spelled correctly – and you can 
ask for a read receipt to indicate whether your target has received 
the message . What ’ s more , you stand a good chance of getting an 
immediate response , since the easiest time to click on ‘ reply ’ or a link 
to a webpage is while you are actually reading the mail . 
This doesn ’ t mean that all email marketing is inherently good , 
however . For a start it is indelibly associated with spam – unwanted 
and unrequested junk mail . Make sure that the people on your list 
actually want ( and preferably are expecting ) the material you are 
sending them . There are laws about this now , though they are 
depressingly feeble . The ‘ From ’ and ‘ Subject ’ lines are crucial in email 
marketing . The recipient must recognise the sender – company name 
or brand are good options if your own name will mean nothing . And 
the Subject is what will persuade them to read on , so put real effort 
into fi nding the right words . People don ’ t read emails , they skim them . 
You still need good copywriting in an e-newsletter or a sales letter , but 
if possible you should also include clickable links or buttons for instant 
access to key online areas . 
You can send a test mailing to a subset of your mailing list using 
two different subject lines . When you track the response , you can 
see which subject worked best and use that for your main mailing . 
The same holds true for other marketing methods such as banner 
advertisements and paid search campaigns . You can start with a low 
investment , track your returns , and make changes before deciding 
An email 
doesn ’ t carry 
the materials 
and overhead 
costs of 
a paper 
mailshot , and 
you ( probably ) 
don ’ t need 
the expensive 
and risky 
element 
of visual 
design
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 241 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
242
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
whether to invest more or try a different tactic . Internet marketing is 
useful to marketers on a budget because it is fl exible , trackable , and 
offers vast reach for little investment . 
Finally , always include an ‘ Unsubscribe ’ option in your message , 
but you may as well make sure that people know what they ’ re missing 
when they do unsubscribe . Clicking the Unsubscribe button should 
take them to a webpage which asks them to confi rm their decision 
and to identify what they specifi cally want to remove . They might not 
want to unsubscribe from everything and may want your occasional 
product updates , but not the regular newsletter . 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 242 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
243
8 . 0 TELLING THE WORLD
ACTION POINT
KEEPING HOLD OF YOUR CUSTOMERS
Looking after customers is far more important than attracting new ones , according to Alastair 
Campbell , managing director of The Ideal Marketing Company .  ‘ It is far more cost effective to target 
your resources towards holding onto a customer you already have than to spend a fortune trawling the 
country to attract a new one ,  ’ he says .  ‘ After all , it costs seven times more to attract a new customer than 
to maintain an existing one . A whopping 75% leave because of “ perceived indifference ”  . That means that 
they stop doing business with you because they feel that you aren ’ t interested in them ; that you don ’ t 
make them feel special anymore . So while you may think you are treating your customers well , most of 
them probably think otherwise and could be quickly tempted away by a competitor .  ’ Here are Campbell ’ s 
fi ve easy-to-implement ways on how to keep hold of your customers : 
Capture their details and keep in touch with them : At least once a month write to them about a 
special offer , special product preview , clearance sale , new product line , open evening or whatever . This 
lets them know that you are thinking about them and looking for new ways to serve them . 
Ask them how you are doing : Conduct a customer satisfaction survey on an annual or regular basis 
depending on your customer base . You can even offer an incentive if they complete the form . 
Conduct regular customer forums : This allows you to tell your best customers more about what you 
are up to and to fi nd out from your customers what they like about your service and products . It can also 
be a useful opportunity for customers to meet your staff ( especially background staff ) and of course other 
customers . If you are feeling brave , let them talk about you while you are out of the room for an hour and 
then listen to their feedback on what they like and don ’ t like about your company . 
Develop more than one contact point : If a buyer leaves or your contact leaves , the relationship 
between your two organisations disappears overnight , but if you have more than one point of contact , 
the relationship is far stronger and can withstand the odd member of staff moving on . When a company 
pairing system is carefully planned your two organisations become so closely intertwined that no other 
company will get a look in ( as it does with Northern Foods and Marks & Spencer )  . 
Be honest : Own up to mistakes , and don ’ t pretend to be something that you are not . You can ’ t build a 
long-term relationship based on mistrust . A customer would prefer you to hold your hands up to making 
a mistake rather than trying to shift the blame where it doesn ’ t belong . 
Remember : Most companies spend their hard-earned marketing and sales effort attempting to attract 
elusive new customers when they probably have most of the business they will ever need sitting on their 
database . 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 243 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 48 PM
244
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
ATTIK AND THE ART 
OF TAKING RISKS
Company : Attik
Owner-managers : James Sommerville and Simon Needham
Attik is a brand business creating advertisements and design-led identities for many of the world ’ s most 
successful companies . Formed in 1986 by two 19-year-olds , a £1 , 000 business grant from The Prince ’ s 
Trust , some practical advice and a mentor , James Sommerville and Simon Needham opened their 
fi rst offi ce in Sommerville ’ s grandmother ’ s attic , hence the name . Needham also cites self-promotion and 
a ‘ no holds barred ’ approach to selling themselves ‘ in the early days ’ as a crucial factor . 
 ‘ We tried PR companies to see if they suited our needs and shared our vision , but it didn ’ t work so we 
took on an internal PR person who understood our way of thinking and working . When we fi rst started 
we also had quite aggressive marketing campaigns , such as going around the streets and sticking fl yers 
on walls and buildings , and we ’ d also do this to recruit people – something no one was doing at the 
time . We ’ ve even got a 6m by 4m poster on the wall next to our Sydney offi ce . We didn ’ t ask , we just 
put it there .  ’ 
This may not be an everyday method to establish brand recognition but it ties in neatly with Needham ’ s 
fearlessly opportunist nature .  ‘ Taking risks is all part of the game ,  ’ he says .  ‘ You can be comfortable and 
run a business with 10 people and not aspire to grow any further , but you can also be prepared to take 
a gamble , although you should always have a plan in place in case it doesn ’ t work .  ’ To increase brand 
recognition as well as revenue , Needham created a separate concept entitled Noise seven years ago . 
Billed as a design bible , Noise is an annual publication containing the creative thoughts of all fi ve Attik 
studios and sells thousands of copies each year . 
 ‘ The industry needed something more ballsy instead of a standard brochure ,  ’ Needham explains .  ‘ We 
gave it away to begin with , but when people actually came to us and asked if they could buy it , we stood 
back and let them ’  . 
08SYOB_CH_08 . indd 244 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 50 : 49 PM
247
9 . 0
OPEN FOR 
BUSINESS
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ After months of preparation including researching 
the viability of your proposed business , fi nding the 
appropriate name , putting together your business 
plan and implementing your pre-launch marketing 
campaign , the time has fi nally arrived to open your 
new company for business . You will be feeling a 
mixture of trepidation and euphoria , and will have to 
prepare yourself for a few months of heavy work to 
get your business off the ground . Key to your early 
success will be setting up effective processes for 
invoicing , and the vitally important payment collection , 
not to mention setting yourself a realistic salary . 
Read on to fi nd out how to approach these essential 
tasks… we start with the issue of paying yourself . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 247 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
248
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Paying yourself
Few people start their own business solely for the purpose of becoming wealthy , and even fewer actually succeed in achieving this . So 
right from the start , it ’ s essential to consider how much you should be 
paying yourself . 
When starting up you are likely to want to plough everything 
you can into making sure you give your business every chance of 
succeeding , but aside from the issues of needing to keep enough 
back for running costs and marketing , etc .  , you need to live . The fi rst 
12 months , or however long it is until you think you will be in profi t , 
will be a diffi cult period – in fact , there are more people who scrimp by 
than make a bucketload of cash straightaway . 
Essentially , you need to be realistic . If you have given up the comfort 
and security of a regular salary , you can ’ t suddenly survive without 
any income at all . You are also likely to have fi nancial commitments 
that you will still need to meet , in addition to the new ones you will 
be taking on by starting a business , so it ’ s important to make sure 
you take enough to support sensible living costs . If you don ’ t , you 
may be tempted to borrow more or build up another debt on a credit 
card – something that will inadvertently place more pressure on your 
business . Starting a business is also one of the most stressful things 
you can ever do . Failing to ensure you have enough money to relax 
when you are away from it will only increase the strain , and again , will 
prove detrimental to your business . 
So how much should you pay yourself ? This will be dependent 
on the sector you are going into and is probably the best place to 
start looking for answers . Talk to others in the trade or to people 
with similar sized businesses and ask how much they were able to 
pay themselves at fi rst , and what they can afford now . If they are not 
willing to tell you , try contacting trade associations , who should be 
able to help . 
Once you have some idea of what others in the sector are earning , 
try to fi t a similar fi gure into your fi nancial estimates and see if it ’ s 
You need to 
consider , 
right from the 
very start , 
how much 
you need to 
live on and 
what you can 
afford to pay 
yourself
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 248 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
249
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
viable . If it isn ’ t , it could be that there ’ s a problem with your business 
plan as a whole , and it is something you will need to address before 
you take the plunge . The key is to plan ahead . 
Don ’ t be afraid to treat yourself every now and then , but don ’ t go 
overboard . You will need every penny of your startup funds and profi ts 
to put back into the business to help it grow . But don ’ t undercalculate 
what you can live on either . Be honest about what you need to ‘ get 
by ’ and incorporate that into your costs and your business plan . 
Making a sale
Some people seem like they were born to sell , while for many the 
thought brings them out in a cold sweat . But if you want to make 
your business a success , then you need to sell what you do – at least 
until you have the resources to build up a sales team . And even if you 
may not consider yourself a salesperson , if you can launch a new 
business you can probably also sell your product or service . In fact , 
when you speak to your bank , and potential recruits and suppliers , 
you are essentially selling your business to them to get them to work 
with you . 
A lot of businesses – from clothes shops and online retailers to 
cafés , bars and restaurants – don ’ t need salespeople in the classic 
sense , with sales driven more by marketing , such as advertisements 
in the local press , calls to action on websites , direct mail fl yer drops , 
etc . But for many more businesses , salespeople are a key aspect of 
generating income and driving profi t . 
In many cases , simply having the best product or service is not 
enough . You still need a marketing strategy to raise awareness , and 
once you ’ ve launched , you will need a sales plan alongside it to build 
up a list of key prospects and sell directly to them . In fact , this is where 
any sales effort should start – drawing up a list of potential customers . 
This should consist of people you think should buy from you . Initially , 
buying in a database of contacts that fi t your criteria from one of the 
many list brokers can be a good way to start . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 249 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
250
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
With the list in place , create a sales story or pitch before you start 
making contact . You have launched a business on the basis that 
people would want to buy what you offer , so revisit those reasons . 
Write down brief points about what you offer , how it can benefi t your 
potential customers and what sets you apart from your competition . 
Hone the points down to three or four and devise the best way to 
build them into an engaging story . 
Having drawn up the fi rst draft of your pitch , try it out on friends 
or colleagues who know a little about your sector and canvass 
their opinions . Tell them to be honest , and ask them to suggest 
improvements , which you can consider taking into account to make 
your sales story more effective . 
Making contact
Cold calling can be effective , but it isn ’ t for everyone . If you feel this 
way , you may fi nd it useful to send an introductory email , which you 
can then follow up , giving you a reason to make contact and also 
providing a softer opening question :  ‘ Did you receive my recent email 
about… ’ 
One problem is getting through to the right person . If the list you ’ ve 
bought is what it claims to be , this should be easy , but as people 
frequently change job or roles within an organisation it ’ s important to 
ensure the contacts are up to date . However , there is often someone 
– the ‘ gatekeeper ’ – standing between you and your contact . This 
could be a receptionist or PA who has been instructed not to put 
salespeople through . This means the less you sound like a classic 
salesperson the better , so clearly introduce yourself and where you 
are from , and be polite and friendly , perhaps saying you have only a 
few questions and won ’ t take up much of your target ’ s time . Don ’ t 
open the conversation by asking them how they are and not telling 
them who you are – this will be highly unproductive , even though it is 
standard cold-calling fare . Ultimately , if you befriend the gatekeeper , 
you are more likely to get through after a few calls . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 250 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
251
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
The point of the initial calls is not necessarily to make a sale , 
but to nurture a key contact that you can arrange to visit to guide 
them further towards a sale . Although it depends on your product 
or service , few businesspeople will agree a sale without at least one 
face-to-face meeting . 
Presenting well
Once you have a meeting arranged , you need to work on a short , 
engaging presentation that adds key points to your initial phone 
conversations . 
POWERCHEX AND THE COLD CALL
Company : Powerchex
Owner-managers : Alexandra Kelly
The service Alexandra Kelly ’ s business offers could be used by many types of company , but strategically thinking about the best sector to sell to , and not being afraid to cold call , laid the platform for future 
success . 
Kelly founded her employment-screening fi rm Powerchex after being made redundant and spotting 
a gap in the market . Powerchex screens the histories of new recruits to the fi nance sector , validating 
everything from credit and police records to employment references . Kelly ’ s team offers a guaranteed 
fi ve-day turnaround – a promise that impressed the 2007 Startups Awards judges enough to name 
Powerchex the Service Business of the Year . 
When starting up , once she had the IT infrastructure in place , it was time to get some customers on 
the books . But Kelly wasn ’ t willing to offer her services to just about anyone ; she was determined to specialise in helping fi nancial companies , an area that she thought would want her service more than most . 
And selling her services to the right contacts in the right market has worked wonders .  ‘ It was hard to 
turn down people that approached us from outside the fi nancial sector ,  ’ she explains .  ‘ When you don ’ t 
have any clients , turning down money isn ’ t easy , but it paid off in the end . We ’ re now asked to bid for 
contracts as a result of how specialised we are .  ’ 
Kelly already had a lot of contacts in the very industry she was pitching to from her previous job , but found 
that , for her business , cold calling was still more effective than networking for getting the fi rst client on 
board .  ‘ Even people that were willing to meet for lunch and chat didn ’ t want to sign up ,  ’ she says .  ‘ Yet , 
some of those same companies became clients through us cold calling junior members of their team .  ’ 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 251 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
252
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Pre-presentation preparations
Try to keep your presentation to no longer than 20 minutes – 
even shorter if possible – and then be prepared to fi eld questions . 
PowerPoint presentations are effective , but a little old hat these days , 
so if you can use more engaging graphics projected , say , from your 
laptop , you may make more of an impact . And remember to say that 
you will need a few minutes to set up , and fi nd out if they have a plain 
white wall or projector screen you could use . 
First impressions do count , so it ’ s important to come across well 
at that fi rst meeting . Good preparation will help build your confi dence 
and calm your nerves , and always begin by taking a deep breath and 
smiling , as this will help to relax both you and your audience . 
During the presentation
Speak slowly and calmly , making regular eye contact , as this 
engenders a feeling of trust and helps you maintain their attention . You 
should also come over as enthusiastic and passionate , as this can be 
infectious , but don ’ t overdo it . Also , pay attention to the mood of your 
audience all the time , and adjust your presentation accordingly . For 
example , if they start fi dgeting or looking bored , move on swiftly if you 
have more key points to make and wrap up as quickly as you can . 
After the presentation
Once you ’ ve fi nished and invited questions , try to answer confi dently 
and knowledgeably , but also don ’ t be scared to say you don ’ t know 
the answer to a particular query , as this is better than bluffi ng your 
way through , and won ’ t come back to haunt you later . You can always 
research the answer and get back to them . 
Lastly , close the meeting effectively . Ask your audience for their 
opinions and if they are going to buy . Whether they say yes or are 
undecided , fi nd out what the next steps are , what additional information 
they need and what factors they will be basing their fi nal decision on . 
This will help you at the next meeting , if necessary . 
Of course , rejection is just as , if not more , possible than clinching 
a sale , so be prepared for it and take it on the chin . Try to ask your 
Always begin 
by taking a 
deep breath 
and smiling , 
as this will 
help to relax 
both you 
and your 
audience
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 252 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
253
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
audience the reasons for them not wanting to buy from you , as this 
can be key information in the development of your offer , and will mean 
you will get something productive from the meeting . Also ask your 
audience if they would mind if you contact them in six months or a 
year ’ s time to review the situation . 
Once you ’ ve got your fi rst few sales under your belt you will start 
to build up a network of customers , and further sales should be a little 
easier – you could well have some good testimonials to back up your 
pitch . 
It is easy to think that once you have closed a sale , you can relax . 
But the reality is far from it . Often , shaking hands is simply the fi rst in a 
series of steps to ensure the deal goes through smoothly . Remember 
to enter the sales negotiation armed with information . If the value 
or risk of the business transaction is high , it ’ s wise to get as much 
fi nancial information about the client as possible , to minimise the level 
of risk to the business and protect against bad debt . Closing the sale 
is not simply a matter of asking for an order , and establishing terms 
of delivery and payment . You should also re-state your credit terms 
to the buyer and present them with your credit application form ( free 
samples are available at the Better Payment Practice Group website : 
www . payontime . co . uk / collect / collect_cash . html )  , while establishing a 
named contact responsible for payment . 
The importance 
of getting paid
Half of all new businesses fail during the fi rst two years . All too often 
the cause of failure is not the quality of the product or service , the 
effort and talents of the people , or the sales and marketing . It is quite 
simply down to fi nancial failure – running out of money – which leads 
to closure , if not bankruptcy . In many cases , this failure could have 
been avoided by simple but effective planning from the outset . In too 
many new businesses , well-qualifi ed people enthusiastically develop 
their goods or services , but pay insuffi cient attention to cashfl ow . Late 
payment erodes profi ts and stifl es growth . 
Shaking 
hands is 
simply the 
fi rst in a 
series of 
steps to 
ensure the 
deal goes 
through 
smoothly
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 253 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
254
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
EXPERT 
OPINION
ACCEPTING ONLINE PAYMENTS
Shai Meijers , Marketing Manager of ChronoPay 
offers advice on accepting online payments for 
internet businesses . 
With growing usage of the internet , for many 
businesses accepting online payments provides 
major benefi ts . Customers increasingly expect 
this facility and it can improve your online 
sales . 
Accepting credit cards online will mean that you 
will be able to attract both regular and impulse 
buyers . Setting up a system in order to accept 
credit card payments online will also provide 
security for conducting your transactions . 
Getting started
Setting up a merchant account
To accept online credit card and debit card 
payments on your website you must set up 
a merchant account with an acquiring bank 
( this means the bank will accept all credit card 
transactions , regardless of which bank has 
issued the card )  . 
A merchant account is an agreement with a bank 
that allows you to accept payment by credit and 
debit card . This is a separate account from your 
business bank account and because not all banks 
are acquiring banks , you can have an internet 
merchant account ( IMA ) at a different bank from 
the one where your business bank account is 
located . The bank deposits the daily proceeds 
from your online sales into this account , deducting 
all service charges and fees as well . 
The payment gateway 
system
The next step for accepting credit card payments 
from your customers is to use the online payment 
gateway system from your Payment Service 
provider . The payment gateway gathers all the information necessary to process the card , encrypts 
the information , and sends that information to Visa 
or Mastercard . The payment gateway allows the 
transmission of all the necessary information to 
the Payment Service provider who then handles 
the actual transaction on behalf of the website 
and the person buying the product and / or service . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 254 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
255
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
Why you need a 
shopping cart
Probably familiar to you as a consumer , a shopping cart is a series of scripts that keep track of 
products a customer chooses to buy from your 
site until they move on to checkout . 
A shopping cart acts as a front end which passes 
information via a secure connection to a payment 
gateway . Shopping cart scripts come in many 
shapes and sizes and at many prices too . A good 
shopping cart script will guarantee security and 
stability at any stage of a transaction , handling 
the complex data encryption processing while 
providing an easy-to-use shopping cart interface 
for your customers . 
Fraud prevention
E-commerce fraud has increased signifi cantly in 
the past few years . It is therefore important for 
you as a merchant to protect your online business 
against possible fi nancial loss caused by fraud . 
Chargeback fraud is an increasing concern 
especially for online retailers , where people buy 
something online with credit and then report the 
purchase as fraud . The Payment Service Provider 
can help you avoid chargebacks with their fraud 
screening services , which is included in your 
monthly fee . Most payment gateways now offer 
real time fraud prevention . 
Fees
The fees associated with various merchant accounts vary widely and can change depending 
on the e-commerce website ’ s average ticket size 
and average number of transactions per month . 
Typical fees include transaction , discount , and 
set-up or application fees and could range in price 
according to the Payment Service Provider and 
your business ( credit history , type of business , 
transaction volume )  . 
Lastly , Online Payment Service providers will let 
you know what is required from a merchant to 
open an account in their bank ; e . g . business 
account , business or a reseller licence , proof of a 
return policy , tax return document , etc . Once your 
account with a merchant provider is setup , you 
can start charging and processing credit cards in 
your online store . 
For more information on the best online payment 
gateway contact Chronopay at www . chronopay . com
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 255 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 05 PM
256
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
A sale is not really made until it has been paid for , so the discipline of 
ensuring prompt payment , called credit control or credit management , 
has to be a priority if a business is to succeed , rather than payment 
being an afterthought . Establishing it as a priority means you can then 
consider granting customers credit where appropriate . But this should 
be calculated risk , never a gamble . You must know who you are dealing 
with , and this should be part of the preparation before a sale . 
Late payment 
erodes profi ts 
and stifl es 
growth
LUXTECH AND THE WISE MOVES
Company : LuxTech
Owner-manager : Russell Lux
The quickest route to sales isn ’ t always picking up the phone and talking to someone directly . In Russell 
Lux ’ s case , the environment in which he set up his IT support services company LuxTech was ripe for 
networking , and he exploited this to the full . Starting up in the spare room of Lux ’ s London fl at , LuxTech 
was founded in January 2001 and raised its fi rst invoice in July 2002 . Embellished with £2 , 000 of funding , which came from Lux ’ s savings , the business was initially simply equipped with a computer with 
broadband connection . 
Lux fi rst gained clients through word of mouth . He targeted solicitors and accounts as they are clientbased businesses and could recommend his services on to others .  ‘ I built up a good reputation ,  ’ he 
recalls .  ‘ London is a huge market to attack , but I had to do business through an introduction . It was very 
diffi cult to walk in off the street and introduce yourself .  ’ 
The increasing number of clients saw the business naturally outgrow the fl at , prompting LuxTech to relocate to a small serviced offi ce . It turned out to be a smart move , which saw a sharp increase in clients . This 
was because Lux used his networking skills to win the business of 22 other startup companies who also 
used the serviced offi ces within the fi rst six months . It ’ s a trick he repeated when moving to larger serviced 
offi ces in Camden , north London . LuxTech took on 42 extra clients – every business in the building . 
 ‘ We moved into serviced offi ces because we didn ’ t have any infrastructure costs – we didn ’ t have to 
pay for desks , chairs or telephone systems ,  ’ Lux explains .  ‘ We found the place through the internet and 
made lots of business contacts while there . It was great for them because we were on their doorstep – 
they had IT support literally down the corridor . It was like a large corporate – you had an IT department , a 
fi nance department and a marketing department there .  ’ 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 256 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
257
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
Credit and creditors
Granting credit to a customer involves the risk of non-payment and 
so should only be done after checking and assessing that risk . A bad 
debt means that a company could have to make sales fi ve – or even 
10 – times the value of that bad debt just to recoup the loss . Research 
shows that the longer a trade debt remains unpaid , the greater the 
risk that it will never be paid . For many companies , their receivables – 
the money owed to them by their customers – are their largest assets . 
Figures from BACS – the banks ’ automated clearing system – show 
that growth businesses have a combined overdraft of £4bn . Reducing 
the amount owed by debtors cuts the overdraft and frees up capital 
to be used to fi nance the business , and reduces the stress of running 
the business . 
You can get some basic training in credit control even before you 
have made your fi rst sale . Local chambers of commerce usually have 
courses available , including such topics such as how to collect a debt 
over the phone . These are open to non-members . The governmentsponsored Better Payment Practice Group ( BPPG )  , which was formed 
to reduce late payment of commercial debt , publishes advice on the 
subject . 
From the outset , establish procedures for credit applications by 
customers : 
• Produce a credit application form : you can download an example 
at www . payontime . co . uk / collect / collect_cash . html
• Make credit terms very clear
• Ensure that all staff are aware of your credit policy
• Make payment terms a condition of sale
• Make sure that every buyer signs , agreeing to your credit terms . 
Then , to help ensure you receive prompt payment : 
• Design a clear invoice , which will always state agreed payment 
terms
• Send out invoices promptly and keep paperwork up to date
CONTACT
Better Payment 
Practice Group
www . payontime . 
co . uk
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 257 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
258
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
• Establish a timetable for chasing debts , starting with the first request 
for payment : the invoice . 
Establishing customer credentials
It is important to establish a potential customer ’ s credentials . Obviously 
if your sales are low value / high volume , this will not be practical , but 
many companies have a small number of major customers , the 
effective management of whom is crucial to success . In these cases , 
a visit to a potential customer ’ s premises will usually tell you a lot . The 
annual report of companies is also useful ( although the information 
could be out of date )  . For particularly high-value or high-risk orders , 
obtain a credit report from a credit reference agency . Such reports 
cost between £3 and £25 , depending on the level of information . 
For very small orders , buying a credit report may be uneconomical 
and you may wish to take the risk yourself , but for signifi cant orders , 
it ’ s well worth the expense . Bank and trade references should always 
answer specifi c questions , such as : can I grant £500 credit , or what 
proportion of this fi rm ’ s payments to you are overdue ? However , they 
should not be solely relied on . If you have a new customer , confi rm their 
address to avoid fraud , and fi nd out how long they ’ ve been trading . If 
they are on a short lease , they could disappear with the goods . Also 
confi rm that they have the cash to pay . There ’ s no need to check their 
profi t and loss account yourself , because a credit reference company 
will do it for you – and they will suggest a credit limit and a credit 
rating . For potentially high-value orders , take a credit report prior to 
negotiation , to avoid wasted effort . Credit costs and knowing the risks 
in advance helps in pricing . 
Remember that credit control is a continuous process . Always 
monitor your debtors as their circumstances may change . 
Deciding a credit limit
A credit reference agency may recommend a credit limit or you can 
do it yourself , deciding whether a fi rm is high risk – a late payer , for 
example with adverse information such as county court judgments 
against them or dubious individuals involved – or low risk , with a good 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 258 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
259
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
payment record and strong credit references . If you decide to grant 
credit , set up an account and write to the customer confi rming this . 
Always have delivery of goods confi rmed through a delivery note and 
follow up with a phone call , confi rming that goods were delivered 
satisfactorily . Then invoice immediately , re-stating credit terms , and 
quoting an order number if appropriate . 
Dealing with debtors
A new customer can equal more profi ts to your fi rm , but it could also 
spell disaster if they turn out not to be what they originally seemed . 
It may sound obvious , but it ’ s vital to be sure of customer ’ s identity 
to help avoid the heartache of receiving a ‘ gone-away ’ notice in 
response to your invoice . Start by getting complete and correct 
contact details for every customer via a proper account opening form . 
This must include the correct address and telephone details , which 
should be checked against alternative sources , such as the Yellow 
Pages . In the case of a limited company , request the full limited name 
and registration number , and for a proprietorship and partnerships , 
ensure that you take private address details and telephone numbers . 
The Better Payment Practice Group has a sample account opening 
form on its website ( www . payontime . co . uk / collect / credit_app_pre . 
html )  . Using a credit reference agency to check the credit viability of 
new and existing customers will often reveal any address anomalies , 
which can then be confi rmed directly with your customer . 
Once you have established the new relationship , maintaining 
regular contact means you quickly become aware if a debtor relocates . Do not just issue invoices and wait for payment . Contact 
customers by phone to enquire politely whether your invoices have 
been received , and in doing so , you can verify that the address and 
telephone details you have remain accurate . Ask delivery staff to 
alert you to anything suspicious about the way goods or services are 
delivered , such as if the customer insists on collecting the goods , 
without adequate verifi cation of their trading addresses . 
Credit 
control is a 
continuous 
process
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 259 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
260
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
TRACING A DEBTOR
If a letter is returned via Royal Mail marked ‘ Addressee not known ’ or ‘ No longer at this address ’  , never 
assume this is actually the case . Many practised debtors simply return a letter as ‘ gone away ’ to give 
themselves more time . Start by taking the following steps : 
1 . Check your own information to see if you have made any errors on the original details . If you identify 
an error , re-issue your invoice immediately using the correct details . 
2 . Dial telephone numbers and re-check via a directory enquiry facility to ensure that you have the correct number . 
3 . Try a recorded delivery letter , as this may be accepted and thus confirm occupancy . 
4 . If the debtor appears to be no longer trading from the premises you have details for , then consider 
the following : 
• Contact the debtor ’ s local Royal Mail sorting office as it may have forwarding addresses , or may 
confirm that the subject is still at the original address . 
• If you operate in the vicinity , use your delivery drivers or staff to seek information from the address 
or from its neighbours . However , you must have due regard to the Data Protection Act 1998 . In 
particular , do not divulge any information about a debt to non-interested parties . You should say 
that you are seeking general information on a ‘ private matter ’  , asking if there a forwarding address 
that they know of . 
• If you know any other suppliers that your customer uses , contact them to enquire if they have 
been notified of their change of address . 
• For businesses rather than individuals , use the Yellow Pages for the area of enquiry to identify and 
telephone businesses / newsagents in the locality who may well know the business or have useful 
information on the business ’ s status . Again you must have due regard to the Data Protection Act 
when making such enquiries . 
• Look at the status or credit reference report you may have obtained when opening the account 
as this may give you alternative addresses . In the case of a limited company , you are entitled to 
contact the directors , particularly the company secretary , who has an obligation to inform any 
interested party of the status of the limited company . 
• You can contact these individuals at their home address or an address lodged with Companies 
House , but you cannot make them individually liable for any debt . A polite question should help 
you establish whether , for example , the company has entered liquidation , or a Creditors Voluntary 
Arrangement . If this is the case , you may need to seek professional advice about your rights as 
an unsecured creditor to a limited company . If these efforts fail then you could seek the help of a 
professional collection / tracing company who may quote costs , usually from £50 to £60 . 
Handling debt collection and your debtors professionally and effectively can help protect your company 
against a bad payment that could send the business under . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 260 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
261
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
Late payment and how to avoid it
Whether you have a manual accounts system or a computerised one , 
it is important to prioritise debts , chasing the largest fi rst . It is crucial to 
establish strong relationships with major customers to ensure prompt 
payment . Remember , the longer a debt is outstanding , the less likely 
it is to be paid . 
So when payment is due , don ’ t be afraid to ask . After all , it ’ s your 
money , and if you have done the job right , you are entitled to be paid . 
Any disputes or complaints that delay payment must be addressed 
immediately . Some customers will pay promptly whereas others are 
habitual late payers . Establish a timetable for chasing debtors ( see 
the box for an example ) and to keep receivables under control . The 
suggested procedures should be supplemented with phone calls 
– one of the most effective methods of chasing debts – and faxes , 
emails and visits . Some businesses choose not to undertake their 
own credit control , but have someone else do all or part of it for them 
by outsourcing . 
Techniques worth considering are debt collecting agencies , credit 
insurance , factoring , retention of title or payment in advance .  ‘ There 
are a range of ways in which third-party outsourcers are being used ,  ’ 
says Colin Thomas of Graydon UK , a credit referencing agency .  ‘ If you 
have limited resources , you can bring in an outsourcing company that 
can provide some immediate level of expertise . Future growth always 
depends on cashfl ow . Outsourcers can cover the entire order-to-cash 
cycle . You can choose whether your outsource partner operates in 
your name or in their own name . In the cash collections fi eld , you may 
prefer them to operate in your name at the receivables stage and then 
in their own name for accounts that become overdue .  ’ 
Debt collecting agencies
 ‘ We ’ re very much involved in advising small-to-medium-sized fi rms in 
ways to tighten procedures and collect debts ,  ’ says Trevor Phillips
of consultancy Credit Professionals .  ‘ Debt collection requires pleasant 
persistence . It ’ s a selling job . Companies have to persuade customers 
CONTACT
Credit Services 
Association
www . csa-uk . com
Some 
customers 
will pay 
promptly 
while others 
are habitual 
late payers
Future growth 
always 
depends on 
cashfl ow
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 261 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
262
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
that they have to be paid . Once a debt is more than 60 days overdue , 
a company has probably exhausted all its own internal resources for 
collecting the debts , therefore , it is necessary to intervene with a third 
party .  ’ 
Many debt collection agencies have relationships with credit 
reference agencies giving them leverage to collect . Of course , there 
is a cost , typically between 1% and 5% of the sum , depending on 
circumstances . Under the Late Payment of Commercial Debts 
( Interest ) Act 1998 , a company can charge interest to its debtors 
on late payments . Many collectors have solicitors associated with 
them and can handle litigation if it is necessary to sue for a debt . 
It shouldn ’ t be seen as a sign of weakness to pass on a debt to a 
collection agency . Simply view it as an extension of your business . 
A new business should be equally as professional as a large one in 
pursuing outstanding debts . 
Credit insurance
Credit insurers , such as Euler Trade Indemnity , will insure against the 
risk of bad debt . Insurance companies can be contacted through the 
Association of British Insurers . 
TIMETABLE FOR DEBT CHASING
Here ’ s a sample schedule for chasing money you are owed : 
• The sale : send out invoice
• 21 days : send statement reminding payment due after 30 days
• 30 days : if not paid , send reminder statement , re-stating terms and pointing out payment is overdue
• 45 days : send reminder , re-stating payment is overdue
• 50 days : stop supplies until paid
• 60 days : send final reminder
• 90 days : assign debt to collection agency
CONTACT
Association of 
British Insurers
www . abi . org . uk
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 262 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
263
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
Factoring and invoice discounting
Factoring is a popular choice for new businesses because it helps 
avoid cashfl ow problems . In both factoring and invoice discounting , 
small businesses borrow against sales as a means of sustaining 
cashfl ow . Invoice discounting also involves a company loaning you 
a large percentage of the money for each invoice as soon as it is 
raised , which is then repaid plus a commission fee when payment 
is received from your customer within a specifi ed time period . Under 
factoring the company will also chase the debt for you , for a larger 
commission payment . The key difference between the two is that in 
invoice discounting you continue to chase the payments yourself and 
the service is usually undisclosed to customers . 
There are two types of factoring : recourse factoring , which excludes 
bad debt protection , and non-recourse factoring , which includes it . In 
the latter case , if a credit-approved customer fails to pay an undisputed 
debt , the factor will credit you with the amount of the debt . 
Retention of title
Retention of title – keeping ownership of goods until they are paid for – 
has only limited application . It can ’ t be used where you are supplying a 
service such as cleaning or architecture , or where the goods supplied 
are then made into something else , as in fl our in a bakery . 
Payment in advance
Credit is a privilege , not a right , and in some circumstances it may be 
appropriate to ask for full or part payment in advance – for example , 
when making a large order , which would extend the supplier ’ s fi nancial 
resources , or if a customer is not deemed creditworthy . In other 
instances , credit terms could be reduced to , say , one week , instead 
of the normal 30 days . 
Credit is a 
privilege , not 
a right
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 263 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
264
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
EXPERT 
OPINION
CONTROLLING CASHFLOW
Matthew Holmes , Managing Director of Liquid Accounts offers advice on 
keeping the money coming in . 
When you are starting out in business it ’ s very 
easy to get carried away with the novelty and 
excitement of it all , and forget about the more 
mundane stuff such as admin and accounting . So 
it ’ s important to get some systems in place right 
from the beginning ( ideally using some software , 
even if it ’ s just a spreadsheet )  . It ’ s easier to do it 
now while you ’ ve still got the time , and can get 
into a habit , regularly setting some time aside to 
get your fi nances up to date , and review what 
they ’ re telling you .  ( Are your sales going up and 
down ? Are you making enough money to cover 
your costs ?  ) Liquid Accounts regularly gets clients 
coming who only realise they ’ ve got a problem 
when they ’ ve got their fi rst VAT or tax return to do , 
or their business adviser cannot help them until 
they ’ ve got some up-to-date fi gures . Here are 
Liquid Accounts ’ top fi ve tips for getting it right : 
Make sure you bill as soon as possible : It 
may sound obvious , but as soon as you ’ ve done 
the work , send the invoice ! Don ’ t be afraid to be 
prompt – you are only asking for money that ’ s 
owed to you , and they ’ re not going to pay you 
unless you ask for it . If your payment terms are 
30 days ( see below )  , and you wait another two 
weeks before you raise an invoice , you are only 
going to get your money after 44 days at the 
earliest . 
Set payment terms and stick to them : If you 
decide to put on your invoices when you will like 
the bill to be paid ( normally ‘ on receipt ’  , 7 , 14 
or 30 days )  , known as payment terms , don ’ t be 
afraid to make a quick call on the fi rst day that the 
invoice is overdue to ask when you can expect 
payment . If someone is a habitually bad payer 
( or you need to improve your cashfl ow )  , don ’ t be 
afraid to shorten your payment terms , or use your 
rights to charge interest ( under the Late Payment 
of Commercial Debts ( Interest ) Act 1998 )  . Big 
companies in particular can be particularly bad 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 264 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
265
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
payers , and so don ’ t be afraid to use these rights 
– that ’ s why they exist . 
Have a debt collection system in place : To 
make sure that all the above happens you need 
to have good accounting software that fl ags up 
for you when people haven ’ t paid and someone 
keeping an eye on things and doing the chasing . 
Early on , this is probably going to be down to 
you , but as you grow you may consider having 
someone do this for you , such as a professional 
debt collection agency . 
Consider using sales order processing and 
purchase order processing : On a basic level , 
this can mean anything from making sure that you 
get a signed letter of confi rmation for everything 
you sell and everything you buy , through to issuing a full contract for each piece of work you do . 
Whichever route you take , it will make it easier for 
you to chase a debt or dispute a bill if a problem 
arises , and even without a full contract in place , 
it will be easier for you pursue a legal course of 
action . And you will be more likely to get a result ( if 
they ’ ve signed for it , they can ’ t say that they didn ’ t 
want it !  )  . Big companies will automatically have 
these processes in place , so don ’ t put yourself , 
as the little guy , at a disadvantage . Any good 
accounting software should have sales order 
processing and purchase order processing as an 
option , and so it should only mean an extra fi ve 
minutes ’ work – think of it as an insurance policy . 
Your accountant , lawyer or debt collection agency 
should be able to advise you on what you need . 
Consider changing to cash accounting : Liquid 
Accounts ’ top tip is that if you are VAT registered , 
consider changing to cash accounting . This 
means that you only pay the VAT on your invoices 
once you ’ ve received the money , and it will really 
help if you don ’ t know exactly when you are going 
to get paid . Obviously you would need to take 
advice from your accountant and check the rules 
of cash accounting before switching , but the good 
news is that you don ’ t have to notify Her Majesty ’ s 
Revenue and Customs ( HMRC ) of the change . 
Again , any good accounting package should have 
cash accounting built in as an option . 
For more information contact Matt Holmes on 
0845 450 7304 ; matt . holmes @ liquidaccounts . net 
or visit www . liquidaccounts . net
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 265 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
266
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Private limited companies and their subsidiaries are obliged to 
publish the time taken to pay suppliers in their annual report and the 
Federation of Small Businesses produces annual league tables of 
companies ’ payment records , while credit reference agencies focus 
on recent payment trends . Adverse information , such as county court 
judgments or previous insolvencies involving directors , clearly indicate 
high risk . This information is available from offi cial sources such as the 
Registry Trust or the Insolvency Service for a fee , and is also included 
in credit reports . Basic information can be obtained from Companies 
House , but , again , a credit report includes this information . Good 
credit management should aid , not inhibit , the sales effort . The key 
is obtaining good information and setting up effective procedures . 
Making the effort at the beginning can save much wailing and gnashing 
of teeth later on . 
CONTACT
Better Payment 
Practice Group
www . payontime . 
co . uk
Institute of Credit 
Management
www . icm . org . uk
Asset Based 
Finance 
Association
www . abfa . org . uk
Federation of Small 
Businesses
www . fsb . org . uk
Companies House
www . 
companieshouse . 
gov . uk 
! TOP TIPS
ASSESSING CUSTOMER RISK
If your sales are high value and low volume make sure that potential customers can pay , 
by :  
! Confirming their address 
! Establishing how long they ’ ve been trading 
! Visiting their premises 
! Consulting their annual report 
! Running a credit check through a credit reference agency 
! Collecting payment
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 266 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
267
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
Travel and expenses
Few people actually know how much they spend each year on travel 
and expenses and most would have to take valuable time researching 
to get the answer , and they should . Travel and entertainment – or T & E 
as commerce likes to call it – amounts to the third largest controllable 
corporate cost , just behind salaries and data processing , and as a 
small business , it could be a leakage in your profi ts and something 
you need to keep under control . You are also likely to spend more 
on T & E than advertising . So it ’ s even more concerning that so few 
companies can actually put an annual total on such a vital part of their 
operation . As a startup , this is your opportunity to redress the balance 
and keep a close track of T & E from the start . 
You are likely 
to spend 
more on 
T & E than 
advertising
MINIMISING TRAVEL COSTS
Whether you work by yourself or run a company employing several people , travel expenses will need to 
be minimised wherever possible . Here there are a number of easy steps that you can take to help control 
your costs . 
Don ’ t just take the most obvious route : A business can save almost a third by sending an executive via Paris to Los Angeles instead of fl ying direct from London . If you operate away from London and 
would be paying for a connecting fl ight , say from Aberdeen or Manchester , it may well benefi t you to skip 
London and go direct to Paris . 
Think about downgrading : When arranging business fl ights , ask yourself if business class is really 
necessary . Of course , for many startups ‘ slumming it in the back ’ may well be the only affordable way to 
go – but it can make better business sense anyway . Equally , using secondary airports or ‘ no-frills ’ airlines 
can cut costs signifi cantly . For example , a return fl ight to Geneva , from London Gatwick , is six times 
cheaper with a low-cost carrier . 
Loyalty schemes : If you will be travelling to see the same client several times a year , there may well 
be an opportunity to negotiate a better rate . It is also important to remember that a travel policy is more 
than just about the fl ights . Using the same hotel chain on a regular basis can also cut costs with a negotiated rate . And for individual travellers , who happen to be with the company too , loyalty schemes are 
worth using . Free points towards fl ights and hotel bills all help the bottom line . 
Get in the professionals : You could use a company , such as American Express , which will help you to 
implement and follow a travel policy , organising travel for you and negotiating better rates on your behalf . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 267 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
268
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
A formal travel policy and improved T & E management . With any 
travel policy , the balance is between the benefi t of the travellers and 
the cost saving for the company . And this isn ’ t simply a cost issue . 
Time out of the offi ce has to be managed effi ciently . No one can afford 
to miss too many important calls and it may be diffi cult to hand over 
to anyone else to ‘ hold the fort ’ while you are away . Then , of course , 
these days there is concern over a company ’ s environmental impact , 
of which travel can play a major part , particularly with respect to air 
travel . 
Bookkeeping
One of the most daunting things about giving up full-time employment 
to start your own business is the prospect of looking after the company 
accounts . For an ex-employee who is used to having his or her tax 
and National Insurance contributions ( NICs ) deducted at source via 
PAYE ( pay as you earn )  , the prospect of dealing with the vast , looming 
shadow that is HM Revenue & Customs can be quite daunting . 
It ’ s tempting to say that there ’ s no need to worry and that the 
entire bookkeeping process is child ’ s play , but that wouldn ’ t be strictly 
true . If it were , accountants wouldn ’ t be paid so well . But HMRC is 
not – perhaps contrary to popular belief – a bullying , authoritarian 
organisation . On the contrary , its aim is to help businesses manage 
their accounts as effectively as possible . To this end it publishes regular 
newsletters and leafl ets giving tips and guidance on bookkeeping , 
and has teams of advisers on hand to help out over the phone should 
you run into diffi culties . 
Sole traders
If you are setting up as a sole trader rather than as a company with 
employees , then your bookkeeping work can be kept to a minimum . 
There ’ s the added advantage that sole traders pay less tax than any 
HMRC has 
teams of 
advisers on 
hand to help 
out should 
you run into 
diffi culties
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 268 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
269
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
other class of working people , although you have to be careful that 
you don ’ t fall foul of the IR35 regulation . This rule , which quite simply 
states that if you look like an employee , you are an employee , was 
introduced to prevent contractors working on site for single clients for 
long periods of time , effectively acting as employees , but invoicing as 
sole traders or single-employee limited companies . 
As a sole trader , you have to keep track of monthly income and 
expenditure , which means holding on to all invoices and receipts . You 
will also have to talk to HMRC about National Insurance Contributions 
( NICs ) – the easiest way to handle these is by setting up a direct 
debit , and the amounts involved are quite small . You could manage 
your accounts by hand , but it ’ s easier to do it using a computer . A 
spreadsheet will suffi ce , containing columns for income , expenditure 
and VAT ( if you are VAT registered )  . This means keeping track of all 
invoices ( along with the dates they were issued and paid ) and all receipts 
for work-related transactions , including any ground rent , telephone 
bills , heating and electricity costs and so on . If you work from home , 
some of your household expenditure may be tax deductible . This is all 
the information you will need to fi ll in the tax return form each year . You 
can then either attempt to calculate the amount of tax owed yourself 
or send the form to HMRC and let it do it for you . It ’ s actually all quite 
easy and shouldn ’ t take more than a couple of hours each month . 
Partnerships and limited companies
Things get a little more complex once you start employing people , 
because you will have to look after their salaries as well as the general 
company accounts . You will have to manage the deduction of their 
tax at source , payment of employer and employee NICs , plus any 
pension schemes , bonus arrangements and non-salary expenses . 
The process is far quicker and simpler than it ever was thanks to 
bookkeeping software packages , which also let you plot graphs of 
profi t and loss or income and expenditure , track overdue payments 
( both incoming and outgoing ) and the more advanced tools can even 
You can 
manage your 
accounts by 
hand , but it ’ s 
easier to do it 
using a 
computer
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 269 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
270
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
automate the submission of the relevant forms to HMRC . Options 
available include QuickBooks Mind Your Own Business ( MYOB )  , Sage 
Instant Accounting / Payroll and Liquid Accounts ( online accounting 
software )  , which can all be used for companies of up to 20 employees 
– and don ’ t be put off by the relatively low cost of these packages . 
Most of these packages are powerful accounting tools that can double 
as business assessment and stock control systems , giving you a real 
feel for which areas of your business are doing well and which are 
failing . For the sake of convenience , it ’ s best to ask your accountant 
which software package he or she prefers to use and then buy that 
one for internal use . 
When it comes to doing your company accounts , you will be 
better off fi nding a good accountant . Note that they won ’ t do the 
donkey work of everyday data input for you , unless you are prepared 
to pay extra – a lot extra . What they will do is take the fi gures you have 
provided for the year and plug those into various forms to tell you the 
amount of money you have to pay for each class of tax . See page 272 
for more on accountants and fi nding the right one . 
VAT considerations
For companies , and sole traders for that matter , with annual turnovers 
exceeding a certain amount ( currently £68 , 000 )  , quarterly VAT returns 
must be completed and sent to HMRC along with any payment due . 
The VAT form is very simple – just a single page – and usually 
works in the company ’ s favour . This is because , although you must 
pay VAT on any income generated , you can claim back VAT paid on 
some goods and services , such as offi ce supplies , vehicle servicing , 
fuel and so on . So the extra accounting is defi nitely worth it and even 
companies with turnovers less than the VAT limit can still register 
voluntarily . Remember that the standard rate of VAT was changed 
recently to help kick start the economy during the recession . Having 
been 17 . 5% for years , it was reduced to 15% . However , not all 
products and services attract the standard VAT rate , so ask your local 
CONTACT
For the most 
-up-to-date 
VAT registration 
information : HMRC 
. 
gov . uk / vat / start / 
register / index . htm
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 270 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
271
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
ACTION POINT
KEEPING ON TOP OF TAX 
AND ACCOUNTS
In your fi rst year of operation it will seem as though there ’ s an endless array of forms to be completed 
and taxes to be paid , whereas in fact there aren ’ t really so many . Although your accountant will guide you 
through the process , it pays to understand the tax and accounting demands on your business , and if you 
bear in mind the following basics , you won ’ t go far wrong . 
During the tax year you must : 
• Deduct the correct amount of PAYE from your employees ’ pay
• Work out the amount of NICs that you and your employees have to pay
• Keep a record of your employees ’ pay and PAYE and NICs due
• Make monthly or quarterly payments of the total PAYE and NICs due to the Accounts Office
• Manage VAT return completion and payment on a quarterly basis
At the end of the tax year you must : 
• Send a Return ( form P35 ) and an End of Year Summary ( form P14 ) showing details of each employee ’ s total pay and the PAYE and NICs due , to your HMRC office
• Send details to the Inland Revenue office about expenses you have paid to employees or benefits you 
have provided ( forms P11D and P9D ) 
• Give each employee ( who has paid PAYE or NICs and is still working for you at the end of the tax year ) 
a certificate showing their pay , PAYE and NICs details ( form P60 ) 
• Give each employee a copy of the information you have given your HMRC office about their expenses 
payments and benefits provided ( duplicate of form P11D ) 
At the end of your company ’ s accounting year you must : 
• Send a formal return for your company ’ s accounts to your HMRC office
• You should receive copies of the Employer ’ s Bulletin from HMRC along with the Employer ’ s Annual 
Pack . Request the copies if you haven ’ t received them within a month or so of starting your business , 
as these provide useful tips on the above duties , plus contacts and advice for business owners
• The percentage of companies audited each year by HMRC is quite small , but the organisation has 
effective ways of tracking suspicious returns . The auditing process is thorough and time-consuming , 
since all receipts and invoices must be checked against the returns and shown to the investigating accountant . Also , the Statute of Limitations is biased in the auditors ’ favour , so you may have to dig out 
paperwork going back many years . This means that you may want to take out auditing insurance with 
your accountant . The work involved during an audit is considerable – allow for three days at the very 
least – and could become very expensive if you pay your accountant by the hour . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 271 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
272
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
HMRC offi ce for its introductory video that explains the basics of VAT 
accounting . If that ’ s not enough , you can also enrol on a brief course , 
again run by HMRC , which will go into greater detail . 
Try to keep track of changes to tax regulations . This means 
listening to the entire budget speech ! Your accountant should do 
this for you , but it doesn ’ t hurt to know about VAT limits , along with 
changes in basic tax rates and company car regulations yourself . 
Above all , tempting as it may seem , don ’ t ever attempt to ‘ cook the 
books ’  . Penalties for tax evasion are high . It ’ s not worth the sleepless 
nights and feelings of guilt just to shave a few pounds off your tax bill , 
and there ’ s always the chance that you will be found out , especially if 
you are audited . 
Ultimately , you should remember that you are expected to account 
for every single business-related penny spent – this includes invoices 
for trade magazines and newspapers , for example . Although there 
may be some discretionary leeway , you are expected to show each 
month ’ s transactions in suffi cient detail that your profi t and loss , income 
and expenditure – and therefore tax – can be clearly calculated . 
Why you need an 
accountant
You might think that a startup or small business isn ’ t big enough 
to warrant an accountant , but unless you are an expert in tax and 
fi nance – in short an accountant yourself – this simply isn ’ t the 
case . An accountant can provide your business with a great deal of 
essential support . If you are just starting a business , your accountant 
will take the form of another business adviser . As mentioned in 
previous chapters , they can give advice on your business plan and 
the tax issues of registering your company . Some accountants offer 
bookkeeping services , but if they don ’ t or if you wish to handle this 
yourself , you can get help with setting up manual or computerised 
bookkeeping systems . And most importantly , you need an accountant 
Above all , 
tempting as it 
may seem , 
don ’ t ever 
attempt to 
 ‘ cook the 
books ’ 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 272 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
273
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
to assist on things such as whether it is necessary to register for VAT 
or PAYE and the procedures involved . You can also ask them for help 
with budgeting and forecasting cashfl ow , as well as credit control and 
general fi nancial advice . They can also offer you up-to-date information 
on any general or legal enquiries . 
An accountant can also advise you on the best way to arrange 
additional fi nance without putting your business at risk . Once you 
have the fi nance in place , there needs to be some control to ensure 
the growth of your business is handled in the right way . Many of your 
concerns will be fi nancial – adequate working capital , good stock 
control , invoicing and so on – and an experienced accountant ’ s advice 
can prove invaluable in such matters . Furthermore , can you honestly 
say that you are on top of all the essential taxation issues ? Well , that ’ s 
also an accountant ’ s job – taxation is a large business expense and 
an accountant can effectively minimise these costs . 
Finding an accountant
A simple internet search will throw up lots of accountants in your area . 
There are many ways to track down the right accountant for your 
new business , one of the best of which is through recommendation . 
Simply ask friends and contacts if they would recommend their 
various accountants . Also ask businesses around you if they use 
someone locally . Your solicitor and bank manager will be working with 
accountants all the time , and they will probably have a good idea of 
the fi rms most suited to your type of business , making them also a 
good source of recommendation . Equally , your local Business Link or 
Enterprise Agency will be able to help you in your search . 
Make sure you ask people what they use their accountant for , as 
you might not need the same kinds of services . You should also quiz 
them on what they would recommend about them , their weak points , 
and if they are always on hand when needed . Most importantly , it is 
advisable to choose someone who is a member of one of the main 
professional accounting bodies . There is no legislation to stop anyone 
Your 
accountant 
should be 
a good investment
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 273 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
274
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
setting up as an accountant , so asking for member accountants in 
your area will ensure you are getting someone fully qualifi ed . 
Qualities to look for in an accountant
You need to make sure that the accountant you choose for your 
company is at least familiar with your business sector so that they 
are aware of any specifi c legislation . Also , look at the size of the fi rm . 
As you are a startup , look for a small- to medium-sized business 
accountant as they will probably specialise more in small business 
work , charge less than a larger fi rm and give more direct access to 
more experienced partners . 
Make arrangements to visit several fi rms in person to meet the 
people you will be working with and to make comparisons .  ‘ A lot 
comes down to personal chemistry ,  ’ maintains Paul Watts , corporate 
fi nance partner at HLB Kidsons .  ‘ The accountant needs to be able to 
get into your business and show an interest in it , as well as just doing 
your accounts , if they are to advise you properly .  ’ 
You are likely to be working closely with your accountant , so if you 
don ’ t get on at a basic level , your professional relationship may be 
more diffi cult than it needs to be . It ’ s good to ask if you can speak to 
other clients , in the same way that you would ask for references , and 
this will be a real test of the calibre of the fi rm . If they are confi dent that 
their service has impressed , they shouldn ’ t have a problem referring 
you to a few people . Equally , a good accountant should want to make 
an appointment to come and see your business .  ‘ It ’ s important to go 
out and see clients ,  ’ says Watts .  ‘ You can ’ t fully understand a business 
until you have been taken round it .  ’ And allow each accountant to 
pitch to you , as it isn ’ t just about what you want , but also what they 
are prepared to offer . 
Business 
Link
www . businesslink . 
gov . uk
Enterprise Agency
Each region has 
their own agency ; 
search online for the 
one nearest you . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 274 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
275
9 . 0 OPEN FOR BUSINESS
Agreeing terms
When you are considering taking on an accountant , it ’ s important to 
establish who your contact will be at the fi rm and who you can speak 
to in their the absence . This , along with the services they are offering 
you and the fees they will charge , should form part of the engagement 
letter . Like the contract , this should be signed by both of you , and will 
form the basis of your working relationship . As such , it is important 
to get as much information on it as possible . If the accountant is to 
handle your tax , your accounts and your payroll , it should say so . 
This is also the point where you talk about money . Traditionally , 
accountants charge by the hour with more for a partner than for a 
junior member of staff . However , many fi rms are prepared to be fl exible 
with regards to payment , and you might negotiate a fi xed one-off fee 
for a full audit , for example , or pay monthly rather than all at once at 
the end of the year . The latter should be popular with both parties as it 
ensures regular payment when the money is available . However , going 
for the fi rm that charges the least can sometimes be a false economy , 
according to Watts .  ‘ Don ’ t always go for the cheapest fi rm , look for 
one that adds value ,  ’ he advises .  ‘ For example , how much does the 
hourly fee vary for a partner and other staff and will photocopying and 
phone time be included in the cost or be extra ?  ’ Most importantly , 
don ’ t be afraid to question anything on the engagement letter or to 
ask for something to be added . As with most contracts , it is in both 
your interests . In exchange for an hourly fee , you should get someone 
who saves you money , prevents you sitting up late with accounts that 
won ’ t balance and who can provide general business sense . All the 
more reason to choose carefully . 
Knowing whether you ’ ve made 
the right choice
So you have followed all the rules and carefully chosen your accountant , but this is the fi rst time you have had one , so how do you know 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 275 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
276
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
if they are doing a good job , and what do you do if you think they are 
not ? To gauge their performance , look at what you are getting from 
them . At a basic level , are your accounts and tax returns prepared on 
time ? Are you being billed as agreed and are your phone calls and 
letters answered ? On top of this , take note of the advice they ’ ve given 
you . Have they come up with ideas you wouldn ’ t otherwise have 
thought of ? And if not , is that because you haven ’ t liked the ideas , or 
because there haven ’ t been any ? 
It is possible just to say to an accountant that you no longer want 
to work with them – you can effectively ‘ sack ’ the fi rm . But don ’ t 
rush into doing this at the slightest hitch , as it ’ s important to build a 
relationship with your accountant , which is diffi cult if you are changing 
every six months . Problems can often be ironed out , so keep careful 
track of the service and speak to your accountant if you need to . But , 
ultimately , remember that you are not paying for poor service . 
09SYOB_CH_09 . indd 276 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 51 : 06 PM
279
WHAT ’ S IN THIS CHAPTER
■ Once you ’ ve got your business up and running , it ’ s 
vital to maintain the momentum and look for ways 
to improve the way you work continually . Thinking 
strategically while managing your company day to 
day will be a challenge , but there are several ways 
you can achieve this ranging from managing your 
time effectively and keeping yourself and your team 
motivated , to reviewing and boosting performance 
through training . The key is to put measures and 
policies in place that drive you to constantly review , 
improve and generally work smarter . Doing this means 
you will not only boost the performance of your 
company , but also steal a march on your rivals . Read 
on to fi nd out some of the key areas to address…
10 . 0
NEXT STEPS : 
REVIEW AND 
IMPROVE
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 279 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 09 PM
280
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Time management
It ’ s not just owners of small businesses who claim that 24 hours are 
just not enough in a day – but do they seem to complain about it 
more than most ? It almost seems obligatory that , when starting out , 
you will be at your desk late into the night , early in the mornings and 
throughout the weekend . Can you operate in this way for long at an 
effective level ? The European Union ( EU ) obviously thinks not , as its 
many rules on working hours suggest that the evidence shows that 
people do not work effectively at such a pace , and it is unfair to expect 
your staff to do this . So why do owner-managers do it themselves ? 
How many working hours ? 
A recent Bank of Scotland survey found that entrepreneurs work 
on average a 50-hour week compared with the EU norm of just 35 
hours work a week . For those businesses growing at over 10% a year 
the average working week is 52 . 3 hours . The survey reported that 
overall , Britain ’ s 1 . 4 million small businesses are collectively putting in 
a staggering 31 . 2 million extra ‘ working weeks ’ each year . Seven in 
10 ( 71% ) small business owners claimed to feel stressed by running 
and managing their business , compared with only half ( 54% ) in the 
previous year . 
Without doubt , new businesses owners want to be effi cient , 
and one way of keeping costs down is to take on as much of the 
workload as possible . And if , during the regular nine-to-fi ve working 
day , you are handling customers or clients , then it is more than likely 
that the administration will follow in the evenings or at weekends . The 
increasingly global nature of business , particularly for anyone running 
a website as part of their business , for example , also means that 
working hours are extending – a work phone call at 9pm or even 4am 
is not unusual for website owners . But the key to making it all work is 
time management . 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 280 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 09 PM
281
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
Imogen Daniels , an adviser at the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development ( CIPD )  , believes ‘ time management can make 
an enormous amount of difference to small businesses ’  . However , 
she also believes that you have to fi nd the right solution to suit your 
business and your personality . Managing your time more effectively 
can be as simple as being more organised , such as keeping your desk 
tidier and having a more effi cient fi ling system , or a good software 
package . However , if you are the kind of person who hates tidying , 
there ’ s no point forcing yourself to keep everything on your desk neat , 
as you will simply resent it and soon stop making the effort . There 
will be another solution that suits you better , such as placing key 
documents in a certain place on your desk . As long as the important 
stuff is in one place , it doesn ’ t matter if your desk is cluttered . 
You are likely to have gone into business because you have a 
particular skill or want to do something you enjoy under your own 
supervision . Getting bogged down in all the administration and other 
chores that come with running your own company can be frustrating , 
prevent you from enjoying what you do and could result in you 
ultimately losing interest in the business . What ’ s more , you won ’ t be 
dedicating enough time to what you do best , which is running your 
company . And if you are stacking up the hours so you can fi t it all 
in , you will be far from your best most of the time . So for the sake 
of your health , sanity and business , it is worth applying a few time 
management techniques to reduce time spent on administration and 
free up time to dedicate on the work you are better at and enjoy more . 
In the end , it ’ s your business that will benefi t . 
Work rate
Any self-employed person , and certainly any new business , will agree 
that it is practically impossible to turn down work . Even if you are 
manically busy , it is very diffi cult saying ‘ No ’ because of the fear that 
all existing work will dry up and that you will be left with nothing . 
Unfortunately , although understandable , this approach has been 
CONTACT
Chartered Institute 
of Personnel 
Development
www . cipd . co . uk
020 8612 6200
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 281 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 09 PM
282
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
responsible for bringing down many a good company . That ’ s because , 
although business may be booming , individuals and companies that 
overstretch themselves are in serious danger of missing deadlines 
along with the faith of their clients – which means business won ’ t be 
booming for long . However good the work , it is of little use when the 
deadline has passed . Clients are also quick to point out this failing 
to others and may recommend you , but with the words of warning : 
 ‘ Good , but a hopeless timekeeper ’  . 
The key is to be honest with yourself and your customers , and 
making sure that the people who are employed to carry out the key 
work that delivers your products and services – one of whom will be 
you – are doing just that , rather than taking on less productive roles 
that don ’ t make the most of their skills . This will have the impact of 
maximising your work rate , allowing you to get through as much of it 
as possible , and so turn down less . 
Ultimately , if you aren ’ t confi dent that you can deliver goodquality work within the required timescale either don ’ t take it on , for 
the reasons outlined earlier or be clear about your existing workload 
when talking to your customer . Being honest and saying you need 
a little more time doesn ’ t necessarily mean the work will go elsewhere . A customer may decide to be more fl exible and give you the 
time you need to do the work properly – and will appreciate your 
honesty and commitment to only delivering the best possible product 
or service . 
Photographer Jonathan Pollock has built up a team of freelance 
assistants , whom he calls on at busy times . This frees him up to 
concentrate directly on his primary function , photography , and allows 
him to take on as much work as possible , without cutting corners . His 
assistants help with building sets and also staff the telephones when 
he is at work .  ‘ You don ’ t want to miss a call from your next potential 
client because you are too busy to answer the phone ,  ’ he advises . 
In terms of balancing work and personal life , which is essential to 
prevent you from becoming jaded and maintaining your work rate and 
hunger for the business , he advises that everyone books a holiday 
well in advance and sticks to the dates . This will give you plenty of 
If you aren ’ t 
confi dent 
that you can 
deliver goodquality work 
within the 
required 
timescale , 
don ’ t take it 
on or ask if 
the customer 
can give you 
more time
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 282 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
283
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
time to book in any necessary cover for when you are away or plan 
work around your break . He also suggests ,  ‘ Never tell anyone that 
you have no other work . Of course , as well as busy times , you also 
need to prepare for quieter periods , which using freelance help is ideal 
for as you simply won ’ t employ them at this time .  ’ Pollock ’ s tip during 
leaner times is :  ‘ Although you should never lie to customers , avoid 
revealing that that you have no other work . Simply say that you can 
fi t them in .  ’ 
Be prepared
Another common problem among inexperienced owner-managers 
is underestimating the time a job will take and consequently 
undercharging . It is easy to think that a job will be cracked in a day or 
two , but it is much better to add on extra time to cover any changes 
that a client might request . Some people are afraid of charging for that 
seemingly unnecessary day in case they lose the work to someone 
else , but experience does prove that clients will be prepared to pay 
a little more for the confi dence of knowing that a job will be done 
properly . 
Often clients will ask :  ‘ How much will you charge ?  ’ at a very early 
stage of negotiation . One tip is to throw the question back and ask 
what size budget they have and , if appropriate , how long they expect 
the job to take . Imply that you are fl exible . You do not want to lose the 
work in a haggle over fees , but also stress that you want a decent rate 
for the decent job that they will get . Try to gain as much information as 
possible about what is required before naming your fee and timescale . 
Questions that may have seemed unnecessary at the outset can save 
a lot of embarrassment and heartache down the line . 
The second of the MORI / British Gas Time surveys mentioned 
earlier showed that small owner-managers are setting aside more 
time to plan . Commenting on the fi ndings , a British Gas spokesman 
says he believes businesses were dedicating more time to planning 
because owner-managers were ‘ working smarter ’  . Owner-managers 
Never lie to 
customers – 
but you can 
avoid 
revealing that 
that you have 
no other 
work . Simply 
say that you 
can fi t them 
in
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 283 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
284
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
were seeking more external advice and keeping a careful watch on 
spending as two ways of managing their time more effi ciently . This is 
because they felt that forward planning was allowing them to allocate 
the right time to jobs , employ the relevant number of staff to achieve 
deadlines and give them time to chase up new contracts . 
Keeping on track
Staying on top of your working schedule is hugely important , particularly with a newly launched company , as you won ’ t have slotted 
into any kind of routine or work pattern , and taking your eye off the 
ball can harm your reputation before it ’ s even built . It is all too easy 
to forget to send an invoice as one job is completed and the next 
deadline is on top of the list on your mind . Losing control of the 
cashfl ow in that way is bad enough , but worse still , a disorganised 
owner-manager could easily lose sight of a whole commission . Time 
management consultant Gerard Hargreaves is a great believer in 
lists . When working with British Gas on its biannual Time survey of 
small- and medium-sized companies , he suggested making lists as 
a top tip because it helps organise the tasks in your head and helps 
prioritise the tasks ahead . Keep the diary up to date , make sure that 
conversations with clients are logged and that agreed actions are 
noted somewhere prominent , so that those actions do actually go 
forward . 
Pollock has a page-a-day diary for just this purpose .  ‘ It was one 
of the fi rst things that I did when launching on my own ,  ’ he says .  ‘ It 
sounds a little silly , but it is so crucial .  ’ Each day is split into hours so 
Pollock can log meetings in the correct order and it has space for him 
to include priority tasks . He keep this diary up to date all the time , 
fi lling it in as he speaks to clients .  ‘ I keep lists of props that are needed 
and tasks to be done , and I tick them off as they are completed so 
that , at a glance , I know what still has to be worked on ,  ’ he explains . 
Daniels , from the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development , 
is also a great believer in lists , claiming they organise events in your 
Keeping lists 
and being 
aware of what 
is needed 
next does 
help to 
reduce the 
stress
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 284 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
285
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
own mind , regardless of whether you actually keep the list beside 
you through the working day . She also fi nds that ‘ people gain a great 
deal of satisfaction from achieving listed goals and being able to tick 
things off ’  . Again , the answer lies in fi nding the solution that suits your 
character – some people prefer to use Post-it notes , sticking them 
around their computer and offi ce , while others prefer accessing a 
complex diary on their computer .  ‘ There is an enormous amount of 
fi re-fi ghting that goes on in small businesses ,  ’ says Daniels .  ‘ Keeping 
lists and being aware of what is needed next does help to reduce the 
stress .  ’ 
Delegation
One of the biggest challenges facing entrepreneurs is delegating 
tasks effectively . When it is your own business , it is very hard to let 
go , but delegation is a sign of sound management . Even early on in 
the life of your business , it is pretty diffi cult to do everything and there 
comes a point when the cost of employing someone else to help is 
less than the cost of work lost because you can ’ t cope . Chartered 
surveyor Simon Smith has fi rst-hand experience of this . After setting 
out on his own , he quickly found plenty of demand , and a recent 
merger with another business has meant extreme pressure on his 
time . Instead of being out and about winning business and handling 
the tricky side of the operation , he found himself bogged down in 
administration and routine jobs that were taking up disproportionate 
amounts of his day . With a wife and three young children at home , he 
also found it hard to justify spending weekends at the offi ce .  ‘ I knew 
I needed someone to help out , but there has to be a balancing act 
between cost and help ,  ’ he says . 
In his sector , Smith knew there was a history of recent graduates 
receiving low salaries and a consequent backlash of students unwilling 
to enter the profession . After months of seeking out the right person , 
he appointed a recent graduate who was going to the spend the next 
two years working towards full qualifi cation . Smith knew he would 
Learn to let 
go and trust 
others to take 
on some of 
the burden
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 285 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
286
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
have to give time to the new recruit to ensure he was in the best 
possible condition to pass his exams – and also give him the right sort 
of work to meet industry criteria . But he still got the benefi t of having 
time to return to his core business and concentrate on doing what he 
did best . 
Of course , you may not need to actually take someone on but 
simply to delegate the work to someone already within the business . 
And this shouldn ’ t just be done for the more menial tasks . Passing on 
responsibility to staff can be a great motivator and often people rise to 
the challenge if given the chance . As long as you monitor the situation 
carefully and build in review processes , little damage to your business 
is likely to be done .  ‘ Often owner-managers have a strong emotional 
ATTIK AND THE FIVE PATHS 
TO SUCCESS
Company : Attik
Owner-managers : James Sommerville and Simon Needham
Attik is in the brand business , creating advertisements and design-led identities for many of the world ’ s 
most successful companies . Today , the company is a complete ‘ brand communications group ’  , designing and implementing creative design solutions for a host of large companies , such as BT and Infogrames . Attik has grown to such a level that it has fi ve offi ces in three different countries , including the 
UK ( London and Huddersfi eld )  , Australia ( Sydney ) and the USA ( San Francisco and New York )  . But even 
though the company is one of the most recognised in its fi eld , co-founder Simon Needham believes 
that the same principles apply today as to when it was a small business with only a few employees . Here 
are his fi ve roads to success : 
• When you take risks , prepare yourself for some losses by always having a back-up plan in place just in 
case
• In the initial stages of starting and running your business , never let your thoughts get past the first year 
of trading
• Get yourself known . If someone ’ s already heard of you they ’ ll come knocking on your door . 
• There are times when things aren ’ t going to go as well as you ’ d like but stick with what you ’ ve got and 
you ’ ll get through it
• Grow reluctantly and only when you need to and use freelancers ( no fixed overheads / costs ) wherever 
possible
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 286 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
287
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
attachment to their business and it will have affected them in a lot of 
ways , from fi nancial to family ,  ’ says Daniels ,  ‘ but they do have to learn 
to let go and trust others to take on some of the burden .  ’ 
Self-motivation
The key to the continued success of your new enterprise is maintaining 
the levels of motivation that drove you to launch the business in the 
fi rst place . Motivation is more important than a business plan , or 
funding , or even business skills , according to entrepreneur Leonard 
Tondel , director of the Home Business Alliance . He believes that selfmotivation is something you either have or haven ’ t got . Successful 
owner-managers have it whereas frustrated employees don ’ t . 
However , as time goes on , entrepreneurs can suffer from a drop 
in self-motivation . This can be brought on by anything from too much 
success ( if there is such a thing !  )  , which can cut the drive to succeed , 
and delegation , which can result in a reduced sense of control , to 
failure and excessive stress , which can sap motivation . The key to 
avoiding this , and therefore maximising your potential , is to understand 
what motivates you . Ask any self-employed person what drives them , 
and the answer is likely to be simple :  ‘ Money ’  . But owner-managers 
who think purely fi nancial factors keep them motivated may be fooling 
themselves .  ‘ Enthusiasm that ’ s purely profi t-based wears thin very 
quickly ,  ’ advises Tondel .  ‘ So if you are going to start a business , make 
it something you will enjoy doing .  ’ 
Experts believe that the real source of motivation is likely to be 
rather more complex . Being your own boss comes top of the list for 
most small businesses , followed closely by fl exibility and fl exible hours , 
according to research by Andrew Oswald , Professor of Economics 
at Warwick University . Money comes a poor third for most selfemployed people , including those who believe they are driven by the 
clatter of pound coins and the rustle of large cheques . A whopping 
49% of the thousands of self-employed people he has studied call 
themselves very satisfi ed , compared with 29% of employees , and yet 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 287 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
288
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
the popular view that self-employed people are happier to take risks is 
unfounded , Oswald argues .  ‘ Their gambling behaviour is no different 
from the rest of the population ,  ’ he says . 
Studies by Cary Cooper , Professor of Organisational Psychology 
at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology 
( UMIST ) and a director of business psychology at Robertson Cooper 
consultants confi rms Oswald ’ s fi ndings .  ‘ People who start their own 
businesses have typically worked in a larger organisation and enjoy 
the amount of control and autonomy that self-employment gives 
them , when they see the direct rewards for their labour ,  ’ he says . 
But although that autonomy may make most self-employed people 
happier than the average employee , Cooper ’ s studies of top business 
people have shown that the desire to prove themselves is often what 
drives them rather than money .  ‘ Many top entrepreneurs have had 
unhappy experiences in childhood , and are motivated by something 
negative . They want to go on and prove they can succeed , and 
are driven by control and power ,  ’ he says . Although those negative 
experiences may drive many to set up their own businesses in the fi rst 
place , motivation grows with the enterprise , argues Cooper .  ‘ As the 
business expands and they employ people , it ’ s like an extended family 
with everyone depending on your success ,  ’ he explains .  ‘ The drive 
that keeps you going then comes from your feelings of responsibility 
to everyone who depends on you .  ’ 
Although small business owners ’ lives have become more 
stressful , with increasing red tape and too little time to fi nish too 
many tasks , most would never contemplate working for anyone else , 
according to research by Abbey National Business Banking and the 
Federation of Small Businesses . Running a business now means 
longer working hours , less free time and a negative effect on family 
life , but the attraction of being your own boss still outweighs going 
back to working for someone else . Once the business is up and 
running , stress can undermine self-motivation unless you fi nd some 
way to control it or channel it . Set yourself targets , recommends 
independent business adviser David Street , former director of the 
Institute of Business Advisers , and dig out that business plan , too . 
Selfmotivation is 
something 
successful 
ownermanagers 
have whereas 
frustrated 
employees 
don ’ t
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 288 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
289
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
 ‘ Small businesses tend to use business plans only when they ’ re 
trying to raise money ,  ’ he says ,  ‘ but they can also help you set 
realistic performance targets .  ’ At the Royal Bank of Scotland , Head 
of Business Banking Jason Oakley agrees , saying :  ‘ Your business 
plan should be the life and soul of your business and the key to 
targets you set .  ’ 
Formulating realistic goals for you and your team means you 
are more likely to achieve them , which will feed motivation all round . 
Gradual delegation of the jobs you don ’ t enjoy or excel at will also 
boost your self-motivation , enable you to play to your strengths and 
boost the performance of your business .  
! TOP TIPS
STAYING MOTIVATED 
! Find a mentor to help you steer your self-motivation in the direction of success 
! Set yourself realistic targets , and draw up a checklist 
! Think positively by congratulating yourself on all the things you have achieved 
! Visualise success by thinking in terms of what you will achieve rather than the obstacles in your way 
! Make time for family and friends as strong relationships can help support your success 
! Recognise that breaks are benefi cial 
! Look after your health – if it breaks down , so does your business success 
! If you work from home , separate your working time from your leisure time 
! Identify what really motivates you – money , independence or a fresh challenge – then 
pursue that goal 
! Take a step back to gain a broader perspective
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 289 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
290
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Enhancing performance
In the early days of a business you are likely to be highly motivated , 
which will drive you to work very hard . If you are not motivated you 
should seriously consider why you ’ ve launched your own business . 
Having said that , racking up the hours alone doesn ’ t mean you are 
performing to your maximum . 
If you are working long hours , make sure the effort you are putting 
in is as effective as possible , and that you are not wasting your time . 
So look at how you are spending your time during the day , and work 
out just how much of it is actually being spent productively . Then think 
of ways that you may be able to do certain tasks more effectively . 
For example , if you are spending a long time doing an essential , but 
rather repetitive or highly intense activity , there will be a maximum 
period when you will be at your most productive before you become 
jaded and distracted and your performance levels starts to fall off . Try 
to recognise when this occurs and recharge your batteries by taking 
a short break and then switching to another task , returning to the 
original work with more vim and vigour later on . 
A great way to monitor the time you are spending on each task 
is by completing a time sheet for yourself . This is simply a sheet of 
paper ( or you can do it on a spreadsheet on your computer ) divided 
into the days of the week under which you write the times between 
which you have been working on a particular job , and the nature of 
that work , building up a list throughout the day . Many companies use 
time sheets not only to ensure their people are spending their time 
productively and to keep on top of which projects they have been 
working on , but also to assess the time – and therefore cost – spent 
in terms of person-hours on certain jobs , to inform decision making 
and assist customer costings . 
 ‘ In the early days of a business you need to put the hours in to 
make it work , but you also need to analyse the quantity and quality of 
what you do in the day ,  ’ says David Broad , management consultant 
at M2R . Broad also recommends networking as a great way to gain 
You need to 
analyse the 
quantity and 
quality of 
what you do 
in the day
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 290 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
291
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
the necessary insight to improve your performance levels .  ‘ Managers 
in larger companies have to motivate their staff , while in very small 
businesses often the owner just has to motivate themselves ,  ’ he 
points out .  ‘ Going on a course or networking helps you to fi nd a 
group of people who are all speaking your language , and can help 
enormously .  ’ Networking can help to direct your motivation towards 
properly defi ned goals , and generate more business too . 
 ‘ Keep in touch with other businesses and fi nd out how they ’ ve 
managed to keep things fresh and meet their targets ,  ’ counsels 
Oakley .  ‘ Exchanging views can inspire new ideas that apply to your 
business and may be proven winners .  ’ 
Personal development
Sometimes , it can be hard to get up in the morning when you are your 
own boss – late night drinking , a wakeful young child and extreme 
tiredness can all contribute . Motivation is one of the essentials for 
anyone working for themselves , but there is far more to it than simply 
gearing yourself up to start the day , and it isn ’ t enough to keep your 
career on the straight and narrow . It is equally important to establish 
a career path that you work towards maintaining . It might be hard 
to envisage needing a career pattern when you are your own boss , 
but in reality , personal development is still important , and the same 
also goes for your staff – an employee who receives training will see 
that they are moving forward by gaining key skills , feeling valued and 
satisfi ed in their position , making them far less likely to leave than an 
untrained member of staff . 
Move on up
Its important to bear in mind that once you are your own boss it won ’ t 
be enough to is simply keep working – as anyone who has survived 
It might be 
hard to 
envisage 
needing a 
career pattern 
when you are 
your own 
boss
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 291 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
292
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
a recession can tell you . As mentioned above , standing still in career 
terms should never an option , no matter how small your business . 
Take the example of a copy typist . There was plenty of work in the 
past on old style typewriters , but those who weren ’ t able to become 
computer literate would have quickly found themselves , quite literally , 
redundant . 
If you worked for a large company , you may have been offered 
training as required , with follow-up opportunities where necessary . 
Your employers might have even been prepared to give you time 
off for outside course work or even contributed towards the cost of 
independent training . Although your business may be no more than 
a one-man band , you can still adopt the same strategies for yourself . 
The only difference is that you will have to be more organised than if 
you were part of a large organisation . As a small business , attending 
a block release course will mean that no one is back at your desk , 
keeping the business going . The fi nancial and practical implications 
need to be carefully thought out , too , but there is still no reason why 
you shouldn ’ t better yourself and the same goes for your staff . 
Personal development can help your business in several unexpected ways : 
• Not only will you be better able to carry out the related task , but 
it may also help motivate you through a rough business period or 
provide fresh ideas if the business becomes stale . 
• You never know when you might think of taking up a job again , 
for example because you have sold your business or you have 
been asked to join at board level – so keeping up to date with 
developments in the sector and by being seen as an industry leader , 
you have a better chance of winning a lucrative position . 
• Your own business may be so successful that others will want you 
on their board as a non-executive director . 
• If you sell your business on after the first flush of success , you may 
well want to start afresh and need to have developed your skills 
along the way . 
Many 
industries are 
experiencing 
calls for 
better quality 
and greater 
responsibility 
towards the 
consumer
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 292 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
293
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
Legal requirements
Besides personal development aimed at becoming better at the job 
and gaining confi dence in your own ability to handle various situations , 
there is also an increasing need for gaining knowledge about the 
latest statutory requirements . The government has placed a lot of 
emphasis on the need for improved quality at all levels of business . 
Its new laws on corporate manslaughter ( where individuals can 
now be prosecuted for the deaths of employees and members of 
the public in their charge ) are just one example of where individuals 
are being forced to take responsibility . Mark Redfern , a director of 
training at Searchlight Solutions , has seen increased demand for 
senior management training to keep abreast with the new legislation . 
 ‘ People are having to become very well versed on the legal side and 
keep up to date with current and forthcoming legislation , such as the 
Companies Act , the Data Protection Act and the Human Rights Act ,  ’ 
Redfern reports . He adds that Searchlight tries to address problems 
before they arise , so that trainees are in the best position to manage 
their businesses correctly . 
Professional director Martin Pedler has strong views on the 
need for better quality directors and believes the recent legislation 
on corporate manslaughter mentioned above , in particular , will give a 
wake-up call to the nation ’ s bosses .  ‘ I think people have a fear factor 
about what they are taking on ,  ’ he says .  ‘ It will not be long before the 
fi rst corporate manslaughter case is taken against an individual rather 
than a company . It will set the cat among the pigeons .  ’ Pedler adds 
that ignorance will be no defence for directors who haven ’ t kept a close 
eye on what is happening within their businesses , and it could land 
them in jail . He believes that the fi rst custodial sentence meted out will 
launch a surge in demand for greater training among directors . The 
same rules will apply to owner-managers and will put great pressure 
on all bosses to adhere strictly to health and safety regulations . If 
companies and directors can show they have tried to maintain proper 
standards , the courts will have no grounds for conviction , but cutting 
corners or non-compliance in any way will open the door . 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 293 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
294
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Having a 
training 
programme 
or ‘ people 
development ’ 
strategy in 
place can 
help to both 
attract and 
keep key 
members of 
staff
Corporate manslaughter rules are not the only area that has been 
tightened up in terms of director responsibility . Many industries are 
experiencing calls for better quality and greater responsibility towards 
the consumer . The insurance industry , for example , has established 
its own self-governing watchdog , but in 2007 the government 
announced plans for the whole sector to come under the rule of the 
Financial Services Authority . One of the expected consequences 
is that industry pundits believe greater numbers will have to hold 
recognisable qualifi cations . Experience alone will not be enough to 
convince regulators that you are fi t to run the business – you will need 
qualifi cations too . Insurance is not alone in this type of development , 
and it ’ s something that could stop you operating your own business 
in the future . 
Personal and staff training
Developing the skills of your workforce through training boosts 
morale and helps provide a better service to customers . They , in turn , 
are happier and more likely to return , swelling profi ts , which then 
benefi ts the business and encourages higher salaries . This is very 
much a win–win situation , and should encourage new ownermanagers to view training less as a drain on resources or an annoyance 
that takes up employees ’ valuable time , and more as a useful 
investment . 
In addition , it can help attract and retain the right people for your 
business . While unemployment levels are rising for the fi rst time in 
years , making it easier to fi nd applicants , recruiting is often expensive , 
disruptive and time consuming . So when you do hire the perfect 
candidate , it makes sense to try and hold onto them . Having a training 
programme or ‘ people development ’ strategy in place can help to 
both attract and keep key members of staff , giving your company a 
positive profi le in the recruitment marketplace . 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 294 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
295
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
Bosses , too , can also benefi t from career development and training 
as touched on earlier . Completing a course will provide a boost in selfconfi dence and renewed interest in developing the business . A bettertrained boss will be more motivated , and this is refl ected throughout 
the business , whatever its size . The director of development at the 
Institute of Directors ( IoD )  , John Weston , calls it a virtuous circle . 
 ‘ Better directors run better businesses and as a consequence you 
create wealth and employment ,  ’ he says . One of the IoD ’ s prime 
missions is to improve professional standards across the UK , and 
Weston believes that by starting at the top , the professionalism will 
fi lter right through the business . The IoD offers a series of courses 
designed to cover most aspects of running a business , which are 
available to members . They are designed for like-minded people 
and many who have been through an IoD course say that the most 
valuable part was not the formal course work , but learning about other 
directors ’ experiences . 
Choosing training courses
There are two ways to go when choosing courses : you can follow 
the structure of your chosen career or develop across a spectrum of 
skills . The options have led to the development of an IoD chartered 
director qualifi cation , because , as Weston points out :  ‘ Most directors 
have followed vertical career ladders , but our membership comes 
from a horizontal level of achievement and we needed a qualifi cation 
that would appeal to that .  ’ In other words , when you have become an 
accountant , lawyer , etc , you have a career structure that takes you up 
to the boardroom level , but once there you may well need the skills of 
a completely different career . 
To follow your chosen career you need to make specifi c decisions 
about what to learn . Most fi elds have relevant industry qualifi cations 
and there will be a well-trodden route – one that you are likely to 
have done or have followed before you decided to go solo . Learning 
a new set of skills is likely to be more of a challenge . For example , 
CONTACT
For more details of 
the IoD courses , 
contact : 
Institute of 
Directors
www . iod . com
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 295 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
296
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
it is easy enough to employ an accountant , but it might also pay 
dividends if you understand the basics of it as well . The UK has a raft 
of colleges offering full- and part-time courses and you can fi nd out 
more by searching the internet . Bear in mind that different rules of 
entry ( and payment ) apply for mature students , and take into account 
your current workload before committing to a course – one or two 
evenings at college a week may not be feasible . 
Local councils are another good source of courses . Many run a 
variety , specifi cally designed for part-timers . These are often evening 
classes that require a little , but not too much , homework between 
sessions . These could vary from a basic accountancy course to 
learning a new language – or a completely unrelated skill , such as 
upholstery , which could provide another source of income should the 
tough times arrive . 
However , if you are looking for a more academically inclined 
qualifi cation , then check out your local university , although part-time 
courses are usually limited . The other alternative that is quite popular 
is the Open University , as it allows you to work at a distance and at 
your own speed . 
Should you consider an MBA ? 
If you want to learn more managerial skills , a Masters in Business 
Administration ( MBA ) might provide the solution . An MBA often takes 
several years to complete , but can be combined with a full-time job . 
Students complete course work in a series of block releases . An 
MBA is usually divided into 12 modules , comprising eight compulsory 
sections and four optional ones in which a student might choose to 
specialise in a work-related subject . 
Nottingham University has a variety of MBA courses , and according 
to its Centre Director Chris O ’ Brien most students are in full-time 
work . Some choose to concentrate on the course – and there are 
attractive bursaries to help them afford the tuition . Most students are 
in their 30s , although there are both younger and older exceptions . 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 296 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
297
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
O ’ Brien stresses that the aim of the course is to give a framework from 
which students can help run businesses .  ‘ They have an understanding 
of business , which allows them to move businesses forward in a 
changing environment ,  ’ he says . 
Online training
The time spent getting to and from a course and the infl exible times 
of lectures is often the reason why owner-managers don ’ t take up 
training or education . This is where online training comes in , where 
you can work over the internet from any location , starting and stopping 
lectures when you choose . This mode of study is becoming more 
attractive , particularly when the cost of getting online can be as little 
as £12 a month . 
CONTACT
For nationwide 
information on 
MBAs , see : 
Association of 
MBAs
www . mbaworld . 
com
DEVELOP YOUR STAFF FREE THROUGH TRAIN TO GAIN
The government has set up a national skills service called Train to Gain , which is designed to boost the 
performance of businesses by improving the skills of their employees . The aim is also to encourage 
companies to develop their staff by providing guidance and assistance on fi nding and organising training 
resources , making the whole process easier . 
If your organisation is based in England , the government will assess your business and help you get 
access to the necessary skills and training . There ’ s also help available to companies based outside 
England , but in the British Isles . 
In this programme , each eligible company is assigned an independent business broker , who will offer 
free expert skills advice . Your business broker will arrange to visit your offi ce at a time that suits you . 
They will : 
• Identify the skills that will boost your business
• Create a tailored package of training
• Find reliable local training providers
• Find funding to complement your investment
• Evaluate the training to ensure real results . 
For more information on Train to Gain call 0845 600 9 006 or visit www . traintogain . gov . uk . You can sign 
up online at 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 297 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
298
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
ACTION POINT
KEY WAYS TO IMPROVE 
YOUR BUSINESS
You may think that once you have started up your business a lot of the hard work is over , but successful 
owner-managers are the ones who continually try to improve their enterprise . This is particularly important 
in a downturn , when you need to be able to respond to changing market conditions . Sitting on the sidelines while competitors make progress could prove to be disastrous for your venture . To help , here are 10 
ways from startups . co . uk to help you get ahead . 
Take on experienced staff : Since October 2006 it has been illegal to discriminate against workers on 
the grounds of age , so incorporate this change into your thinking when recruiting . Older staff offer maturity and experience , which could provide the keys to the success for your business . Don ’ t believe that old 
dogs can ’ t learn new tricks and remember that they might have a thing or two to show you . 
Train up : The skill levels of your staff will have direct impact on the performance of your company , so it 
pays to continually develop your employees through training to make sure they are up to speed on the 
latest workplace innovations , such as IT , and on those in your particular sector . This is also vital during 
the current economic climate , as you need all possible resources at your disposal to attract business and 
fi ght off competition . The government has set up a scheme to help you do just this , called Train to Gain . 
For more information on this scheme , see the box on page 297 . 
Expansion through recruitment : Not every company is doing badly in the recession , and if yours is one 
of those that is performing well , perhaps you could update your business plan and take on a few extra 
staff . If demand is great enough and you can budget carefully , new workers could drive your business 
onwards and upwards . It will also mean you are ready to push on further when the recovery arrives . 
CONTACT
E-Learnity
www . elearnity . com
REDTRAY
www . redtray . co . uk
Companies such as E-Learnity work closely with an employer to 
provide the necessary training package for its staff . Others such as 
REDTRAY also offer courses on an individual basis . The downside 
is most of the courses are technology based , but this is beginning 
to change . Another criticism is the lack of one-to-one help , but a lot 
of online courses now offer telephone support , while tools such as 
Microsoft NetMeeting help course members share questions . The 
Open University is just one academic institution to make use of the 
internet as a way of reaching students . 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 298 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
299
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
Expand your offer : How about branching into other areas ? If there is a niche market being ignored 
in your local area and your business is doing well , why not exploit it ? Do some market research on 
demand and how any potential expansion would fare , but be careful not to over-stretch yourself . 
However , a targeted , well-thought-out expansion into a closely related fi eld could prove to be very 
profi table – particularly if your existing market is slow due to the recession . 
Don ’ t just bank on banks : Although research has shown that the majority of small fi rms go to their 
high-street bank whenever they need new fi nance , many are now having to look at other options as the 
credit crunch has resulted in bank fi nance being diffi cult to come by . Equity investors , such as venture 
capitalists and business angels are a possible alternative , but they too have been hit by the downturn and 
have less to invest . This makes asset-based lending the best current option , where assets such as invoices , equipment , or even intellectual property can be used as security . See Chapter 4 , pages 103–138 
for more details about fi nding fi nance . 
Go public : The government has announced that red tape on securing public sector contracts will be cut 
and that work will be awarded on a regional , not national , basis . Both measures are good news for small 
fi rms , who can now compete against a reduced fi eld at a fraction of the cost for government contracts . 
From pavement maintenance to IT work , there is around £13bnn worth of contracts out there . What ’ s 
more , the public sector is one of the few that has been actually growing during the recession . 
Get your message across : If you have spent the last year relying on local newspaper advertisements 
or the Yellow Pages , it may be worth widening your options slightly to help boost your business . Cinema 
advertising often proves effective , as do panels on the sides of buses . Or you may want to put together a 
radio advertisement to reach out to local customers . If you come up with a targeted , attention-grabbing 
campaign at a reasonable cost , you should be able to boost takings signifi cantly . See Chapter 8 for a 
thorough discussion on marketing . 
Get supplied : Getting quality , affordable stock is essential in making your business profi table . If you 
feel that you aren ’ t getting the best deal from your wholesaler , do something about it . Most are happy 
to negotiate over prices , particularly at the moment when business can be hard to come by , and good 
wholesalers reward loyalty by offering money off or extra products to repeat customers . If yours doesn ’ t , 
try to fi nd another one . Do some research on suppliers in your local area , and if all of them don ’ t offer 
good value , then look further afi eld , as the savings you make could be critical . See page 206 for more 
details on handling suppliers . 
Get paid on time : Now more than ever it ’ s vital that you do all you can to maintain a healthy cashfl ow 
through your business . A big obstacle to this is that late payment has been seen by many businesses as 
acceptable practice for many years , putting small fi rms in debt that they can ill afford . So it ’ s important 
that you act to get what ’ s owed to you . The government has introduced legislation recently to tackle 
the problem , allowing fi rms to take clients to court for compensation . If all your chasing proves fruitless , 
consider using these laws . See Chapter 9 for more details on tackling late payments . 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 299 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 10 PM
300
START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 2010
Keep the cash fl owing : Debt is not necessarily a bad thing for small fi rms attempting to grow . However , 
it ’ s essential that you keep up with repayments or your whole business could be at risk . Make sure you 
operate a well-organised cashfl ow system . Try to negotiate repayments so that you can pay in instalments when it suits you best , try to use a business debit or credit card to cut down on paperwork , make 
sure your records are well looked after , and ensure that you are aware of all outstanding debts . See 
Chapter 9 for more details on tackling debtors . 
DOSH SOFTWARE AND THE 
GOLDEN CONTACT LIST
Dosh Software was set up by accountant Jonathan van der Borgh to develop new 
accounting packages for small fi rms . By constantly reviewing and updating the details 
it holds on former and existing customers it has developed a strong direct marketing database which is 
proving a great source of business , while helping the company deliver excellent service levels .  ‘ If you buy 
a cold list , you will be lucky to get a return of half a per cent ,  ’ explains general manager Tony Trevillion . 
 ‘ It is always easier to sell to someone that you have sold to before .  ’ This has meant an investment in 
database technology to help Dosh keep up-to-date and accurate listings , but it has been money well 
spent . No opportunity is lost and Dosh uses every invoice mailing to existing customers to make full use 
of the postal charges . As well as an invoice , customers could receive additional information about the 
company or questionnaires regarding customer service , all within the weight limit allowed for second 
class mail . 
 ‘ The nice thing about direct marketing , as an accountant , is that you can measure the success . You 
know all the costs–the creative outlay , the mail , the time involved and the envelopes ,  ’ says van der 
Borgh . 
10SYOB_CH_10 . indd 300 10 / 15 / 09 10 : 52 : 11 PM
301
10 . 0 NEXT STEPS : REVIEW AND IMPROVE
Over to you…
If you ’ ve read this far you must be serious about setting up your own 
business , but now it ’ s up to you . You ’ ve taken the journey through 
this guide from idea to launch , and now it ’ s time for you to put all the 
theory into practice – and perhaps fl ick back through these pages 
along the way to make sure you are on the right track . 
You should now be under no illusions of the task ahead , and 
have a much better idea of what starting up involves . You will also 
have read plenty of examples of those who ’ ve gone before , and how 
they ’ ve overcome obstacles and faced challenges along the way , 
fi nally achieving what they set out to do – running their own company 
on their own terms . 
Remember , no one has launched their own business without 
making mistakes along the way . This is all part of the process , and it ’ s 
how you deal with these situations and learn from them so you avoid 
them in the future that matters . As for the challenges , you are bound 
to face plenty , but approach them in the right way and they ’ ll make 
you even more determined to succeed . 
This should be an enjoyable , liberating and ultimately exhilarating experience . And hopefully you will be making the webpages 
of startups . co . uk in the not-too-distant future as one of our entrepreneurial success stories . 
Good luck ! 