Chapter 1
Introduction
Who would buy a complicated machine without an owner’s manual? And
who would push buttons and pull levers on a sophisticated new instrument until
something good happened? An owner’s manual saves time—and lots of money—
by describing how to operate a machine and get the best results. Your small
business is like a very complex machine. Accordingly, in the following pages we
discuss how to quickly and effectively push buttons and pull levers so that this
machine will make a lot of money and save a good deal of time.
You’ve heard the saying, “Success is 90 percent perspiration and 10 percent
inspiration.” These days we might say, “Success is 90 percent information and 10
percent perspiration.” This book will save lots of perspiration, and the time and
money gained may well take care of the inspiration part, too. Becoming an expert in running a small business takes a substantial amount of time and perspiration. The objective here is to cut through the chaff and deliver information to
small business owners in the most meaningful way, so that they may quickly
choose the right direction and get back to business.
The book may be read from cover to cover, or those facing a big decision can
rip it open and read any chapter or section.
This book doesn’t puff out to over 125,000 words by offering lame advice
such as “Liability insurance is complex, so ask your agent.” It goes far beyond
such platitudes to offer important information specifically for small business
owners. In many cases, the counsel given here will help the small business owner
make a decision without going any further; in other cases, entrepreneurs will be
able to select one or two options from among many choices. For example, there
are many forms of business ownership, and attorneys will gladly discuss the characteristics of each for about $150 per hour. Reading this book will permit the
small business owner to narrow the conversation. If this book saves only eight
minutes of discussion time with an attorney, it has already paid for itself.
The book indicates when material is available for review or can be downloaded from www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com and other sites, but it
does not tell readers to go to other books or simply to look on the Internet. The
essentials are right here.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 10
This is a serious book, because running your small business is serious. Still,
readers should try to have fun with it. Do the best you can; but whatever the
outcome, you’ll live longer and enjoy it more by looking at the lighter side of
even the most serious problems. This can be seen in many of the “Learn With
Joe” stories sprinkled throughout the book. Most of these offer a lesson or
reinforce the text, but they are related in an interesting and entertaining way.
Speaking of Joe—that’s me, the author. I am not a spectator but have learned
most of this through 20 years of opening, owning, and operating small businesses.
Along the way, I’ve worked for and against some of the biggest, and smallest,
companies around, including businesses specializing in everything from e-commerce to aircraft leasing to mining equipment. I also earned a B.S. in finance
and an M.B.A. in marketing from a great university. I’ve had some big successes
and some tragic failures, and I know what small business owners want. They
need to make quick and informed decisions, they don’t have time to read a textbook or a dumbed-down version of anything, and they don’t want to read material that can be picked up just as quickly on the Internet. In most situations,
entrepreneurs want to cut to the chase and move on. The Small Business Owner’s
Manual is designed with all this in mind.
The book assumes that:
 Readers already operate a small business or are planning to start
one. There is no need to waste time by asking readers to search
their souls and discern what they want.
 Small business is nice, but big business is better. I assume you’re
aiming for the big leagues and not content to stay small.
 Readers know how to use the Internet.
 I’m in business to make lots of money, and I assume the same for
you; so this book is about selling as much as possible, controlling
expenses, and minimizing both personal and business taxes.
Reviewing the chapter titles provides a quick summary of the book. Of course,
there are entire books written on many of the topics listed. It doesn’t make sense
for most small business owners to develop “paralysis of analysis” and read that
much detail, so here you get the condensed version.
I know you’re in a hurry. This is not a textbook, and there are no wasted
words that patronize the reader. If you’re looking at this book, chances are the
information is needed right now, so we get right to it on every subject.
At first I thought it might be hard to write a book that could be relevant to so
many different kinds of businesses. As it happened, it was not that difficult. The
common denominator is that all small business owners encounter the same issues,
need information on the same subject areas, and want to know quickly which
path to take. After that, it’s up to them. This book gets things moving in the right
direction and saves both time and money—and if there are any resources that
will solve just about any small business challenge, they are more time and money.
So let’s get going.
11
Chapter 2
Beginnings of Your Small Business
If You Need an Idea, You’re in Trouble!
This chapter is about developing a unique selling proposal and business plan
for managing your new or existing small business and deciding upon the best
form of business ownership. The book assumes that you, the small business owner
or aspiring entrepreneur, are already passionately excited about a particular business venture and have an extraordinary amount of energy. If your situation falls
short of this, then trouble lies ahead, and it’s best to get this resolved before
proceeding.
Starting or expanding a small business takes an immense amount of energy,
passion, and savvy—all centered on a specific idea that gets you excited. It’s
unlikely you’ll find this in a book. The first order of business is to think hard
about an idea that can bring the wealth and fulfillment that you desire. Then
we’ll see if this can be turned into a successful small business.
Your small business needs to completely understand its Unique Selling Proposition (USP). If the USP is unknown, there is no reason for anyone to buy your
products and services, and sales and marketing efforts cannot be focused.
Rosser Reeves (1910–1984), who remains an icon in the advertising industry,
laid out his ideas about USPs in the seminal 1961 book, The Reality of Advertising.
The USP is the package of features and benefits that distinguishes your products and services from those of the rest of the world: your raison d’etre. A welldefined USP sets your small business apart from the rest of the crowd. Customers
need to know that when they have a particular set of needs, your small business
is the best choice.
The USP is the nothing less than the epicenter of your small business. Once
this is agreed upon, every sales, marketing, and communications effort of your
company should flow from this. Employees should be informed and reinformed
of your USP, and they in turn should communicate this to customers, potential
customers, vendors, agents, contractors, and everyone else in the world. Of course,
if a USP is chosen that is not accurate (“We can repair any computer in the city
within 60 minutes of your call”), marketing and sales efforts are misdirected,
customers are unhappy, and your small business is likely to get even smaller.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 12
As a small business, it is especially important to focus on the special niche
where you have the assets and capabilities to succeed.
Most business owners have never developed a USP. They turn out their products and sell them because that’s what they do. This is dangerous. Such businesses are implicitly communicating that there is nothing unique or special about
their product or service—it’s just there in case you want it. If competition arises,
complacent companies will respond in an unfocused manner.
But some companies do get it right.
Domino’s Pizza, for example, uses this frequently cited USP:
Fresh hot pizza delivered to your door in 30 minutes or less,
guaranteed.
Notice that Domino’s does not mention the words cheap, good, nutritious,
quality cheeses, or secret recipes. Domino’s understands it cannot be all things to
all people all of the time, and it understands its USP.
The following are also good examples.
Notice that the lighting-fixture manufacturing company whose USP appears
below is offering the assurance of a deep inventory (no drop-ship model here) of
residential lighting fixtures for consumers (as opposed to commercial products). They are not focusing on price, and efforts are directed at distributors
and retailers.
Every season, we will provide the widest selection and inventory of
residential lighting fixtures, custom designed, satisfying current trends,
and available for shipment within 24 hours, to our customer base of
distributors and retailers.
This importer does not fool itself about providing quality products or selection. There is a large market for cheap, common tools that are used in homes
and apartments for light projects such as hanging pictures or fixing bicycles.
This company sells to anyone—hardware stores, retailers, and direct to consumers through its Website. Their proposition is simple.
We are the low cost leader in tools for the home.
And finally, in the ultracompetitive market for printer and copier toner products, one firm understands that its customers, mostly businesses, do not want to
shop around and take chances when a printer is off-line and workflow is slowed
due to a faulty toner cartridge.
Any cartridge, anywhere, within 24 hours, or your money back.
A USP is not the same as an advertising slogan. Company insiders understand this best, so first develop your USP and then let your marketing people
translate this into advertisements.
Beginnings of Your Small Business 13
Characteristics of Unique Selling Propositions
Great Unique Selling Propositions have the following characteristics:
Joe’s Message to Modem
Company: “You’ve Got Mail—
The 90s Are Over”
The CEO of a company that was a
huge success in the mid-1990s
was talking about his USP, which
needed some focus. This small
business designed and produced
modems at a time when everyone
needed one to go on-line for the first
time. But the firm never developed
a USP. It seemed like a waste of time.
Orders and money were pouring in.
The industry was constantly moving the product lines upwards, from
2,400 baud modems, to 9,600,
14,400, 28,800, and 56k, and customers traded up accordingly. This
firm rode on the crest of the wave,
and it seemed like it would never
end.
Then the world changed. Customers no longer needed modems,
because high-speed DSL and cable
connections became available. In
addition, PC manufacturers stopped
including modems as a standard
component, and modem chip manufacturers began sharing designs
with anyone that could print a circuit board, including low-cost producers in China.
Revenues dropped like a rock,
the production floor closed, layoffs
emptied half the building, and it was
clear that modems were not coming back. But the firm could not respond. They had no Unique Selling
Proposition, no means of looking at
their own strengths and resources,
and no ability to see their way into
the future.
 They contain one crisp,
clear, sentence.
 They are credible.
 They describe the unique
benefit associated with your
products or services, focusing
on your market niche.
 They state in measurable
terms how your small
business satisfies a customer’s
needs.
Developing a Winning USP
Are you ready to get started? Here is
a great way to develop a winning USP.
 Gather the right people
together in a comfortable
meeting room.
 Make sure that everyone has
a paper and pencil (not
computers).
 Explain the purpose of your
meeting.
 Brainstorm.
 List the unique benefits your
small business offers to
customers.
 Eliminate the entire list
except for the three most
important items.
 Write one creative, concise
statement that best
communicates each USP.
 Meet again the next day to
choose a single winner from
among the three, and finetune the wording.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 14
 Begin communicating the USP to employees, customers, and the
entire world right away.
 Completely integrate the USP into all marketing and sales efforts,
and include it in every communication emanating from your small
business.
A Business Plan for You Only
Let’s get this resolved right away: Business plans are tedious and take a lot of
time. Nevertheless, regardless of whether your small business is new or established, a business plan is needed. This book assumes that you are the captain of
your own ship, and the objectives are growth and prosperity (as opposed, for
example, to selling your small business or grooming it to attract venture capital).
Given these objectives, what’s next? The successful entrepreneur must have a
plan to get from here to there.
A small business, like a ship, needs a detailed map of its destination and
route. Ships don’t just head out to sea and churn around. They plan their travels
and navigate efficiently to their destination, taking aboard sufficient fuel and
provisions, mindful of the known perils along the route. A small business without a plan is like the captain of a ship without a destination. Things may be okay
for awhile, but it’s only a matter of time before something bad and unexpected
happens.
Many books devoted entirely to this subject describe in great detail how to
construct an M.B.A.-style business plan with the intent of attracting venture
capital or similar major-league financing—and many entrepreneurs have invested
huge amounts of time and money in researching and preparing business plans.
This may be the best move for your company. In that case, professional assistance from marketing and financial experts may be needed. You may want to
consult a book specifically devoted to this subject or obtain software designed
to assist in building a business plan. In contrast to a formal business plan designed for investors, however, this book describes how to build a business plan
just for you, the small business owner. It will serve as your navigation chart for
the next year or so, when it should be revised. If a more formidable plan is
needed at a later time, it can be built on top of the business plan described in this
chapter.
In building the plan, be sure to talk to as many people as possible to get their
ideas, viewpoints, and buy-in. In that way, you are both developing the plan and
selling it to important others at the same time.
This business plan is for you and, perhaps, partners or family, so it’s okay to
be informal and use lots of bullet points instead of writing out everything. If a
more formal plan is needed later, it will be easy to do, because all of the research
and big thinking is already finished. You will just need to shine and polish.
Beginnings of Your Small Business 15
Elements of a Business Plan
Business plans vary in structure, but most are organized as follows:
 Executive Summary
 Description of Your Company and the Market
 Competitive Analysis
 Marketing and Pricing Plan
 Management
 Operations and Development Plans
 Milestones and Financial Estimates
 Appendices
Executive Summary
The Executive Summary brings together the entire plan, so it is necessary to
write it last. This section briefly describes your business, its history, management, and method of ownership; but most important, it talks about the company’s
products and services and their place in the market. Also, it should state business objectives over the short and long term.
This may seem obvious at first, and you may be tempted to write something
such as:
Our company desires to dominate the local market and then expand
around the world, eventually eliminating competitors and then ruling
the market as our unassailable wealth allows us to continually release
better products.
But a more realistic objective is better:
Generate net income before taxes of $1 million per year, increasing at
10 percent per year thereafter for five years. This will allow officers
and owners of the company to earn income 50 percent greater than
could be obtained through employment with competitors, provide the
company with adequate working capital, and allow sufficient funds to
expand into the new markets described in this plan.
Description of Your Company and the Market
This section defines exactly what markets your small business intends to
serve, including market size, growth rates, and trends. Because this plan is for the
management of your small business, focus on the specific geographic or niche
market targeted, and concentrate only on statistics that will be meaningful to company insiders. You should also provide a little background information on the
company. After describing the general market, get specific: Exactly which market
segment is the focus of your small business, and what is the strategy for attaining
this? Moreover, what are the marketing, sales, fulfillment, and distribution plans?
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 16
Does your product or service have any unique features? Remember, it may be
acceptable to be terse and brief here, because the objective is for internal management (and not outsiders) to agree on the way to proceed.
Most importantly, indicate the products and services your small business
depends on now and which ones hold the most promise for the future.
You are already focusing.
Competitive Analysis
Now that you’ve established where your small business fits into the market,
it’s time to get very specific about the competition. You will use and refer to this
work for many years to come, and it should be updated at least yearly. Now is a
good time to do intensive research and make sure you really understand what’s
going on in the market and how your company fits in.
To begin, make a chart and list competitors as well as their products, services, and pricing. You may also note the size and market position of other firms
and how their strategies differ from yours. Consider further if your small business or the competition can release a new product or service that could significantly change the market.
If there are too many competitors and it doesn’t make sense to analyze each
of them, pick the ones “in your face” the most often and think especially hard
about what they are doing right. You might just figure out how to trump them,
because the answers often lie close to the most successful competitors. Speak to
mutual customers and vendors and see what you can learn.
Also, answer this question: Why are your competitors successful? More
specifically:
 How and where do they advertise?
 How do they sell their products(sales force, telemarketing force,
catalogs, Website)?
 What conventions and trade shows do they attend?
The Local Market for Philly Cheese Steak Sandwiches
Company Product Niche Pricing
Us Most authentic ingredients $8.95
Eagle Sub Shop Football lover’s hangout $8.95
Philly West Largest (16") $7.95
Liberty Belle’s Students; near university $6.95
Beginnings of Your Small Business 17
This is discussed further in Chapter 3, which deals with selling. Your business plan should map out a strategy that follows this model.
Information is easy to gather if you put in the effort. If an inside or outside
sales force is already in place, be sure to ask them about the latest trends and
what they hear when speaking to potential clients. It’s important to learn about
the deals they’ve lost as well as the ones they’ve landed. What would have made
the difference? Clients may also appreciate being asked.
Many industry trade magazines may have done much of the competitive analysis
already, so visit their Internet sites and review a few issues to see what’s available. Also, check with industry associations and, perhaps, the local chamber of
commerce. Of course, typing a few keywords into an Internet search engine will
likely lead to fast and rich returns on the competitive information you need—
and your competitors will not mind if you read their Websites and advertisements carefully to learn even more.
Finally, when important questions come into focus, consider conducting a
simple, anonymous poll in which potential customers are asked what is good and
bad about your company and the competition. Ask for suggestions! A professional market survey firm might be better, depending on the size of your business. This exercise will be very informative to the small business owner.
Marketing and Pricing Plan
Once the market is described, together with the position of the products and
services offered by your small business, you are ready to determine the best
marketing and pricing plans to obtain your objectives. Of course, this must all be
consistent. If, for example, the marketing objective is high-volume/low-cost/big
market share, then the advertising plan would likely stress price rather than quality
or premium features. If widespread awareness of your company name is an objective, a big advertising budget is in order.
As we discussed previously, the Unique Selling Proposition of your small
business is the foundation of the business plan. If this has not yet been developed, do it now.
Management
Management may, in fact, be the most important section of the business
plan. Many managers agree with the old saying, “I would rather work with good
management and a bad product than with a good product and bad management.”
List each major partner, employee, or agent for your company, and then do the
following:
 List the skill sets needed to accomplish the business plan.
 List each key employee and his or her skills (derived from
discussions and long-forgotten resumes).
 Identify areas where extra help is needed, and describe in the
business plan how to find the right people.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 18
Operations and Development Plans
In this section, list the assets used by your small business to generate key
products and services. Also, consider what is needed to create the products and
services needed to meet your objectives. Include current “cash cows” as well as
promising new revenue generators.
Next, determine how much extra capacity your small business will need. Will
you need to replace any equipment? Is there a plan to improve the efficiency of
operations (for example, redesigning work flow)?
Milestones and Financial Estimates
Now that you have done such a good job of presenting your objectives, market, competition, Unique Selling Proposition, and future plans, you need to get a
little more specific about when each objective must be reached and who is responsible. Breaking big objectives into smaller tactical goals and milestones is a
key part in building your bridge from here to there.
When this is accomplished, your small business is in a position to quantify all
this data and create projected financial statements—an Income Statement, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash Flow.
 Income Statement (also known as Profit and Loss, or “P and L”).
Calculates how much the business has earned (or lost) over a specific
period of time by adding revenues and subtracting expenses. The
presentation varies depending upon the type of business.
 Balance Sheet. Provides a “snapshot” of where the business stands
at a particular point in time, usually at year-end. In other words, at
this particular point in time, projections are made for all important
accounts, including cash, receivables, inventory, fixed assets, other
assets, and total assets. The balance sheet also tells how the assets
are financed—trade credit, payables, loans, or equity (your initial
investment in the business plus accumulated earnings after taxes).
 Cash Flow Statement. Tells how much cash flowed through your small
business over a specific period of time, normally one year. Cash flow
includes sales receipts, receivables actually collected, new investments
in the business, new loan proceeds, and increases in trade credit—
countered by cash paid out for bills and expenses, investments in new
equipment, loan paydowns, capital paid out to investors, and some
other items. Cash flow is also affected by depreciation and
amortization charges that hit your income statement, because these
are “expenses” not requiring cash outlays. These non-cash items are
added to net income to help figure cash flow.
For most small businesses, it makes sense to build monthly estimated financial
statements for the first year, and then yearly statements for the next four years.
Beginnings of Your Small Business 19
I’ve found that the best way to do this is by building a model with a spreadsheet program such as Microsoft Excel. If the spreadsheet is designed flexibly,
different assumptions can be entered, and the effects recalculated in nanoseconds though the financial statements, charts, and graphs. This is of critical importance, allowing management to see how the results may vary.
The structure of these statements will differ significantly depending upon
your business model and the level of complexity needed by management. For this
reason, the Small Business Owner’s Manual advises that an experienced financial
pro be considered for this part of the project. You can also go on-line and visit
www.TheSmall BusinessOwnersManual.com.
Joe’s Big Business Idea Is Not
I once rolled up my sleeves and began zealously working on a business plan that I was sure would
quickly put me in league with Bill
Gates. I invested a great deal of time
doing all of the right things—I saw
what the competitors were doing,
figured our place in the market,
and calculated projected revenues,
costs, and income. The final numbers didn’t look very good.
I worked the numbers again,
stretching the truth just a bit. Still,
the returns were not very good no
matter how much money I invested.
I did my research again and ran the
numbers again—and again.
Finally, I realized that if I worked
24 hours a day, seven days a week,
cut expenses to the bone, was fantastically successful in selling, and
everything worked out as planned
with no unexpected problems or delays, I would eke out a miserable
existence and barely be able to pay
my bills.
Thanks to the business plan, I
decided to trash that idea and move
on to more profitable endeavors.
Appendices
Here is where the business plan retains all of the backup information gathered to compile the plan. Interested
parties will need to refer to this when
additional detail is needed. Again, this
can be informal because the business
plan described here is intended for use
by company insiders.
Useful appendices might include financial projections under different “best
case” and “worst case” assumptions,
competitor catalogs and advertisements,
management resumes, income tax returns of your small business for previous years, articles from trade magazines,
and sales spreadsheets broken down by
product and salesperson.
Business Plans—A Final Note
More than anything, a well-developed
business plan will reveal if your small business is headed in the right direction and
if it can realistically attain your objectives. The word realistic is important here.
Many business plans slip into a fantasy
as overly optimistic assumptions are
made about pricing, revenues, and expenses. It is possible that the final plan
will end up much different than what you
expected. Just remember that the objective is a realistic plan to help you move
forward into the future.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 20
Legal Forms of Business Ownership
Most small businesses are structured in only five forms: sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, Limited Liability Company, or Subchapter S Corporation. The proper form is critical, determining whether owners may protect their
personal assets, have the ability to buy or sell portions of the business, minimize
taxes, and fully enjoy the benefits of being an entrepreneur. The decision as to
which form to choose is important when starting a business, but it should be
revisited every few years. The purpose here is to provide an overview of each
business form so that small business owners may evaluate their own situation
and better assess their strengths and weaknesses in dealing with vendors, competitors, and customers.
Sole Proprietorships
Description
Also known as proprietorships or DBAs (“Doing Business As…”), sole
proprietorships are the simplest business structure. In fact, if you make no effort at all to formalize your business (not a good idea), then you are a DBA.
As the name implies, a sole proprietorship can be owned by only one person;
if others are involved, another business structure must be chosen. Unlike corporations and L.L.C.’s, a sole proprietorship is not a separate legal entity. The
small business owner remains personally accountable for the liabilities, debts,
covenants, contractual commitments, and taxes of the business. This includes
claims made against employees acting within the course and scope of their employment. If, for example, one employee accuses another of sexual harassment
and wins, your sole proprietorship must pay the judgment and everyone’s attorney fees.
A sole proprietorship does not have “perpetual life.” When the small business owner dies, the business simply ends. The assets are normally distributed
under the terms of the deceased owner’s will; however, the probate process may
last 12 months or more, and this may cause difficulties if the heirs desire to
operate or sell the business or its assets.
If a small business needs new financing, the sole proprietorship structure
may not be right. Banks and related lending institutions, and investors, are
uncomfortable working with individuals; most of their agreements are structured as corp.-to-corp. and desire to eschew the many special laws protecting
consumers.
To formalize a DBA, you simply need to register the name at the county or
local level. In most places, this involves only a small fee.
In general, a “fictitious business name statement” must be registered and
published (printed as an announcement a few times in a local newspaper) if the
business name is different from the name of the proprietor, partnership or corporation doing business with that name. For example, Amy Apple needs to register
Beginnings of Your Small Business 21
the name “Mediocre Advertising.” However, she need not register the name
“Amy Apple Advertising.” Additionally, if the business name suggests additional
owners, you are also required to file for the use of the name (“Amy Apple &
Partners Advertising”).
Registering a name will also prevent others from using it, at least locally. In
most cases, registration is all that is needed. Nevertheless, this is not a “bulletproof” way to protect a business name, and others may later contest your right
to use it.
Another advantage of registering a business name is that the courts can then
be used to file legal proceedings, and the legal system will generally support
enforcement of a signed contract under a registered name. Finally, and perhaps
most important, banks allow small businesses to open accounts in the name of
the business only when proof of business name registration is provided.
Tax Treatment
The federal and state tax treatment of DBAs is also straightforward (which is
not the same as reasonable). At the federal level, the small business owner completes a Schedule C (Net Profit from Business), which summarizes the revenues
and expenses of the business, and then enters the proverbial bottom line onto
Form 1040 (Individual Income Tax Return), which everyone must file personally. If the small business made a profit, that is added to other income, and taxes
are due at the normal personal rates. Federal and possibly state and local payroll
taxes are also due. Note that income derived in this manner is taxed only once (in
contrast to corporations, where income is taxed twice). However, use of the sole
proprietorship form of ownership generally results in a reduced ability to minimize and defer taxes.
Partnership
Description
Unlike other business forms, a partnership must be owned by two or more
people. There are two kinds of partnerships: general partnerships and limited
partnerships, both of which are reviewed in the following sections. Every partnership must have at least one general partner who is personally responsible for
the firm’s debts and liabilities.
General Partnership
In this arrangement, two or more partners enter into an agreement to operate a business. Any general partner may act on behalf of the business unless the
partnership agreement says otherwise. It follows that—unless the partnership
agreement says otherwise—any of the general partners may, on behalf of the
partnership, borrow money, enter into agreements, hire and fire, and execute
any other act for the business. So if one general partner grabs the money, maxes
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 22
out the business line of credit, and then heads to Rio, the other general partners
must still pay all outstanding obligations of the partnership, even if it is bankrupt. If protection from personal liability is required, then another structure
should be considered.
Limited Partnership
A limited partnership is a general partnership with the addition of outside
investors who have limited powers. Not surprisingly, these are the “limited partners.” Unlike a general partnership, a limited partnership cannot be established
with a verbal agreement. There must be a written document. For all practical
purposes, this should be done by an experienced attorney. The limited partners
invest (and often loan) funds to the business, but they are “passive investors”
who have no further powers beyond the rights granted in the investment agreements. Limited partners cannot assist in management of the firm nor participate
in decision-making. However, they also do not need to worry about unlimited
liability. When big problems occur, limited partners are only liable to the extent
of their capital contributions to the business (original investment plus accumulated profits).
Limited partnerships are often seen in real-estate and many other investment opportunities, where there is a desire to invest or loan funds for the purpose of realizing income or tax advantages. Limited partners usually have little
interest in actually rolling up their sleeves to make the business work better; this
is the job of the general partners, who desire to operate without the counsel of
meddling outsiders. In fact, limited partners must be careful not to become involved in the business, or the law may consider that the hapless limited partner is
actually a general partner and is therefore responsible for all obligations of the
company.
The Partnership Agreement
Partnership agreements are not required. Oral agreements may actually be
binding for general partners, but not with limited partners. However, for all practical purposes, it is necessary to construct an agreement describing the obligations, responsibilities, income, and ownership for each general partner (and
perhaps limited partner). The partnership agreement often further describes
business operations, goals, and background information for the limited partner
investors. An attorney may draft these for $1,000 to $5,000, depending upon the
“special twists” needed in comparison with standard boiler-plate partnership
agreements. Although this start-up expense is pricier than what one would pay
for sole proprietorships or most corporations, cost should certainly not be a
significant factor in determining which business ownership form to use.
Unless the partnership agreement says otherwise, a partnership terminates
upon the death, disability, or withdrawal of any partner. When this is not desirable, partners may agree (in the partnership agreement) to permit the remaining
Beginnings of Your Small Business 23
partners to purchase the interest of the deceased partner. Other associated problems can be solved through the use of specially constructed partnership agreements and careful tax planning.
To register a new small business partnership, most states require filing a
certificate with the secretary of state. This also secures the name (although use
of the name may well be contested without a trademark; see more in Chapter 4),
indicates how meetings will be called and held, and describes legal and statutory
requirements.
Tax Treatment
Partnerships must file income tax returns at the federal level and—if your
state collects income taxes—at the state level as well. Form 1065 (U.S. Return of
Partnership Income) is basically an income statement and is filed with the IRS.
Actually, the partnership pays no taxes. Instead, the IRS is informed of the name
and taxpayer identification number of each partner, and partners are given the
same information on IRS Schedule K-1. Amounts from the K-1 are then transferred to Form 1040 (Individual Income Tax Return), the personal returns of
partners.
General partners’ income and losses are considered to be “at-risk.” This
means that their personal assets are available to creditors if problems occur.
Therefore, the IRS allows these monies to be classified as active income or loss.
This may be netted against other forms of active income such as normal employment wages and salaries from the partnership itself. This is useful in minimizing
taxes.
Conversely, limited partners’ income and losses are not at-risk, so the IRS
classifies this as passive income or loss. Passive amounts cannot be used to shelter (offset) active income but must be netted against other forms of passive
income and loss (for example, investment gains and losses, interest income, and
interest expense). Passive losses are often less useful in sidestepping federal and
state income taxes.
The Corporation (C-Corp.)
Description
The ultimate goal of many small businesses is to operate under the corporate
form of ownership. We will discuss the reasons for this, but first let’s understand
exactly what a corporation is.
Unlike most other forms of business ownership, a corporation is a separate
legal entity, chartered under state (not federal) laws, with a perpetual existence
independent of its owners, directors, and managers. Among other activities, a
corporation can incur debts, enter into agreements with vendors and customers,
employ people, and pay taxes. A corporation is owned by shareholders, controlled by directors, and operated by officers. Normally, small business owner(s)
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 24
hold all these positions. They are at the same time shareholders, directors, and
officers. Another important characteristic of corporations is that they are taxed
as separate entities. This allows corporate owners (the stockholders) a good deal
of flexibility in minimizing or deferring taxes (more on this later).
Included under the “corporate umbrella” form of business ownership are CCorps., S-Corps., and Personal Service Corporations. All have many similarities, but a few important differences will be discussed shortly.
With this in mind, here are the main characteristics—good and bad—of incorporating a small business:
Limited Liability
 Perhaps the most important reason for incorporating is to shield owners
from problems that may occur in the business. Specifically, if a small business
runs into troubled waters and cannot pay its debts or other liabilities, the assets
of the business may be lost, but personal assets are not in peril. Owners, directors, and officers stand to lose any investment (including retained earnings) they
may have in the small business. But homes, bank and investment accounts, retirement savings, automobiles, etc., not held in the name of the small business are
difficult to seize.
There are at least three possible exceptions to this rule:
1. Piercing the Corporate Veil
When troubles arise and your small business runs into legal trouble, plaintiffs
will routinely charge that
…if the small business is, in fact, a corporation, such a corporation
is in mere form only, having no existence, and that there existed a
unity of interest and ownership between the small business and its
owners (the Defendants), such that any individuality and separateness
between the small business and its owners (the Defendants) have
ceased, and the small business owners are the alter ego of the small
business.
The plaintiff here is charging that your corporation is a sham—which will
happen any time troubles arise—and you had better be ready to defend yourself
and win on this issue. This is where entrepreneurs need to prove that the
small business is indeed a separate entity, demonstrated by the bookkeeping
system, the shareholders and directors’ meeting minutes, and other evidence.
It is possible to lose on this issue if there is too much hanky-panky between
the small business owners and the business, or if poor records are kept. In
this case, plaintiffs can indeed seize the personal assets of the small business
owner.
2. Personal Guarantee
In many cases, lenders or vendors will request the personal guarantee of
small business owners before advancing funds or credit. Others understand
Beginnings of Your Small Business 25
that it is easy for small business owners to “sell” or otherwise transfer assets
out of the corporation and into the names of the owners. They also understand
that small business owners sometimes retain little value in the business, but
transfer assets out of the company. The intent of a personal guarantee is for
the lender to have access to personal assets, which transcends the benefits of
limited liability.
3. The Feds
Limited liability is not recognized by taxing authorities when a small business
has failed to pay income, payroll, or other taxes. Further, these obligations
survive bankruptcy, and both federal authorities and their state-government
colleagues will pursue “responsible employees” for amounts due plus interest
and penalties.
Tax Planning
Another important benefit of organizing the small business as a corporation
is reaping the rewards of tax planning, also known as tax minimization and/or tax
deferral. A corporation is an independent and separate tax-paying entity from its
owners, so significant tax-minimization and tax-deferral opportunities may be
available. This is discussed further in Chapter 7.
For now, let’s just say that incorporated small business owners, unlike sole
proprietorships or partnerships, may distribute income earned by the small business between their corporate and individual income tax returns, rather than report all business income in the year in which it is earned. Further, small business
owners may deduct some expenses unavailable to non-corporate business owners, such as certain types of insurance, vacation, and sick pay.
Charitable and Political Contributions
In addition, the IRS allows corporations to make tax-deductible charitable
contributions. Other forms of business ownership are not allowed this deduction. Small business owners, of course, may take income from the corporation
and donate it personally to a charity, but note that although payroll taxes must
be paid on any amounts transferred from business to owner, these amounts also
reduce corporate income taxes, since taxable income is reduced. Since the small
business is owned by the same person making the tax contribution, he or she can
devise the best overall plan. Other businesses do not have this flexibility and
cannot deduct such contributions as a business expense.
Year-End
An incorporated small business may keep an accounting system and report
taxes based upon dates that make sense to that business rather than follow the
traditional January 1 – December 31 tax year or the owner’s personal tax year.
For example, a ski resort may find that it makes sense to close the year when
winter is over, say on April 30. Things are not so busy then, and interested parties
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 26
will find the financial statements and tax returns more meaningful. If the year
closed in the middle of winter (December 31), purveyors of financial statements
would not know how the season really turned out.
Double Taxation
A drawback to the corporate form of ownership is the widely debated anomaly
known as double taxation. Here, the federal government (and most states) charge
corporations a portion of their earnings for income taxes. After the income taxes
are paid, the business may declare that some of the remaining after-tax earnings
are payable to owners as dividends. Unfortunately, dividends may not be deducted by the corporation as a business expense, so corporate taxable income is
higher by this amount and corporate taxes do not benefit from the dividend
declaration. However, after the dividends are paid, the government steps in again
and asks you (as an individual) to report those dividends as income on your
personal tax return and pay a portion as part of your income taxes.
For this reason, small businesses do not normally declare dividends. However, this declaration may be forced if the IRS accuses a firm of holding excess
retained earnings. In that case, the firm is forced to declare dividends, which
leads to paying double taxes.
In reality, however, double taxation can be avoided though careful tax planning. Normally, this is accomplished when the small business corporation pays
compensation (salaries, bonuses, commissions, fees) to owners before the tax
year ends. Thus, the expense is out the door before taxes are calculated. As
business expenses go up, taxable income goes down, so fewer taxes are due. On
the other hand, payroll taxes are due on the compensation received by the small
business owner. In summary, corporate income taxes decrease—and personal
income taxes and payroll taxes increase—due to the extra compensation. No
general rule governs this particular issue. Small business owners and their CPAs
must compute this annually as year-end approaches.
There are, however, limits to this device. The IRS requires that small business owners may not be paid compensation and avoid taxes beyond those amounts
normally paid in specific industries and locations.
Perpetual Existence
Unlike sole proprietorships, partnerships or even professional service corporations, C-Corps. live on until the owners decide to terminate or sell off the
business, or upon bankruptcy. Despite changes in management or even the death
of an owner, corporations enjoy an independent and continuing legal existence.
As a result, employees, creditors, vendors, clients and other parties may be impressed by this fact and feel more confident about working with your small business. Outside parties working with fast-growing businesses especially appreciate
this corporate characteristic.
Beginnings of Your Small Business 27
Formality
There’s no doubt about it: The corporate form of small business ownership
commands at least a little more respect from everyone. Incorporating is one of
the best ways to tell the world that your business is here, and here to stay. Your
company is now ready to enter into agreements and relationships that are normally afforded only to corporations (for example, a service contract with a big
company, or a bank loan). This benefit is intangible and impossible to quantify,
but it will help distinguish your company from competitors. In the end, many
small businesses incorporate for this reason, regardless of the tax consequences.
Access to Capital and Big Deals
The corporate form of business ownership is custom-designed to receive
capital through investment and the sale of a wide variety of equity devices; through
debt instruments such as unsecured lines of credit, collateralized loans, secured
promissory notes, debentures, and the many other options described in Chapter
11; or by landing a big corporate client. When the situation requires special features (such as allowing debt to be converted into shares of stock; conferring
voting rights on lenders; providing for preferred stock conversion to common
stock, stock options for management, indemnification of large clients, etc.), it is
easier to write these into corp.-to-corp. agreements than into any other form of
business ownership. In the real world, small businesses requiring access to bigtime capital need to be incorporated.
Paperwork and Fees
Some small business owners feel that the corporate form of business ownership requires more administration as well as attention to deadlines and details.
For example, California corporations are required each year to announce and
hold at least one shareholders’ meeting, (re)elect the officers and directors, and
convene meetings to discuss special situations, report decisions, or grant special
authority (for example, “Owen Owener is hereby granted the authority to open a
new business checking account at Corner Bank”). California corporations must
also file an annual Statement of Information with the secretary of state ($25 fee);
file corporate income tax returns; pay and file documentation for state and federal payroll taxes at least quarterly; pay a minimum annual state income tax of
$800, even if the year was a loss; and be aware of many other potential events
requiring time, work, and fees. A good accounting system is required to handle
these obligations.
The counterargument here is that this is not a great price to pay, considering
the benefits of corporate ownership. This is what is required if a small business
wants to play in the big leagues—and what kind of business these days cannot
afford Quickbooks or similar accounting software?
One disadvantage is the $1,000 to $3,000 fee normally charged by attorneys to
set up a new corporation properly. This fee can be avoided, however, if the situation is straightforward (incorporating a new small business with one owner)
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 28
and the owner has the time and patience to read and follow instructions carefully. Moreover, many of the forms dealing with corporate formalities can be
found easily on the Internet and at office supply stores, or may be borrowed
from colleagues.
Tax Treatment
In addition to the tax issues described previously, note that the IRS recognizes corporations as entities separate and independent from their owners. Accordingly, corporations must file separate federal and state income tax returns.
Federal returns are submitted on IRS Form 1120S (Corporation Income Tax
Return). Apart from normal income taxes attributable to dividends received,
there are no income tax consequences for corporate shareholders until shares
are sold and a gain or loss is recognized. In that case, the gain or loss is treated
the same as any other security transaction.
Subchapter S Corporation
Description
A Sub S election is available only to companies that have already incorporated. As described in this chapter, corporations offer small business owners
limited liability, which is attained when the small business incorporates. When
the owners also make the “Subchapter S election,” the company is taxed like a
partnership but retains the benefits of limited liability.
The Sub S structure allows investment by a maximum of 75 shareholders, but
investors may be offered only regular common stock, thus limiting options such
as preferred stock. Further, there are limits on the types of investors allowed to
participate. For example, non-resident aliens may not invest. Insurance companies, banks, Domestic International Sales Corporations (DISCs), and certain
other businesses are not allowed to seek Subchapter S status. The rules are complex, and a specialist may be needed to determine if they apply to your small
business.
All income and losses are reported, but not paid, by the Sub S Corporation.
The Sub S lists all owners and their share of the company. Each owner receives a
copy of this list from the company via a K-1 statement. Owners then report all of
the gains or losses on their Form 1040 (Individual Income Tax Return). Income
deferral is not relevant here.
Sub S businesses must comply with most of the same regulatory requirements as corporations, such as filing articles of incorporation, calling and holding meetings of both directors and shareholders, and keeping accurate minutes
of meetings. This results in higher set-up and operating costs than some other
forms of business ownership.
Beginnings of Your Small Business 29
Tax Treatment
Some small businesses choose the Sub S structure because it allows start-up
losses to be passed to investors and deducted against personal income. After
this, however, election of S Corporation status makes sense only if taxes at corporate rates are less than those at individual rates. Of course, this varies over
time and depends upon income and state taxes. Once a small business elects to
be treated as an S-Corp., switching back to a C-Corp. or other form of business
ownership may be complex or impossible. Do not assume that it will be simple,
easy, or cheap.
As with partnerships, Sub S Corporation income and losses are passed to
shareholders and included on their individual tax returns. Corporations elect to
be treated as Sub S companies by filing IRS Form 2553 (Election by a Small
Business). As always with the IRS, however, there are exceptions (for example,
if the LIFO inventory valuation method was used in the year prior to election as
an S-Corp.), so it is important to check the regulations.
Normally, then, income is reported (but taxes are not paid) by the S-Corp.
on IRS Form 1120S (Income Tax Return of an S Corporation). A Schedule K-1
is generated for each investor in proportion to gains (or losses). K-1’s are then
provided to each shareholder, and the information ends up on Form 1040, Schedule E, of the Individual Income Tax Return for each shareholder.
Limited Liability Company (L.L.C.)
Description
L.L.C.’s have become an especially popular form of business ownership in
recent years, although they first became available in 1977.
An L.L.C. blends some of the features of partnerships and corporations.
Perhaps most important, members of an L.L.C. enjoy limited liability, much like
shareholders of a C-Corp., but they are not subject to the double-taxation problem faced by corporations. Specifically, the L.L.C. does not pay federal or state
income taxes directly but passes gains and losses on to the L.L.C. owners in
proportion to their ownership. The gains or losses are then reported on the owners’ individual personal income tax returns, as in partnerships.
Beyond this, there is no limit to the number of shareholders L.L.C.’s may
engage. Having said this, L.L.C.’s do not actually issue shares, but instead deal
with owners in terms of their investment in the small business.
For example, Romeo and Juliet formed an L.L.C. in which Romeo contributed $200,000 and Juliet, $300,000. The R&J L.L.C. earns $100,000 before taxes.
Thus, Romeo earns 40 percent of this (40% × $100,000 = $40,000), and Juliet
earns $60,000.
Regarding management, L.L.C. owners may participate fully in managing the
small business’s operations. Unlike limited partners, they face no restrictions.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 30
To set up an L.L.C., the prospective owners establish the entity at the state
level by filing articles of organization, entering into an operating agreement that
defines their rights and obligations as members (much like a C-Corp. shareholders’ agreement). L.L.C.’s do not have a perpetual life, so small business owners
must check state laws to learn about limits to the lives of their L.L.C. small
businesses, and then plan accordingly.
Tax Treatment
The IRS considers “L.L.C.” a state designation and therefore requires taxpayers to file under one of the business ownership forms that it recognizes. The
small business L.L.C. will always file at the state level as an L.L.C., but in some
cases it will file at the federal level as one of the following:
 Sole Proprietorship. The single L.L.C. owner files a Schedule C with a Form
1040.
 Partnership. As in a general or limited partnership, the L.L.C. files Form
1065 (Return of Partnership Income); gives K-1’s to the investors in proportion
to their ownership; and requires that owners enter the K-1 information on
their individual income tax returns.
 Subchapter S Corp. The Sub S files Form 1120S (basically a corporate tax
return), and investors carry this amount onto their personal tax returns via
Schedule E, which carries onto individual tax returns. To file as a Sub S with
the IRS, the firm must register as a Sub S as described previously.
 Corporation. The corporation files Form 1120S and pays the taxes. Individual
investors pay taxes only upon receiving gains and dividends. Note that in this
case, the L.L.C. may not avoid the problem of double taxation.
Although the L.L.C. is increasingly popular among small businesses, the laws
are still new and untested. Accordingly, there is still great uncertainty as to how
well the “limited liability” benefit of an L.L.C. will really stand up when attacked
by creditors. We can only wait and see how this develops in different states and
over time.
Additional protection may be gained by organizing the ownership through an
offshore managing company to provide asset protection.
Due to the uncertainties involved in organizing and operating an L.L.C., an
experienced attorney or CPA should assist in the structuring if issues such as
asset protection and corporate tax treatment are complex.
Professional Corporations
Description
The Professional Corporation form of business ownership provides that certain services may be offered only through persons who are properly licensed to
Beginnings of Your Small Business 31
engage in particular professions. The Professional Corporation is recognized
only at the state level, not at the federal level. In California, for example, attorneys, chiropractors, clinical social workers, dentists, doctors, and members of
several other professions who wish to incorporate must do so as Professional
Corporations. Others, such as engineers and financial advisors, may incorporate
as a regular “C-Corp.” but have many other options as well.
An additional benefit of a Professional Corporation is that persons outside
of the chosen profession cannot end up as partners with equal rights. For example, Dr. Sarah Bellum and Dr. Ann Eurism are brain surgeons who are in
business together. Sarah dies. Dr. Ann is relieved that Sarah’s sit-at-home husband, who aspires to appear on “Celebrity Bowling” will not end up as an equal
partner. Of course, this also allows the public to be confident that Professional
Corporations are owned and managed only by professionals.
Tax Treatment
“Professional Corporation” is a state designation and has no meaning to the
IRS. Small businesses offering professional services must determine whether to
file at the federal level as a C-Corp. or as an S-Corp. (both described more fully
in this chapter). In either case, the small business files IRS Form 1120 (Corporation Income Tax Return).
Fans of tax minimization may prefer to be treated as a C-Corp., due to the
relatively low initial tax rates (currently 15 percent on the first $50,000 in taxable
income); however, Form 1120 asks taxpayers to “check [box] if a qualified personal service corporation under section 448(d)(2).” (In case you are not already
confused, this will do it: The IRS does not recognize Professional Corporations,
but it does recognize “qualified personal service corporations” that perform professional services where substantially all activities involve accounting, actuarial
science, architecture, consulting, engineering, health, law, and the performing
arts, and where at least 95 percent of the firm’s stock is owned by employees
performing services for the corporation, retired employees, the estates of deceased employees, or other persons acquiring stock in the corporation by reason
of the death of employees.)
When the IRS understands that your small business fits the definition of a
qualified personal service corporation, a different—and much higher—tax schedule must be used, in which shareholders pay a flat (not graduated) rate on all
income. In fact, the personal service corporation is a penalty situation as far as
the IRS is concerned: Corporate taxpayers are slapped on the wrist for even
thinking about the 15 percent initial C-Corp. tax rates. The taxable income of
qualified personal service corporations is currently subject to a flat tax rate of 35
percent instead of the graduated rates available to most corporations.
The IRS believes that professionals who earn the majority of their income from
the performance of services should not be allowed to enjoy the low, graduated tax
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 32
rates offered to C-Corps. Since the tax-minimization factor is not relevant to professionals, other factors will normally determine the best form of ownership (such
as limited liability).
Small business owners must check state laws to determine which professions
require registration as Professional Corporations.
Differing Laws and Many Exceptions
It should be clear from our discussion that a general explanation of the different forms of business ownership may be offered, but rules vary from state to
state, and there are many exceptions in each state. In simpler situations, this
overview may be sufficient for you to understand the alternatives and head in the
right direction. Under more complex conditions, however, small businesses may
find this overview useful but should seek legal help before proceeding.
Incorporating in Another State
These days it is popular to incorporate a small business in one state and
conduct operations in another. As state income tax rates have become more
burdensome, some small business owners have reacted by incorporating in states
with minimal or no corporate income taxes, such as Delaware and Nevada. This
is not a tenable solution.
The essence of the issue is that states want to tax for business activity that
occurs within their boundaries. If you drive on their roads, rely on their police,
and use their courts, then your small business must pay for this, in part through
corporate income taxes.
Small businesses that register in one state and use a sham address for their
corporate headquarters may get away with this for a while—maybe even for a
few years. But one day, the state really hosting the firm will understand the true
situation and the small business will likely need to pay all back taxes, penalties,
and interest.
Further, your small business will probably be charged with violating the law.
Businesses are normally required to register and qualify to do business in each
state in which significant business volume occurs. Registering and qualifying expenses are usually not significantly different from the fees a domestic corporation would pay to register properly, so there is little to be saved in this sense.
When the state finds out that all of this has been going on, there is a chance
that your corporate status will be suspended. In this situation, you will likely
receive a letter demanding that your company not
legally transact business, defend or initiate an action in court, protest
assessments…[or] use the entity name.
Beginnings of Your Small Business 33
The result of suspension is that the corporation cannot utilize that state’s
courts to prosecute any claims or initiate other types of actions. Any court proceedings then in process or contemplated where the small business is the plaintiff (for example, trying to collect from a deadbeat customer) would not be allowed.
Setting things right again is often very expensive, given the need to pay all back
fees, fines, penalties, and interest.
Incorporating out of state does not allow small businesses to avoid payment
of state income taxes. In fact, such behavior will lead to big-time trouble when
the real situation becomes known.
How to Decide on the Best Form of Ownership
This chapter has provided a good deal of information on the best form of
ownership for your small business. You have many options, and each has many
implications, including taxes, liability, perpetuity, formality, ease of doing business, filing and regulatory demands, access to capital, year-end, image, and
more.
Making a decision is important, and it is not one that is changed frequently.
Hopefully, your situation is simple and the various alternatives discussed in this
chapter will be enough to enable the right choice. Some small business owners
will even be able to set up the business themselves. In many cases, however, it
will be necessary to discuss this with an attorney or accountant. For some small
businesses, the ability to minimize taxes will be paramount; for others, additional factors will be more important, such as limited liability.
More help and information on this subject is available at www.TheSmall
BusinessOwnersManual.com.
Entrepreneurs should revisit this decision every few years, and especially
after major events occur (departure of a partner, hiring extra employees), to
reassess whether the current form of ownership remains the best for your small
business.
Other Start-up Matters
Sales Tax Permit
In addition to other business start-up and registration activities, all small
businesses should check with their CPA or call a local sales and use tax office to
see if a seller’s permit is needed. More than one permit may be needed depending upon the products sold and the location of the business. With this permit,
your company is on the state’s radar screen and will be able to submit and pay
sales taxes. Otherwise, the business may not legally sell products.
See Chapter 7 for a complete discussion on sales and use taxes.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 34
Employer Identification Number (EIN)
The EIN is a special number issued by the IRS upon the request of new small
businesses and is used in virtually all communications with the federal government. A similar identification number is probably needed at the state level as
well. If the business form of ownership is a sole proprietorship, then an EIN is
not needed, because your Social Security number is used instead.
The easiest and fastest way to get an EIN is to call the IRS at 1-800-829-4933.
The number is issued immediately. Otherwise, fill out form SS-R (Application
for Employee Identification Number) at www.irs.gov. The IRS will send back
the EIN in about a month.
Every small business (except sole proprietorships) should get an EIN because it is needed to submit payroll tax returns and pay the associated taxes,
even if you are the only employee of your small business.
See Chapter 7 for more information on payroll taxes.
35
Chapter 3
Sales and Selling:
The Oxygen of Business
The reason that sales and marketing are discussed at the beginning of this
book is very simple: Without sales, you won’t need any other advice about running a small business. And marketing (the next chapter) is the artillery that helps
sales advance more easily.
Many businesspeople do not consider sales to be a real profession—but
just ask any seasoned business executive who he or she values the most, and
the answer will be the people that bring home the sales. Hunters (people who
bring in the deals and make sales happen) and skinners (administrators and
those who fulfill sales agreements) are both important in an organization, but
sales trumps all.
Some who are starting a small business may believe that a sales force is not
needed. After all, family, friends, and business colleagues are impressed by your
venture and are promising big deals and sales. It’s not a good idea to depend
upon this. In today’s ultracompetitive environment, serious business volume will
only come through serious sales efforts generated in a professional manner.
We begin this chapter with a review of fundamental sales concepts and how
they apply to your small business. The discussion includes both sales qualifying
and the different stages in the sales process. Every small business should understand how this cycle works for them so that sales resources can be applied to the
prospects most likely to buy.
The chapter also discusses various ways in which sales forces are structured
and managed, and the pros and cons of each. Here, the small business owner may
learn about and consider selling through a direct sales force, an inside sales group,
telemarketing efforts, agents, business partners, dealers and distributors, retail
(direct), and on-line. The issue of channel conflict is also reviewed, and some
advice is provided on selling to government as well as internationally.
There is nothing that can buoy the success of a small business more than an
effective sales force, so we provide some tips on how to hire and fire and weed and
seed until the best possible group is in place. Managing salespeople is different
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 36
than managing other employees. They require more maintenance, so we talk
about what to expect and how to deal with conflicts over commissions, recognition, and assigning accounts.
Selling your product or service is the most important part of any business; if
you find the magic-bullet solution to sales, just about everything else will be easy.
Most experienced pros would much rather manage an effective sales force selling a lousy product or service than the reverse. If you still don’t believe this, look
around at all the mediocre products on the shelves today that were brought to
dominance by the right marketing and sales strategies. (I could name more than
a few, but then I’d get into trouble!)
Further, there is a common misconception that because entrepreneurs know
their products or services intimately, they can sell them easily. Small business
owners must face up to the fact that they often are not the best people to generate revenues for the company. This chapter discusses ways of dealing with these
issues to get the most productive sales force possible given limited resources.
On the other hand, everyone is a salesperson at least some of the time. You
should decide on your role in the sales process and get good at it. Although sales
is a skill that is natural to some, it can be learned by others. Most small business
owners will not want to be involved in the front end of every deal, but maybe they
will participate in the later stages of the sales cycle. Decide where you come in
and get good at it. Learn from others the skills you will need, such as how to
make a good presentation or how to go for the close. Be honest with yourself if
help is needed, and recognize that sales is a complex profession that may be
difficult to master right away.
Throughout this chapter, think about how your products or services fit into
the market, and when and where it makes sense to buy. As discussed in Chapter
2, this critical determination is your Unique Selling Proposition, or USP. For a
small business, a well developed USP is all the more critical because most can
offer only a limited range of items. Buyers are smart and will eventually understand where their best value lies, so sales efforts must target market niches where
your company is mostly likely to win. Otherwise, large amounts of time and
effort will be invested in deals where prospective customers end up saying, “Thanks
for the free education, but now that I have studied the market, I can see that
your product is good but another is my best value.”
Sales Qualifying
Professional salespeople are extremely careful about how they use their time.
There are only a few hours during the day to speak with potential new customers, and out of this must flow the sales to support an entire business. It is important to know in advance the characteristics of likely customers and focus on
these opportunities. This is called sales qualifying.
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 37
Sales pros normally do this by constantly prospecting for new business and
immediately qualifying for:
 Need. Is the customer buying what I am selling? Ask hard questions
to learn what the customer really needs. If he or she requires widgets
with blue buttons and yours have green buttons, then quickly move
on, no matter how nice they are.
 Competition. To further understand need, ask about the competition.
Who is in the deal, how far along has the process gone, does the
prospect prefer a particular proposal, and why?
 Decision-Maker. Are you dealing with someone who can sign an agreement, or a water carrier who only takes information to the boss?
Worse yet, has the customer already made a decision but is dancing
around with you because the boss upstairs requires at least two bids?
(A frequent problem.)
 Decision Process. How does the customer make buying decisions?
Who is involved, what are the criteria, and should you make additional proposals and presentations to others within this organization?
 Budget. Learn what the customer expects to spend, and then make
sure he or she understands where your small business fits into the
market. If you sense that the customer cannot understand the value
of your product or service, then quickly move on.
 Time Frame. Is the customer ready to buy soon, or just shopping
around? It’s usually a bad bet for a small business to romance buyers
and spend time educating them on the industry and market. Time is
better spent directing efforts toward clients who are ready to buy
now.
 Other Criteria. Maybe the customer will buy only from local firms,
or big companies, or firms that sell widgets and 24/7 widget maintenance plans. Ask a lot of questions to decide quickly if you are wasting time.
In the end, most buyers are smart people and will make rational decisions.
Sales professionals who are on top of the qualifying game make the best use of
their time by weeding out time-wasting efforts and focusing on real prospects
who can actually buy the products and services of your small business.
Stages in the Sales Cycle
Every product or service has a sales cycle, beginning with some form of
introduction and ending with money in the bank. To properly allocate time and
to structure sales efforts, the sales cycle for each small business must be thoroughly understood.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 38
For some products, such as electronic devices sold on the Internet, the process is rather simple. The consumer “clicks around” with the following thoughts
in mind:
 Research. I want a Home Theatre System, but I don’t know the
products; I want information.
 Shopping. I know the features I’d like in my Home Theatre system,
and now I want to shop around to see who’s got the best deal and
the best reputation.
 Buy. I know just what I want. I’m going back to buy and I hope
everything goes smoothly as I choose the products and enter my
credit card.
In this sales cycle, sellers do not want to speak directly with buyers because
margins are thin and this would not be feasible. Internet-savvy Web-retailers
direct potential customers to different pages of the e-store, depending upon the
stage of the sales cycle, as indicated by keywords entered during the shopping
process. For example, if a buyer uses a search engine to look for “Home Theatre
System,” a link is returned directing the shopper to a list of the company’s products and its place in the market. But if “Bose GS Series II 3·2·1 Home Theater
Progressive-Scan DVD/CD/MP3 Player” is entered, the shopper is sent right
into the buy-page for this specific product.
For certain B2B (business-to-business) IT services, however, the sales cycle is
dramatically different and much time is spent directly with the prospective customer. I once worked with a firm that expected a sales cycle something like this:
 Prospecting (many calls to find the right contacts within the IT
groups of potential customers).
 Send letter and information.
 Call for appointment.
 First meeting. Objective: Qualify (as described above) and identify
others involved in the decision-making process.
 Meet with internal technical staff to discuss customer needs.
 Schedule a technical call to resolve issues and build the
relationship. Objective: Gather enough information to prepare a
proposal.
 Meet with marketing and technical staffs and prepare proposal,
presentation, and pricing.
 Sales presentation to customer (perhaps several presentations to
different groups).
 Meet with customer to learn any objections.
 Request internal legal staff to prepare documents.
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 39
 Meet with customer to review documents.
 Arrange for counsel from both companies to resolve legal issues.
 Sign agreements to close the sale.
Not surprisingly, a normal sales cycle here was six to 12 months. And even
after the sale, the company had to deliver and install equipment, provide services, get customer acceptance, send an invoice, and wait for payment. This could
easily require an additional six months. Fortunately, this firm understood the
process and was patient with its sales force.
Small businesses must outline a reasonable sales cycle to estimate the length
of time—and the overhead required—to close sales and generate revenues. Small
business owners must decide at which stages their involvement is the most productive and stay away from the rest. Be careful, because many firms are overly
optimistic when planning sales and revenues.
Structuring Your Sales Force and Channels
With all of this in mind, it’s time to figure out the best way to sell your
products and services. Consider your ability to reach customers effectively and
think about expenses, loyalty, and other issues. Many arrangements are possible,
but most small businesses have limited resources and must choose only one or
two sales avenues. Perhaps the best hint here will be to take a look at your most
successful competitors. Chances are, the solution for your small business will be
similar to that adopted by the competition. The most popular arrangements are
described in the following section.
Direct Sales Force
Hiring and training an outside sales force is expensive and time-consuming.
In addition, managing salespeople is always a little more difficult than managing
other employees. They just require more maintenance. A direct sales force is
targeted to selling your products and services only. Hopefully, they will not switch
to a competitive product when the deal starts slipping away, which can be the
case with agents, field reps, business partners, dealers, and distributors. Be prepared to design a commission system that is fair, competitive, clear, and legal in
all respects (for example, paying employees “commissions only” is not legal in
some states if the amount earned is less than the minimum wage).
A direct sales force is most needed in situations where long sales cycles are the
norm, as with rather sophisticated products and services. Of course, the best candidates for this are college-educated, serious, and career-oriented individuals. Be
prepared to pay a significant salary, because it never helps if a sales rep resigns
when big deals are in the pipeline. On the other hand, good management is required because some direct sales types may become a bit too comfortable with the
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 40
salary and lose their thirst for commissions. I have said to many salespeople:
“Your commissions alone must be at least $50,000 per year; if they are less, that
means you are losing money for the company.”
Finally, great salespeople are oriented toward the near-term. If your products or services are not yet deliverable or competitive, don’t expect customers or
salespeople to wait around.
Telemarketing
A telemarketing staff makes outbound sales calls to potential business (not
consumer) customers. Telemarketers are a special breed, and I have a lot of
respect for them. This is a profession within a profession; not many people can
take the rejections resulting from 50 to 100 calls per day. Moreover, telemarketers
often work for $8 to $20 per hour, which is relatively low. But, as always, you get
what you pay for, so don’t expect too much from those at the low end of this
range. Plan on paying a lot more in commissions to those who produce.
Telemarketing efforts must be directed toward products and services with a
very short sales cycle. Many expect to close sales on the very first call to a
potential customer and expect commissions by the end of the week. If your
small business deals with longer sales cycles, consider paying a flat commission
to a telemarketer for setting up an appointment, and then assign the deal to
someone else. The telemarketer gets paid regardless of what happens afterward, since she has done her job and cannot control the situation once the prospect is reassigned.
Recruiting telemarketing people is difficult. My experience is that about 50
percent never show up for the first interview. Others will complete a training
program and then quit without notice. Many have alternate lifestyles, and their
real life lies outside your small business. As an example, I once worked with a
middle-aged man who arrived at my small business and called like a demon, and
then went home to write movie scripts. He was polite, but he clearly told me that
he had no interest in the products we sold. He was only in this for the money but
would work hard on my clock. The situation worked because I respected his
position.
For this reason, it is unlikely that your small business will get very far with
just one telemarketer. There is too much turnover. Most successful telemarketing
operations continually bring in groups of new recruits, train them, get them on
the phones, and expect that half will quit within 45 days.
This situation can be mitigated with a pleasant, professional, and modern
work environment (no smoke-filled boiler rooms); opportunities to be promoted
to other positions; lots of perks and unannounced rewards (“We’re giving a $100
bill at the end of the day to whomever sets the most appointments”); a motivated, upbeat, and energetic telemarketing manager; fringe benefits such as medical insurance; and respect from management. Of course, a hot call list resulting
in lots of deals and commissions raises the morale for everyone.
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 41
Inside Sales
In contrast to a telemarketing staff, an inside sales group handles incoming
telephone calls to book sales from both business and consumer-type customers.
In smaller firms, they also handle customer service. Of course, incoming calls
need to be generated through other marketing efforts, or your small business
will be paying a lot of money to salespeople who only sit and wait for the phone
to ring. Build into your budget sufficient advertising funds (perhaps through the
marketing alternatives discussed in Chapter 4 or through Internet marketing, as
discussed in Chapter 5).
Inside sales people are usually paid a higher hourly rate than telemarketers
but make less overall because commissions are lower. There is also less turnover and less maintenance. Most inside sales people want to learn about a
particular industry and are more career-oriented than telemarketers. Therefore, it pays to invest more in training. Unlike telemarketers, inside sales people
are often encouraged to make their calls as short as possible to book deals and
free up lines for the next incoming customer. Also, they must be articulate as
well as cool under pressure and in the face of unpleasant customers. Many
inside sales people these days are college-educated and at the entry-level stage
of their careers—but don’t discount moms, seniors, and others who are reentering the workforce.
Unlike telemarketers, inside sales people do not need to be hired in packs
but can be recruited as needed, because longevity is preferred. Once again, however, morale, productivity, and longevity are enhanced by a pleasant, professional, and modern work environment.
Finally, when things get slow, don’t expect to turn your inside sales force into
telemarketers. The personality types are not the same, and turnover will soon
result.
Agents and Field Reps
Agents and field representatives (referred to as agent/reps) are not employees
of your company but enter into a relationship where they receive the right to sell
the products and services of your small business in exchange for commissions.
This is desirable in at least two situations:
1. Your small business cannot yet afford a direct sales force.
2. Your products and services require sophisticated representation in
distant geographical areas.
Locating agent/reps may be a bit difficult. This process may be approached
through Internet channels (such as Monster.com, CareerPath.com, DICE.com,
and HotJobs.com), through contacts developed at trade shows and industry
events, and through trade publications. Afterward, the process should be similar
to that for recruiting any other employee (discussed in Chapter 6).
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 42
The agent/rep agreement normally requires no financial commitment on the
part of your small business, but this can be a double-edged sword. On the one
hand, these representatives must produce business to earn compensation. But
on the other hand, loyalty can be an issue because agent/reps flow in the direction of the easiest money. If a potential customer tilts toward a competitive
product after your small business has invested lots of time and resources into a
deal, there is often nothing to stop the agent/rep from switching over to the
competition.
Another problem is that some agent/reps load themselves up with far more
products than they can ever sell. Their thinking may be: “I understand and sell
security software for a living, but just in case an important customer requests a
relational database product, I will have something to offer.” For that reason,
many small businesses require that agent/reps complete a training course on the
product and then enter into an agreement that can be terminated if sufficient
business is not generated. Some even demand fees for the training course to
make sure the agent/rep is serious.
Note also that your small business has little control over non-employees. It is
possible that agent/reps may make unrealistic promises and commitments and
expect the management of your small business to make good on them. Loosecannon types may also use your company name and logo in ways that bring harm
to your small business. That is why many agreements allowing non-employee
sales representation require that the agent/rep not represent himself as an employee of your small business. Nor may she make commitments to anyone regarding your company. These must all come from you. Many also require that
the agent/rep indemnify the small business against associated problems.
Another issue concerns the legal status of the agreement. Small businesses
must take care that the agreement emphatically states that the agent/rep is not
an employee. Most agreements are laced with several special paragraphs on this
subject, such as the following:
Since Agent/Rep is an independent agent to Small Business, Inc.,
and not an employee of Small Business, Inc., Agent/Rep and not
Small Business, Inc., will be responsible for paying and withholding
all federal, state, local, and FICA withholding and income taxes, including Worker’s Compensation insurance that shall become due from
Agent/Rep based on payments made by Small Business, Inc., to
Agent/Rep under this agreement. Agent/Rep further agrees to provide Small Business, Inc., with proof of insurance if requested by
Small Business, Inc., and to cooperate with defending Small Business, Inc., and to indemnify Small Business, Inc., from any claim or
assessment made against Small Business, Inc.. by any federal, state,
or local taxing authority or Worker’s Compensation agency based
on payments made by Small Business, Inc., to Agent/Rep under
this agreement. Total compensation paid shall be reported via IRS
Form 1099.
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 43
The Big Business Partner Deal
That Wasn’t
A friend of mine had a software company, “TDX
Optimizer,” that specialized in a niche market.
He had a great product, a clear-cut Unique
Selling Proposition, and the deals were coming in from corporate data centers all over. His
only competition was from a multinational computer products and services company, we’ll
call MultiNationalMegabyte, or MNM, which offered an inferior product.
At an MNM-sponsored trade show, TDX’s
president excitedly explained to me how he
was on the verge of closing a deal through
which MNM’s sales reps from all over the
world would now carry the TDX product. It
seemed to make sense because customers
were buying it anyway, and everyone felt it was
a solid offering.
My friend thought he had MNM by the tail,
and explained that he would sign the big deal
tomorrow. There was just one catch: TDX could
not sell to any current MNM customers (about
50 percent of the TDX market) for two years.
I was at the same trade show a year later
and saw the president again. I couldn’t wait
to ask about the big deal. It didn’t work out as
he had expected. In fact, almost nothing was
sold. As it turned out, MNM’s reps already sold
over 1,000 different products and services,
and TDX was not properly promoted to the
hundreds of MNM reps all over the world. It
just got lost in the clutter. Besides, with a typical sales price of $50,000 to $100,000, TDX
licenses would be an afterthought in the big
deals where MNM’s systems sold for upwards
of $10 million.
But don’t worry about the big corporate
users that needed an optimizer product—MNM
sold plenty of licenses for their own secondrate product to these customers.
I didn’t ask my friend but wondered: Was
it really an accident that the popular TDX product was put on ice, while MNM’s inferior
optimizer now ruled the market?
The employee or contractor issue is important these
days, and is further discussed
in Chapter 6.
On a more positive note,
agent/reps may have relationships with contacts that your
small business will not get to
for years. And if you’ve got a
good product or service, then
well-connected, knowledgeable, and respected agent/reps
may quickly generate deals
that would otherwise be unreachable through other sales
means.
Business Partners
The business partner relationship is similar to the agent/
reps alternative, but the agreement is business-to-business.
In this section, we are mostly
interested in the arrangement
whereby a larger firms sells the
products and services of your
small business.
In this case, the small business usually has less control,
in the hopes that the larger
player will add its products and
services to the Bigger Business
catalog of offerings, and direct
its much larger sales force to
sell in obscene quantities.
This alternative should be
played out only when simultaneously attempting to sell
through other means. As always, success brings success,
and if a potential business partner sees that your small business is already doing just fine,
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 44
it will make the deal all the better. On the other hand, if your product is still in
development or not getting industry visibility, don’t expect much excitement from
potential business partners.
A business partner relationship normally involves the upper management of
both parties, and other parts of the sales organizations are typically involved
only after the deal closes. The sales cycle may be very long, but the upside can
sometimes bring a small business into the big leagues.
Distributors and Dealers
Depending upon the product, dealers and distributors may be an integral
part of your sales model. Distributors and dealers typically carry a wide range of
products, including the competition, and have market reach not available to small
businesses. Customers depend upon this extension of the sales channel to provide a robust range of products quickly and at low prices. The best way to determine if this alternative should be included in your sales efforts is to look at
successful competitors. How do they sell? The answer for you is probably about
the same.
The following can be expected when selling through distributors and dealers:
 Loyalty. Don’t be offended, but most distributors and dealers will be happy
to add your product to their catalogs: If it sells, it sells; and if it doesn’t, it
doesn’t. Don’t expect loyalty or hard selling efforts from distributors and
dealers.
 Product Knowledge. Distributors normally utilize an inside sales force to
sell their offerings; dealers may actually have face-to-face contact with customers. In both cases, sales efforts flow to the easiest money. If the distributors and dealers are familiar with competitive products, adding your offerings
to their knowledge base may be relatively easy. Expect to do a lot of promotion to gain visibility, or competitive products may be offered instead of yours.
 Promotion. If your small business expects serious revenues through distributors, expect to spend heavily to push and pull products through these channels, as described below.
 Pulling. Pulling is when your small business advertises and otherwise promotes
products directly to consumers, who then buy through dealers and distributors. Always be on the lookout for opportunities to pull products through these
channels, because trading partners expect vendors to make their phones ring.
 Pushing. In some cases, small businesses should consider hiring distributor
reps who push products through D and D channels by visiting new and existing contacts frequently to announce new products and changes, for training,
to make sure catalogs and databases are current, to resolve administrative
issues, to promote special sales incentive programs, or just to take everyone
to lunch. An experienced distributor rep with lots of contacts may quickly
generate some big revenues.
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 45
 Volume Discounts. This is easy. Set up a schedule where D and D sellers get
discounts as volume increases, such as “If shipments exceed $250,000, Seller
shall receive a 1 percent discount on future purchases; if shipments exceed
$500,000, then 2 percent...” The program must be promoted, or some sellers
will receive discounts without knowing it.
 Co-op Marketing Programs. Many small businesses offer special programs
to dealers and distributors where extra discounts are given to sellers who
send approved mailings to customers or place approved print ads. For example, one co-op deal may allow that
If dealers print their name in the designated area of this four-color
brochure and send it to recent customers, our small business will
pay up to $2,000 by offering an extra 4 percent discount on all new
products purchased for the next 30 days.
When this program is offered, be sure to have lots of marketing materials
printed and ready to ship the same day, especially the four-color brochure.
Retail
Many small businesses begin as retail operations, where products are sold
out of a storefront location. The pros and cons of such operations are reviewed
here as a checklist for new businesses and for small businesses who currently sell
through other channels and are contemplating retail:
 Expensive Overhead. Retail stores are relatively expensive, because small
business owners must spend heavily on higher rent, design, furniture and
fixtures, computerized point-of-sale systems, back-office computer systems,
and a great location. It’s often not feasible to keep significant inventory at
retail outlets, so extra warehouse space may also be leased. Further, a solid,
well-thought-out business plan must be in place because most leases require
a three- to five-year commitment.
 Better Prices. Your products should fetch the highest possible revenues in a
retail location. If other channels are currently in use—such as dealers, distributors, agents, or the Internet—check out the local retail competition,
note their prices, and then set yours to about the same for walk-in customers. Expect some static when customers realize that the same product is
available from your small business at a better price through other channels.
 Recruiting and Compensation. Cashiers in retail locations often double as
sales representatives if they have a good knowledge of your products and
perhaps those of the competition. It’s relatively inexpensive and easy to hire
retail salespeople, and commissions should be considered if they can affect
customer purchases. Check-out clerks, for example, don’t receive commissions because there is no customer contact during the buying process. However, commissions might be considered for representatives of a light-materials
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 46
handling operation, because they often advise retail customers on the best
configuration of parts for a particular need. As always, make sure that the
compensation plan is congruent with the goals and Unique Selling Proposition of the company.
 Advertising. Depending upon your location and industry, heavy advertising
may be needed. See how your competition and nearby retail locations have
resolved these issues and consider doing something similar.
 Speaking of location, this and location and also location are critical in the
success of small businesses engaged in retail sales. Sales will be a function of
many factors, including population and demographics, local foot and car traffic,
visibility, signage rights, competition, parking, location history, image, zoning and local restrictions, competition, interior design, and expansion alternatives. Choosing a location is discussed further in Chapter 10.
The Internet
There is no avoiding the Internet these days, so every small business should
have a Website to augment sales efforts, and many should also consider ecatalogs, e-commerce, and keyword ads, as described in the following section:
Website. Every small business must have its own Website. A Website validates your business and provides information critical to new customers, such as
your Unique Selling Proposition (Chapter 2), business specialty, location, and
hours. It also helps many other new customers find out that your small business
simply exists! Setting up a Website is easy and inexpensive (as detailed in Chapter 5). Once the site is up, it becomes the foundation of related initiatives such as
on-line catalogs, e-stores, and e-mail accounts. Your domain name should then
be added to all marketing materials, such as business cards, brochures, and even
the side of delivery trucks. The Website is heavily used by inside and outside
sales reps when customers ask common questions or need information.
E-Catalog. A catalog in this sense simply means many Web pages describing
the products and services offered by your small business; but customers cannot
buy from a catalog—they must buy from an e-store (described in the following
section. The e-catalog option is especially relevant to small businesses selling
complex, expensive, or regulated products, where on-line sales are not feasible
but where customers want detailed product information. A distributor of pharmaceutical products, for example, cannot ship prescription drugs to unknown
buyers. The same reasoning applies to products such as guns, industrial chemicals, capital equipment, and many others. In each case, it is not realistic to sell
the product on-line, but the sales force will greatly appreciate the ease and speed
of guiding customers to Web pages where detailed product information and details are immediately available and can be reviewed on the telephone or in person.
Perhaps the most important reason for a good e-catalog is that customers can no
longer put off the sale by saying “Mail me some brochures, call me in two weeks,
and we’ll discuss it some more.”
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 47
E-Commerce. E-commerce, through an e-store, is where products are actually sold on-line with little or no help from your sales force, and customers pay
through credit/debit cards, PayPal, or similar electronic means. E-commerce
continues to grab an increasingly large share of total retail sales. In 1999, ecommerce sales totaled $5 billion, increased to over $16 billion in 2004, and are
expected to reach $316 billion by 2010 (Census Bureau, Forrester Research,
ClickZ, as reported in Processor Magazine, October 2004, 4.) Many small businesses are finding the setup and operation of an e-store increasingly easy and
affordable. The e-commerce alternative should be seriously considered because
customers from all over the world may shop 24/7; the growth numbers cited
above are compelling; and many small businesses believe this is the future. On
the other hand, e-Commerce requires new methods of doing business and may
affect existing sales channels. Many small businesses find that an e-store is a
handy augmentation tool to supplement the inside sales force. The e-store attracts buyers, but many want to speak with a real person for a few minutes before entering a credit card and committing to the sale. The inside sales force or
call-center can then fully explain products, convince customers to purchase more,
suggest high-margin accessories, or work out expedited shipping arrangements.
In any case, an inbound call-center and customer service desk is needed to augment the benefits of an e-store.
Search Engine Marketing and Keyword Ads. The rage in Internet marketing
these days is keyword ads, having supplanted alternatives such as e-mail, banner
ads, and others approaches. Keyword ads (also known as Adwords on Google
and called various other terms elsewhere) appear when an Internet browser
searches certain keywords. The search results include sites and articles of interest, as well as small advertisements. When browsers click the keyword ad, they
link to the seller’s Website and hopefully then call or buy something on-line.
Some firms have reported huge increases in business from keyword ad campaigns. Still, keyword ads can be expensive, and much time is required to maintain these programs.
Much more information on Websites and Internet marketing is provided in
Chapter 5, which is dedicated solely to these subjects.
Channel Conflict
Be aware that success in selling through new channels may not please other
parts of the sales and distribution network. For example, when small businesses
open Internet stores and sell directly to the public, dealers and retailers are
often unhappy because products may now be purchased on-line at lower prices.
This conflict exists on two levels: legal and marketing. On the legal level,
there may be agreements in place between parts of the distribution channel that
prohibit your small business or others from selling directly in certain areas, and
this could kill plans to open new channels. Review existing agreements with your
legal counsel to see if vendors or various resellers have a legal basis for objecting
to the new plans.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 48
On the marketing level, perhaps no legal agreement is in place but valued
distributors simply object to being cut out of the deal. They may threaten to stop
buying or selling products that are sold through other means.
In both cases, the management of your small business must weigh the risks
and rewards to make a strategic decision and either terminate existing agreements and move into new channels, or hold off on opening new channels. Obviously, it may be difficult to cut off existing revenue-producing relationships in
favor of promising but untested new sales channels. The decision may be complex and will vary with each small business, but a decision must be made.
The “Retail Store” That Doesn’t Want Customers
I recently helped a new small business
set up operations and sell a popular
electronics product. Sales mushroomed from zero to over $1 million
per month in only 18 months. The company sold exclusively through three
on-line stores and was set up as a callcenter and shipping operation.
One day I noticed that overnight,
the firm installed a cheap and badly
designed retail showroom. A few products were on display among dozens
of empty boxes, tape, and computer
cables. It wasn’t pretty.
Did the company have aspirations
of becoming a big retailer? Not exactly. A major vendor had apparently
received a complaint from aa local
retailer, who said that my client was
selling products exclusively on-line
(which was true), in violation of the
distribution agreement that allowed
for on-line sales only to supplement
sales through a retail location.
Fortunately, there have been no
visitors to the “retail location” so far:
neither customers nor auditors from
the distributor.
Selling to Government
Small businesses looking to sell to the government should consider separately efforts directed to the federal government and the state/county/city/local
levels.
Selling to the Federal Government
The U.S. Government purchases products and services through the General
Services Administration (www.gsa.gov). The GSA is thus the one-stop purchasing agent and business manager for the world’s largest buyer. Just in case you’re
not sure if that’s big enough, note that the GSA acquires equipment, office space,
supplies, and services for more than one million federal workers in more than
8,000 buildings in 2,000 U.S. communities.
The good news is that instead of contacting every U.S. government office
that could possibly need the paper clips manufactured by your small business,
just pursue the GSA. The federal government consumes incredible quantities of
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 49
just about every possible good and service—and the GSA is mandated to spread
the business around by purchasing from many vendors rather than just a few
heavy hitters, which works in the favor of small businesses. That’s the good news.
The bad news is that even though the GSA has attempted to simplify its
procurement processes for years, selling to the U.S. Government remains a special undertaking. Dealing with the GSA requires a significant amount of time
and attention, probably unlike any other initiative ever attempted by your small
business.
Also, pricing is cutthroat, so before commencing these efforts, small business owners must ask themselves, “Can we afford to offer these products to the
federal government at the most competitive prices in our industry?” If your firm
is not geared toward low pricing, then save yourself the time and stop now.
Notwithstanding these concerns, the GSA is seeking small businesses able to
provide services and products anywhere in the U.S. and worldwide. All GSA
contracting opportunities over $25,000 are advertised on FedBizOpps at
www.fedbizopps.gov/. This Website allows vendors to register to receive e-mail
notification of opportunities in specific business areas. FedBizOpps is somewhat
similar to Monster.com or other job sites, in that buyers post their needs and
requirements and sellers may respond with offers.
GSA contracts are managed by GSA headquarters and regional offices, while
managers of federal buildings also purchase products and services.
Most small businesses, and even the largest of large businesses, employ special sales groups to deal with the federal government. That is because of the
regulations, processes, procedures, systems, etc., put in place to consider everything from good pricing, to the “Reduced Greenhouse Gas Intensity of Electric
Power,” to Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, to Amendments of 1998
[29 U.S.C. § 794(d)] requiring that the federal government acquire only electronic and information technology goods and services that provide for access by
persons with disabilities. It takes a great deal of time to get familiar with all of
these requirements, to remain in compliance, and to keep abreast of the constant changes.
If there is a strong desire to sell to the federal government, it’s best to seek
outside help, probably by employing or contracting experts who are knowledgeable about dealing with the federal government, and, more specifically, with the
products and services sold by your small business.
Another approach is to establish a close relationship with the “big fish” that
can afford the long and tedious selling processes required to gain larger contracts from the federal government. Here, the strategy is to appear after the deal
has been awarded, and the larger contractor needs products and services offered
by your small business. Becoming a subcontractor to larger private businesses is
usually an easier and more familiar process for small businesses.
Small business owners must consider if it is realistic to sell to the federal
government. Access to the very best pricing and the ability and staying power to
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 50
deal with the GSA bureaucracy are the minimum prerequisites. Otherwise, attempting to sell to the feds can be a time-consuming foray that ultimately does
not bear fruit.
Selling to the State and Local Government
Selling to government at the state, county, city, and other local levels may be
a bit less intimidating to small businesses. These situations vary widely from
hopeless bureaucracies to informal deals that any newcomer can quickly win if
the price is right.
The best approach here is to call government entities that use the products
or services sold by your small business and learn if there is a current need. If the
answer is positive, learn about the processes needed to sell.
In many cases, this will first require becoming an approved vendor. Approved
vendor status usually means that your small business is properly registered and
in good standing, financially sound, in compliance with local laws and regulations, and has signed a thick contract concerning everything from kickbacks to
subcontracting to indemnification.
The advantage here is that approved vendor status normally allows small
businesses access to databases or printed notifications of all upcoming business
opportunities. This makes finding new business opportunities much easier.
Most purchases by government are managed through a formal Request for
Proposal process, in which small businesses prepare a written response or price
quotation and submit this for consideration. Selling (in the traditional sense)
and presentations are less relevant, which may require a change in thinking at
many companies.
Selling Internationally
Many small businesses suspect that their products would sell successfully
outside the U.S. but feel that they should first exploit fully the huge domestic
market before venturing outside American borders. Besides, selling overseas
may seem intimidating because of unknown regulations, taxes, customs, competition, and pricing. And there are so many countries. Where to begin?
International selling may be easier than many small business owners believe,
and there are ways of testing the market without opening offices in the major
capitals of the world. Here are some alternatives:
 Trade Magazine or Internet Site Ad. Buy a continuing ad in a trade
publication or Internet site visited frequently throughout your industry.
In the ad, offer to ship your product anywhere in the world, but require
that the buyer pay for shipping, taxes, customs, and import fees. This
is common. Expect to make a few telephone calls overseas in the
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 51
middle of the night. You will need a customs broker to deal with the
foreign buyer and help figure out the fees and compute the total costs
paid by the buyer, such as local transportation. Just handle the deals
as they appear, and later see where the sales are coming from. You
may be pleasantly surprised when contacted by a foreign distributor
seeking a reselling relationship.
 Foreign Distributor. Contact companies that are already selling
related products overseas, and discuss whether it makes economic
sense to import and resell your product through their channels.
(Regarding the language issue, it’s not much to worry about these
days: Just about everyone in business speaks English.)
 E-Store and eBay. This is the easiest alternative and requires simply
that products sold through your e-store allow for international shipping.
Again, add language stating that buyers pay shipping and all other
fees once the product leaves your location. If your small business
does not yet have an e-store, try a few listings on eBay (selling a
single product is acceptable on eBay, but an e-store must have many
products). Once again, see where the business is coming from, and
expand efforts accordingly.
The overall strategy here is to test the market and let buyers do the footwork
in the various countries where your products may sell. As business develops,
consider reducing costs and expanding volume by contracting a sales
representative or opening a sales office in the most productive overseas locations.
80/20 Rule
The 80/20 rule is one of those mysterious phenomena which seem to occur all
the time in sales. It is worth mentioning here. Many small businesses notice
something like this:
 80 percent of sales are generated by 20 percent of the sales force.
 20 percent of products generate 80 percent of sales.
 20 percent of customers account for 80 percent of revenues.
 80 percent of sales and marketing efforts are directed at 20 percent
of the product line.
 80 percent of problems come from 20 percent of customers.
 80 percent of profits come from 20 percent of the product line.
 20 percent of your competitors are seen in 80 percent of deals.
Don’t be surprised to notice the 80/20 rule hard at work in your small business.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 52
Tips on Hiring and Managing Salespeople
Salespeople require a little extra care and attention. Here are some tips on
how to find the best people, build morale, point everyone toward the same objectives, and get better results:
 Measure Sales Objectives Against the USP. To meet business objectives,
make sure that salespeople are measured by goals that tie in with the Unique
Selling Proposition (Chapter 2) of the small business. Everything must be
consistent. For example, if growth in revenues is the most important objective, tie compensation to sales volume and discount the importance of customer satisfaction surveys or units shipped. Of course, all this is important,
but clarity in tying compensation to the USP will yield best results. Sales
objectives must be congruent with the USP and overall business objectives.
 Manage Consistently. “Plan your work and work your plan” is an old adage
that works well in managing salespeople. Once a plan is in place, be consistent about applying it to everyone all the time, under both positive and negative circumstances. This sends the message that personalities and politics do
not rule in your small business, but results do. Everyone must see that the
only thing that matters is results, and they must know for sure that certain
results yield certain actions. Consistency also suggests confidence, and helps
salespeople manage their efforts and set expectations.
 Recruiting Salespeople. Where is the best place to recruit established salespeople? Why not poach from competitors? It’s an ancient trick to quickly
pump up business. But be up-front about your expectations, and watch out
for “non-compete” agreements, where your new sales star may have signed
an employment contract with a competitor stating, in part, that the departing
employee may not call on certain clients for a period of time (usually one to
five years) after leaving. Such agreements are difficult to enforce but may
still get in the way.
 Hire 5; Get 1. The 80/20 rule at work again. Sorry, but that’s about the ratio
of successful hires to duds. Both employer and employee may try as hard as
possible to make the relationship work, but most of the time only one in five
salespeople really produce. (Of the other four, one or two will barely meet
expectations, and the others will be on a downhill slide from day one.)
 You Get What You Pay For. Expect to pay serious money for good salespeople. Remember that more than anyone, salespeople are money-motivated.
 Meet Frequently and Manage Consistently and Closely. It’s a good idea to
hold weekly meetings with all salespeople to learn what they are selling, to
whom they are selling, and how they are spending their time. If things are
going in the wrong direction, sales management must act quickly and decisively to fix the problem. Otherwise, no one will be happy when sales efforts
are terminated after much time and expense.
Sales and Selling: The Oxygen of Business 53
 Big Commissions for Bad Business. Related to the aforementioned topic,
creative salespeople may be leading the company into the wrong kind of business, when loopholes are found in commission agreements. Sales managers
must be prepared to referee situations where, for example, two people are
chasing the same deal, or where a new salesperson calls on a forgotten account of a more senior rep.
 Compensation Agreements. Be prepared to spend considerable time designing and writing the sales compensation plan, and especially details on salary,
commissions, and bonuses. If a mistake occurs and an eager salesperson
wants commissions for something that wasn’t really considered, it’s okay to
change the agreement but only after the commissions are paid in full. One
way to limit this problem is by placing caps on commissions. Good salespeople are difficult to find, and a good way to lose them is through unclear
and frequently changing commission agreements.
 Perks are ’Preciated. Salespeople these days are motivated by commissions,
but other perks are appreciated as well, and money spent in this direction
may buy a lot of goodwill and loyalty. Consider the personalities of your
team members and the importance of building a collegial environment where
everyone enjoys coming to work. Here are some ideas to reward top performers and motivate everyone:
 Entertainment event attended by everyone making quota (sports
event, monthly awards dinner).
 Primo parking space
 Dinner with the boss
 “Salesperson of the month” plaque and photo mounted in a
prominent place
 Article and photo in company newsletter and Website
 Newer offices and computers go first to top performers
 Company pays for an educational course
 Some of this may seem cheesy at first, but look around at all the other
businesses successfully employing these motivational tools. Build fun and
recognition into the lives of your salespeople: It’s often cheap and easy. A
couple of final notes however: Perk plans must have minimums. The deal is
off if the company normally sells 100 units per month and then sells 50 units
in the first month of the new “basketball game with the boss and top five
producers perk plan.” Also, make sure that these programs serve to bring
the group together and are not divisive. This will depend upon your small
business and the personalities involved.
 Having said all this, be prepared to “weed and seed” your sales staff quickly.
Tell recruits before hiring that they have a certain amount of time to achieve
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 54
predefined results; if the numbers don’t come in, it’s over (for example, “I
need to see you working on three good deals in the first 30 days, and close
one sale in 60 days.”). Sales managers must then stick to the plan to maintain
credibility, and because it’s the right thing to do.
Just Don’t Ever Stop Selling
Success in sales is an ephemeral victory. For the moment, everything seems
easy. One deal follows another, and the successes become bigger and bigger. But
small business owners can never relax. Other entrepreneurs see your success
and are tempted to enter the same market. Success attracts larger companies,
too, who could not be bothered when the numbers were smaller. Competitors
are not standing still either. The market continues to change, and customers
have new alternatives. It’s only a matter of time until change hits home, affecting
your small business.
For this reason, it is imperative that sales efforts never cease. Small business
owners should always examine their products and services; keep track of the
competition, selling channels, and methods; and watch the markets to learn the
best way to keep reinventing the small business and remain competitive as the
world moves on.
55
Chapter 4
Marketing: Artillery for Sales
A small business has many ways to generate awareness of its products and
services, and all are expensive! It is therefore critical that small business owners
devise a marketing mix that best reaches likely purchasers. This can hopefully be
thought out in great detail and then modified over time, but the initial plan is
especially important: Its success could bring abundance to the small business,
but failure could result in wasted money when the firm is most vulnerable.
There are four parts to this effort:
1. Determine the Unique Selling Proposition of your small business
(as described in Chapter 1).
2. Define your target market.
3. Decide upon the message to these customers.
4. Choose the best media to deliver the message.
Determine Your Unique Selling Proposition
How to determine the USP of your small business was discussed in Chapter 1.
The USP is the nexus of your business. This must be resolved before proceeding.
Define Your Target Market
This should be easy. Simply write down the characteristics of your most likely
customers.
Choose the most important metrics and forget the others. Your target customer base may include age, gender, profession, income level, residence, reading
interests, hobbies, university, etc. Or, if you are selling business-to-business, you
might consider company size (revenues, number of employees), type of company, number of workstations, etc.
A few examples:
 A pizza restaurant in a small town targets hungry people within delivery
distance of the shop.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 56
 A titanium-dioxide distributor targets companies within 500 miles
that produce white products—anything from paper to paint to castpolymer products such as white countertops (titanium dioxide is a
chemical whitening agent).
 A company producing small motors targets model-airplane
enthusiasts around the world.
 A computer services firm offering backup services targets small
businesses in the $500,000 to $50 million revenue range, within a 50-
mile radius.
 An aircraft valuation expert targets banks, lessors, and insurance
companies involved in commercial aviation, as well as aircraft
operators and owners worldwide.
 A sporting equipment retailer targets families with children of
school age and the directors of sports leagues (Little League
Baseball, AYSO, etc.) within the county.
It’s not complicated to define your market. If this part of the effort gets
bogged down, then you’re probably going in the wrong direction. Defining the
market is actually the easy part. Reaching the market, which we discuss later, is
more difficult.
Decide Upon the Message to These Customers
Now that the Unique Selling Proposition and target market have been considered, it’s time to decide upon the message itself. It will then be easier to decide how
to deliver the message. We assume here that your small business is interested in a
direct-response advertisement (that is, the prospect will buy something now) rather
than image or branding ads, which create or reinforce awareness.
During this time, you will decide how much to say about your product and
services, and this will help determine the best advertising media. If the message
is very short and simple, a billboard, yellow-pages ad, or post card may work. If
much needs to be said, a complete mailer, brochure, or television ad may be the
best delivery medium.
In all cases, the use of images such as photos, drawings, charts, maps, etc.,
should be included whenever possible. Images attract attention in ways that words
cannot. Notice, for example, that newspaper ads for grocery stores present dozens of common items such as batteries, trash bags, and paper towels, and include
color photos. Why is the photo necessary? Everyone knows what batteries look
like. Technically, the image is not needed—but well-placed images attract attention and increase sales.
We will review two types of ads: AIDA and Announcements.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 57
AIDA
Many ad agencies use a simple but effective method for producing advertisements: AIDA. This technique is a great tool for bringing attention to ads and
converting lookers into buyers, regardless of the media used.
Small differences in ad content can make a huge difference in pull rates.
AIDA provides a structure for constructing the ad to draw a direct response.
AIDA is an acronym for Attention, Interest, Desire, and Action.
Attention
Ads must begin with an attention-getter, directed at your target market. Fear
is always popular; so is appeal to an interest (for example, vacation spots or
antique autos) or a surprising statement. Drag prospective customers into the ad
by hooking them on your attention-getting device. This is a good time to be loud
and abrasive—but keep it short.
Here are a few examples:
Cool your computer to ensure peak performance and stable operation.
(Plays on fear; we will develop this ad later.)
Mortgage rates at five-month lows!
You deserve the smell of new car leather!
Lose 6 pounds per week without dieting!
Less Money—More Options on our newest models!
These headlines catch your attention. Make a list of some other headlines
that will catch the attention of your target audience, then ask around to gain a
consensus on which is the best.
Interest
Interest is created by describing one or more benefits your product or service offers that will improve the life of the buyer. Remember, customers buy on
benefits not on features, so stress the benefits.
When a CPU overheats as your old fan fails, your computer will experience problems right away. Much slower performance, malfunction,
noises, and even fire can spell the end quickly. Beat the heat with the
AsterTech.FX-D2000A CPU Cooler. Running with an ultrapremium Xidec
permanently lubricated dual ball-bearing fan makes for trouble-free
operation and twice the life of other ball-bearing fans.
Here, we again stress the problem to generate attention but then build interest in a credible solution. Note that no one cares about “ultrapremium Xidec
permanently lubricated ball-bearing fans”—that is merely an impressive sounding feature. The benefit is “trouble-free operation and twice the life…” and that
solves the problem.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 58
Desire
Build desire by making your offer compelling. This is the time to describe
free shipping, bonuses (for example, “free adapter included—normal retail price,
$4.95”), guarantees, endorsements, etc., to seal the buying decision.
Continuing our example from the previous section:
Since 1999, over 825 Value-Added Resellers nationwide have insisted
on using the FX-D2000A in every machine they install.
Comes with industry-best two-year warranty.
From Palm Chemical—the leader in quality industrial resins.
Note that these statements are not time-related; they build interest and a
desire to own the product, but do not compel the buyer to do anything now. But
the call to action is coming.
Action
The purpose of the ad is to convert the ad-recipient into a customer right
away. It’s futile to hope that the prospective customer will remember your ad
and come back later. Great ads close with a call to action—immediate action.
Without a call to action, shoppers will keep on shopping and the next competitor
will close the deal instead.
Examples:
Order by (week + 1) and get free shipping!
Buy now and get a $25-off upgrade coupon for our next model
(which buyers may fear is coming soon).
Sign up by January 31 and receive 256MB of extra memory—for
free!
Limited quantities, so act now!
The call to action is the most important part of your ad.
Announcement Ads
Announcement ads are easy, compared to AIDA-structured messages. Announcements assume the audience is already shopping for your product or service, so the message gets right to the point. In other words, attention and interest
are not so important here. The purpose is to inform and call for action.
A good example is shown on page 59.
A 2" × 3.5" ad like this was seen in a trade magazine for computer resellers.
The seller ran similar ads for four products side by side. Computer resellers
have a continuing need for this type of product, which is resold to their customers. Thus, there is little need to convince resellers of the need to purchase tape
storage devices—this is assumed. Announcement ads get right to the point and
assume the buyer is already looking for this type of product.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 59
Advertising people are not usually enthusiastic about announcement ads because they don’t require as much creativity, but they can be very effective
when used in the right places and repeated frequently. They are normally short,
simple, and in a specific format. Announcement ads are used most often in
trade publications or professional situations where other formats would not be
appropriate.
A few final tips on writing an advertisement:
Consider the appropriateness of the AIDA and announcement formulas for
every piece of sales collateral now in use at your small business. In addition, use
these techniques to develop all new ads. This may take some time, but the difference in response rates generated by great ads as opposed to mediocre ads can be
dramatic.
Finally, look at the ads produced by your best competitors—yours should
probably not deviate too far from them.
Choose the Best Media to Deliver This Message
Once the ad content is determined, picking the vehicle to deliver your message to a particular market becomes much easier. If the message is complex, a
letter with a brochure or catalog might be required. “Sam’s—the largest selection of commercial electrical supplies in Kern County” (announcement ad) is
complete in itself, so a billboard, yellow-pages ad, or post card mailed to a carefully selected mailing list could yield great results.
Of course, we determined our target market earlier, so this makes media
selection that much easier. Once again, an overall theme here is that the plan
should probably not differ greatly from what your most successful competitors
are doing.
The advertising world has been kind in offering us limitless opportunities to
spend money and reach various target markets. This includes everything from
STORGARD AIR-7 StorGardStation
Data Protection Drive for servers
AIR-7 tape drives deliver performance and reliability with 60GB –
120GB max capacity (compression ratio varies from 1:1 to 2:1) in
an 8mm compact data cartridge with fast data transfer rate of
16mb/sec.
 Wide Ultra-SCSI interface
 16MB Buffer Memory
 3.5" form factor
 Amber and green front LEDs
Call StorageDudes at 800-555-5555 or see www.StorageDudz.com
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 60
bus-bench ads to T-shirts to browser pop-ups to Google AdWords (Google is a
registered trademark of Google, Inc.). They show a lot of variety but have one
thing in common: All are expensive.
We review a few of the most popular ads here:
Direct Mail
The science of mailings includes four key variables: what to say, what to
send, whom to send it to (mailing list), and when to send it. Many great books
have been written on this subject, but the topic is reviewed here in enough detail
that small business owners may construct a good program.
Advertising people say that mailers have a success rate of around 2 percent
to 5 percent, but the real low-end answer is 0 percent. That’s right: It’s actually
possible to spend a lot of money designing and mailing thousands of mailers and
end up with zero extra revenues.
The easy solution is offered first, for those who have a little more money and
a little less time: Find a mailing house and outsource the whole job. Companies
that specialize in this area will advise your small business on how similar projects
have worked for related companies, and thereby determine whether a simple
post card will work or whether a large envelope with a four-color letter, glossy
brochure, postage-prepaid reply card, and other enclosures are necessary. These
companies can also acquire mailing lists and perform labor-intensive tasks such
as adding mailing labels, folding, stuffing, sealing, stamping, and sorting (sorting
by zip codes is required to get better postal rates). These tasks may seem simple,
but they can cause huge headaches for small business owners who are accustomed to other types of work.
To find a local company that specializes in turnkey mailing projects, ask around
among printers, designers, and list brokers. These people all seem to know each
other, and many have worked together before. A printer, for example, will refer
you happily to a mailing house with the expectation of getting the print job.
If outsourcing the job is not an option, here is some more information on
doing the direct mailer internally:
What to Say
Fortunately, you’ve already accomplished this part, as described earlier in
this chapter.
What to Send
Most small business owners should concentrate on simple mailings, such as
large post cards (my favorite), form letters produced in Microsoft Word or a
similar program, or a mass-mailed brochure. If the sales situation is simple, the
piece will call upon the recipient to buy. In more complex situations, recipients
can be encouraged to call a sales rep rather than read a large and complex assemblage of printed items.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 61
The Mailer Is Sent on November 63
This story is short, but the stress
caused by a simple newsletter mailing will be easy to understand.
I worked with a small business
that published a newsletter every
two months for a group of database
users. We wanted the December
issue to be mailed in late November, in advance of the holiday
crunch.
The project got off to a rather
slow start, and the text was not approved until November 20. But the
printer needed five days to produce
the piece, which, of course, was
really 10. The printer claimed that
this was because he had to wait for
us three times as we approved the
design copy, which was partially
correct. Unfortunately, “November
issue” was still printed on the
newsletter.
Blinded by wishful thinking, the
management expected that the
printed newsletter would be in the
mail within a day after printing was
finished, but clerical people needed
to be found who could add labels,
stamp, seal, and sort into postal
containers. Everyone was busy on
another big project, so the newsletter was temporarily shelved.
On December 11, everyone was
assembled to begin again, but then
someone asked, “Where are the
mailing labels?” The newsletter was
mailed to an internally developed
mailing list that resided on a computer somewhere in the company,
but only the systems administrator
knew exactly which mailing list file
to use, and he was out of town until
December 16.
On December 16, the list was
printed, but the folding, stuffing,
labeling, sealing, and stamping operations took longer than expected.
Clearly, the mailing could not reach
the post office before December 21,
and that was too close to the holidays.
Management was then faced
with two bad choices: (1) mail on
December 21 and expect that most
newsletters would be trashed by
readers who were on holiday until
January, or (2) mail on January 2
for receipt around January 9, and
hope readers would not notice the
November date printed on the newsletters.
The “November 63” option was
finally selected, and the mailing finally went out in early January, despite additional delays in
coordinating the tasks required to
organize the work among vacationing employees.
Note that when form letters are produced, an additional complication arises
where the letter to Mr. Gray must be placed in the envelope addressed to Mr.
Gray, and not in the envelope for Mr. Blue. This may seem simple, but when
thousands of envelopes and letters are lying around in boxes at your small
business—and some letters did not print correctly and some envelopes were
ruined—headaches will result and the project can stall.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 62
Since the message is known, the issue here is reduced to finding a designer
who can create a piece that will attract the target market. After you approve the
piece, the designer turns over the computer files to the printer. Printers often
work with designers, so ask for a referral.
Who Gets It?
There are basically two sources of mailing lists: internal and purchased. The
best results will be obtained from internally developed lists, where previous customers and contacts are culled from one or more databases. However, these lists
are often not large enough. If that is the case, supplement the internal list with
one from an outside source.
Utilizing mailing lists purchased or rented (good for one mailing only),
direct or from a list broker, are quick ways to get your mailing to thousands of
new customers. Databases (lists) may be purchased or rented directly from sources
such as InfoUSA, the Harris Directory, Dunn & Bradstreet, and other companies. Many trade magazines also sell or rent their subscriber lists to vendors with
relevant products and services, so this may be the best source for specialized
small businesses.
InfoUSA (www.infousa.com) allows customers to select and sort lists in
various ways (for example, health services companies in the 312 area code,
with 10 to 999 employees, sales from $1 million to $500 million, and an A or A+
credit rating). The list can then be purchased with a credit card and downloaded
immediately.
Finally, most lists these days are delivered in the form of a spreadsheet or
similar (for example, tab-delimited) computer file, so someone at your small
business must be familiar with this format and understand how to use it to produce mailing labels, print form letters, and load the data into related programs
such as ACT (contact management programs, described in Chapter 14).
Pricing will vary greatly, depending upon the list quality, quantity, and extra
information required (such as telephone number, fax number, title, department,
SIC code, etc.) and many other factors, but as an order of magnitude, expect to
pay about $0.10 to $1.50 per name. Don’t acquire the list until it is needed, because a portion (maybe 2 percent to 10 percent) of the names will already be
outdated, and as the list sits on your computer, unused, the situation will only
grow worse.
A firm able to help in acquiring, importing, and producing mailing lists and
mailers is described at http://www.ant91.com/InfoUSA.htm.
When to Send It
Most small business owners will be able to determine for themselves the
best times to send various mailing pieces. Sporting goods companies, for example, know the seasons in which their products are purchased, and plan accordingly. Allow large amounts of slack time because mailing projects always
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 63
seem to take longer than expected, and a late mailing can be a complete waste of
money (for example, a ski equipment mailer sent in April; yes, it can happen).
Budget for repetition, because almost all experts agree that response rates
increase after recipients see a similar ad several times. Once again, watch what
your successful competitors are doing: If they send out a large format card every
quarter, consider sending a larger format post card every quarter, too.
Publicity and Public Relations
Good PR is often the least expensive and most effective means of generating
greater awareness of your product or service—and getting lots of new business.
Publicity (free publicity is what we really mean here) in this context means
getting print or broadcast coverage of your small business as a news item, not as
an advertisement. Good publicity is better received by prospective customers
than advertising because the seeming objective of the story is to inform or interest and not to sell, and because information disseminated by the media as news is
perceived as more credible than advertising.
Editors of trade magazines, newspapers, and local radio and television newsrooms have a ravenous and continuing need for stories that will be of interest to
their audience. Therefore, they will be receptive to your suggestions. On the
other hand, most are sensitive about being duped by businesses into releasing
stories that are thinly veiled advertisements. If your small business can properly
disseminate news of interest and cooperate with the media, the benefits to your
bottom line may be huge.
Many small businesses prefer to retain a publicity agent, who should constantly
inform relevant media outlets about new developments at your company. PR agents
normally know exactly who to call, what to say, and how to spin mundane events
into something exciting. This can mean quick, effective results for you.
Otherwise, always be on the lookout for any kind of information that could
be of interest to the media, even if you have to dress it up a little. Then, write
a press release. A press release is a short (one- to five-paragraph) article describing what is going on and utilizing the standard who-what-when-where-why
format. Popular themes are: how the world will be a little bit better because of
this development, fear (always popular), or how a local company is making a
splash elsewhere. Creative PR releases may yield important results.
Here are a few other points to keep in mind:
 If the press release is event-related, be sure to send it out at least two weeks
before the big day to get maximum exposure.
 Be sure the press release includes contact information such as the name,
telephone number, and e-mail address of your PR person. This makes it easy
for the media to call for more information.
 Most press releases quote the president or a top officer of the company.
 Most press releases offer a short company description at the end.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 64
Sample Press Release
The following press release may not be entirely serious, but note that it does
have all the elements needed to interest editors and producers. This item would
be released to industry sources, such as trade magazines.
* * * PRESS RELEASE * * *
SkoolTel Announces New Telephone for In-Class Use
Educators Expo, Washington D.C., August 30
SkoolTel® today unveiled its newest product, an apple-shaped celltelephone for the desktop with a small but high-resolution graphics
screen, aimed at the high-school student market. The new SkoolTel
Rotten A+® model boasts a 2-inch active matrix LCD monitor,
understands Morse code (entered when students tap pencils), and
operates in “dead mode” - meaning it dumps all memory and appears
to turn off in less than 10 milliseconds after students tap a small,
playful-looking worm on the top of the unit.
The Rotten A+ model will be especially popular with students who rely
upon cheating to improve their grades.
Pricing & Availability
The new Rotten A+ will begin shipping worldwide in mid-August—just in
time for the new school year—and will retail for $199.99 in leading
consumer electronics outlets. See www.skooltel.com to find an
authorized SkoolTel retailer nearby.
The new Rotten A+ also ships with:
2-inch LCD with 1680-by-1050 pixels
1.8 GHz 64-bit PowerXX5 processor
iCheat AV, an easy-to-use desktop video-conferencing solution
customized for in-classroom usage
128-bit encryption technology to keep test administrators at bay
AutoClass Networking, which automatically and silently connects all
students in the classroom using high speed CheaterNet, 802.12
wireless connection protocol
The entire GlobalBook Encyclopedia, current year edition, so that
students may look up just about anything in seconds
Invisible, wireless earpiece and microphone
AC Adapter and batteries
Everything needed for the modern high-school test-taker is included
right out of the box.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 65
“The Rotten A+ will raise the bar for all students, because test scores
will improve dramatically,” said David Reebar, SkoolTels’s senior vice
president of worldwide product marketing. “With the entire system,
including a gorgeous 2-inch display, all shaped like an apple sitting on
the student’s desk, even teachers will love it.”
Formed in 1999, SkoolTel ignited the multi-use cellular-telephone
market for students with the Crabby II. Today, SkoolTel continues to
lead the industry in innovation with its award-winning products. SkoolTel
is also spearheading the digital music revolution with free music
downloads of major artists to cell telephones with its “Crabster” music
download service.
Press Contacts:
Derick Sheeter
SkoolTel
(800) 555-5555
dericksheeter@skooltel.com
NOTE TO EDITORS: For additional information, visit Skootel’s,
www.skooltel.com, or call our Media Helpline at (408) 974-9288 x101.
SkoolTel, the SkoolTel logo, Rotten A+, iCheat AV, Crabby II, AutoClass
Networking, and CheaterNet are either registered trademarks or
trademarks of SkoolTel. Other company and product names may be
trademarks of their respective owners.

The press release can be fine-tuned a bit for local media by using the same
text as above but adding the following paragraph:
Skooltel, an area firm employing 55 technology workers, is making a
mark on the national scene. SkoolTel is improving the educational
system by helping high-school students all over the U.S. improve their
test scores.
The first press release should be sent to a well-researched list of industry
experts. It’s worth a few phone calls to find the appropriate contact person at
major trade publications, research firms, Internet sites, etc.—and keep this list
updated.
The second press release is sent to the local media, including television, radio, and newspapers. Again, keep the list current and send the press release
directly to the appropriate contact, not simply to the newsroom.
Press releases will eventually generate great publicity, goodwill, and increased
revenues for your small business.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 66
Promotional Items
The use of free promotional items such as pens, mouse pads, kitchen magnets, yo-yos, stress balls, T-shirts, and zillions of other devices can be effective if
the message is extremely short, or if the objective is to reinforce a message that
is developed in detail elsewhere.
Promotional items may travel far and wide, and you never know where they
will end up. Many also have very long lives and can bring new customers to your
small business years after distribution.
Some items are more effective for a particular demographic group, such as
golfers or office workers. However, many end up with the children of the intended recipients, which may be of limited value to your business.
If you are considering promotional items for your marketing mix, contact a
company that offers these products. Most will ask about your intent (for example, “We are giving these away with brochures at a trade show,” or “We put
Monopolizing the Show
I once exhibited at a trade
show where vendors competed
furiously for attention from attendees. The most successful
gave away increasingly expensive promotional items, and
the most popular of all was a
well-known board game that
had been customized from its
original 1930s format to a modern, industry-specific theme.
The game was a big hit, but
the savvy exhibitor did not just
hand it out. Interested attendees had to sit and listen to a
well-produced 15-minute demonstration of the company’s
services and pass a simple
test before they were handed
the coveted box.
The exhibitor had no
trouble filling seats for each
presentation, and making attendees “earn” the game increased the perceived value of
both the prize and the
company’s services.
these in the bag of every customer at checkout”), give you a catalog offering hundreds
of different items in various colors, sizes,
etc., and then advise on what may work best
in your particular situation. A graphics person will advise you on what message can be
effectively applied.
Customizing the design and producing
and shipping these items will take at least
three weeks, so plan for a month. Although
these giveaways are free to your customers, they are hardly free to you: Expect to
pay from $0.25 for a cheap pen to maybe
$10 for a good coffee cup or calculator. In
most cases, printing, setup, and design
charges are additional.
Most small businesses do not have widespread name recognition, so the short messages imprinted on promotional items
should be used in conjunction with other
devices if the products and services offered
are not apparent. For example, hand out a
brochure with the promotional item, or
make the items available to customers only:
They already know your business but may
need a reminder when it comes time to purchase in the future. On the other hand,
“Tommy’s Tire Shops” need not be concerned with developing the message since
the company name says it all.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 67
Print Advertising
Print ads are the basis of all other forms of advertising.
Print ads, in this sense, mean newspaper, magazine, or trade-journal placements, in contrast to brochures (described later). Although newspaper advertising is not a great growth area, an increasing number of specialty trade
magazines serve just about every possible niche and interest of every possible
industry in every geographical region. As a result, the number of print advertising choices available to small business owners continues to increase. Since
print ads can be expensive to produce and run continually, the big question is:
Are they effective?
It takes a lot of time and money to get the answer to this question. Many
companies have experimented with many publications over long periods of time
(repetition is important). Further, many potential buyers have become accustomed to looking in specific publications when certain products and services are
needed. For many small businesses, the answer is simply to see where your most
successful competitors are advertising and then do the same.
Note also that there is a big difference in expected results from newspapers
as opposed to magazines or trade journals. Newspaper ads enjoy a shelf life of
only one day. Results can be expected almost immediately: If the phone does not
start to ring within 24 hours after release, it’s not going to happen. Magazines or
trade journals, in contrast, may have a shelf life of several months, as they sit
around in waiting rooms, on conference-room tables, and in the briefcases of
interested but busy executives.
In addition, newspaper ads are normally black and white, while print ads in
trade journals and magazines are usually in high-resolution full color. This results in better quality and impact, but higher design and production costs.
Timing of your ads is also of critical importance. In advertising, timing is
everything. A newspaper ad run by a toy store in January will probably not do
well. In contrast, an ad for an industrial products distributor describing the availability of the new HotHead welding gun in the very issue that names HotHead as
the most advanced gooseneck-design 400 amp welding gun on the market, should
draw a much better response.
Timing requires advance planning. The time required to design and approve
a printed ad and send it in an acceptable form to the publisher may vary from an
absolute minimum of two weeks to three months.
Speak with your advertising rep to learn more about this. While some reps
will say just about anything to get the business, others will suggest upcoming
special issues or insert sections designed to attract special groups. Also, learn
about production schedules, printing deadlines, and discounts for a long-term
commitment. Repetition pays. And repetition pays.
And also, repetition pays.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 68
Brochures
Company brochures may be the best overall way of describing to prospective
customers the Unique Selling Proposition (USP) of your small business, although
the usefulness of this marketing device is sometimes questioned. The purpose of
brochures is to give the prospective customer the warm, fuzzy feeling that your
small business is for real and can be trusted to deliver, whereas most other media
focus more on messages that issue an immediate call to action (“Buy Now”).
Consequently, brochures may be most needed in more complex situations, where
the products and services offered require real trust from the new customer before a sale can be contemplated. Or, the prospect may need to know more about
the exact USP of the seller.
A distributor of mail-order point-of-sale (POS) devices, for example, may
need a brochure to communicate to prospective customers across the country
that the seller is a large, established firm. Seller credibility is needed here, since
POS orders may be large, and if problems occur, an entire store may need to halt
business until the right equipment arrives. Here, a brochure with a picture of the
huge warehouse, a company history, a 1945 black-and-white photo of the founder
(the current president’s grandfather), and the normal feel-good statements (“The
customer is our number one priority”) would accomplish this purpose. Note that
the brochure does not contain an immediate call to action.
On the other hand, a company selling similar devices primarily from a retail
storefront most likely does not need a brochure. The living brochure is the store,
its employees, and its inventory. Printed hyperbole will not work as well here
because customers easily can see the real situation.
A brochure is normally a four-color production on high-quality paper stock
(read: the most expensive type of printed collateral) and requires a significant
amount of time to develop and print (read: design expenses not cheap). Because
of this, most companies design brochures to last a long time, even though specific products may change much more frequently. For this reason, most brochures focus on the company and its USP, values, history, founders, and
clients—and not on specific products, services, and pricing. When prospective
customers need more specific information, then catalogs, spec sheets, line cards,
customized proposals, or other marketing materials are used.
For small business owners in some industries, a well-designed, high-quality
brochure is mandatory. In other cases, the usefulness of brochures is sometimes
questioned because few prospective customers actually read them. As with
Websites, it’s too easy to end up with “company propaganda,” overstating the
firm’s credentials. Many readers become bored when every brochure they read
describes how every business is the best at everything.
Also, many adept sales reps sense that they are being turned away politely by
prospective customers who say “Send me a brochure and I will call you back
later.”
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 69
Look around. Most doctors, attorneys, CPAs and other professionals do not
use brochures, even though the business relationship requires great trust from
clients. In most cases, theses professionals prefer to sit with new clients for a
while and sell themselves.
Small business owners should think carefully about the value of brochures
before investing in this potentially important, but potentially useless, marketing
device.
Newsletters
A newsletter can be an inexpensive and effective way of reaching your target
audience, but when should it be used, and what can you say so that readers don’t
think it’s just another advertisement?
The purpose of newsletters is to generate goodwill and serve as soft reminders
that your small business offers certain products and services. The goodwill part
is accomplished by including articles and information of genuine interest to prospective customers. These articles should answer questions and address concerns picked up by your sales force or customer service reps. The newsletter
may also include direct ads.
For example, I once worked with a small business that offered a popular disk
storage subsystem to its medium-sized-business customer base. Many current
and prospective customers were asking if this device could be connected to more
than one server. The small business wrote an article in its newsletter laying out
customer options in a straightforward manner, including the pros and cons of
each choice, without any sales hype. The newsletter was well received and generated a number of calls.
Newsletters don’t need to be long and complex. My favorite format is a folded
11" × 17" sheet, resulting in a four-page newsletter where each page is a standard
8.5" × 11". This can be folded in half again, and half of one page can be used for
the mailing area (postage, return address, and mailing label).
As the name implies, newsletters should be sent regularly (for example, every two months). If the newsletter conveys information of real value to your
target market, it may be read and passed around to others for some time. Otherwise, it will be treated as just another advertisement. Useful newsletters are
often valued by readers, so to gain new contacts, be sure to include text such as
the following:
Address Additions, Changes, and Corrections
Want to receive Teramarkets? Just send us your name, title, business
address, and telephone number, as shown below. Already receiving
Teramarkets? Make sure we have the correct name and address
information for you and your associates. Please check the mailing
label (below), write in the corrected information (or additional names
to add), and fax back the entire page to (555) 820-6361. Or e-mail
xx@xxx.com.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 70
Double-Oh Joe (or Bond, Joe Bond)
I once worked with a small business
that sold a product used by large
corporations and certain parts of the
government. This product was
manufactured and sold by a Fortune
500 company directly to large users,
and to resellers such as our small
business.
We knew the CIA used this product, and our sales force had tried
for some time to contact the right
group. We wanted to sell directly to
the CIA and displace the Fortune 500
company, but we had no success at
all. In fact, it became a bit of a company joke—just try calling the CIA and
asking, “Can I have the name and
telephone number of the people who
use this product?” It’s not going to
happen.
We sent out a company newsletter,
but the CIA was not on our mailing list
because we had no contacts there.
Then one day, out of nowhere, the
CIA called us and inquired about buying from our firm.
Someone had seen our newsletter
and passed it to the appropriate people.
Flattered and full of curiosity upon
learning this, I said, “I’m glad to hear
someone gave you our newsletter. Tell
me who it was and I would like to call
and thank them.” My question was met
with silence, and then the caller flatly
replied, “I’m not allowed to tell you that.”
I quickly moved on to the business at hand. We finally did connect
with the right contacts at the CIA, and
I never did learn how they acquired
our newsletter.
Once a newsletter is printed, it’s a great idea to post it on your Website. It
will need to be translated into a format understood by Web browsers, however,
which involves a little more time and money.
The cost of printing a well-designed color newsletter may range from $1,000
to $3,000 per issue, plus maybe 10 to 20 cents per copy, plus mailing costs. It may
be tempting to save on these expenses and produce just e-mail version of your
newsletter; however, a large portion of the recipients will hit the delete key before reading it. Although it is easy for readers to forward a good newsletter to
others, most are too sensitive to the spam issue these days to do that, so it is
increasingly unlikely.
Spam, er...E-Mail Marketing
E-mail marketing was once seen as the great new frontier in advertising.
Brilliantly designed pieces can be produced easily and cheaply and sent to millions for about the same expense as e-mailing to just one person. In addition,
buyers can click a link and be directed straight into e-stores to complete a sale.
It’s all true. Many legitimate companies have set up carefully designed databases
where potential buyers see only the information relevant to their interests, and
others may easily opt out. Theoretically, e-mail advertising should rule the world.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 71
Unfortunately, e-mail ads are also a cheap and easy way for spammers to
produce and send millions of e-mails to disinterested parties. As a result, recipients trust neither the seller, the product, nor the opt-out provisions. It is increasingly difficult for busy e-mail users to distinguish spam from legitimate e-mail
marketing, and as the level of spam increases to over 80 percent of all e-mail
sent, most recipients simply hit the delete key before reading all unfamiliar emails. Worse, legitimate e-mail offers sent by your small business to carefully
selected recipients will be regarded by some as spam, and the effort may do more
harm than good. Or, your small business may be labeled as a spammer by Internet
deities, and all e-mails sent from your company could be stopped.
The industry has discussed and tried all possible ways to stop spam, including legal efforts, technical means, and other strategies, but none have seen significant success. Spam continues to plague and dominate e-mail marketing.
The new world of e-mail marketing has been challenged by spammers, and
the battle is over: The spammers have won.
For that reason, e-mail marketing is an unlikely source of new customers for
your small business and is therefore not recommended.
Internet Marketing
Promoting your products and services through the Internet is the rage these
days. Visitors to major search engines such as Google, Yahoo, Lycos, MSN, and
Netscape learn of your small business, click through to your Website, and then
either spend lots of money on-line or call directly to spend even more.
This subject is so important that an entire chapter of this book is devoted
exclusively to designing, building, promoting, and operating your Website and
e-store. Please see Chapter 5 for more information.
Yellow Pages
Yellow Pages advertising is essential to certain types of small businesses,
such as plumbers, electricians, and insurance brokers. Just about every home
and business keeps a copy of the Yellow Pages around, and when they open the
book to your section, they are looking to buy.
As always, check the competition: Do similar companies advertise here? If
yes, it’s a sure bet that you should piggyback on their success and do the same.
Customers are in the habit of looking here.
An interesting characteristic of Yellow Pages advertising is that an ad may be
effective for years, because many consumers keep copies around for a long time.
This is quite unlike other media, such as newspaper advertising.
Yellow Pages advertising is expensive, though, so think this through before
giving approval. Ad reps will increase the tab by suggesting listings in several
sections of the same book, and, of course, a larger ad, in color, attracts more
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 72
attention. In larger metropolitan areas, ads also must be purchased in several
books to reach different geographical locales. Still, none of this may be necessary. If your small business seeks a niche market on a national scale, for example, the Yellow Pages will do little good.
Also, be aware of the many scams out there, where Yellow Pages look-alikes
attempt to trick busy small business owners into buying an ad in the wrong book.
The Yellow Pages offered through local telephone companies is really “the”
Yellow Pages. Similar offerings like “Local Metro Yellow Pages” or “Horizon
Yellow Pages” may actually contain a directory with yellow-colored pages, but
distribution and usage may be smaller because many consumers throw away all
but one book. Before buying, know what you are paying for.
Radio, Television, and CATV (Cable Television) Ads
Broadcast advertising has a place in many small business situations. Through
this technique, a great deal of information may be conveyed quickly to a large
number of potential customers. Nevertheless, broadcast ads are expensive and
ephemeral.
For these reasons, small business owners should approach this form of advertising by asking the following questions:
 Who exactly are my potential customers? (This may seem obvious,
but think about it, because the cost of reaching unlikely customers
may dramatically increase the price of your campaign but lessen its
effectiveness.)
 Are my competitors using radio, TV, or CATV advertising? Have
these ads run for a long period of time?
 Will the products and services offered by my small business be
complimented by the imagery (for example, shots of your beautiful
premises, large inventory, special equipment, or a map of your great
location) available from broadcast advertising?
After obtaining rates, decide how this form of advertising compares with
alternatives (for example, newspaper ads).
There are, of course, major differences between radio, television, and CATV
advertising. Here are some to consider:
 Radio is more of a background medium than TV, which dominates
the attention of the viewer.
 Radio may reach working people during the day and during drivetimes, whereas television generally does not.
 Television is watched by just about everyone at night.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 73
 The format of television allows advertisers to take advantage of the
creative qualities of sight, sound, color, and motion. This is a powerful
way to convey information and elicit emotion.
 CATV can provide extremely detailed information on the demographics of viewers, and small businesses can reach almost surgically
defined geographical areas. In contrast, the reception and reach of
broadcast television, and especially AM radio, may vary between day
and night and depend upon the weather.
To move forward, speak with account executives from local stations as well
as with local colleagues and customers. Learn whether companies like yours
have advertised, and for how long? Was it a one-shot experiment, or a longerterm affair?
In all cases, account executives from the various broadcasters will provide
detailed demographic information on the reach and impressions of each spot,
using industry jargon such as AQH Persons (average number of persons estimated to have listened to a station for a minimum of five minutes during any 15-
minute period, and AQH Ratings (the estimated number of listeners (AQH
Persons) as a percentage of the survey area population). This can get complicated. Be attentive, because most advertising vendors have a way of presenting
the numbers to show that they are the best. It’s up to you to make the final
decision.
This is where brokers come in. Radio and television advertising brokers know
the market and can cut through the hype, providing your small business with:
 An overall advertising strategy
 Direction on what to say and help in writing the scripts
 Counsel on how to reach your market, thereby transcending the
complex and confusing demographic information provided by
advertising account executives
 Advice on an advertising schedule that makes sense (frequency, time
slots, duration). This alone is a huge issue. Given a certain budget and
objective, should your spots be spread over the day or appear only in
the morning? On one station or several? Should your first test
campaign last for one week or 10 weeks?
 Here’s the big one: Buying through ad brokers will often result in less
expense, because they are adept at hammering the local broadcasters
for better rates, which they pass on to you.
Unlike the big national players, small businesses normally do not need to
spend large amounts of money to produce an ad. For radio, carefully write your
30- or 60-second spot and record it yourself a few times. Then e-mail the script
to your grateful radio account executive, who will have a local radio personality
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 74
record it. This increases the professionalism and credibility of the message. Beware of offers in which the radio or TV executive wants you to be in the ad,
unless you’re in this for ego-gratification purposes.
Most stations now use digital recording techniques, so MP3 files may be emailed back and forth until the message is just right. If you want to pay more and
fancy it up a bit, add sounds and music from prerecorded libraries available to
the stations.
Producing a local television or CATV advertisement may cost $500 or more,
but most can be capped at around $2,000. This is negotiable, however, and advertisers who agree to longer campaigns may get the ad produced for free.
Most small businesses want to test a broadcast advertising campaign before
committing to a large expenditure. If you choose to do this, capture the benefits
of repetition by selecting a limited time of the day, and just one or two stations.
Depending upon the results, adjust accordingly and try again.
Ad brokers are aware of techniques that will measure ad effectiveness, such
as using special toll-free (“800”) numbers that forward to your office. The statistics are then available through Web-based browsers.
Once the ad is produced, economies are realized only when it is played over
and over again. Make sure your budget allows for the production of a good message, and lots of spots. As with all forms of advertising, repetition is critical.
It’s often a good idea to piggyback on the success of your competition by
mimicking their advertising strategy. Your competition may have spent a great
deal of time and money perfecting this strategy, so why reinvent the wheel? If
customers accept a competitive ad, it’s likely they will accept your ad, too.
Trade Shows and Conventions
If you’ve ever been to the vendors’ exhibition hall at a large trade show or
convention, attracting new business seems like a turkey-shoot. Exhibitors just
seem to stand there as new business prospects queue up in line. Nevertheless,
this form of marketing is more expensive and draining than it looks, and small
business owners should analyze carefully the benefits that really accrue.
Standing at a table and signing up new customers may look easy but the
reality is different. Let us take, for example, the actual costs paid by a small
business that recently attended a computer trade show in a different city. At
first, the $6,000 show fee seemed steep, but that was just the beginning as shown
in the list on page 75.
The show continued for four days, but that is really six days when you include travel time, or 24 days for four people. The convention hall, however, was
open for only 18 hours. Because show attendees were in classes most of the time,
there were only about six hours of significant traffic. The rest of the time was
spent in special meetings with an occasional customer and throwing toy footballs
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 75
Fee for 10' table in the vendors’ exhibition hall ............................. $6,000
Print new literature * ......................................................................... $2,500
Print mousepads (free giveaway) ..................................................... $3,200
Design and construct trade show booth * ..................................... $2,200
Ship booth and materials to and from trade show ............................ $750
Travel, hotel, meals (four people, four days) * ................................ $8,200
Clothing (30 blue shirts with logo; eight pairs of khaki pants) * .. $1,100
Entertainment ....................................................................................... $950
Miscellaneous (union handling fees, tips, etc.) ................................. $900
Total..................................... $25,800
* Note that some of these items can be spread over more than one trade
show.
After determining the total cost, there are two questions that must be answered to determine the viability of attending trade shows and conventions:
1. How much new business can we identify that can be directly
attributed to this event?
2. How does this cost for attracting new business compare with other
alternatives?
Small business owners must determine the answer to the first question by
asking show participants and sales reps several weeks after the event (depending
upon the normal sales cycle of the products and services sold by your business).
The answer to the second question, of course, must be separately calculated.
In many cases, a large amount of interest can be generated at the show, but
harried attendees are bombarded with so much information that little is retained.
Some marketing experts claim, for example, that 70 percent of trade-show literature is thrown away before attendees even get on the plane to return home.

The Full Expense of Exhibiting at a Trade Show
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 76
Therefore, it is critical to get the identities of visitors and follow up by telephone
after the show. Here are some other tips to maximize your investment in these
events:
 During the year, keep a folder of mailings and e-mail announcements regarding
all types of tradeshows, conventions and related industry events. Review all
of them once or twice a year to determine which ones to attend.
 In some cases, money is not the only factor. Consider that the prestige
associated with attending—or not attending—certain important industry
shows must be weighed. Further, consider the value of solidifying on-going
relationships through face-to-face contact at events.
 During the event, the first objective is to get business cards and notes. Expect
that once a conversation with a prospect is concluded, there is no chance
that he or she will call later for additional information. The obligation to call
rests 100 percent with the staff of your small business.
 Before investing, ask how many people attended this event last year—100 or
10,000? Many show sponsors have detailed information on the number and
types of attendees. Are these the kinds of buyers sought by your small business?
 Is attendance free, or must attendees pay a fee or prove industry credentials?
(If anyone can attend, then expect to spend a lot of time meeting with bored
hotel guests or passersby.)
 At some shows, the exhibitor hall is hardly the main event. Attendees come
to attend classes, hear important speeches and presentations, or even for
social reasons. Can you expect show attendees to spend much time in the
exhibitor hall? This may help determine which shows to attend. (See “Joe
Loses Out At Trade Show To California Girls.”)
 Location at a trade show is important in predicting expected traffic. Many
well-run events plan carefully so that all exhibitors receive similar exposure,
but make sure your booth is in a main corridor, near a major attraction, or
otherwise in an area where walk-by traffic is heavy.
 A great way to attract attention to your booth is to give a speech, presentation,
or class. You cannot directly “plug” your company, but this will still attract
positive interest and gain a lot of preshow publicity (in printed programs,
Websites, etc.). At some shows, there is a fee for this.
 Most trade shows or conventions offer endless opportunities to spend a little
extra money and more heavily promote your presence. For example,
announcements such as “lunch today is sponsored by Hi-Temp Plastics Co.,
booth 117” are available at a price. Consider if this may be effective.
 Consider that attendance at trade shows or related events is just another part
of the marketing mix. Is this where your small business gets the most value
for the marketing dollar? Adjust spending up or down accordingly.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 77
Joe Loses Out at Trade-Show to California Girls
Our company once exhibited at an
annual trade show for database
companies in San Diego. Attendees
arrived in February from all over the
world for three days of classes and
speeches by industry leaders. We
hoped that many would visit the exhibitors’ hall.
Most of the attendees were
young or middle-aged males, and
San Diego was a welcome respite
from the cold winter. It was not until
after we had set up the booth that
we realized our problem: After listening to 90-minute presentations about
new database software, attendees
had the choice of either taking a
break by heading into the basement
of the building to see the exhibitors’
hall, or strolling outside the hotel,
inhaling the fresh ocean breeze, feeling the sun, and viewing legendary
California girls sunning on the
beach.
Attendance in the exhibitors’ hall
at this event was uncommonly low.
Co-op Advertising
Many small businesses work within a chain of manufacturers, wholesalers,
distributors, and retailers, or among a group of interrelated service providers. If
this is the case, look into co-op advertising programs.
Co-op programs normally work something like this: “The manufacturer will
credit your account for 2 percent of the cost of all approved mailers in the next
90 days.”
The process here is first to design or change a mailing piece to the
manufacturer’s liking. (The manufacturer will like ads that feature only their
name and products. Ads prominently promoting the competition will not be approved.)
Keep track of costs and send receipts and sample ads to the program originator. If $10,000 is spent on the mailing program, $200 will be credited to your
vendor account, which will reduce the real cost of future purchases.
These programs often do not make sense all by themselves, but they may
sweeten and change the shape of advertising campaigns that were planned anyway.
Ask business partners about co-op ad programs, or suggest a similar plan
that makes sense for your small business.
Chamber of Commerce and Networking
Many small business owners enjoy networking with other entrepreneurs at
chamber of commerce meetings, or those of related organizations. Chambers
ostensibly exist to represent the business side of issues to local government, and
there are many special committees through which this can be accomplished. Still,
the overriding reason to join chambers of commerce is—to make commerce.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 78
Most business meetings and social events are structured to encourage as
much networking as possible among members. For example, many events begin
by allowing each participant 60 seconds to explain his or her business. To some
extent, this is a great way to make new contacts in the business community; but
organizations such as this should be viewed in a “what goes around comes around”
sense—that is, be prepared to develop real long-term relationships and buy as
well as sell to other members. The problem with these organizations is that some
meetings turn into selling frenzies, with 40 salespeople presenting and selling to
each other. Everyone is there to sell, not to buy.
Organizations such as these are heavily attended by local service providers
such as dentists, lawyers, financial planners, insurance agents, bankers, doctors, printers, contractors, marriage counselors, CPAs, computer types, and
many others. Most are classic small businesses. Larger firms are normally represented by salespeople (sorry, it’s unlikely the director of purchasing will be
attending).
Look for chamber of commerce and related organizations such as “Le Tip”
in your area. This can be accomplished on-line by searching for “Chamber of
Commerce” on Yahoo, and then entering a local zip code into the directory
search. Or search for “LeTip” (no space between the words) on any major search
engine.
Ask to attend a meeting for free. Then, when the pressure is on to join, learn
the total benefits package and don’t be shy about asking how the group may
benefit your small business. Consider the whole concept, and not just the opportunity to sell to other members. Expect to invest real time in a sincere effort to
help the business community and get to know other members. Then decide if the
overall commitment has a place in your marketing budget.
Corporate Image and Identity
The image and identity of your small business are augmented by the company name, logo, slogan, colors, and related collateral such as business cards and
letterhead. Many firms spend an inordinate
amount of time churning over these decisions,
so here are a few points to remember to keep
all of this in perspective:
Trademarks
Before choosing a company name, slogan, or logo, it’s important to do a
trademark search. Trademarks can identify and protect company brands and
products.
If a name or slogan is already being used by a local business, a great deal of
money may be spent advertising someone else’s company, and your small business may be sued for doing so. This would not be a good use of marketing funds.
A favorite saying:
“Advertising hates a void”
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 79
Trademark protection is not exclusive, but depends upon the distinctiveness
of the name. Ordinary and common words are difficult to trademark. Imagine,
for example, if only one company in the U.S. was allowed to advertise under the
name “Tony’s Pizza.” On the other hand, no one had better mess with the Nike
name and swoosh logo.
In some cases, a small business may retain the right to use a name merely by
proving it was the first to use it. This could occur if another firm challenged your
use of the name long after promotional efforts had begun. Here, proof that it was
used (for example, showing old newspaper ads) might hold off others and even
trump trademark registration, but this is a cavalier approach to protecting such
important properties.
A trademark is the best and most formal way of securing a name or logo for
your small business, and a trademark search is the place to begin. It’s now easy
to search and register names without an attorney, through the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (www.uspto.gov). The USPTO site answers many questions
and allows on-line searches, access to forms, and registrations. If things get complicated, a trademark attorney (sorry, it’s not a good idea to use a generalist)
must be called in—and they are not cheap. The entire process may take several
months, assuming there are no challenges.
The final product here is federal registration of your trademarked names,
slogans, or logos. This means that these items are locked-down and seen in searches
by others, on a nationwide basis. No other company may say, “I thought no one
else was using that name or phrase or logo.” TM’ing is also evidence and presumption of ownership.
Company Name
Keep your company name simple and descriptive. “Pittsburgh Plate Glass,”
“Comfort Inns,” and “Burger King” are companies that started out small but are
now well-known examples of company names describing their product or service. Of course, the business was successful for reasons well beyond the company name. A good name will make a marginal difference in some situations, but
don’t spend excessive time and money on this. It’s hard to go wrong with a short,
simple, descriptive name, even if it doesn’t have sizzle.
Many small business owners use their last name in the company name (for
example, “Smith Printing”). Some feel, perhaps, that this is a small, but deserved,
measure of ego gratification. However, using your last name may actually be
counterproductive unless it carries positive associations. When negotiating with
new customers, for example, do you want them to know right away that the first
person they have met is the owner, founder, and president of the company? An
exception may be in situations where the last name is well-known in a positive
sense. For example, local boy and ex-professional baseball player Slider Wilson
returns home and opens the Wilson Insurance Agency. Even this can be dicey
because not everyone may agree that this is a positive association.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 80
Jose Bernstein Does Not Compute
Here is one I can’t figure out. This is
a Los Angeles restaurant that breaks
just about every marketing rule but
is successful.
Jose Bernstein’s may sound either Mexican or Jewish, but it sells
American-style burgers made by a
cook from Brazil. Most of its customers are Asian. Right next door is a
thriving Persian café (not big fans
of Bernstein’s). JB’s is located in
the middle of other businesses that
cater to UCLA students, but there
is a red-and-yellow neon sign in the
window. Red and yellow are the colors of arch-rival USC.
Everything works just fine.
Sorry, but I can’t explain this one.
Slogan
A company slogan is often used as a tag line to the company name and should
flow right out of the Unique Selling Proposition of your small business. The
slogan should be as ubiquitous as the company name, appearing on the Website,
business cards, letterhead, brochures, trade-show booth, and even radio and TV
ads. A slogan is not essential, however, and small business owners should not
dwell on this unless there is a compelling message that needs to be associated
with the company name.
Examples of well-known slogans are:
United— “Number One in The Sky Wherever We Fly”
GE— “We Bring Good Things to Life”
Frankie Auto— You’ve never heard of this one, but where I grew up,
an auto dealership continually ran radio and TV ads
imploring listeners in a nauseating voice to “Try me
first or try me last but just try me. Try me.” Eventually,
this became a joke as locals repeated the mantra to
each other to “ just try me.” But 40 years later, the
message is still repeated.
Large companies periodically refresh slogans as marketing campaigns run
their course. Small businesses may do this also, but use caution in this regard
because a change may jeopardize goodwill and recognition that has accrued over
the years.
Logo
A good logo may be nothing more than your company name in a selected
font. To get a little fancier, perhaps underscore the name, in alternating colors,
and enclose it in a simple box.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 81
Notice that many successful small—and large—businesses have very simple
logos. Don’t spend a lot of time and money on this. In fact, simple logos usually
scale to small and large sizes (needed for different advertising materials) better
than more complex designs.
Colors
There is no chance you will think of a stunning, new, and undiscovered color
combination, so it’s probably best to stick with tried-and-true combinations such
as black, blue, and red on white. Depending upon your business, other colors
may be acceptable, but fortunately there is so much color out there today that
it’s hard to make a mistake.
In more complex situations, where company image and identity may be more
important, small business owners are encouraged to work with firms that specialize in this area.
Company image and identity are important, but these decisions will only go
a certain distance in growing the business. Despite all the hype, buyers still
prefer substance over style. The cleverest materials of this sort may get some
initial attention, but this will not be enough to prevail as the products and
services offered by your small business are analyzed and compared with those of
competitors.
Decisions associated with your company image and identity should be made
quickly and without undue time and expense. Stick with your choices, remain
consistent, and, most important, offer good products and services. Goodwill will
build over time.
Advertising and the Law
Laws concerning advertising are generally administered by the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC), but this area is also governed by a number of state and local
agencies. Consumers also may sue companies that make false offers, usually to
compel performance. For example, if a small business offers “free shipping on
all orders placed this month” and buyers later find that this applies only to
purchases over $100, a class-action attorney may force your company to pay
restitution to every buyer during this period of time, plus damages and legal
expenses—yours and theirs.
Beyond this, the FTC is generally on the watch against false and misleading
claims. This is a complex legal area, but problems may normally be avoided by
making sure all advertising is factually correct. For example, it’s acceptable to
say, “We are a leading supplier of aerospace fasteners,” because “leading” may
be interpreted in many ways; but if the ad says “We are the number-one seller of
aluminum aerospace fasteners in the U.S.,” then this fact had better be correct.
If not, expect your competitors to speed-dial the FTC.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 82
Unwanted attention may be received regarding claims about competitive products, such as “twice as effective as the same product from Acme Chemical.” In
this case, you may receive notice to defend the claim in a libel lawsuit.
Finally, your small business may get sued if your advertising program is too
successful. This may occur when consumers line up to buy the products and
services offered in an advertising campaign, but they are not available. The thinking
here is that you have made an offer, and must therefore perform—or it was a
false offer. An example might be, “Close out! Any RCX Color Television for
only $100!” What you really mean is that old inventory must be cleared out. The
ad should have included three extra words: “Close out! Any RCX Color Television for only $100! While supplies last.”
Attention from the FTC usually begins with informal communications to
gain voluntary compliance. This may result in an expensive settlement, but it is
better than slugging it out in court. In a battle of attrition between a small business and the FTC, the FTC will always win. Other actions available to the FTC
include cease-and-desist orders, civil lawsuits, and forcing your small business to
run an embarrassing corrective advertising program.
Visit www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com for additional help with
trademarking.
Budget
Advertising is not for the feint-of-heart small business owner. Although spending in most areas of a company is closely regulated and monitored for effectiveness, attitudes towards small business advertising are usually something like,
“Let’s throw some money into this idea for a while and see if it works.” In the
beginning, results are usually less than expected, and changes are made until the
effort is fine-tuned. Of course, this may take a great deal of time and money,
more than some small businesses have.
Consumers are bombarded relentlessly with non-stop advertising in just about
every possible media, so even if your small business has the world’s best products
and highest-quality services, no one will know without advertising. Therefore, some
real money must be budgeted for advertising, especially in start-up firms.
Begin by getting statistics on how firms like yours prefer to advertise. The
answer for your small business is probably similar. Check trade publications, other
industry resources, or the U.S. Small Business Administration for statistics on the
percentage of revenues committed to advertising by similar companies in other
areas, or across the U.S. If the competition is a publicly traded company, check
SEC filings to see what dollar amount and percentage of revenues is spent on
advertising and marketing. For example, an insurance broker may learn from his
company marketing group that colleagues operating in other cities spend 5 percent of revenues per year on advertising, with a minimum of $5,000. This wellestablished company statistic may be of immense value to a new agent.
Marketing: Artillery for Sales 83
Once your small business is underway, watch carefully where new business
comes from. This information is best gained by asking customers directly. Budget accordingly. If you devise a way to predict revenues based upon advertising
and your small business cannot afford this expense, perhaps it’s best to wait until
sufficient funds are available before entering the business.
In any case, be prepared to play around with variations of marketing programs and see what works best. This will cost a lot of money, and some carefully
designed programs may yield absolutely nothing. Still, as we said, advertising is
not for the feint-of-heart small business owner.
Once the budget is established, small business owners are ready to consider
other parts of their marketing and advertising strategy, described in this chapter.
Model for Calculating Return-on-Advertising
Comparing different types of advertising and marketing alternatives can be
mind-boggling, so how does the small business owner calculate the best value?
It is best when a small business can reduce marketing costs directly to sales
and profits, such as “radio spots cost $1,000 per week but generate $5,500 in
increased revenues; $5,000 in extra revenues means $1,800 in additional profits.
So $1,000 in advertising yields back my expenses plus $800 in profits.”
This model may be extremely effective. Study the structure below, and then
add or delete lines, change the percentages and amounts, and otherwise customize to your own situation:
Cost of campaign per week ...................................................................... $1,000
Reaches how many new prospects? ...................................................... 50,000
How many prospects will call for information? 1% ................ 500
Of the call-ins, how many will request a price quote? 25% ................ 125
What percentage of price quotes do we normally win? 20% .................. 25
What are the average revenues of a new deal? ........................................ $220
Multiply by number of deals: .......................................................................... 25
= Incremental revenues per week from the advertising campaign ......$5,500
What is our margin from new deals? ........................................................... $72
Multiply by number of deals: .......................................................................... 25
= Incremental margin per week from the advertising campaign ..........$1,800
Therefore, $1000 in advertising yields $5,500 in extra revenues and $800
in additional margin after advertising expenses.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 84
Now look at each number in this model. Is it realistic? If not, change the
amounts until each value is believable and yields the margins needed to pay the
expenses of your small business. Is this amount affordable?
As your small business considers different forms of marketing and advertising, using this model may be the best way to measure and compare the effectiveness of everything from newspaper ads to trade shows.
Writing and Designing Ads: In-House or Outside?
As noted in the very first sentence of this chapter, all forms of advertising
have one thing in common: They are all expensive. Is it a good idea to at least
write and design your ads in-house? The answer to this question is no, unless you
have significant previous experience in this area.
Small business owners should always be concerned with where they can add
the most value, and although it may be tempting to write your own ad copy and
use in-house computer skills to lay out the ad, in the end, this may be a tragic
waste of money. In a classic case of “win the battle and lose the war,” ads designed by amateurs will still cost the same amount to produce and distribute, but
may be dramatically less effective.
Advertisers should be intimately involved in all phases of the campaign, beginning with the first copy and design. There is no one who understands your
small business better than you. But in general, it’s best to let professionals do the
creative work and step back into the role of subbing out the project and limiting
your involvement to editing, reviewing, and approving. Delegating this task to
experienced copywriters and designers offers a certain peace of mind, assuring
you that the look and feel of the advertising campaigns is professional.
Whatever Works
American businesses of all sizes are blessed with an extraordinary range of
choices in marketing and advertising our products and services. Advertising
can be purchased just about anywhere, anytime, and in any format. Do not
stray too far from what the competition is doing, but be open-minded about
new possibilities.
85
Chapter 5
Your Incredible Website
and E-Store
This chapter reviews the essentials of setting up and operating a basic Website,
one with advanced features such as an e-catalog, and an e-store. We also advise
the small business owner when it’s okay to “do it yourself, do it for less,” and
when outside expertise should be considered.
There is just no getting away from the necessity for some level of Internet
presence these days, so small business owners should consider what level of involvement is appropriate for now, and also plan for the future. As we proceed, it
is important to remember two concepts.
First, think of the key objective of your Website. Is it to create visibility and
attract customers? Is it to sell your products? Perhaps call-ins regarding professional services offerings are desired. Is it to provide information to build goodwill and reduce the number of calls to your staff? Keep this in mind as the initial
Website is built, and add on additional features later.
Second, remember that a Website is not a project that is started and finished
(say, like a brochure), but is a continuing work in progress. Unlike printed materials, a Website should be updated frequently and always reflect the latest news
about your small business with an exciting spin, to encourage visitors and customers to return often.
Website
The most basic Internet presence is a one-page Website; because these are
so cheap, easy to set up and effective, the smallest of small businesses must have
one. Even if the Internet site is a single page and merely gives your name, address, and business hours through a template from Yahoo or a similar operator,
it’s still a good deal. Something like this will cost about $12 per month, and you
won’t find a more effective form of advertising, as we shall see.
Small business owners can have a site up and running within a day by investing less than $30 in fixed expenses, and by sailing through two on-line sessions of 30 minutes or less. For example, Yahoo.com, MSN.com, Earthlink.net,
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 86
and hundreds of other smaller Internet operators offer many attractive “fill-inthe-blanks” Website templates (more on this shortly) and hosting services, and
do the job just as well as the bigger companies.
You can set up a Website in three steps:
1. Choose and register a domain name.
2. Select a place to host the domain.
3. Design and publish the Website.
Choose and Register a Domain Name
The first step is to register the desired name, such as www.dwightkennedy.com.
This is your domain name and is critical for two reasons: First, once the name is
registered, it belongs to your small business and to no one else; and second, an
Internet Protocol (IP) address is issued immediately in the format of four numbers separated by periods. Each of the four numbers can be up to three digits in
length, for example, 66.218.79.155. Servers on the Internet desperately need IP
addresses for just about everything, such as knowing where to go when someone
types “www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com,” for delivering e-mail, for
routing bits of music, video, or telephone traffic to the right place, and much
more. However, people find it much easier to recall words and phrases. Imagine,
for example, how Amazon would promote their site with just an IP address of
“We are Amazon. See us on the Internet at 207.171.166.102.” Not too elegant. So
the DNS directories cross-reference IP addresses and domain names so that
Internet users do not need to work with geeky IP addresses but only need to
remember snappy domain names. (IP, DNS, and other terms are defined further
in Chapter 14.)
Pick something that is descriptive, memorable, and as short as possible. The
company name is always a good idea but is not required. If your company name
doesn’t say enough, consider something more descriptive. An increasingly common tactic is to register several names, with each domain either a separate Internet
location or redirecting browsers to a single main Website.
For example, the owners of Heckler Accounting Services, LLC, may consider:
 www.HecklerAccountingServices.com—the main site
 www.LosAngelesQuickbooksHelp.com—a one-page Website
about the Quickbooks expertise offered by this firm
 www.SouthernCalBusinessAccounting.com—when users click
this link, they are directed to
www.HecklerAccountingServices.com
 www.BizTaxHelpLosAngeles.com—when users click this link,
they are again directed to www.HecklerAccountingServices.com
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 87
The name “Heckler’s Accounting Services” may not say enough in Internet
parlance, but the other names, such as www.LosAngelesQuickbooksHelp.com,
do. A good name in itself is an advertisement, leaving no doubt as to what
browsers will see at this site.
There are many places where it’s fast, easy and inexpensive to find and register a domain name, such as http://smallbusiness.yahoo.com (then click “Domains”), or www.DomainBank.net, www.Register.com and www.GoDaddy.com.
Or go to www.Google.com and search for “register a domain name.”
Select a Place to Host the Domain
Once the name is registered, the next step is to tell the Internet where the
Website will reside. In other words, there are millions of servers out there, but
which one hosts the files that make up your site? This information is needed so
that traffic will be directed to the correct place.
For most small businesses, selecting the host site is an easy decision that
should cause little consternation. For example, if the domain name was registered with one of the big names described above (e.g., Yahoo), then just go with
the flow and let it stay there. If you are working with a local Website design
company, in most cases it’s fine to use their servers. Larger operators must worry
about downtime, input/output speeds, and bandwidth. Small businesses normally
do not need to be especially concerned about these issues, because technology
has improved so much in recent times. After the site is up (“published” or “online”), visit it at least once a week and click a few links to make sure everything
is still there and to see if the response times are acceptable (that is, how long
does it take after clicking a link until a page is fully visible?).
To select the place to host a domain, enter your IP address and two DNS
server names (primary and secondary). For example, if your small business is hosting its Website on Yahoo, the primary DNS server is “yns1.yahoo.com”, and if
that server runs into trouble, the secondary DNS server is “yns2.yahoo.com”. Don’t
worry about finding this information. Most Internet companies put it in your
face as much as possible to make it easy to register the domain on their systems.
A second choice is to host your own Website by purchasing a Web server
and attaching it to the Internet (a Web server looks like any other workstation
but has a few extra hardware features and is configured to serve up pages to the
Internet). A Web server (in contrast to a file server, print server, etc.) attaches
to a DSL or T1 line through a modem, switch, and router. All of this—including
hardware, software, and installation—will cost from $2,000 to $5,000. The bottom line will be substantially more than the $15 to $60 per month charged by
Website hosting firms, especially considering maintenance costs, but some small
businesses prefer the security and ease of access of operating their own Internet
server. This depends upon many internal factors. In general, however, small
business owners should not attempt to get into the Web-hosting business, because other alternatives are so easy and inexpensive.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 88
A middle way between option one (renting space on commercial servers) and
option two (buying and operating a Web server) is to purchase a server and have
it installed and managed at a “colocation site” through a Dedicated Server Hosting provider. Here, the server is normally installed in a rack-mount cabinet at a
professionally managed facility offering many related services, such as tightly
controlled access into air-conditioned, secure data centers; modern firewalls;
nightly data backups; backup electrical power systems (battery for short-term,
falling over to diesel generators); backup cooling systems; lots of extra capacity
for peak-use periods in routers, switches, load-balancing equipment, and disk
storage space; higher-speed connections to the Internet; and perhaps, most important, capable hands to fix both software and hardware problems immediately.
The Dedicated Server Hosting option may be the best for small businesses that
need a high-capacity, high-availability server but do not want to purchase the
infrastructure needed to keep all of it going.
Many Website design firms can recommend a good Dedicated Server Hosting option, or provide one themselves. Or just search under “Dedicated Server
Hosting” on a favorite search engine. Because there is no reason to ever visit
your server, the collocation site may be located anywhere, and it is not especially
important to work with a local provider.
Design and Publish the Website
Once the name is registered, find a Website hosting company. These companies have hundreds of templates available where small business owners need
only enter the name, address, and a few other points of interest about the company. Voila! Your Website is up and running and visible to the world. A more
formidable site with additional features can replace this at a later time.
Just about anyone who can get on the Internet with a credit card can register
a domain name and set up a simple site. For those who are too busy or not
comfortable enough with all of this, pay your nephew or the kid in the shipping
room a little extra to do the job. The skills needed at this level are very easy to
find, and many aspiring Internet mavens are eager to get some production experience on their resumes. Make sure the information entered is correct, and make
sure you have the user names and passwords to get back into the account and
later take over or reassign the job.
The simplest Website should explain commonly asked questions about the
company, such as location, hours, business specialty, and your Unique Selling
Proposition (Chapter 2). In fact, many sites have an FAQ, or Frequently Asked
Questions page, to provide the most needed information quickly to visitors.
This, and any text or pictures describing a small business, is called “content.” Writing content is normally the job of the small business, not the Website
designer. Be prepared to do a lot of writing, or rewrite existing marketing materials for the Internet. Once the Website is up and running, the new domain
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 89
name should be added to all marketing materials and can be used by inside and
outside sales reps to reference when customers need commonly requested information and to establish credibility.
As the Website grows, extra features are commonly considered that require
expertise beyond the skills of most small business owners. Applications such as
Adobe Photoshop and Macromedia Fireworks are used to create or edit pictures
(GIFS or JPEGS); Macromedia Dreamweaver or Microsoft FrontPage and
HTML are used to lay out and design Web pages and structure sites; and when
“dynamic content” is needed (the Web page changes depending upon what the
visitor wants to see), expertise in programs such as Java, Java Script, .NET,
ASP, mySQL, osCommerce, php, and Perl may be required.
Remember that in all marketing efforts, form and substance work together
to create an overall impression in the minds of visitors. Make sure the people
working on the site have a good feel for the latest designs, colors, and structures
of other successful locations. This is where great value may be gained from working
with the right outside Website design company.
Internet sites are normally built on developmental machines and then sent to
the Website server when completed, where they are then “published” or available for the world to see. The files are usually sent via FTP, or File Transport
Protocol, with easy-to-use programs such as CuteFTP.
Remember that a Website is never really finished but should be considered a
continuing work in progress. After the first few pages are up and running, the
next step for many firms is to add extra features, as described in the next section.
Additional Website Features
Once your first Website is set up, it won’t be long before extra features seem
like a good idea. At this point, the skill sets needed are more formidable, and so
a Website design firm should be contracted. The objective here is to gain a modern, appropriate look and feel in the context of the small business, and fast,
professional work. Also, the overall structure of the Website is critical in allowing visitors to find what they need quickly, and thereby promote your company.
A local Website design company is not required because the latest changes
can be viewed on the Internet quickly and easily, but there are benefits in dealing
with a vendor doing business across town rather than across the country. Locating a good Website design firm is not difficult. It can be accomplished in much
the same manner as finding computer expertise, discussed in Chapter 8.
Some of the extra features to be considered are:
 E-mail Newsletter. This could be a great way to continually promote products
and services. The newsletter should contain relevant information and articles
so that readers don’t consider it to be spam, and it should be sent twice a
month at most for the same reason. Various Internet services and software
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 90
are available that allow small businesses to set up and administer the production
and distribution of e-mail newsletters quickly. Professional administration is
especially important these days so that your e-mails are not labeled as spam
and blocked by big hitters such as AOL and Earthlink. Features such as
automatic opt-in (where the newsletter is sent only to those who have
requested it) and one-click remove (recipients may immediately stop receiving
e-mails by clicking one link without remembering user names and passwords)
are essential in this respect.
 Support Center. Visitors can download installation instructions, technical
information, diagrams, and details on how to fix problems. This could be an
important selling point to prospective customers.
 Industry Information. Some Websites seek to draw visitors by becoming a
community resource. A doctor specializing in hyperbaric medicine (problems
associated with deep-sea diving), for example, might offer information such
as diving tables and information about shellfish poisoning. The doctor is
providing information needed by this community.
 On-Line Catalog. A catalog in this sense means lots of Web pages describing
the products and services offered by your small business, but customers do
not have the option of buying from the Website. This option is especially
relevant to small businesses selling complex or regulated products, where online sales are not feasible but where customers may need detailed product
information. A distributor of pharmaceutical products, for example, cannot
ship prescription drugs to unknown buyers. The same reasoning applies to
gun dealers, industrial chemical suppliers, and many others. But in each case,
the sales force may greatly appreciate the ease and speed of getting customers
to Web pages where detailed product information and details are immediately
available and can be reviewed on the telephone or in person, rather than
spending the time and money and suffering the loss of sales momentum in
mailing the same data.
 Lead-Generation Tools. This addition to the on-line catalog allows viewers to
push a button, fill in a form, and request more information or a telephone call
from a sales rep. This may be an inexpensive and effective way to increase
sales.
 Live Chat. One way to reduce the number of inbound telephone calls for
customer service and support is to set up an Internet chat service (for example,
Groopz, at www.groopz.com), where customers are encouraged (usually, by
not giving out your telephone number) to communicate via computer with
operators in real time rather than call. Website visitors type their concerns
into a chat window, where a live operator on your end can manage several
calls at once. For special situations, such as an opportunity to sell the customer
a better product, promotional Web pages and files can be pushed (sent) to
the customer.
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 91
 Search. Many larger sites offer a search feature where visitors can cut through
all of the mumbo-jumbo and just see pages with a particular keyword. This is
a relatively easy add-on, and is especially relevant for sites with a lot of
information. The search capability may be a key feature in enhancing useability
and separating your site from others.
 Customized Features. Special services can be added, such as asking visitors a
series of questions to help them select the best product, calculate the financial
effects of a purchase over time, or other special needs they may have. Such
services are custom-developed by programmers in the various disciplines listed
previously.
Considering an E-Store
On-line sales continue to grow at an unbelievable rate. Even when the economy
is chugging along at a 2 percent to 3 percent growth rate, sales on the Internet
are increasing at a rate of 10 percent to 20 percent per year (depending upon the
market segment). In some cases, Internet sales are simply displacing purchases
that would have occurred in retail locations, but maybe your small business should
take advantage of this sales channel, which now exceeds $1 billion in revenue per
week.
E-commerce also continues to grab a larger share of total retail sales. In 1999,
e-commerce sales totaled $5 billion, increased to over $16 billion in 2004, and are
expected to reach $316 billion by 2010 (Census Bureau, Forrester Research, ClickZ,
as reported in Processor Magazine, September 2004).
Gaining an additional revenue stream from e-commerce is an alternative that
should be carefully thought out. Customers from all over the world may shop all
day, the growth numbers cited above are compelling, and many small businesses
believe this is the future. On the other hand, e-commerce requires new methods,
concerns, and infrastructure and may affect existing sales channels.
Many small businesses are finding the setup and operation of an e-store increasingly easy and affordable. Many find that an e-store is a handy augmentation
tool for the inside sales force. In some cases, the entire sales transaction takes
place on-line, and buyer and seller have no direct communication. In other cases,
the e-store attracts buyers, but many want to speak with a real person for a few
minutes before entering their credit card and committing to the sale. Some operations are set up so that the inside sales force or call-center can fully explain products, close the original sale, and then up-sell customers into higher revenues, suggest
high-margin accessories, or work out expedited shipping arrangements. In any
case, your small business will need to commit resources to a call-in center to fully
maximize benefits from the e-store and handle customer service issues.
The theme of this section is how to consider, set up, and launch an e-store.
All the major dimensions of running an e-store are discussed, along with the
resources that will be needed.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 92
Access to Cheap Prices
The most important factor to on-line sellers these days is access to low prices.
Pricing on the Internet is hypercompetitive, and the only way to make a reasonable margin is by purchasing and reselling at discount. If your small business is
accustomed to selling at normal retail prices, this will prove untenable on the
Internet because it’s just too easy for shoppers to check prices and shop elsewhere. Shoppers can check dozens of competitors in a minute or less, and there
is little loyalty. Every small business contemplating an e-store must have access
to very low prices or everything else is for naught. An important exception is
firms who manufacture or have access to difficult-to-find items, such as replacement parts for business equipment.
Estimating product margins through the e-store is easy. Because the costs
are known, pretend you are shopping on the Internet and see what these products sell for in other e-stores, then subtract direct expenses. Can you make serious money this way? Don’t try to answer before reading the rest of this section.
Will Your Product Sell?
Beyond pricing, determine first if your products can really sell through an
e-store. For example, some products cannot legally be shipped (certain chemicals, alcoholic beverages, animals, weapons); others may require government
Joe Turns Trash to Cash on eBay
Our small business had a large number of high-end, esoteric computer
products used only by larger businesses, and they weren’t selling. This
subsystem could be of use only to
certain businesses that had already
installed similar equipment, and
these companies were scattered
across the U.S. Potential customers
were difficult to find through our
conventional methods of smiling and
dialing. And as always with technology-related equipment, prices were
always headed south.
We decided to try eBay. I worked
from my computer at home late into
the evening one night to open an account and set up the ad. I though I
was wasting my time and money. Selling high-end business equipment
through the Internet seemed unlikely.
It actually took a few days to get
the first auction up and running, as
we edited and posted digital pictures
and learned a little more about
credit cards, Paypal, html, and other
details.
We set the first auction for seven
days, but after only three days had our
first bid. This was exciting. Although
we thought the equipment would sell
only to large businesses, a small business owner in Alabama had found the
equipment and placed a bid for
$2,100. We would not have ever
found this buyer otherwise—and the
bid was considerably more than the
$300 we were getting by selling the
same equipment as parts. Things
were clicking.
The auction ended and we soon
had our equipment on a truck headed
to Alabama. The buyer was delighted
with the purchase and our business
relationship expanded into other areas
from this first sale.
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 93
approvals to sell (imported toys, cosmetics, vitamins), and still others are too
fragile to be shipped (to test, drop-kick a packaged sample item across the room;
this is what happens after the delivery truck leaves your loading dock).
Also, most on-line selling these days is centered on keyword searches. For
example, from Yahoo! or Google, a shopper types in a keyword (also known as
“search term”) such as “Seagate,” and hyperlinks to dozens of e-stores appear
on the screen. If there are great keywords to associate with your ads (for example, Nike, Ralph Lauren, or other household names) and access to great prices,
then we’re off to a great start. If there are no distinguishing search terms that
shoppers frequently use when looking for your product, it will be difficult for
anyone to find the e-store through keyword searches. Other promotional means
would be needed, which are often prohibitively expensive except when a firm
selling business or industrial parts promotes an e-store to other businesses
through its sales force.
Fast Shipping
Most Internet shoppers these days expect shipment of their order within 24
hours. If your small business is already shipping products, this may be easy to
do. Otherwise, be prepared to hustle furiously to process orders in the morning,
pack after lunch, and finish before the UPS pickup in the afternoon. Even though
we are talking about the Internet here, many sellers cannot completely automate
these processes, and much work and stress is involved in processing credit cards,
printing shipping labels, packing boxes, etc. And attention Quickbooks users:
Don’t expect much integration between the e-store and the accounting system.
This is also generally true of other accounting and e-commerce applications,
where seamless integration remains a dream.
For some products, it’s necessary to offer the full range of shipping alternatives from cheapest-and-slowest to expensive-and-expedited. Since there may be
many different products and different weights, and since buyers may purchase
several items from an e-store at once, some sellers offer different size-and-weight
combinations in addition to different delivery methods. This can get very complex very fast. The easy solution? Find a competitor with a simple shipping deal,
then offer the same to your customers. For example, if a competitor offers “Standard Shipping $9.95 anywhere in the continental U.S. in three business days,”
then a simple plan like this may be the best. In some cases, shipping expenses will
actually end up costing more than this, but on balance, the whole store may
produce more revenues and profits.
As business grows, there are powerful shipping options that can be connected
to the e-store. These allow buyers to punch in their zip code and see many shipping alternatives at once. Once again, this is a great feature, but can be too much
to handle in the beginning. Perhaps the best advice is to add full shipping options
after the e-store is a success.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 94
Additional information on shipping solutions for e-stores is available from
UPS.com, FedEx.com, USPS.gov, and through e-store providers such as Yahoo
(http://smallbusiness.yahoo.com).
Credit Card and E-Payment Systems
Accepting, managing, and accounting for credit cards and other forms of
e-payment is a major component of running an e-store. Chapter 13 is devoted to
this subject.
Ad Copy
Small businesses that already use printed catalogs certainly have an advantage in setting up an e-store, but be prepared to spend time checking each ad in
the catalog and review for appropriateness in the new Internet store. For example, an inside sales force may know how to look up in a printed catalog and
describe K5E-1KSTP-YL, CAT-5E Cable, 24AWG, STP, 4 Pairs, Solid, 1000’,
Yellow, $57.30. But this description will need to be prettied up and expanded to
please new Internet customers. Also, remember that buyers love photographs,
even if they know exactly what they are buying. So you’ll need digital photographs of each item, cut to a white or neutral background. Be sure to budget
enough time and money for all of this.
If your small business distributes a large number of products, consider offering only the hot sellers initially in the e-store. Allow a few weeks to resolve any
problems, and then expand to include the entire product line.
Call-Center
Many Internet shoppers prefer to conduct research on the Web but then call
a toll-free number to ask a few final questions and place the order. A call-center
is also needed for customer service. For a small business, this can be as simple as
adding one PC to the network, installing an extra phone line, and assigning a
cheery, sharp person to handle calls. But call-centers add to the cost of doing
business and must be carefully factored in to business plans because margins will
already be thin. And what kind of sales volume is needed to support all this? If
the business plan shows that 100 shipments per day are needed to break even,
and expects that this will require 50 inbound telephone calls, is it feasible that
your small staff can do this without extra help?
Interestingly, many successful e-stores strive to create a well-designed e-store
that attempts to answer all frequently asked customer questions and that does
not promote a toll-free telephone number. At some sites, there is much information and guidance allowing customers to research, compare, and purchase
on-line—but many sellers don’t necessarily want to speak with customers, because each call is extra time and expense. These vendors are striking the balance
between converting e-store shoppers into buyers and striving to minimize costs.
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 95
Despite this, a call-center with toll-free lines is essential and can distinguish
your store from others, give comfort to customers, even if they never call, react
quickly to customer service situations, and perhaps most important, take orders
from the many customers who want to give their credit card information to a real
person rather than an Internet site.
Vermont Company Gets Its Bear-ings On-Line
Here’s a great story about a successful small business that was around
for a long time but really came into its
own by selling its products on-line.
Vermont Teddy Bear sold the majority of its products through a telephone call-center for more than 20
years. Most of its customers are men,
and the biggest holiday season at this
company is Valentine’s Day. The
problem with telephone call-centers,
however, is that customers often have
trouble visualizing what they are buying. Catalogs help, but printing and
mailing costs are expensive, and the
time frame is slow.
Then, in 1997, Vermont Teddy Bear
(www.VermontTeddyBear.com)
opened an e-store. Once grizzly customers could now browse through the
Website and see different products
before ordering, and compare clothing and accessories, too. The amount
of time needed to complete sales
through more expensive telephone
sales reps decreased, and the company could now pander (they say
“panda”) to customers by shipping
most orders the same day.
Of course, this small business
uses on-line marketing techniques to
promote its products, but good old
radio spots directed to male audiences are also heavily used. The company has found that sometimes, men
and women have un-bearable problems, but just about everyone melts
when a nice teddy bear appears.
Bearing witness to the effects of a
solid Unique Selling Proposition, a well
run e-store, and both on-line and traditional marketing efforts, Vermont
Teddy Bear has seen sales through
its e-store increase to $28 million per
year, accounting for around half of
total revenues, while the remainder
of the industry has been in a state of
hibernation.
Fulfillment Companies
When sales volume approaches 100 units per day, its often time to consider
outsourcing e-store and call-center activities to a fulfillment company. Fulfillment firms are happy to take over just about any ordering and shipping activity,
and are frequently a good option for small businesses that don’t want to get
overly involved in e-store operations. Most of these companies got their start in
the mail-order business as infomercial-related commerce gained steam in the
1980s, and now happily serve e-store operators. Utilizing these firms allows small
business owners to focus on sales, marketing, and cost controls, while outsourcing
functions such as call-centers, warehousing, shipping, inventory control, accounting, order processing, returns, and exchanges.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 96
There are many fulfillment companies across the U.S. The easiest way to
find a local firm is to search for “Fulfillment Company” on your favorite search
engine.
Recruiting
Your small business will need lots of grunts to build the store, upload the
catalog, process, ship orders, and make the accounting entries. The good news is
that it’s now easy to recruit great people at low prices for this type of work.
Many job searchers, especially towards the entry level, are looking for an opportunity to break into e-commerce and develop their skills. Place a well-written ad
(see Chapter 6) and ask for responses by e-mail. The recruiting in-box will soon
be bulging.
The skill sets needed will vary depending upon the type of e-store you envision. At a minimum, anyone building the store or catalog will need to know
HTML and associated products such as Macromedia’s Dreamweaver, Fireworks, and Coldfusion; Microsoft’s FrontPage and Excel; as well as Adobe
PhotoShop. If additional functionalities are needed (such as dynamic pages),
other skills may be necessary, including Java, Java Script, .NET, ASP, mySQL,
php, osCommerce, Perl, Microsoft VBA (Visual Basic for Applications), and
Microsoft Access. If these skills are well-known within your small business,
consider managing the project internally. However, if the programs listed above
sound like a bunch of mumbo-jumbo, start off by contracting an e-store development vendor since all of this is a bit much to learn quickly. A checklist and
sample e-store development proposal and agreement may be seen at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Extra marketing help may also be desirable. A marketing analyst is often
needed to tweak pricing and specials continually relative to competitive sites,
watch the success of keyword ads, and drive marketing campaigns such as crosssells, up-sells, holiday specials, express-shipping options, etc. In this case, the
new hire already should be familiar with dozens of Websites frequented by shoppers and Internet-selling mavens, and know how e-stores are affected by variations in keyword ads.
For other recruits, however, fewer technical skills are needed. Administrators who process credit card orders and handle e-mails, packing and shipping
types, and customer service reps may only need basic PC and Internet skills.
Entry-level types do need tight and effective management, however, to schedule
staff around the various tasks and to optimize efforts on a continual basis.
Hopefully, in-house staff can be used for some of this, but beware if the
project is off to a slow start. The best argument for using an outside contractor is
that things get done quickly and with fewer headaches, and the cash begins rolling
in sooner. Although e-stores are easier to set up and operate than before, much
has not been automated and never will (for example, taping boxes), so as business
volume grows, expect to work with lots of new staff to keep things moving.
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 97
Channel Conflict
Small business owners should be aware that others may not be wild about
your new on-line store. Consider how distributors, dealers, retailers, VARs, or
other parts of the sales channel feel about getting cut out. Many retailers, for
example, become angry at vendors when a customer walks in the store, examines
a product, asks lots of time-consuming questions, and then leaves to buy the
exact same item for a cheaper price on the Internet. Antagonizing established
and lucrative parts of the sales channel is risking a revenue stream that is hereand-now, versus the promise of perhaps selling more at some later time on the
Internet. This is the dilemma faced by many small business owners.
Some traditional sellers have found a way around this by setting up a separate company to handle all e-commerce sales.
In some cases, setting up an e-store may displease the channels, and in other
cases selling outside of channels may not be allowed at all, according to agreements signed with customers. But the small business owner may still decide that
the future is coming and that ultimately an e-store will be the best means of
growing revenues.
eBay
Ebay is an alternative to an on-line store, where specific items are “launched”
and then either auctioned or sold in a limited period of time (for example, 10
days). Entire books are available on the eBay experience, but a few words are
offered here to help you consider the overall situation.
Ebay is sometimes used by small businesses as a separate selling channel,
and, just as important, as a means of pulling shoppers into the e-store. The
biggest issue among on-line sellers remains how to drive traffic to their sites.
For example, if your small business sells bicycles, a few hot-selling, low-priced
models can be offered on eBay. But in one subtle way or another, the eBay
browser is encouraged to visit your on-line store directly and shop for more
expensive models and lots of high-margin accessories. In this way, eBay can be
the most effective means of driving traffic to an e-store. Many sellers even set
up a store on eBay for this purpose only. Not surprisingly, eBay is happy to
accommodate vendors in this way through its “eBay Store” program, since
transactions are still settled on their site and eBay earns handsome fees. Ebay is
less happy when sellers lure buyers away and onto other sites, and they thereby
miss out on the fees.
Don’t expect high prices on eBay. It is true that most items sell at heavy
discounts off normal end-user prices to buyers who can wait a few days for the
transaction and shipping to conclude. The competition on eBay is extreme, and
there are many sellers with “high-feedback ratings” (meaning that buyers know
they are legitimate and reliable). It is interesting that a seller such as
“aaaaronsairplanes,” selling model airplane motors from an apartment in the
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 98
middle of nowhere, can be a serious competitor to an established small business
with a leased warehouse and business office, lots of employees, design knowhow, computers, taxes, and overhead.
Fraud, Scams, and Viruses
Credit card fraud and related scams are an unfortunate part of the Internet
landscape. Small businesses that do not worry about this much now will need
extra vigilance as e-mail and credit card systems are put into place.
To begin, insides sales and administrative people working the e-mails must
constantly be on the lookout for new viruses, phishers, worms, scams, hackers,
and frauds (see Chapter 14). Extra vigilance is required, and small businesses
must set up systems and shift gears in thinking, so that all are aware that these
systems are constantly under attack. An e-store is only as strong as its weakest
link.
A related problem for the small business owner is that all new employees
must be informed of these threats quickly, because just about everyone needs
access to one important on-line account or another. In the rush to keep things
going, it’s easy to forget.
For example, anyone working the e-mails should expect several officiallooking “urgent notices” every week describing the importance of pressing a link
right away and reentering user names and passwords of the most important online banking and related accounts. Virtually all of these are scams. It takes just
one hapless error for an important account to be lost to bad people across the
country or on another continent.
If an account is compromised and something terrible happens, law-enforcement
agencies will barely lift a finger to help. The problem is too small, spread among
too many jurisdictions, too complicated, and too intangible for busy and disinterested law-enforcement authorities. Scammers know that the chances of getting caught are extremely slim, so if your small business loses money in this
manner, it’s probably not worth the time even to file a police report.
Finally, expect that at least one virus-laden e-mail per day will test your systems. Know how to deal with this by making sure that antivirus definitions are
updated daily and that employees know how to minimize the risk of computer
virus infections.
Sales Taxes
Sellers must generally collect, report, and pay sales taxes on shipments within
their state, and various counties and other taxing jurisdictions may also want a
piece of the action. This can be a real headache, especially in the beginning.
There are three ways to approach this problem.
First, learn what must be done to comply with sales tax laws, and do it. Most
small business owners must learn something about sales taxes anyway, so conduct
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 99
a little more research and learn your responsibilities and liabilities when orders
are shipped from specific locations to customers in diverse areas. Although compliance with sales taxes are complicated, most states offer taxpayers supporting
seminars, informative Websites, call-centers, and printed materials.
Normally, a seller is responsible for collecting and paying sales taxes on transactions shipped to states where they have a physical (for example, office) presence. (Theoretically, customers in other states are supposed to report their
purchase to local taxing authorities and pay the corollary of the sales tax, which
is the use tax. This is undoubtedly a rare occurrence.) Learn if the order-processing system collects this information and if appropriate sales tax reports can
be generated. And, by the way—is the system charging sales tax to customers?
Don’t assume that your e-commerce system knows what to do regarding sales
taxes, because the seller is liable to pay the state regardless.
The second solution: Ignore sales taxes for a few months. After things have
settled down from opening the e-store, time will be available to run the reports,
fill out the forms, and pay sales taxes due. Also, taxes due will most likely be a
very small amount because buyers often jump to a competitor anyway when they
realize that the total price, including sales taxes, is no longer the best deal.
Finally, the entire matter may be turned over to a CPA. Professional accountants are very familiar with sales taxes, but many are not familiar with e-stores.
The CPA will probably be able to prepare sales taxes only after special reports
are run from the e-store. Be prepared either to run these reports or to give the
CPA access to the on-line store.
Much more is said about sales and use taxes in Chapter 7.
There is much to be considered when setting up an e-store, and it takes a
large amount of work and time to set up the required systems. Nevertheless, online sales continue to soar, and an e-store may become an essential part of your
revenue mix. Small business owners should consider this selling option carefully
and be prepared to bring in the help that is needed to study, design, set up, and
operate a successful Internet shopping site.
Setting up an E-Store
Considering all of this, how do you set up an on-line store? There are too
many alternatives to review here comprehensively, but a few are outlined. Our
purpose is to give small business owners enough information to decide which
options to fully investigate.
Rather than buy workstations, servers, special software, extra Internet services, and lots of people to make all of this work, the easiest place to begin might
be to use the programs already available at locations such as Yahoo, Amazon,
MSN (Microsoft Network), and many others. In simple situations, there is no
need to reinvent the wheel.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 100
At Yahoo, for example, new sellers may go to http://smallbusiness.yahoo.com/
(note no “www” in this address) and sign up for a low-end package such as “Merchant Starter,” where $40 per month buys a catalog, shopping cart checkout
system, software tools, a domain name, e-mail accounts, and more. After this is
set up, sellers jump back on their local machine to make a product spreadsheet,
including prices, descriptions, photos, and other information. This is then pumped
(in technical terms, FTP’d) from a local workstation into the new e-store.
Running Faster but Losing Ground
Selling many items on the Internet
these days is easy, but sometimes
it’s difficult to actually make a buck,
especially on electronics products.
Often, the decision comes down to
who has the lowest price on certain model numbers. When buyers
search and see pricing from many
vendors at once, they inevitably
pick the lowest number.
I once helped a small business
move large quantities of disk drives
on both eBay and an e-store, and
everyone was delighted—we were
selling for around $60 each and
the disks were flying off the shelves.
Lots of sellers had the same model,
SZ118202LX, but our prices were
the best by about $2—and it made
a difference.
Then suddenly it slowed. Our
volume declined by about 50 percent in just a couple of days. We
checked and found that major
competitors had lowered their
prices to the $55 – $58 range. We
sweat megabytes. Our company
had huge quantities of the disks,
and we could not afford to sit on
them. It was only a matter of time
until prices fell further, so the only
way to keep them moving through
the Internet was to lower our prices.
We did. The disks started flying off
the shelves again. The competitors
did the same. Their sales went up
and ours went down. This went on
and on.
It was a race to the bottom. In
the disk-drive world especially,
prices either fall fast or they fall
slow. But they are always falling.
No one wants to get caught with
inventory. We had huge quantities
on our shelves, however, and great
determination not to get caught
holding the bag.
We finally came across a marketing trick that paid off royally.
Rather than sell the disk as a single
model number, we turned our
SZ118202LX into many different
products. Suddenly, we were selling larger quantities by calling our
product “SZ118202LX for IBM”,
“SZ118202LX for Compaq”,
“SZ118202LX for Dell”, and so on.
Buyers paid a bit more because
they had an extra assurance that
this disk would work on their specific computer.
Finally, the last SZ118202LX
was gone from our shelves, but we
learned that the secret to Internet
sales is not in inventory, but in
marketing.
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 101
Once the e-store is established, credit card authorization and acceptance
systems must be set up. Fortunately, this is much easier these days, as many card
merchants are familiar with Internet stores and almost everything can be done
on-line. Be prepared to pay slightly higher rates than brick-and-mortar retail
stores to make up for the extra potential fraud. Overall discount rates are now
about 2 percent to 3 percent off the gross amount of the sale, plus 20 cents to 30
cents per transaction, plus a flat fee of about $20 to $30 per month.
For more information on credit and electronic payments systems, see Chapter 13.
Promoting Your Products and Services on the Internet
The best Website is of little use if no one knows it’s there. That is why small
business owners must strive constantly to ensure that their Website is promoted
to both old and new visitors. Much of this depends on having a good listing with
the search engines. It is well-known, for example, that when most Internet browsers conduct a new search, they carefully read the listings on the first page, sometimes get to the second page, and rarely go further. Several means of promoting
your Website are described below.
Search Engine Marketing and Keyword Ads
The rage in Internet marketing these days is keyword ads and Search Engine
Marketing (SEM), which have supplanted alternatives such as e-mail (heavily
used but not effective), banner ads, and other techniques. There are a few steps
in this process.
First, sellers of products or services set up accounts at Google (to advertise
on Google, of course), or Overture.com (for advertising on parent company
Yahoo.com as well as AltaVista.com, CNN.com, Excite.com, Go2Net.com,
InfoSpace.com, MSN.com, Sympactico.ca, and others).
Sellers then enter their Website domain name, brief informative ads (perhaps 150 characters and no superlatives), and keywords relevant to the specific
product or service. These are called “keyword ads” (also known as “Adwords”
on Google.com, “Precision Match” on Overture.com, and other terms elsewhere).
Sellers also enter the price they are willing to pay for the ad. Top bidders get top
placement, which is the first listing on the first search results page; lower bids
appear later.
Keyword ads then appear to browsers who conduct keyword searches from
sites such as Google.com, Yahoo.com, and many others. These are also known
as “sponsored” or “featured” listings. Sellers pay only when an ad is clicked,
which then sends the browser to the seller’s Website or e-store.
Once you attract browsers to the seller’s site, your objective is to turn the
browsers into buyers. At this point, small businesses offering relatively inexpensive and commodity-type products should direct the shopper right to the e-store
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 102
to purchase and continue shopping. It is a “best practice” always to send the
browser to the exact product page they searched for or a “jump” page that contains a number of products that fall under a more general search term.
Overture.com has an Advertiser Center with a number of tutorials that provide
great reference tools for newer on-line advertisers.
For firms offering more complex and expensive products, or for serviceoriented businesses, viewers are directed to relevant pages at the company’s
Website, where the objective is to generate interest and telephone queries.
As an example, go to Google.com and search for “Garmin Streetpilot.” Or
for services, search for “Los Angeles Quickbooks Help.” Virtually every site
shown on the results pages is generated from keyword ads.
As noted previously, an interesting facet of keyword advertising is that the
seller pays only when someone clicks the link from the search engine. This allows
for carefully tuned marketing programs. Depending upon the search term used,
prices can vary from 5 cents to more than $70 per click. Depending on the business
model, some firms can afford a high cost per acquisition (that is, determining an
affordable price for one new customer). The Wall Street Journal reported that “Mesothelioma Lawyer” is the most expensive keyword, and law firms have paid over $70
per click for the highest possible listing. Most clicks cost from 10 cents to $2.
Many new advertisers are quick to think, “What if my competitor just sits at
the computer and clicks my links all day—I’ll pay a fortune for that!” But keyword ad vendors are quick to point out that they have the means of detecting
fraudulent clicks and will not charge advertisers when they occur.
For many small businesses, keyword ads are now the way to promote products and services on the Internet. Still, as with the e-commerce selling alternative already described, Search Engine Marketing programs can augment but not
replace an inside or outside sales force. Keyword ads can be used to generate
visitors to your e-store or Website, or calls to the call-center. Some firms have
reported huge increases in business from well-thought-out SEM campaigns, and
many newer small businesses rely almost exclusively on keyword ads to generate
their revenues.
Here is a summary of the pros and cons of keyword ads.
Pros:
 Sellers advertise only to customers interested in very specific
products or services.
 Advertising budgets can be set with great precision per day, week,
or month by using built-in budgeting features.
 You get great marketing statistics on program effectiveness.
 Advertisers can set a maximum price per ad (click-through).
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 103
Cons:
 Much time is required to monitor, administer, and track the
performance of these programs.
 Some buyers distinguish between these “featured results,” which
they correctly consider to be an advertisement, and natural results
(to be discussed), which often are considered to be more credible.
 Ads on the Internet, of course, lead to sales on the Internet—which
often means reduced prices and increased exposure to credit card
fraud.
Many small businesses will find it difficult to mount an effective paid keyword search marketing program continually. A great deal of time is required to
keep up-to-date on the industry and to monitor SEM programs. Here, better
results may be obtained through working with a Search Engine Marketing firm.
How do you find one? Why not try an Internet keyword search? It seems these
firms might know something about this. Just type “Search Engine Marketing”
into your favorite browser and see over 10 million links.
As long as we’re looking at these links, notice the difference between paid
and natural results (the other links). The importance of this is discussed in the
next section. In Yahoo, for example, the paid links (labeled “Sponsor Results”)
are at the top of the search results in the left-hand column, and comprise all of
the listings in the narrower right-hand column. The other links are natural
results.
Natural Search Results, Spiders, Robots and Crawlers
In the previous section, we described paid search results. But even more
powerful results may come from “natural” or “organic” searches. There is nothing complicated about natural search results; they are simply the natural—or
unpaid for—links that appear in just about any Internet search. Since the links
do not have the look and appearance of a paid result or advertisement, they are
ostensibly non-biased, meaning that the search engine did not accept money to
influence the rankings. Thus, many Internet users consider natural search results to be more credible.
Understanding this is important, because savvy searchers who know the difference are more likely to hold natural search engine results in higher regard,
just as television viewers may watch a local news story about a new restaurant
more carefully than a paid advertisement from the same firm.
Even in this time of mushrooming popularity of paid searches, about 70 percent of user click-throughs are to natural search results. And the legitimacy of
natural versus paid searches is likely to increase in the future, as more Internet
users become aware of the differences. On the other hand, there may well be
more than enough for all, as many Internet shoppers will be happy to click through
known paid search ads to find the prices and selection they desire.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 104
The next question is: How can your Website gain a high ranking in a natural
keyword Internet search?
One way is by feeding the spiders, robots, and crawlers who come to visit
your Website. These are programs run by the search engines that automatically
follow links from one page to another as they crawl around the Internet. When a
new site is discovered, it is examined for keywords, and these are then sent back
to the search engine, analyzed, and indexed. Because Websites change frequently,
these creatures return often to look for new updates so that search engines can
quickly pick up changes. Google, Inktomia, and AltaVista are examples of
crawler-based search engines.
Search engines known as “directories” use actual humans to analyze Websites.
Editors who visit Internet locations categorize them, and write the titles then
assemble directories and descriptions that form the basis of what appears in
searches. LookSmart is an example of a human-powered directory.
MSN and Yahoo are hybrids in that both Crawlers and human-powered directories are used to analyze Websites.
The good news here for small business owners is that no extra work at all is
required for the Website to be visited and reranked. The results may not be to
your liking (your Website appears low in the rankings), so many firms take steps
to insert certain words and links into areas of their Internet sites and adjust the
architecture to improve natural search rankings.
Some Websites try to trick search engines by exaggerating their offerings. As
a result, a kind of cat-and-mouse game takes place where search engines constantly change the algorithms used to evaluate Websites, Website owners then
tune their sites to tilt the results of the search engines, the search engines change
their algorithms again, and the game goes on.
It is impractical for a small business owner to get ahead of this game, so the
solution is to work with firms specializing in Search Engine Optimization (SEO).
These small businesses keep up-to-date on the latest techniques used by the
various search engines and perform the following tasks to increase the visibility
of their Website:
 Keyword selection.
 Competitive analysis.
 Optimize Web pages to get the best search results.
 Build links to related sites.
 Submit the newly tuned site to search engines for analysis.
 Continually test search results, report, and modify as needed.
There are thousands of SEO firms all over the U.S. Everyone approaches
this continually changing area differently, but if Internet marketing is important
to your small business, it is important to work with professionals to achieve the
Your Incredible Website and E-Store 105
best results. To find a firm that can increase the natural search engine rankings
for your Website, type “Search Engine Optimization” into a favorite search engine. Note also that many firms offer both SEO and SEM (described previously)
services.
From a marketing perspective, many firms need to complement their paid
marketing leads (see previous discussion) with free marketing leads (this section) in order to achieve a cost per acquisition that falls within the target range.
While SEOs are expensive at first glance, think of this as a one-time expense that
can be amortized over several hundred conversions.
Website Architecture
The design and content of your Website, especially the home page, greatly
affect the listing position with search engines. The architecture also significantly
affects the user’s experience when visiting the site. A well-designed site is easy to
navigate, and information can be located quickly. Visitors will not hang around
for long at a badly designed site, which means low conversion rates and reduced
sales.
The design, architecture, and overall look and feel of a good Website for
your small business remains an art, not a science or something amenable to
straightforward rules. That is why a Website designed by professionals will make
a huge difference in the marketing results realized by your small business. Beyond Website design, Website promotion is developing into a separate art form,
and there are many SEM and SEO firms that specialize in just this area. For all
but the simplest of sites, the small business owner is encouraged to play a different role and contract experts to make all of this look good, produce results, and
fully exploit the vast potential of Internet marketing.
The small business owner should walk through the store as a customer and
note awkward, unclear, or problematic areas, as well as needed extra content
and features. If something does not make sense to the seller, it definitely will not
make sense to the buyer. Simple things such as a search box for the site can make
a huge difference in customer satisfaction. Test every button and small feature,
because this is often where the problems lie. Go through the entire buying process, including ordering by credit card and entering real shipping instructions.
Then make sure the order is processed correctly. Problems may then be reported
to the Website designers, who will fix them.
This process is not a one-time audit but should be a continuing effort,
because things break down even in e-commerce.
Link Exchanges
Another popular and inexpensive feature used to increase Website traffic is
to exchange links with other sites. Visitors to these other sites then see links to
your Website, and search engine spiders see the links and increase the site’s
ranking in keyword searches. The hyperbaric doctor (problems associated with
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 106
deep-sea diving, described earlier in this chapter), for example, might exchange
links with hyperbaric chambers in the area, equipment rental locations, diving
instructors, and doctors in related specialties.
Conventional Advertising
Finally, we sometimes forget that Websites can and should be promoted
through conventional forms of promotion. These might include printing the name
of your Website on letterhead, business cards, envelopes, packaging materials,
bus benches, giveaways such as pens and T-shirts, printed advertisements, and
just about any other form of communication used by your small business.
The “Vermont Company Gets Its Bear-ings On-Line” story presented previously is a great example of how a successful e-store does much of its advertising
off-line.
Many good articles have been written and there are Websites concerned with
building and promoting effective Websites. Stick to the recent ones, because
things are changing all the time. Two sites worth investigating are
www.bruceclay.com, with information and advice on search engine optimization
and search engine ranking, and http://www.monash.com/spidap.html, which is about
understanding and using search engines. There is also a great deal of additional
information on these subjects at http://SmallBusiness.Yahoo.com/marketing (no
“www”), www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com, Google.com, and
Overture.com.
Finally, look into www.InternetRetailer.com. Here, small business owners
may learn a great deal about e-commerce from the Website, and then keep upto-date with an e-mail newsletter and a subscription to a hard-copy magazine.
107
Chapter 6
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding
Hiring the First Employees
Your small business is expanding and it’s time to hire your first employee—
and double the workforce. Or maybe a full staff is already in place but it’s time to
become more formal. If you’ve never hired anyone before, then this is one of the
biggest decisions so far. After all, the company’s payroll is about to explode.
Hiring the wrong person will result in months of wasted time, thousands of dollars lost through investment in the wrong person, and bad feelings for all. On the
other hand, recruiting the right person can make life easier, customers happier,
and keep the business growing.
Chances are, money is tight and things are tenuous, so the quality of the new
hire is critical. There are many things to consider when hiring the first employee
and then recruiting and managing correctly as the company continues to grow.
Inevitably, employees will move on, and so it is equally important that the small
business owner understands about resignations and terminations and their legal
implications.
The big word to remember for the moment is “recruiting,” because even
after the right person is found, your company and the opportunity you are offering must be presented as a worthwhile investment of some part of someone’s life.
Good employees do not take this decision lightly. Beyond getting paid well, they
want a pleasant place to work, like-minded co-workers, benefits, and the prospect of growth. That’s often not an easy sell for a small business. Many potential
employees may be wary of getting trapped in a difficult job with an amateur
entrepreneur. Keep in mind that throughout the hiring process, and especially
after employment commences, you may be buying the services of employees; but
the benefits of working for your small business must be sold at the same time.
Further, all of this takes longer than you may expect.
Time Frame for Hiring
Many small businesses get blind-sided by not realizing that it takes a long
time to find, recruit, and hire a new employee. Here are the steps, taking from 51
to 103 days—if nothing goes wrong:
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 108
 Decide it’s Time to Hire a New Employee. It often takes 10 to 30 days
from that feeling of “Gee, things are getting too busy around here”
until “Okay, I guess I’d better hire a new employee.”
 Write the Job Description. Allow one to three days to think, decide,
and write—especially if the input of others is needed.
 Inform the World. Getting the word out can take just a few hours
with a little luck and by asking the right person, or by calling a temp
agency (to be discussed later). On the other hand, it may easily take
30 days before certain printed publications go to press, get distributed,
and the details are communicated to the right recruiter—let’s say 10
to 20 days, on average.
 Call Candidates, Screen, and Set Up Interviews. Allow five to 15
days, because some great candidates may apply late, and there may
be difficulties scheduling interviews on short notice. (I always like it
when candidates push me a bit for an interview right away.)
 Check References; Credit and Criminal Background Check. You’ll
need five to 10 days, including telephone-tag time, to catch up with
references; time for the candidate to review, sign, and return the
credit and criminal background check release; and for the background check to be completed. Let’s hope that the promising new
recruit doesn’t flame out at this stage, because you’ve already invested a lot of time.
 Make and Negotiate an Offer of Employment. Each offer is unique,
depending upon the recruit’s situation (flexibility is one of the advantages of a small business, so take advantage of this). It’s always complicated when there are two great candidates and one job. If you dance
around with the first candidate too long, the second one may be lost.
And then we’re back to square one in the search. But let’s assume it
takes five to 10 days to make and present an employment offer and
get back a “Yes!”
 Resignation Period. Most employees will need to give their current
employers two weeks’ notice. If they don’t, is this a concern? In the
meantime, it’s a good idea to worry and lose sleep wondering if the
current employer will offer more money.
 Day One. Hope the employee shows up fully dressed and completes
the first day without doing something weird.
That’s 51 to 103 days until help arrives—if everything goes well. So when it’s
time to hire someone, do yourself a favor and begin looking now.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 109
Joe Hires Ms. Dependable
Hiring is a time-consuming and
stressful process for the small
business owner, and sometimes
it can all fall apart despite hard
work and the best intentions.
Our business had a surge in
orders, and I urgently needed
someone to help out. I went
through the steps described
above and realized that we
wanted an entry-level university
student. I asked around, advertised on the Internet, and then
called several applicants without
success, until speaking with a
young lady who went to school
close by. We met at a local coffee shop for an interview and she
seemed perfect for the job. She
had recent and similar part-time
experience, she was graduating
and not yet employed, and she
was presentable and well-spoken. I figured that in a short period of time, I could have her
working directly with clients.
Everything else checked out
just fine, and we mutually agreed
upon a starting date. I accommodated her desire for a little vacation before she began work and
explained that I would be flexible
about her hours, because she
would be commuting sometimes
from a long distance. I offered her
an hourly compensation rate and
she wanted a little more, so I
agreed. After all, time was short
and she was a capable candidate.
And I had no one else. She
agreed to everything. In fact she
agreed so readily, I felt that something was not quite right.
As the starting date approached, I grew a little uncomfortable. It was too quiet. We
exchanged a couple of e-mails
where I welcomed her and “confirmed” some small details, but
I was really trying to see if she
was still committed. She acknowledged the e-mails without
incident. Meanwhile, our
workload increased even more,
and I feared we would soon fall
behind schedule.
Finally, her starting date arrived. As I walked in, I noticed
that she had not yet arrived—not
a good sign for the first day of
work. I checked my e-mails.
Sure enough, there was a polite
note from the new recruit thanking me for the opportunity but
informing me that “something
else has come up” that would
preclude her from accepting my
opportunity.
If she had been an employee, I would have asked why
she waited so long to tell me
this, but I had no control over
the situation. In retrospect, I believe she had an offer from another company, and I was the
backup deal in case Job #1 fell
through. There was little I could
do, and it would be futile to ask
her to change her mind. In addition, it would set a bad precedent
for any future relations. Despite
the increasing workload, I began pounding the phones again
in search of a replacement for
Ms. Dependable.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 110
Exempt vs. Non-Exempt Employees
What are exempt employees, and how are they treated differently? Exempt
employees are those who are not subject to the overtime pay requirements mandated by state and federal laws.
Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”) rules require that an exempt
employee be paid a full salary for any week in which work is performed, even if
some days are not worked. For example, exempt employees must normally be
paid the full weekly salary even if work is missed due to a temporary business
closure, for arriving later and leaving early, and for medical problems lasting less
than a week. Compensation also may not be reduced for civic duties such as jury
duty and military service lasting less than a week. Employers may make deductions from exempt employee pay for taking full workdays off for personal reasons. In contrast, non-exempt employees are paid at an hourly rate and must be
paid overtime when applicable, per state laws.
Many small businesses believe that giving an employee the title of “executive,” or “manager,” or “professional,” or “administrative” something makes them
exempt from overtime pay. Nevertheless, federal and state laws look at the substance and not the form of the relationship. Very specific criteria must be met to
satisfy these requirements, and the employer’s interpretation of the situation
means little. These issues may surface years after an employee is improperly
classified as “exempt,” subjecting the employer to back pay at overtime rates,
penalties, and interest.
For example, to be exempt in California, truly exempt employees need to
spend at least 50 percent of their time performing duties that meet the state’s
definition of exempt work, such as administrative or managerial tasks. Additionally, the exempt employee must receive a salary of no less than two times the
state minimum wage for full-time (40 hours per week) employment.
Before classifying employees as exempt, small business owners must review
the FLSA and state laws to make sure that this treatment is correct.
At-Will Employment
Most small business owners will prefer to hire employees at-will. What does
this mean?
Simply put, an at-will employee works at the will of you, the employer, and
there are no promises regarding the future. At-will employees can be terminated at any time, and a reason is not needed, except that employees may not
be terminated:
 Because they are of a different race, religion, ethic background,
gender, sexual orientation, age, or because of disabilities.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 111
 In retaliation for filing complaints against their employer, such as
those related to OSHA, workers’ compensation, whistle-blower
situations, and others.
 For jury duty or military service.
Beyond this, you may simply decide that someone else is better in this position, and that is good enough to fire an at-will employee. But even this thinking
does not need to be disclosed.
The good news is that the default situation is at-will employment, so small
business owners do not need to craft agreements in special ways to gain this
status. It is prudent, however, to mention this explicitly in a memo signed by the
employee (sample at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com).
Care should be taken that at-will does not accidentally morph into something
else over time. The employment status may change unintentionally if the employer makes express assurances (in writing), or even implied assurances, such
as saying, “If we get this deal, you’ll have enough work for years.” It may take
just one careless slip for this to occur, such as referring to a position as “permanent,” rather than “full-time.”
In situations where employment is not at-will, the relationship is more onerous on the employer, because terminations are allowable only “with cause.” With
cause occurs when the employee has breached or defaulted on the conditions of
employment as expressed in an employment agreement, the employee handbook,
or perhaps has broken a law (for example, stolen company funds).
Employee vs. Contractor
In today’s musical-chairs job market, many potential employees will ask to be
contractors, or “1099s” rather than employees. This is especially common in certain industries. This important decision—employee or independent contractor—
must be determined in advance before proceeding further in the hiring process.
Benefits of an Independent Contractor vs. Employee
There are many reasons small businesses prefer adding new personnel as
independent contractors rather than as employees:
 Specific skill sets may be required only for a limited duration, such as
for a special project.
 Extra help may be needed during a particularly busy period.
 The small business may not able to attract highly skilled professionals
as employees because it is still too small or financially fragile.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 112
 Small businesses must generally withhold the proper amount of taxes
from employee checks, pay much larger amounts to local, state, and
federal taxing authorities, and submit timely returns accounting for
federal, state, and local taxes, FICA taxes, FUTA, unemployment
taxes, and more. Yes, this is all a major headache. The government is
more than happy when small businesses screw up, because crushing
penalties and interest are immediately assessed. (See Chapter 7 for
more information on payroll and withholding taxes.)
 Employers must make sure that employees are paid the minimum
wage, whereas this is not a concern with contractors.
 Employees generally receive benefits paid for by employers, including
medical insurance, vacations, paid holidays, retirement and profitsharing plans, and more; contractors do not.
Of course, all of this depends upon the price. Most contractors must charge
much higher rates to make up for all these factors. That may explain, for example, why a computer maintenance contractor charges $75 per hour for on-site
fixes, whereas an employee performing the same work would be paid less than
half of this hourly rate.
Still, the use of contractors vs. employees is growing. Great caution must be
used in this area because it is the true substance of the relationship that determines whether the new hire is an employee or a contractor. Even after both
parties sign an agreement that says “independent contractor” on every page, a
small business may still lose on this issue if challenged by the employee/contractor, the IRS, other federal government agencies, or state authorities. This often
surfaces when “contractors” do not pay required taxes or become upset about
not receiving benefits, and then later claim that they were employees all along.
The IRS and other interested parties will listen carefully and may easily reach
the same conclusion. The small business owner must then pay back taxes, penalties, interest, and lost benefits that would have accrued to an employee (such as
vacation time, paid holidays, etc.).
IRS/FICA/FUTA Treatments
The determination of employee vs. contractor status is complex, and just to
keep it that way, different federal government agencies may classify the same
person in different ways. In certain cases, the following agencies apply their rules
first. Common-law tests (next section) are invoked after consideration of these
agency requirements:
 Internal Revenue Service - Federal Income Tax (FIT) Treatment.
“Licensed, qualified real estate agents” and “Direct Sellers” are
normally classified by the IRS as independent contractors. That means
IRS rules apply, but not necessarily FICA or FUTA rules. In all other
cases, common-law tests are applied.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 113
 Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) Treatment. FICA
requires that, in addition to regular employees, five types of workers
must be treated as employees: (1) corporate officers; (2) drivers (agent
or commission) delivering food, beverages, laundry, or dry cleaning;
(3) industrial home workers paid $100 or more per calendar year; (4)
full-time life insurance sales representatives; and (5) full-time
salespeople soliciting orders from retailers for later delivery. This
means that FICA rules apply, but not necessarily IRS or FUTA rules.
In all other cases, common-law tests are applied.
 Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) Treatment. FUTA requires
that three types of workers must be treated as employees and not as
contractors: (1) corporate officers; (2) drivers (agent or commission);
and (3) traveling or city salespeople. This means that FUTA rules
apply, but not necessarily IRS or FICA rules. In all other cases,
common-law tests are applied.
In these cases, workers may be classified by the IRS as either “statutory
employees” or “statutory non-employees.”
Now let’s move on to the common-law tests that are applied after the FIT/
FICA/FUTA treatments.
Common-law Tests
The following common-law tests determine whether a worker is an independent contractor or an employee. These amount to an overall analysis of the level
of control that the small business exerts over the worker.
As more and more of the tests below are answered affirmatively (meaning
that the employer is in control), the likelihood increases that the relationship is
employer-employee, regardless of whether the person has signed an independent
contractor agreement:
 Must the worker follow your instructions in accomplishing objectives?
 Are the specific personal services of the worker required to fulfill job objectives
satisfactorily?
 Is the success of your small business dependent upon the specific worker’s
services?
 Are work hours mandated by you?
 Is the overall working relationship continuing or temporal (continuing suggests
employee; temporal suggests contractor)?
 Do you have the right to hire, fire, manage, determine compensation, or pay
others controlled by a specific worker?
 Is the worker discouraged from advertising and actively seeking assignments
with other customers?
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 114
 Do you require that work be performed at a specific location, such as your
office?
 Have you invested in the facilities used to perform the services?
 Do you direct the exact manner and schedule in which tasks are performed?
 Are progress reports required? How often and in how much detail?
 Is compensation determined by hours worked, or by deliverables, progress,
or percentage of job completion (hours worked suggests employee; deliverables
et al. suggests contractor)?
 Does the worker work only for your company?
 Do you provide and pay for items such as meals, travel expenses, and other
business expenses?
 Do you provide training?
 Do you pay for the worker’s tools and equipment?
 Do you pay for indirect expenses incurred by the worker, such as telephone,
insurance, and other overhead?
 Do you provide a compensation plan such that the worker’s gain or loss from
the work is minimal?
 Are you the only revenue source of the worker?
 When the job is completed, is it expected that the working relationship will
continue?
There is no hard rule allowing an employer to answer these questions, make
an independent contractor-employee determination, and know for sure that the
IRS will agree. It depends upon the entire context of the situation, including the
“Safe Harbor” and “Special Rules” described below. It is important to think
these tests through carefully because the decision often turns on these commonlaw tests.
Safe Harbor Rules
In some cases, however, Safe Harbor rules apply. If the relationship fits the
tests indicated, the worker is considered an independent contractor, even if the
common-law rules already discussed suggest otherwise. Safe Harbor exceptions
may apply if your small business:
 Never treated similar workers as employees for employment tax
purposes but as independent contractors
 Always treated this worker and similar workers as contractors by
complying with tax reporting requirements (for example, the
worker did not start out as an employee and later switch to
contractor)
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 115
 Can show the IRS that previous rulings, technical advice, and
precedent have consistently considered this situation as an
independent contractor relationship
 Can cite previous IRS audits at your firm and others in the same
industry finding that the worker’s situation was that of an
independent contractor
 Can point to longstanding industry practices as treating this type of
worker as a contractor
Special Rules
In addition, the IRS has “Special Rules” that apply to diverse groups such as
accountants, attorneys, casual labor, dentists, doctors, family members, insurance agents, officers and directors, partners, certain students, and some other
workers.
If this seems just a bit complicated and you don’t want to just roll the dice
and hope for the best, then small business owners may submit relevant information on IRS Form SS-8 and request that the IRS determine the situation.
More information on this topic is available in Chapter 7 (Taxes) and in IRS
Publication 15, Employers Tax Guide, at http://www.irs.gov.
Writing the Job Description and Defining Requirements
This book assumes that, unlike General Motors, your company does not
have professionally constructed job descriptions and titles. The recruiting process must begin by defining staffing objectives and the associated skill sets carefully. This impresses the recruit, crystallizes management thinking, and forces
the small business to outline exactly what is expected of the new hire. Much of
this list will later guide interview questions and fit into the employment contract.
A common mistake made by many small business owners is hiring an employee
for one purpose and then changing the job later. Many employees will not take
kindly to this spurious kind of thinking. A well-thought-out job description avoids
this problem.
We approach this by solving two problems at once: deciding the type of
person to hire, and writing a help-wanted advertisement to post in a local newspaper, trade publication, or on the Internet. All should go through this process
even if there are no plans to advertise for the position, because it helps define
exactly what is needed. There are three parts to the help-wanted ad: a job description, the job requirements, and information on how to apply.
For the job description, write down a wish-list of every area in which the
small business needs extra help (this should be a continuing effort, so the next
time more help is needed, begin again with this same list). Let’s say you are
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 116
unable to keep up with sales, and primarily need help in this area. Write down all
sales-related tasks, but include other areas of concern in the list as well:
List 1: Help-Needed Wish-List
Represent us at trade shows and chamber meetings.
Add new features to the Website.
Make 50 outbound calls per day to local businesses.
Figure monthly commissions.
Visit customers and demonstrate products.
Monthly bank reconciliation and daily entries.
Design new marketing brochure.
Prepare proposals.
Prepare customer agreements.
Call customers to collect on delinquent accounts.
Enter calls, e-mails, letters, etc., into our customer ACTIV database.
Now make a second list—an outline of the job description—by paring down
the first list. Include in the second list only the duties reasonably expected of the
new hire. Someone else will need to do the other tasks, or this may reveal that
even more help is needed. But for the moment, focus on the sales recruit:
List 2: Job Description Outline
Represent us at trade shows and chamber meetings.
Add new features to the web site
Make 50 outbound calls per day to local businesses.
Figure monthly commissions
Visit customers and demonstrate products.
Monthly bank reconciliation and daily entries
Design new marketing brochure
Prepare proposals.
Prepare customer agreements
Call customers to collect on delinquent accounts
Enter calls, e-mails, letters, etc., into our customer ACTIV database.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 117
From this pruned-down list, write a job title and description—and make it
sound exciting! Remember, this is a big move for potential candidates. You want
the best to apply. Don’t mention compensation at this point. Also, tell candidates
how to apply. Consider: e-mail (fast, easy, and indicates some technical abilities),
fax (be careful—dozens of spammed resumes may empty out the machine), or
mail-in letters (some candidates will not respond this way). Also, note whether
employment agencies may respond; if nothing is mentioned in this regard, expect
a large number of agency-sponsored candidates. By writing out the list above,
something like this will result:
Sales Rep Needed
Breakthrough Computer Service Product
Our company is expanding! Are you familiar with the problems faced
by local businesses as they struggle to maintain their computer
networks? We’ve got a great new product to maintain servers and
workstations remotely. If you love to talk computers with 50 prospects
per day, prepare customized proposals, and meet and help business
owners, e-mail your resume to opportunity@aaaardvarkcomputer.com.
With this job description, the job requirements section of the ad will be easy
to prepare. The job requirements should flow out of the work already
accomplished. Think of the education, background, and experience levels needed,
based upon the job description. In our example, we’ve settled on a more
experienced type, who will hopefully arrive with some ready-to-book business
contacts. Of course, this will cost more but save us time in training.
Requirements
Two or more years of local computer services sales experience.
Two or more years of success in business telemarketing.
Comfortable with local travel to visit customers, demonstrate our
products, and attend local trade shows and business events. (Must
own automobile and have a driver’s license.)
Fluent in computer programs such as word processing,
spreadsheet, presentation software, e-mail, and ACTIV.
Two years of college, including 18 credits in business /
computers.
Put all this together, and we’ve decided exactly what our new hire will do,
your requirements, and how to apply. The help-wanted ad is ready to go. Later
on, we’ll use these same materials to prepare a list of interview questions, and
much of this will end up in the offer. Here is our completed help-wanted ad:
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 118
Sales Rep Needed
Breakthrough Computer Service Product
Our company is expanding! Are you familiar with the
problems faced by local businesses as they struggle to
maintain their computer networks? We’ve got a great new
product to maintain servers and workstations remotely.
Required: min 2 yrs computer svs sales, B2B telemarketing,
trade shows, on-site demos, fluency w/word-proc, e-mail,
laptop-based demos, and ACTIV. If you love to talk computers
with 50+ prospects per day, prepare customized proposals,
and meet and help business owners, e-mail your resume to
opportunity@aaaardvarkcomputer.com.
Ads in printed publications are often edited down to conserve on words—
and the budget. The more you say, the more you pay. On the other hand, some
firms prefer big ads because they attract more attention.
Internet-based ads usually cost a fixed price, but they can be up to 2,000
words in length (more than is needed because few recruits will read this much)
and may include graphics, logos, color fonts, and customized layouts. Internetbased ads usually allow candidates to press a link and immediately e-mail a resume and cover letter. Note that the average respondent to an Internet-based ad
is a bit more technically savvy than respondees from printed publications. While
it may take a while for a printed publication to go to press and be distributed,
responses from the Internet may begin within hours.
Don’t hesitate to spend money on recruiting—it’s better to get a good selection of people than to train and hire the wrong person. Any extra money spent on
recruiting is quickly regained in the productivity of the new hire.
Where to Recruit New Employees
Now that you’ve written a great help-wanted ad, it’s time to consider whether
to use it. Remember that half of the purpose of writing the ad was to determine
exactly what the new hire will do, their credentials, background, and experience.
Help may be recruited from many sources, including the following.
Local Newspapers and Trade Publications
A great tip: Pretend you are looking for a similar job, and see if anything
related is listed in local newspapers or in trade publications. It’s always a good
idea to watch what competitors are doing. If lots of similar listings are seen, then
maybe this is the right place. Key questions to ask printed sources: What is their
circulation (number of readers)? In what geographic areas do they appear? and
How long until readers will see the ad?
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 119
Resume File
After the job hunt closes, I always keep interesting resumes, and this can be
a fast and inexpensive way of finding the right person. Remember that after the
right person is recruited, the other candidates haven’t moved to Antarctica. You
will be surprised at how receptive people are when called and introduced to a
new opportunity:
Hi, you sent your resume in here a while ago and we couldn’t respond
at the time, but I was impressed with your credentials and would you
be interested in learning about a new opportunity here at Aaaardvark
Computer? Not right now? Well then do you know of anyone else that
might be looking for a new career with a fast-growing business?
If enough calls are made, it’s only a matter of time until a great recruit is
located.
The Internet
Sites such as Monster.com, HotJobs.com, CareerPath.com, and DICE.com
are well-known and effective means of locating new employees. There are differences in their approaches. For example, Monster.com is the monster among
employees searching for jobs, and just about everyone spends time here.
HotJobs.com (now owned by Yahoo) also has immense traffic. CareerPath.com
is associated with the listings in many major newspapers; DICE is frequented by
computer types. Of course, pricing varies greatly also. Read up and see which is
best for your situation. Additionally, there are thousands of other Internet-based
job sites that specialize in particular industries or geographic areas, and some
are free. Maybe there is one that is “the place to go” for your business.
Since you have already written a great help-wanted ad, it will be easy to “copy
and paste” this into the forms at various Websites. A new ad can be available to
everyone on the planet within an hour or two, and responses may begin within
hours. Most sites are very easy to use as long as a credit card is handy and special
computer skills or languages are not needed. Just enter the text and press the
appropriate buttons. Color, pictures, and snazzy layouts may also enhance the
ad’s appeal. It’s also easy to post lengthy job descriptions and gushing praise of
your small business, because Internet ads have loose restrictions on ad size.
On the Internet, your ad stands equal to those of bigger competitors. If size
matters, yours will be as big as theirs. Finally, note that respondees to Internetbased ads have pretty much proven that they have some technical expertise.
An idea of their word-processing capabilities can be garnered by looking closely
at the resume.
Ask Around
Asking friends, employees, chamber of commerce members, and colleagues
may also be effective in recruiting—especially if there is a well-thought-out job
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 120
description, as we have already accomplished. If enough calls are made, it’s
only a matter of time until a great candidate is located. E-mail or fax the job
Where the employees are,
someone waits for…
Connie Francis sang about finding
boys, but about 80 percent of jobs
are found through networking and
personal contacts. Only about 20
percent are filled through traditional
printed ads and the Internet, even
though responses to these announcements are often huge.
announcement to anyone that may
help, and call later for follow-up because many will forget. Note that it’s
actually better to hire a friend’s
brother’s girl-friend’s cousin than
your friend, because things can get
complicated with direct acquaintances.
Most recruiting pros say that the
best results come from being a bit
subtle, saying “I am asking to see if
you know of anyone…” rather than,
“I wanted to see if you would be interested…” in this opportunity.
Recruiters
Also known as employment agencies, placement agencies, or “headhunters,”
recruiters earn fees from you, the employer, after they find and you hire an
employee. Since a lot of work is involved in this and small business owners may
change their minds without obligation, the first step may be to convince the
agency that help is needed, and fast. Money is not a major factor.
Rates are usually 15 percent to 35 percent of the new employee’s first-year
salary (not including commissions, benefits, or bonuses). Small business owners
will be asked to sign a contract, which is often negotiable. For example, some
agreements state that the recruiter’s fee is earned and payable on the employee’s
first day on the job, but this is often changed to 90 days. If a new employee quits
quickly after being hired, many recruiters will consider that they have done their
job and earned the fee, and maybe your company is not such a great place to
work. If a recruiter says, “I can’t change the language to 90 days, but I will
quickly replace anyone that quits for free”—don’t expect this to happen. Beyond
this, look for recruiters who have experience, and a reputation, in your industry.
Also, don’t assume that the recruiter has done a thorough background check of
the new employee. If background, experience, education, and references are
important, double-check this using internal resources.
Temp Agencies
Temp agencies are great for quickly filling certain positions where there is a
large demand for common skills, such as secretarial, receptionist, accounting,
and labor positions. The great thing about temp agencies is that they can provide
competent people with the needed skills quickly, but the flip side is that it is
often hard to let these people go—and the fees can really add up.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 121
Also note that although it may seem expensive to pay $40 per hour for a
Quickbooks accountant, the temp-accountant may not be wild about receiving
$18 per hour from the agency. Ask up-front for a “buyout” agreement where a
great temp may be converted to full time for a price. Otherwise, many staffing
firms require a wait of at least 180 days before a small business may directly
employ or contract persons introduced by the agency.
Finally, be careful about temps who stay around for more than 12 to 16 weeks,
because the IRS may later deem this an employment relationship.
Competitors
A time-honored tradition is to raid the staffs of competitors when it’s time to
expand. Many firms love this idea, because these recruits may bring along knowhow and business contacts that would otherwise be difficult to obtain. Vendors
and other business partners are often tapped for these same purposes. Make
sure the new recruit does not have a “non-compete” clause in previous employment agreements, because this could mean that they are not allowed to do the
work that is important to you.
Local Government, Universities, and Schools
This approach may be effective, especially if entry-level or clerical/labor skills
are needed. Many of these services and sites are free. Also, organizations such as
SCORE may provide extremely experienced executives without charge. The downside is that this often takes longer than other alternatives.
Employee Leasing
Employee leasing is where a third-party company hires away the staff of a
small business and then leases them back. Future recruits may be sourced from
either the employee leasing company or from efforts by the small business.
This alternative may be more of a financial-headache outsourcing ploy than a
means of locating and recruiting new employees. Employee leasing firms are
mostly interested in acquiring existing staffs under lease-back arrangements. The
leasing firm then administers payroll functions including withholding, medical
and other insurance benefits, retirement plans, and more. Large employee leasing firms will pay smaller rates for all of these programs than most small businesses because all these costs are aggregated over many employees, resulting in
better pricing. Also, the employee leasing company is relieving its small business
client of many headaches when personnel administration tasks are taken away,
such as employee handbooks, wording of notices, benefits administration, compliance with hiring and firing laws, background checks, record-keeping, and more.
Employee leasing is an unlikely alternative until a small business reaches
about 10 employees because the pricing will not make sense to either party.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 122
Employee leasing should be considered by small businesses employing more
than 10 regular employees, and where the leasing company has expertise in providing quickly a steady stream of quality recruits with important skills sets.
Leasing rather than hiring employees is sometimes considered a way to avoid
or circumvent employment laws and benefits requirements, but this is not correct. The same laws apply, except the employee leasing company is paid to accept compliance responsibilities. At the end of the day, however, the small business
is still responsible, just as before.
Promote Current Employees
Don’t forget current employees. Many have skills from previous jobs that
the employer has long since forgotten but the employee is still keen to develop.
Employees are delighted when their help is needed and their capabilities are
recognized. There are lots of great reasons to promote from within and then
back-fill by hiring less-experienced persons to fill the void.
Recruiting is not a one-time process, but a continuing effort. Hopefully, much
of this will be needed in the near future. Always be on the lookout for the right
people, and keep a file on potential new employees. When the time is right, your
small business will be ready to begin calling immediately, and recruit the best.
Employee Documents and Files
Upon hiring the first employee, your small business has entered a new legal
realm; much of this is described in this chapter. As part of your new responsibilities, you need to keep detailed, accurate, consistent, and timely records on all
employees from the time of application until termination, and to communicate
certain information to and from employees with the following documents.
Application for Employment
Most well-managed businesses require that all candidates under consideration complete a job application, even if a good resume is available.
The application allows the employer to ask certain questions and gain information that may not be on the resume (“Have you ever been fired from a job
with cause?”) and that requires the applicant to agree that information may be
verified and that false statements may result in immediate termination at any
time after employment commences. Employers should also inform applicants if
successful results in credit and criminal background checks or drug testing are
required before hiring.
The completed job application is the first piece of work produced by the
aspiring employee for your small business. So far, it’s free. Look carefully for
neatness, spelling errors, sloppiness, and grammar. Their work will not get any
better than this later.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 123
A sample application for employment is available for review or download at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Conditional Offer of Employment Letter
Many potential employees will be impressed by a conditional offer of employment letter, outlining the terms of the new employment opportunity.
The letter is a one- or two-page document from the small business owner or
another authorized officer of the company, explaining:
 This is an offer of employment (full-time, part-time, or from/to dates).
 Start date.
 Anticipated work schedule or hours.
 Title and work description.
 Reporting manager.
 Salary and related compensation (state salary in terms of the normal
pay period; never use annual salary—problems may occur later if the
new employee is terminated.
 Benefits.
 Whether the employee will be treated as exempt or non-exempt per
the FLSA.
 The offer is contingent upon passing a drug test; a satisfactory credit
and criminal background check; satisfactory reference checks; and
verification of previous employment, work experience, education, and
related credentials (all optional).
 The offer must be accepted in writing by the candidate and returned
to the small business by a certain date or time; otherwise, the offer is
withdrawn.
A sample offer of employment letter is available for view and download at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Credit and Criminal Background Checks
Before hiring, consider a credit and criminal background check. These reports may intimidate some candidates, but in our security-conscious world, the
need for this information is increasingly understood. Good candidates will be
unfazed by all this, and those who decline often have something to hide.
The reports should be ordered upon extending an offer letter, where the
offer is contingent upon a satisfactory record. “Satisfactory” should be rethought
and redefined for different types of workers, but the definition must remain the
same for new employees performing the same job unless there is cause for change
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 124
(which should be documented). Be careful in approaching this, however, since it
may be reasonable to demand a record clear of drunk-driving convictions for
limousine drivers, but not for bricklayers. Again, small business owners often
fear that they will be accused of not employing certain persons for discriminatory reasons.
Credit and criminal background reports are available from many local companies for about $50 to $150. These firms tap the national credit databases and
search local court records. The reports sometimes take a few days, because local
court records are checked and duplicate records of people with common names
may exist.
To find a provider of this information, ask a colleague for a referral, or search
for “credit and criminal background check” on a favorite search engine. A personal relationship is hardly necessary.
The job candidate must sign a statement (normally supplied by the report
provider) allowing your small business to order this report. The recruit should
be given a copy of the report whether hired or not.
When the report is received, what should be of concern? Obviously, any
criminal record may be a problem; but just as important, did the candidate lie
about anything in the application or in an interview? If so, this person cannot be
hired, or the stage has been set for problems:
So Mr. Jones lied to you about his criminal record and you still hired
him? Then you knew he was dishonest when you employed him, didn’t
you?
or
So Ms. Longlegs is being fired for dishonesty—but then you hired Mr.
Jones after he lied to you. So if dishonesty is okay at your company,
why did you really fire Ms. Longlegs?
On the credit report, look for addresses from cities not disclosed on the
resume, indicating previous residences and employment—and perhaps the need
to search local court records.
If credit problems are noticed, consider how it is possible that a candidate
claims to be making big money but can’t pay their credit card bills. Is their current income really correct? If so, why can’t they pay their bills? Could there be a
substance abuse problem? Be attentive because from the moment this person is
hired, their problems become your problems, too. Your small business may be
responsible immediately for medical treatments, and your inventory or assets
may be a handy way for someone with a substance abuse problem to finance the
habit.
If there are judgments on the record, get a copy to learn what really happened. Was a judgment issued because a candidate could not pay for her mother’s
medical problems, or did this person commit fraud at a previous workplace?
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 125
Finally, don’t demand perfection here or anywhere else in recruiting new
employees. Determine what level of problems are not appropriate for the position being staffed, and consider that anything else will be just fine.
Credit and criminal background checks may be immensely useful in protecting your small business from the damages caused by the wrong types of people,
but all actions taken in this area must comply with the Fair Credit Reporting Act
(http://www.ftc.gov/os/statutes/fcra.htm). It is not difficult to run afoul of this
complex, employer-unfriendly 2002 legislation, so extreme care should be taken
if credit and criminal background checks are necessary.
A sample “Credit and Criminal Background Report Release” form is available for download and a sample credit and criminal background report may be
seen at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Drug Testing
This is another area where small business owners have a legitimate cause for
concern. Employers have the right to insist upon a drug-free workplace, but
must tread gingerly not to run afoul of privacy laws and ADA. A recent consulting study found that employees with drug or alcohol abuse problems cost their
employers an average of about $7,000 extra per year in various losses.
Similar to credit and criminal background checks, drug testing takes place
after a conditional offer of employment letter has been extended and the candidate signs a release authorizing the test. In this regard, the offer is conditional
upon the applicant’s: (1) signing a consent to taking a drug test; (2) actually
taking the drug test to the satisfaction of the testing laboratory; and (3) receiving
a negative drug test result. The preemployment drug test should be conducted
less than 30 days prior to the applicant’s expected first day of employment. The
conditional offer of employment letter should state that the offer is withdrawn if
any of the above conditions are not met, and that applicants who submit to a
preemployment drug test and receive positive results may not reapply for any
positions at the small business for at least 180 days. Further, applicants should
be informed in the conditional offer of employment letter that samples provided
by applicants are also analyzed for adulterants (chemicals intended to obfuscate
drug testing). If adulterants are found, the offer for that applicant is withdrawn.
Apart from employment, it is important to inform applicants in the conditional
offer of employment letter that they are not entitled to participate in any employee
assistance or rehabilitation programs offered by the small business until employment commences. In other words, applicants who apply and fail the drug test were
never employees, and are therefore not entitled to any employee benefits.
Regarding confidentiality and privacy, the conditional offer of employment
letter should say that all drug test results shall be considered confidential information, shall be appropriately labeled and managed as such, shall be retained in
a secure location with controlled access, and shall not be kept as part of the
applicant’s employment record.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 126
Finally, your small business should contract with a third-party service supplier to make sure everything is done correctly. These firms provide the administration, collection, testing, verification, and reporting of samples for
preemployment drug testing purposes and ensure that all aspects of the testing
process are private and confidential and comply with applicable federal and state
laws and regulations.
The Employee Handbook
Many new hires consider the employee handbook to be just another curious
pile of papers heaped on during the first day of work. Many end up on the bottom of desk drawers, never read, because it seems easier to ask other employees
questions such as, “What’s the deal around here if I get sick?”
Nevertheless, employee handbooks carry real legal weight and should be considered by growing small business owners because a current, well-thought-out
handbook:
 Makes the small business look more professional and serves as a
welcome letter to anxious new employees
 Clarifies potential misunderstandings within the company and in legal
realms because it serves as the “go to” source for many employmentrelated issues
 Allows employees to spend less time asking and answering the most
common questions
 Lays down important rules and outlines behavioral expectations
 Outlines company benefits, who is eligible, and when
 States that the small business complies with government requirements
such as Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, the Age Discrimination
in Employment Act (ADEA), the Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA), the Federal Electronic Eavesdropping Act, the Fair Credit
Reporting Act (FCRA), the Drug Free Workplace Act, and other
federal and state legislation (yes, that’s a bit much for most small
businesses to take seriously, but at least pay lip service to all of this in
the handbook, which also states that the company consequently
requires that employees must act in accordance with these various
regulations).
Although an employee handbook is not really required, it serves many useful
purposes, and there is a strong argument that as the small business adds its fourth
or fifth recruit, this document would be beneficial. For example, compliance
with the FMLA must be discussed somewhere, so why not in the expected place,
which is the employee handbook?
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 127
Here are the sections to include in the employee handbook. They can be in
any order that suits a particular small business.
Company Background and Overview
In this introduction, start off in a welcoming manner, providing a brief history of your small business, its founders, its current Unique Selling Proposition,
and other background information that may not be readily available.
Compensation
Explain how employees are paid, and when. Describe direct-deposit options
and how employee contributions to benefit programs are deducted from paychecks. Define the difference between part-time and full-time employment. Say
that there will be no guarantees as to the minimum number of hours for parttime workers and that benefits are provided only to full-time employees.
Outline of Benefits, Vacation, Holidays
Here is where any benefits offered by your small business are described.
Include life and health insurance coverages, and ERISA (Employee Retirement
and Income Security Act) plans. Make sure that employees know about mandatory benefits, too, such as disability, workers’ compensation insurance, and unemployment insurance, because employers are required to pay for this. Also
describe when benefits such as paid vacation and medical insurance become available. Provide a list of recognized company holidays (but supplement this with an
annual memo listing the exact dates). Remember that for the most part, the
same deal must be offered to everyone (including you, the owner), so this is a
good place to summarize everything. All this should be summarized very briefly,
with referrals to the actual documents published by the benefit providers; there
is no need to retype and reword what they have already done.
Take care that the employee handbook remains consistent with the requirements of the benefits providers. For example, if medical insurance arrangements are changed to allow that full-time employees (working 30-plus hours
per week) are covered after 60 days of employment, this must be changed in
the employee handbook, too, or the small business is probably liable for any
problems.
If your small business employs more than 50 people, the FMLA generally
requires that employees who have worked at least 1,250 hours be granted an
unpaid leave for up to 12 weeks over any 12-month period to:
 Attend to personal health matters affecting job performance
 Provide care for their children, parents, or a spouse with serious
medical problems
 Care for a daughter or son during the first 12 months of life
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 128
 Offer parental care for children placed with an employee through
adoption or foster care within the first 12 months
State laws may impose additional requirements.
To avoid litigation, it may be wise to include a few words about severance
pay. If there is a specific plan, describe the plan and its provisions. Perhaps the
best advice for most small businesses is to say explicitly that there is no severance pay, and changes regarding this policy are not binding unless communicated in writing from the small business owner.
General Attendance and Employee Behavior Rules
Describe here company rules regarding the attendance policy, tardiness, absences, job performance, disorderly conduct, honesty, insubordination, theft of
company property or use of company property for personal purposes, and falsifying records. It is important to detail how, when, and who employees should
notify when tardiness, early leave, or absences occur.
To avoid a situation where an employee says, “The employee handbook doesn’t
say anything about keeping my pants zipped up,” introduce the section with a
statement such as:
The Company expects all employees to exhibit normal and good
judgment in all situations; however, the following are examples of special
situations . . .
Finally, it is important to spell out policies and procedures invoked when
problems occur, so that employees may see that a particular situation must be
handled in a certain manner, no matter who is involved.
Recording Time and Hours Worked
The FLSA requires that employees be paid at least the federal minimum
hourly wage. This is obviously not an issue when it’s time to hire, but, rather,
when it’s time to fire. Displeased employees may claim that the medieval practices in use at your small business required huge amounts of off-the-clock overtime, and their generous compensation divided by hours worked really resulted
in a per-hour rate less than the minimum wage. The Department of Labor and
the disaffected employee would then feast on your small business for “lost” hours
at 1.5 times the hourly rate, damages in the same amount, and everyone’s attorney fees.
The remedy for this begins with the employee handbook. Provide a policy
and describe the means for reporting all hours worked; describe exactly who
may authorize overtime; and detail the time frame and manner in which to report problems. Also, demand that time-reporting is immediate (not estimated a
week later), accurate, honest, and accomplished solely by the employee (no
log-ins/log-outs by coworkers). Further, state the resulting disciplinary actions
taken if problems occur.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 129
Job Descriptions
Small businesses are often averse to casting job descriptions in stone, because things change so quickly. If the situation is relatively stable at your company, the employee handbook may be used for this purpose.
Care should be taken in this area, however, since small businesses may inadvertently run afoul of ADEA, ADA, and state legislation. This can be avoided by
being as inclusive as possible in job descriptions, or by not discussing job descriptions at all.
Confidentiality of Information and Conflicts of Interest
Employees must know from day one the definition of “confidential information” within your small business. Define this in the employee handbook and describe that this means information cannot be disclosed to outsiders except in
limited circumstances, such that the information becomes generally available to
the public, or if demanded by the legal system. It may also be relevant to include
a “conflict of interest” section, requiring that employees not work in competition with your small business, directly or indirectly, during the period of employment and for a period of time afterward. Of course, it is another matter whether
the courts will allow this.
Work for Hire
For programmers, developers, creative types, engineers, and others, the agreement must describe that anything produced during employment with your small
business belongs to you and not to them, and that the compensation paid is
payment in full for such work. This should also be in employment agreements, if
they are used.
Grooming Requirements and Dress Code
Considering interaction with customers and the public as well as safety and
legal and contractual requirements, set forth your dress code, covering topics
such as facial hair, hair length, jewelry, and makeup. This area may be dicey,
because certain employees may think that gender or racial discrimination is really at work here. Nevertheless, the legal system has generally understood and
supported employers in this regard. Of course, developing a policy after problems surface puts you in a weaker position.
Privacy and Employee Use of Company Property for Non-Business Use
Here, small business owners should describe policies required if and when it
is necessary to:
 Restrict the use of company assets such as computers, telephones, fax
and copy machines, tools, etc. The best policy is to disallow the use of
any company property for any non-business use. This is stark but clear;
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 130
otherwise, company assets will soon be considered at the disposal of
employees for personal purposes, and you will soon wonder if certain
employees are working for your small business or themselves.
 Examine employee property such as purses, clothing, or gym bags
(which may well be separately required for security purposes).
 Enter areas such as restrooms, lockers, or changing areas, to the
extent that company policies may affect employee rights to privacy.
 Monitor employee telephone calls or e-mail. In this area, small business employers must be aware of the requirements of the Federal
Electronic Eavesdropping Act prohibiting interception of certain
communications; both criminal and civil penalties may be imposed
upon violators.
Safety and Health
This section deals with issues such as:
 The policy on smoking, smoking on the premises, the use of prescription, non-prescription, and illegal drugs, alcohol usage, and drug/
alcohol testing. Some employers recently have required that employees not smoke, even when away from the workplace on personal time.
It is not clear if this will be universally allowable.
 Many small businesses involved in the construction, production, testing, medical, and many other industries have special safety requirements, mandated by OSHA, state agencies, insurance providers, or
business partners. Safety policies may all be described in the employee
handbook, including the requirements, when and where the requirements apply, who must comply, and actions taken for non-compliance.
Additionally, employees should be told that although it is the employer’s
policy to maintain a safe and healthy workplace, employees are ultimately responsible as well.
All employee handbooks should also say something about emergency exits
and procedures, the location of fire extinguishers and first-aid equipment, and a
formal process for reporting medical problems, damage to equipment, and new
safety hazards, such as broken equipment.
Finally, a form should be provided where employees provide the names of
individuals to contact in case of emergency or medical problems. Employees should
also be admonished to report workplace injuries and property damages immediately to avoid the risk of losing workers’ compensation and other benefits.
Sexual Harassment, Equal Opportunity
All small businesses must do what is possible to avoid complaints and litigation
regarding sexual harassment or discrimination, especially in today’s legal-lottery
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 131
environment, where unhappy employees and ex-employees may roll the dice and
sue your small business with little downside but a handsome upside. The place to
begin is the employee handbook, which should state that:
 Prohibited behavior includes sexual advances, requests for sexual
favors, and otherwise creating a sexually charged or intimidating
environment. Note that the policy should also say that personnel
decisions shall not be affected if employees accept or reject such
advances. This precludes an employee from demanding a raise and
promotion for providing sexual favors.
 Complaints are made to specified persons, hopefully not to a direct
manager of the aggrieved.
 The small business must affirm its commitment to non-discrimination
and to treat all employees equally.
Yes, this is incredibly vague, which is why a professional and/or attorney is
often needed to get the right language here, and even then there are no guarantees about the language. Nor are there any guarantees that your company will
not be sued. And your small business may still get hammered for a huge judgment, allowing both victim and attorney to live comfortably for a long time.
Both sexual harassment and non-discrimination policies should provide a
channel for reporting problems other than through the purported victim’s manager, because the manager may well be the alleged violator. This is often difficult
for very small businesses with only a few employees.
Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR)
Litigation costs against employers have grown at astonishing rates over the
last couple of decades, and no end is in sight. Many frivolous lawsuits have been
filed, resulting in business bankruptcies and major reallocations of time, attention, and funds away from productive purposes.
Some small businesses sometimes seek to mitigate this threat by handling
grievances internally, and if this fails, through binding arbitration. Binding arbitration requires that both parties waive their rights to resolution through the
legal system in advance, and agree to be bound by the decision of an impartial,
experienced, and mutually agreeable mediator. Many small businesses feel that
binding arbitration is cheaper, faster, and less capricious than the legal system,
although not everyone agrees. There are many firms and individuals offering
services in this area.
Employees must agree to this during the application process, since it is not
proper to demand that new hires give up their rights to use the legal system after
employment commences. More specific information should be communicated in
the employee handbook.
Courts have generally found that employer policies demanding the use of
binding arbitration are legally enforceable, but this area is complex, varies from
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 132
state to state, and many small businesses will have different needs in this area.
For these reasons, it will be necessary to consult with legal counsel to decide
what is best for you.
Employer Caveats
Three important caveats should be included in the employee handbook:
1. First, language should be included allowing the small business in its
sole determination to change, amend, replace, or delete sections of
the employee handbook without notice, and without employee consent,
at any time.
2. Second, in a previous discussion we noted that employment in most
states is generally considered at-will, meaning that employees may be
terminated at any time for any legal reason, or no reason. This is
good for employers. But this may be compromised if the employer
later makes intentional—or, most commonly, inadvertent—
assurances regarding continued employment. This problem may be
addressed by disclaiming such assurances and stating that
…employment is at-will, not guaranteed for any specific period
of time, and employment may be discontinued by either party
at any time, for any legal reason, without cause, and without
notice…
Place this language prominently in the employee handbook and in
other relevant places as needed to avoid loss of at-will employment
status.
3. Finally, state that nothing in the employee handbook may be changed
unless communicated in writing by specific management of your small
business.
Proof of Receipt
When trouble occurs, some employees may claim that they never received
a copy of your carefully drafted employee handbook. This problem may be
avoided by:
 Having your CPA or a credible independent third party give a copy
of this and other employment documents to the new hire, logging the
act, and asking the employee to cosign a log book or related document.
 Asking the new hire to immediately sign a statement affirming receipt
of the copy.
 Asking the new hire to initial each page of the employee handbook,
make a copy, and then return a copy to you.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 133
Yes, this is intimidating, and there is much potential for costly missteps.
But the good news is that this may be accomplished more quickly, easily, and
inexpensively than before, thanks to the Internet. For beginners, just search for
“employee handbook” at your favorite search site; many great on-line templates
are available that can be downloaded in Microsoft Word format. Do your best to
customize this to fit the situation at your small business, but also give it to an
attorney or experienced HR specialist for review and finishing touches.
A sample employee handbook is also available for view and download at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com. An experienced provider of employment agreements is Petroff Consulting (http://www.petroffconsulting.com).
Although all of this may seem harsh, try to keep the tone of the employee
handbook as positive as possible because this important document is needed for
both legal, informational, and motivational purposes.
Employment Agreement
When a new employee is hired, all seems well in the world as employer and
employee enjoy a period of romance (well, business romance). It seems the
other party can do no wrong. That may change, and when things get difficult, a
written employment agreement may quickly and definitively solve many problems. The employment agreement spells out compensation, but just as important, it describes the employee’s responsibilities, schedule, and other details.
The great thing about written agreements is that when there is a disagreement, it
doesn’t matter what somebody thinks or said or feels; only the agreement is
important.
Employment agreements should be used sparingly and not offered to all.
They are especially effective when the employer wants to offer extra security to
an employee with special skills or experience.
The agreement does take some time and requires careful thought. It can be
changed as needed for each new person, but the most difficult part is deciding
exactly how to describe the job and its concomitant responsibilities. The benefit
is that it forces the employer to crystallize and define the exact expectations of,
and compensation to, the new recruit.
Most agreements are for a one-year period. Don’t forget to renew 30 to 60
days in advance of termination. Also, be sure to work with your employee to
make relevant changes as the company changes. Failure to update the agreement
in some areas will make other important areas look outdated, too.
Note that employment agreements are not required, but when they are used,
the employment may no longer be considered at-will.
Employment agreements serve many purposes, but the two most important
are to protect the small business and to motivate the new recruit. These documents are complex and vary greatly in different states, industries, and among
companies, but all should include clear language and articulate the following
essentials:
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 134
 Clearly define the position, so that the new recruit will know exactly what is
expected beyond the hype of interviews and recruiting meetings. This should
include the job title and a list of tasks, responsibilities, and objectives, thought
out clearly in advance so that the new hire’s actions provide maximum benefit.
This section may be quite lengthy. A disclaimer for later changes should be
included so that the job definition may change reasonably as business needs
change (but don’t push it too far here, or promising new candidates may fear
that the situation is unstable). This section should also include work hours
and the person to whom the new hire reports.
 Compensation. This section is usually of paramount interest to the new hire.
Here is where salary, bonuses, commissions, expenses, benefits, and any other
money, perks, and other compensation are defined. For sales people or anyone
working on incentive pay, great care should be taken to think this out carefully
because livelihoods often turn on this issue. If a mistake is made that obligates
your small business, be prepared to pay; it’s not acceptable to change the
deal later. On the other hand, if misunderstandings occur in your favor, the
new employee may become disenchanted and quit. Having said this, the small
business should have the right to make changes unilaterally as business needs
change. Be careful here, because employees may become discouraged by
continually changing comp plans.
 Confidentiality. A common provision these days is that employees must not
divulge or attempt to benefit from information that is proprietary to your
small business—such as trade secrets, customer lists, and production
methods—during the tenure of their employment and for a specified time
afterward.
 Work for Hire. For programmers, developers, creative types, engineers and
others, the agreement must describe that anything produced during
employment with your small business belongs to you and not to them, and
that the compensation paid is payment in full for such work. This should also
be in the employee handbook.
 Term, Renewal, and Termination. Like any agreement, beginning and end
dates must be included. Employment agreements may also describe (1) the
employer’s right to renew or renegotiate, (2) automatic termination or
employer’s option to terminate upon the occurrence of certain events, or (3)
automatic termination on a specific date. Reasons for termination often include
completion of a project, death or disability of the employee or small business
owner, or sale of the company. Assurances may also be given here that
termination will not occur if certain events occur (for example, “Small business
may not terminate this agreement for a one-year period following any quarter
in which sales objectives are met”). This provides security to the employee,
especially in at-will employment states, builds morale, and reduces turnover.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 135
 Performance “Out” Clause. Employers may need the ability to terminate for
material breaches of the employment agreement. For example, if a new
production manager agrees to increase output of welding tools by 50 percent
but production instead declines, the small business must have the right to
terminate Mr. Incompetent and thereby free up funds to hire the right
person.
 Non-Compete. Many employment agreements also demand that employees
may not compete against the employer for a period of perhaps six months to
five years following termination of employment. This requirement is often
not taken seriously by employees, competitors, and, most important, by the
courts.
 Truthfulness. Here, the small business requires that the recruit have been
honest in describing previous experience, background, education, and other
matters. To support this, include a copy of the resume as a formal attachment
to the employment agreement. If material discrepancies are later discovered,
this is usually reason for immediate termination “with cause.”
 Disputes. Many employers demand that employees agree to binding arbitration
as the means to settle disputes, rather than roll the dice with less predictable
judges and juries.
 Attorney’s Fees. A standard provision in almost all agreements allows that if
legal action is taken, the loser pays for the winner’s legal and enforcement
fees.
 Entire Agreement. Employment agreements, like most others agreements,
should have language to the effect that
This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties
and supersedes all previous agreements and understandings. It may
not be changed orally, but only by an agreement in writing signed by
the parties hereto…
This is important so that employees may not later claim, “I don’t care
what the agreement says, they told me in a meeting I would get paid the
maximum amount as long as I showed up for work.”
 Non-Compliance with Laws. The agreement should also allow that if one or
more parts are found to not be in compliance with the law, the entire agreement
is not thrown out by the courts. This is also standard language in many
commercial agreements.
Some of the items described here—such as confidentiality, work for hire,
alternative dispute resolution, truthfulness, and others provisions—may be included in the employee handbook instead of in employment agreements. This is
likely the case if the concern applies to all employees, not just a few.
Note that one of the main purposes here is to establish that the new employee is indeed an employee and not an independent contractor, agent, or
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 136
vendor. This automatically subjects your small business to many statutory, taxreporting, and payment requirements, which is presumably what everyone wants
here.
The employment agreement includes specific understandings between employer and employee. The employee handbook (as discussed) covers company
policies and procedures that apply to everyone, such as recognized holidays.
Finally, the protocol here is that the employment agreement or “written offer,” is sent to the new recruit, who must sign and return within a specified
number of days along with an acceptance letter. Once the letter is released to the
new hire, your small business will likely be held liable even if it not signed by the
employer. Problems could occur if the recruit leaves a current job and then
learns that your offer is not really there.
Employment agreements are notoriously complex. The small business owner
should draft parts of this related to specific areas outside of the legal realm but
then ask legal counsel to review everything to make sure it properly protects the
company and remains in compliance with the law.
U.S. Government Forms W-4, I-9, and Other Needed Documents
The U.S. government requires that employees communicate their desired
income tax withholding on IRS Form W-4. Immigration status is reported on
Form I-9. Both of these forms are detailed further in Chapter 7.
Some states need additional information on new employees, and companies
providing insurance and benefits need relevant information for coverages to be
effective. Make sure this is all organized and ready to go. Ask your CPA to make
a list and supply whatever additional forms and documents are lacking. Professionalism in this area will positively affect the morale of nervous new employees and
allow these burdensome tasks to be discharged quickly with minimal headaches.
The new employee should complete and return this information on the first
day of employment. Also, be sure to provide the employee handbook (as discussed) and information on specific coverages as supplied by insurance and benefits providers.
The Hiring Process
Now that we’ve written the job description and recruiting advertisement and
all the paperwork is figured out, it’s time to hire someone.
Review Resumes and Call
A large number of e-mail resumes are, hopefully, in your in-box as responses
to the recruiting ads. Begin reviewing these immediately; there is no need to wait
for laggards.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 137
The first part of this process is to eliminate the majority of responses. This is
usually quite easy because many respondents send out their applications by virtually spamming their resumes to as many opportunities as possible. As a result,
most responses will be grossly inappropriate.
Focus on the serious, sincere responses by carefully reading cover letters
and resumes, but concentrate on eliminating all but perhaps 10 persons. When
reviewing, think hard to determine whether the candidate:
Joe Learns New Code
Words
Employment practices may be a
minefield of problems. Many code
words can lead to problems. Here
are just a few:
“Overqualified” may be interpreted as age discrimination.
“Permanent Employee” may be
interpreted as a life-long commitment, thereby weakening the argument that an employee is at-will.
“Performance Bonus” may be
considered unfair to employees not
working while exercising their FMLA
rights. Small businesses may need
to pay Performance Bonuses to hapless workers who were denied their
right to earn these extra amounts.
 Meets the requirements
described in the ad and is
not under or overqualified
 Lives within a reasonable
commuting distance
 Appears to be stretching
the truth or is unnecessarily
vague
 Exhibits acceptable
grammar, spelling,
computer skills, and
communications abilities
With the in-box now reduced to a
small number of interesting candidates,
pick up the phone and begin calling. Be
careful about leaving revealing messages
at any telephone number. Saying, “I am
calling about the e-mail you sent earlier
today to our aircraft bearings company”
should be enough.
The purpose of the phone call is to
further qualify and decide whether time
is well-spent by going the next step in the interview. Another purpose is to raise
enthusiasm about opportunities at your small business. To do this, first put the
person at ease. Start by providing some description of your company and the
specific opportunity, and then confirm facts and gain more detail, especially regarding the questions already discussed. If things still look good, agree upon an
interview time immediately, even though it may be best to schedule the interview
for one or two weeks in the future. If things are less certain, simply say:
Thanks for your time. We are considering you along with a few others
that we still need to speak with, so hopefully we’ll be able to talk again
soon.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 138
Interviewing Potential Employees
As good candidates are discovered through responses to help-wanted ads,
don’t wait. Begin calling and interviewing right away. This takes longer than
you think, and the best candidates may be far along in the hiring process with
competitors.
Interviews should be structured and formal, even if your small business is
really small. Job seekers may become uncomfortable in informal situations. If
the interviewer seems unprepared, unclear of exact needs, less than excited, distracted, or vaguely familiar with a candidate’s credentials, this will only reinforce
fears of working for your company. You are being interviewed, too, so dress
well, hold the interview in the most impressive possible surroundings, don’t
allow outside interruptions or phone calls, have a list of questions ready, and
study the candidate’s resume in advance.
It is ironic that even in larger companies, most managers who hire are not
hiring managers. Many are good at one function or another, but they are poorly
prepared for job interviews. Impressive corporate surroundings and a well-known
reputation are often squandered when a busy manager hurriedly reviews a resume for the first time as the candidate sits down for the interview, a discouraging sight to eager candidates—and a waste of your time and money.
There are five steps involved in conducting an interview.
Welcome
Greet the candidates, thank them for coming, and make them feel welcomed.
Avoid making them wait in the reception area. Suggest that this meeting is an
important part of your day. Make small talk about traffic, weather, sports, or
whatever. Avoid news or politics or anything controversial. Of course, don’t
even mention subjects like race, religion, sexual preferences, etc. But also, do
not dare ask questions about family, children, health, background, friends, or
other areas that concern a candidate’s personal situation. If the candidate leads
the conversation into this area, gently direct the talk into a neutral area. No
business yet.
Introduction
Now it’s time for business. Talk about the company, its glorious history and
position in the market. Don’t talk about the job opportunity yet.
Interview Questions
It’s time to get more specific. In a give-and-take manner, tell a little about
the opportunity and then ask a question or two. A great list of interview questions may be downloaded from www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Consider these questions against the “Job Description Outline” and “Requirements” sections presented previously.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 139
It’s not fair to ask too many questions when the candidate doesn’t know any
more than what was described in the help-wanted ad. On the other hand, don’t
lay out the whole situation such that the candidate knows exactly how to answer
the interview questions. Explain a little, ask some questions, explain a little more,
and so on.
Candidate Questions
Ask the candidate if they have any questions or if they need further clarification. Ask sincerely, and not in the manner of, “I am sure you do not have any
questions because I am finished with you.” Much can be garnered from the questions asked by applicants, and this is also a time to build further rapport. If the
candidate has no questions, well—then that says something, too. Expect to be
asked about compensation. At this point, give a range, but not a precise number.
Conclusion
By this time, you will know whether to continue considering a particular
person. If there is insufficient interest, thank the applicant for coming and later
send a polite letter declining further consideration. If there is further interest, this
is the time to tell the recruit the additional hiring procedures and express enthusiasm about his or her credentials. Say something such as:
Well, I am very impressed with your experience in this area, and you
are certainly one of the more interesting candidates I have met. So I
hope we can continue exploring this, and I want to let you know right
up front how we proceed from here. After this interview, I want you to
speak with one of my colleagues, and then we to test your computer
skills. Then, I would like to speak with three of your references for a
few minutes, including a former manager. Someone will also verify
what you told us on your resume about your employment and
educational background. If all goes well, we’ll have a conditional offer
of employment for you within 24 hours. Now the “conditional” part
means we get what’s called a satisfactory credit and criminal
background report, and the resume verifications must check out.
Now I don’t care if there are some minor credit issues, but of course
we need to make sure there are no major problems because you will
be handling valuable inventory. So as we proceed, please be assured
that I am being 100 percent truthful with you, and I need the same in
return. I want this to work out because it looks like this could be a
great opportunity for both of us. So does this make sense to you?
The purpose to this statement is to let the candidate know that this may be a
small business, but you know what you are doing. The credit and criminal background check is increasingly important in today’s security-conscious world.
The process for ordering these, and what to look for, has already been described. Now it’s time to move on to the next step in the hiring process: checking references.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 140
A Few Do’s and Don’ts:
 Do use a checklist of questions.
 Don’t hold it against people if they are not perfect. In the hiring process,
everyone will come up short in some way. You won’t find the perfect employee
in this lifetime.
 Do ask others to interview the candidate, asking the same questions in different
ways. Later compare answers to gauge consistency. You will be surprised at
the little things coworkers saw that you missed.
 Is this a physically attractive candidate? Don’t even consider this factor. In
today’s business environment, it’s better to work hard with people that you
feel comfortable with and pursue other interests elsewhere. Don’t find your
honey where you make your money!
 Do credit and criminal background checks, and perhaps drug testing, as
described in a previous section.
 Don’t believe everything the recruit says. It’s impossible to check everything,
but get to the bottom of a few selected items. If a small item was grossly
exaggerated, chances are, bigger items were also misrepresented.
 Do use the exact same process in hiring every employee. Consistent practices
are necessary to avoid legal tangles.
The New Hire Celebrates by Giving His Boss Joe Some Illegal Drugs
I am always on the lookout for great
salespeople and could not believe my
good fortune when a business colleague referred me to a seasoned
person from my industry who had just
moved into town. He had great experience in another city, and although
his reasons for moving were a bit
vague, I was won over by his zealousness, industry knowledge, and promises that he would walk in the door
with a big book of business. I decided
to cut short my usual processes, and
after only two interviews over two days
and a scanty background check, I
found myself walking around the office and introducing all to this challenging new salesperson. I had to cut
the introductions short as Mr. Perfect
jumped on the telephones, eager to
tell the world they could now do business with my company.
At the end of the day, he asked me
for a ride home. I was not clear on what
happened to his car, and as we drove,
I barely listened to his confusing story
about why he needed to be left off at a
street corner in a somewhat seedy
commercial district. Feeling good about
the whole situation, I complied.
After driving home, I exited the car
and dropped a pen between the two
front car seats. I used a powerful flashlight to help locate and remove it, but
found something else that stopped me
cold. Under the front seat where Mr.
Perfect had been sitting were about a
dozen pills, which I immediately recognized as illegal drugs.
Now I had to unhire a very bad
employee who would never have
made it through my own employment
process—if I had stuck to my own
rules.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 141
Joe’s Spooky Manager From the Virtual Ether
The company was expanding rapidly,
and we had an immediate need for a
manager to generate revenues directly
and open new offices across the
Southwest. The perfect resume was
on my desk.
After conducting the first interview,
I was enamored of this new candidate, who had just moved to the area.
In her previous post, she began as a
sales rep and reported through two
management levels to the three owners of the company. Her husband was
not involved at all, she said, because
he was working out of state. In only
three years, she had increased revenues dramatically and then waltzed
around the western U.S., opening offices in major cities, staffing for more
business, and then moving on. She
was making a fortune but had to leave
because her husband was transferred to our city. There was a good
chance her husband would become
her first customer at our company.
I wanted to jump ahead and make
an offer, but reluctantly began checking her background and references.
She seemed a bit flustered when I
said, “By the way, I can’t seem to find
the phone numbers of the offices you
opened in Phoenix and Denver. Can
you tell me what they are?” After some
delay, I received the two numbers with
an explanation that the offices were
not really that busy now; things had
slowed down since she left. Indeed
they were. Both telephone numbers
connected with personal answering
machines. The red flags were up.
Other discreet checks were not
coming out as expected, but the finale came when I asked in a telephone call, “Susan, I looked up your
business address on the Internet, and
it looks like a residential area. So was
the business (employing 30 people)
run out of your home?”
“Uhhh, no,” she replied, “that is
an office building.” She seemed unsure.
I continued. “Well, I called the secretary of state there and was told that
the business was registered in the
name of your husband. So I was wondering, how do these other three
people fit in?”
There was a long silence, and then
she responded in an uncertain voice,
“My husband is such a jerk. I can’t
believe they would make him an officer of the company and no one even
told me.”
“Your husband was made an officer of a company in which he wasn’t
involved at all, and he didn’t tell you?”
I said.
“I don’t know what’s going on,”
she said nervously, “I’m going to ask
him tonight what’s going on and then
I’ll tell you.”
“Sure,” I said, “call me.”
Her story was unraveled, and that
was the last conversation I had with
my promising new manager.
Reference Checks
Conducting reference checks is a standard part of the hiring process, and if
the situation looks promising, it is appropriate to ask for at least three references. It may not be appropriate to call the candidate’s current employer, but
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 142
this may be accomplished after employment has commenced at your company to
at least verify employment dates. In any case, get a signed release from the applicant before calling (sample at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com).
Many in the business world these days are leery of providing references because there is little upside but plenty of scary stories about references and lawsuits against nice people who talk too much on the phone. Begin the call by
warming up the other person with a short and friendly introduction to the situation and stress informality. Then ask safe questions, such as dates of employment, job titles, and responsibilities. A list of good questions to ask is available at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
One common technique used by good recruiters is to mine references for
additional references. For example, if Roger Recruit helped both the finance
and MIS departments, whom in MIS did he work with? Because a recruit can
hardly be expected to provide anything less than the most complimentary references, the second reference may be more candid than the first.
Finally, if several candidates are being considered, be sure to ask the same
questions of all references for all candidates. This will allow a more accurate
apples-to-apples comparison and avoid accusations that you were unfairly suspicious of particular applicants.
Stop, Think, Then Make the Offer
Now that all the information is gathered, sit back and see if everything is in
accordance with the original plans (as discussed earlier in this chapter). Does
everything makes sense? Hopefully, many candidates were evaluated, a few were
interviewed, and now one is selected. But consider that it may be possible that no
one is really a good fit.
Further, consider that hiring a new employee is a serious matter and greatly
affects both the life of the new recruit and the character of your small business.
There are also many legal responsibilities that commence immediately upon
employment and don’t go away easily.
If the pressure is on and it’s time to grow, then make sure everything is
ready, prepare the offer letter (even if it is short and simple), and call your new
employee with the good news. Now you are in sales mode again, so be positive
and enthusiastic to increase the chances of acceptance.
With permission from the new recruit, send the offer letter and allow some
time for consideration and response. This is usually three to 14 days. Further
time may then be needed so that the new employee may provide notice of resignation to the previous employer (usually two weeks). If the employee says that
notice is not needed, be alarmed and expect the same treatment when troubles
arise at your firm.
Keep all other options open as much as possible, since the deal is not complete until the new employee shows up for work on the first day. There is a good
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 143
chance that the current employer will fight to keep good employees from leaving, there is a chance that another company will come through with a better
offer, and there is a chance the new person will just get buyer’s remorse and not
show up.
Document All Hire, Fire, and Other Employee-Related Issues
Now that things are underway with new employees, it’s time to learn a few
things about management and administration. Many books are available on these
subjects, so just a few words are offered here.
Just to be safe, always keep a wary eye on communications with employees,
including the handbook, letters, e-mails, etc., and make sure that unclear language does not allow anyone to claim that an agreement or understanding was in
place and that their job was secure. Terminated employees are often angry at the
ex-employer and may team up with litigious attorneys and attempt a shakedown.
Careful actions in this area will preclude situations where your expensive attorney concludes:
We can settle now without a trial for $25,000, but if we go to
court, your legal fees will be more than this anyway and we
may get hammered with a wrongful-termination judgment for
$100,000 plus legal fees.
Moreover, it is important to manage all employees consistently; apply the
same rules to everyone without exception, or drop the rule. Otherwise,
employment-related actions appear capricious and your small business is exposed
to claims of wrongful termination, discrimination, and other complaints. Develop,
communicate, and review performance measurements for all employees, and
consistently enforce them.
Every employee-related event should be documented, consistently, for all
employees. This includes tardiness, sick days, vacation days, early leave for
family events and doctor visits, work problems, and employment-related conversations. It’s best to have a neutral person or an automated system record
much of this, since an irate employee will disclaim your observations in court.
For example, it’s easy to say, “I was on time for work every day and never left
early. My employer is lying, and they’re really firing me because I am of a different religion.” It’s harder to claim this if arrival and departure times are recorded by a time clock, by receptionist records, or with the time stamp in
e-mails that employees must send as the method of clocking in and clocking
out every day.
As part of this process, develop performance review meetings and associated
disciplinary policies. When giving reviews, be fair, candid, and not overly patronizing. Immediately after this, while memories are fresh, take time to enter
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 144
the meeting notes into a memo and include the date, names of persons in attendance, agenda, problems discussed, and actions taken. Then, within a day or
two, ask the employee to sign the memo. The signature line may look something
like this:
… Finally, we discussed that you were seen taking pencils
from the office supply room and into your car.
Joe Capitalist,
President, Small Business, Inc.
Joe Smith, Employee (please sign and date)
My signature above means that I have received a copy of this
memo.
(A sample employee review memo is available for viewing and download at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com).
If the employee refuses, trouble is coming, so hold the meeting again but this
time with another person present, who can later serve as a witness. Otherwise,
the employee will claim that the meeting never happened and that he was shocked
at later being fired.
All this may sound somewhat ominous, but keep it light. Don’t let the tone of
the meeting approximate that of a war-crimes trial unless major problems are at
hand. Nothing lightens up a meeting and improves morale better than sincere
compliments about all the things that are going right. The majority of review
meetings should be pleasant for everyone.
Note, however, that even “good time” performance review memos can later
become important. In many cases, if employees claim that they screwed up consistently right from the beginning, your small business may well be found culpable for making the mistake of hiring such a person. But if good, and then bad,
behavior can be demonstrated, it appears that the employee has the ability to do
the job, but now has other problems, which are not your fault.
Good, consistent documentation is usually the enemy of litigious attorneys.
Finally, regulations from all the different federal and state agencies described
in this chapter regarding preservation of records are immensely complex. Problems may resurface years after employees have left the company, or records
may be needed as proof of your consistency when new employees have problems. For example, small businesses may be required to produce information
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 145
for up to 30 years in cases where workers claim exposure to hazardous materials.
The safest advice is to therefore to keep all employment-related records forever.
How to Lose Employees: Resignations and Terminations
There are four basic ways employees can leave the employ of your small
business. The manner of saying good-bye has consequences regarding the unemployment insurance rates charged to your company and may affect other matters
such as employment agreements. The right classification is important because
small businesses with a record of firing many employees without cause will pay
higher unemployment insurance rates.
Additionally, employment terminations must be carefully planned because
of the severe psychological and financial impact this event may have on exemployees. Many shocked and angry ex-employees will seek revenge in a fast
and powerful way, and these days, this often amounts to a lawsuit or legal
shakedown.
You, the small business owner, must approach employee terminations in a
non-emotional and objective manner, no matter how charged the situation. Usually, this can be accomplished by dealing with the matter as a sincere effort made
by both parties, but one that is just not optimal for the company. Or describe
termination as a task that must be undertaken in order to be consistent with
company policies. Perhaps you might also suggest that it is not entirely to your
liking.
In the case of layoffs, it may be appropriate to be more forthcoming and
communicate that the employee’s efforts were good and greatly appreciated, but
it is a matter of money and survival.
Four Means of Employee-Employer Separation
Terminated With Cause
The employee cannot fulfill the job requirements; for example, he or she fails
to meet a production quota (expect this to adversely affect the unemployment
insurance rate) or is caught doing something bad, such as stealing (employees
are rarely eligible for unemployment insurance in this case).
An important exception occurs often when a small business makes a “mistake” in hiring someone who was not capable in the first place. For example, if a
secretary is fired for inability to create original legal agreements, the employer is
likely to be cited as having made a mistake for hiring this person in the first
place. This can be avoided if there is a written record of positive employee reviews at the beginning of the employment tenure to establish that the employee
can indeed do the job, followed by increasingly negative reviews establishing that
performance declined, the employer attempted to fix the situation, but the oncepromising employee just did not respond.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 146
Terminated Without Cause
This is an exercise of the employer’s rights in regard to at-will employment
status, and basically allows that the employee may have performed well, but the
company just wants someone else. Layoffs are also considered “termination without cause.” In this case, the unemployment insurance account of the small business will likely be charged, and UI tax rates may increase.
Sometimes, the small business owner may want to pave the way for unemployment insurance benefits approval by writing a letter to the hapless exemployee, saying something such as:
...despite your best efforts, which were of value and
appreciated by this company, we are experiencing a general
business slowdown that necessitates termination of your
employment...
Resigned With Cause
Watch out for this one. This is where ex-employees say they are quitting
because of an employment-related event they didn’t like.
The ex-employee may also make the accusation of “constructive discharge.”
This means that the employer desired to fire this person but instead created an
unbearable work environment to force the resignation.
In this case, get ready for a call from a local attorney who wants to discuss
discrimination, harassment, a bad work environment, unfair treatment, or something else that’s not pleasant.
Resigned Without Cause
Employees often leave their positions because they get a better job somewhere else, or for no known reason. Here, they have voluntarily left their employment and are therefore not eligible for unemployment insurance. The
employer’s unemployment insurance account is not normally charged.
Note, however, that if the meandering worker is later laid off by his or her
next employer, the unemployment insurance account of your small business may
well be dinged.
The Termination Meeting
When the final day comes and the termination meeting begins, it is important
to have a trusted and credible witness present. Also, have a letter ready for the
employee to sign, acknowledging that you made certain statements in the meeting such as the fact that this is a layoff, or perhaps that the employee could not
adequately perform as expected. Say what needs to be said in a non-emotional
manner, and then ask the now ex-employee to sign an acknowledgment memo.
Hiring and Firing: Weeding and Seeding 147
There may be resistance to this, so stress that signing the memo means only
that the ex-employee has received a copy of the memo; not that he or she
agrees with the reasoning. The purpose is to preclude a situation where the
terminated employee claims that something entirely different was the reason for
termination (“I didn’t like the constant lewd jokes”) or that no termination meeting was ever held at all. That is also the reason a credible witness should attend
the meeting. The memo may say something like this:
Dear Mr. Incompetent:
This company regrets that your employment here is being
terminated, effective immediately, for failure to perform the job
requirements to the levels we expected of you. Please sign below
to acknowledge that you have received a copy of this memo.
Sincerely,
Joe Capitalist,
President, Small Business, Inc.
Ima Incompetent, Employee (please sign and date)
My signature above means that I have received a copy of this
memo.
Note that the biggest concern here is not the unemployment insurance but
the fact that the ex-employee is now madder than a hornet and wants to get a
mean lawyer to grind you into the dirt like a cigarette butt. In a one-on-one
employment termination meeting, it’s your word against the “ex” and there’s a
good chance the evil employer will lose. But if the stage is set as described, there
is less chance of lingering legal consequences.
Retaining and Hiring HR Professionals
Hiring and firing and weeding and seeding are perhaps the most important
activities undertaken by small businesses, but as we have seen, this can be enormously complex. Well-meaning entrepreneurs may easily run afoul of state and
federal laws. Human resource (HR) administration is equally complex, and, of
course, everything continues to change. It is just impossible for mere mortals to
keep abreast of every possible requirement and exposure.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 148
For these reasons, most small businesses should outsource much of this to
professionals as employment grows. HR professionals may be retained to help
on an ad hoc basis for the smallest of situations, and this, along with a good CPA
and legal counsel, may work well until total employment reaches about 50 persons. At this point, small businesses become subject to even more regulations,
and nothing short of a full-time HR manager will do.
Petroff Consulting Group (www.petroffconsulting.com) has a good deal of
experience in most of these areas, or search under the specific topics already
discussed, because many of these specialists offer a full range of human resources
consulting services.
Despite all these employment-related issues, many small businesses continue to prosper and grow. There is a way though all this for small business
owners who are diligent and are able to navigate their way through the challenges of growing the company with a well-managed, productive, and contented
workforce.
149
Chapter 7
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes
Government has blessed small businesses with a cornucopia of taxes. There
are taxes on just about everything imaginable, and civil servants continue to think
of complicated new taxes, fees, penalties, and charges to impose on all of us.
For most small businesses, taxes represent the largest single expenditure. For
many firms operating under the high-volume/low-margin model, the government
makes a lot more money on a sale than the small business. Consider, for example,
a consumer electronics firm that sells most goods on a 10 percent markup. In
some states, sales taxes are 8 percent of revenues, and income taxes are 40 percent of the margin. Without looking very hard, the government makes 12 percent
on a sale and the small business makes only 10 percent.
Most small businesses are always interested in ways to minimize their largest
expense: taxes. That is what we will talk about here.
There are many types of taxes, and a detailed discussion would fill many
boxes of huge, boring books. Further, understanding and preparing income,
payroll, sales, and other forms of taxation are separate areas of study that
cannot be covered responsibly in just one chapter. We review here the major
forms of business taxation, summarizing information most relevant to small business owners.
 Description (not justification) of the tax
 Rates
 How to pay (forms to use)
 When to pay (schedule)
 How to minimize
Income Taxes
Description
The federal government (IRS) and all states except five charge income taxes
to incorporated small businesses. (Nevada, Washington, and Wyoming do not
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 150
have state corporate income taxes; Michigan uses a “business activities tax,” and
Texas imposes a franchise tax.) Rates are from 0 percent to a high of 9.99 percent
of income in Pennsylvania.
If your small business is a proprietorship, partnership, Sub S-Corporation,
Personal Service Corporation, or Professional Corporation (all described in
Chapter 2), income from the business is not taxed but flows to personal tax
returns; some aspects of this are discussed here, but personal tax rates are not.
Rates
At the federal level, income taxes are basically “revenues less expenses
equals taxable income.” This is where the simplicity stops and complexity begins (although complexity can be advantageous to the small business, as we
shall see soon). At this point, most corporations figure their tax by using the
following schedule.
Federal Corporate Tax Rate Schedule
 Taxable Income
Over— But not Tax is: Of the amount
over— over—
$0 $50,000 15 percent $0
50,000 75,000 $ 7,500 + 50,000
25 percent
75,000 100,000 13,750 + 75,000
34 percent
100,000 335,000 22,250 + 100,000
39 percent
335,000 10,000,000 113,900 + 335,000
34 percent
10,000,000 15,000,000 3,400,000 + 10,000,000
35 percent
15,000,000 18,333,333 5,150,000 + 15,000,000
38 percent
18,333,333 ———————— 35 percent –0–
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 151
In most cases, the state taxes begin by taking the federal corporate tax return, making certain adjustments, and then applying the state corporate income
tax rates. Note that many states charge a minimum fee, ranging from $10 in
Oregon to an $800 franchise tax fee in California. Further, most states do not
allow federal income taxes to be used as a deduction before paying the state
rates. Thus, a corporation with $1 million in taxable income operating in New
York, for example, will pay federal income taxes of $340,000 (34 percent) plus
$750,000 (7.5 percent) at the state level, totaling 41.5 percent.
How to Pay (Forms to Use)
A corporation generally must file Form 1120 to compute its income tax liability. However, shorter and nicer Form 1120–A may be used if gross receipts, total
income, and total assets are each under $500,000 and certain other requirements
are met.
Estimated income tax payments are usually submitted by dropping off a check
and a Form 8109 “coupon” at your local bank or other authorized financial institution; these are not sent directly to the IRS.
Generally, all corporations in existence for any part of a taxable year (including companies in bankruptcy) must file an income tax return, regardless of
whether or not they have taxable income.
When to Pay
Corporations must make installment payments if estimated taxes for the
year are $500 or more. As always, if the payments are even a day late, an underpayment penalty is assessed. To avoid this, make installment payments by the
15th day of the fourth, sixth, ninth, and 12th months of the corporation’s tax
year. (For most small businesses, this is the 15th of April, June, September,
and December.)
After making the estimated tax payments, most corporations need to file the
complete income tax return (Form 1120 or 1120A) by the 15th day of the third
month after the end of its tax year (for most companies, this is March 15). A new
corporation filing a short-period return must generally file by the 15th day of the
third month after the short period ends.
It is probably apparent from all this that filing federal and state corporate
income tax returns (or the equivalent forms for small businesses that are not
incorporated) is a task for professionals. There are many opportunities for the
busy small business owner to screw up and get pounded with penalties, taxes,
and interest. The best advice is to focus on growing the business, and let an
expert do the taxes.
For those who must do everything, however, volumes of information on corporate taxes are available in print and on-line, so small business owners needing
extra detail should consult these sources. Begin with Publication 1066 (Small
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 152
Business Tax Workshop Workbook) and Publication 542 (Corporations). The
IRS has done a great job of preparing these simple-to-read compilations of a
difficult-to-understand area, and these publications can easily be found on-line
and downloaded at www.irs.gov or can be obtained by calling 1-800-829-4933.
Minimizing Business Income Taxes
The complexities of income taxes for corporations and other business forms
offer great opportunities to minimize, defer, and avoid taxes. This subject area is
vast enough to employ battalions of business tax specialists, but the most common techniques and areas of concern are reviewed here. In general, use the
business to pay as many personal expenses as possible. This increases deductible
business expenses and reduces taxable income. The most commonly used deductions for this purpose are as follows.
Business Use of Home
Small business owners may be able to deduct certain expenses for part of the
home, even if it is not the primary business location.
The IRS considers deductible expenses for business use of the home to include the business portion of personal expenses such as depreciation, maintenance, insurance, mortgage interest, real estate taxes, rent paid, repairs, and
utilities. If a home office, for example, is 15 percent of the square footage of the
home, the small business owner as an individual may submit an expense report to
the company for 15 percent of these expenses and receive reimbursement. The
company’s taxable net income and income tax expenses are reduced, but neither
the owner nor the company incur payroll taxes on these amounts.
To deduct these expenses, IRS rules require that the home be used “regularly and exclusively” as one of the following:
 The principal place of business for a small business [this means that
the home is used “exclusively and regularly for administrative or
management activities of your trade or business; and you have no
other fixed location where you conduct substantial administrative or
management activities of your trade or business” (Reference: IRS
Topic 509, Business Use of Home)]
 The place where you meet and deal with patients, clients, or customers
in the normal course of the trade or business
 A separate structure that is not attached to the home in connection
with the small business
Be careful that no personal activities are apparent in the room, because this
would foil the requirement that the room or structure be used “exclusively” for
business. For example, if a library of family photographs resides on bookshelves
or on the computer in a home business office, this may cause a problem.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 153
Be sure to keep records, bills, checks, and worksheets used to calculate these
deductions.
As a practical matter, many small business owners use portions of the home
for business and take liberal deductions even when the allowance is questionable.
Use IRS Form 8829 to calculate “business use of the home” deductions. This
amount is then carried as a deduction to the appropriate business income tax
return statement. IRS Publication 587 has detailed information on rules for the
business use of the home (available at www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and
receive free copies by mail).
Travel and Entertainment Expenses
This category includes payment for entertaining clients and employees, meals,
travel by auto, air travel, baggage handling fees, taxis, hotels, parking, gifts, car
rentals, taxes on these items, and other related expenses. The IRS generally
allows a deduction for business-related travel and entertainment expenses; however, although employees may receive reimbursement for all their meals and
entertainment expenses, only 50 percent of these amounts may be used as a deduction for business income tax purposes.
The IRS has complex and intricate rules regarding this. In IRS Publication
463, for example (Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses), small business owners may learn all about the precise definition of a“Bona Fide Business
Expense,” “Lavish or Extravagant” meal expenses, the “Directly Related Test,”
the “Associated Test,” and much more.
Further, accurate records and receipts must be kept explaining the date,
business purpose, persons met, and amounts associated with each travel and
entertainment expense. This is best accomplished using spreadsheets such as
Microsoft Excel; however, the report must be printed and signed periodically.
In general, small business owners want to report expenses of this nature
liberally to increase business expenses, reduce taxable income, and thereby reduce income tax expenses. The reality is that many small business owners consider virtually all travel and entertainment expenses to be business related. Many
small businesses simply pay off the credit card of the owner and the top officers
each month, and everything is wedged into one expense line item or another. As
far as recordkeeping is concerned, many consider the credit card statement enough
for the IRS, although this would not suffice for an audit. These companies are
obviously taking the position, “If I get audited, I will explain it all, and if they
don’t believe me, so what? I won’t go to jail.”
I have heard of some rather extravagant interpretations of “travel and entertainment expenses” over the years, but have never heard of a situation where the
IRS challenged a small business owner for incorrectly classifying personal expenses as business-related travel and entertainment expenses.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 154
For more information, see IRS Publication 463 (Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses), www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and receive free copies
by mail.
Automobile Expense and Mileage
Automobile expenses are usually treated in one of two ways, depending upon
which offers the most advantage to the small business:
Joe’s Colleague Has More
Mileage Than He Thought
I once attended a meeting of a small
business colleague and his CPA, where
we computed corporate taxes for the
previous year. The CPA was a large,
jolly Santa-Claus type of person, always
generous in giving away the
government’s money. My colleague
was rather detail-oriented and had a
good accounting background.
We got to the part about automobile expenses. The CPA asked my colleague, “So how much did you use
your car for business this year?”
He replied, “Well, I kept a spreadsheet of my mileage, and it’s either 45
percent or 55 percent of my total mileage this year, but I wanted to ask you
a question to see if this one type of
use is allowable.”
The CPA grimaced and said, “I
don’t like either of those numbers. I
like 80 percent because it’s a nice
number and everyone is using it these
days.”
“But I don’t have records to support that,” protested my colleague.
“It’s okay. Everything will be fine
and I’m sure no one will ever look at
your records anyway,” responded the
CPA.
And so 80 percent it was. And we
never did hear from the IRS.
 Businesses may deduct estimated automobile expenses by
charging a standard mileage
amount of $37.5 cents per
mile. This is normally accomplished when employees or
owners submit an expense report to the small business and
receive expense (no payroll
taxes) reimbursement. At
year-end, the small business
claims these expenses as deductions on the business income tax return. Note that if
reimbursement amounts are
more than 37.5 cents per mile,
the difference is taxable income to employees or owners.
There are several situations
where this standard allowance
may not be used, such as when
two or more vehicles are used
in the business.
 Small business owners and
employees total all of their
automotive expenses (such as
gasoline, maintenance, parts,
fees, depreciation, interest,
etc.), figure the percentage of
business use, and receive reimbursement from the small
business. At year-end, the
small business claims these
deductions on the business
income tax return.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 155
Once again, the IRS has complex and intricate rules regarding this (see IRS
Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses), where the proper
deduction may be calculated for when the owner leaves home, drops a child at
school, goes to a business appointment, and then to the office.
The IRS requires those who use this deduction to keep accurate records of
each deductible trip, including dates, miles, business purpose, and persons met.
As a practical matter, however, many small business owners keep very thin
records, or none at all, and simply report 100 percent of their automobile expenses as business related. Again, many seem to take the position, “If I get
audited, I will explain it all, and if they don’t believe me, so what? I won’t go to
jail.”
For more information, see IRS Publication 463 (Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses), www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and receive free copies
by mail.
Retirement Plans
The federal government now allows tax benefits under a wide range of retirement plans available to small businesses, and small businesses have taken notice.
More than 1 million firms of 100 or fewer employees now offer one of the many
retirement plans available, and over 80 percent of the employees in these companies have chosen to participate. The tax advantages to these programs have been
increased recently, which is all the more reason for small business owners to
take notice of this tax minimization opportunity.
Employer-sponsored retirement plans are popular because this benefit helps
in recruiting and retaining better-quality employees, and improves employee
morale. This is a great way to gain an even deeper commitment from a good
team.
Retirement plans were created primarily to encourage savings by offering
employers and employees the opportunity of deferring taxes, and that is what we
discuss here.
Small business owners gain a double benefit from setting up and investing in
company-sponsored retirement plans, because (1) business income taxes are
deferred (that is, pushed into later years, but not avoided), and (2) entrepreneurs actually pack away significant funds for later years. Retirement savings are
not taxed at current rates, but accumulate untaxed until they are later distributed back to the participant. This means that bigger nest eggs are available at
retirement (because income was earned on the deferred taxes for many years).
When the plan begins distributions back to the participant, overall income—and
taxes—will likely be less than now.
For example, let us assume that a New York manufacturing company finds
that taxable income will be about $115,000. This small business owes the IRS
$28,100 and the state of New York $8,625 (totaling $36,725). But if the business
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 156
contributes $20,000 to SEP-IRA’s (including your SEP-IRA), taxable income
drops to $95,000, and total taxes drop to $27,675. But the balance in the small
business owner’s retirement plan still increases.
Take note, however, that retirement plans offered by a business to employees
must generally offer the plan to everyone, or no one. If a small business owner
decides to contribute 10 percent of income to a retirement plan, the same amount
must be paid in for other employees, too. A way around this is to set eligibility
policies, such as “only employees with more than five years of continuous employment with the company qualify for the retirement plan.”
Further, the IRS sets limits on employee contributions to these types of plans,
to ensure that highly paid employees do not abuse these tax advantages, and we
certainly would not want this to happen. These limits change annually. On the
other hand, some retirement plans allow the option to reduce or even skip contributions in lean years.
Many companies kick in a percentage of what the employee adds to his or
her retirement plan. For example, if an employee (including the small business
owner) contributes $100 out of each paycheck to a retirement plan, and the company matches 50 percent of this, the total amount of tax-exposed income now
shoved into these plans increases by $150 per pay period. Some plans allow employees to “roll over” the funds if they decide to leave your small business for a
new job, so none of their savings is lost.
There are now a complete range of retirement programs for small businesses.
Many are listed here. Some are not relevant to certain forms of business ownership (for example, sole-proprietorship or corporation). Specific plans that may
be considered include:
401(k) Plans
A 401(k) is a type of retirement plan in which the small business owner and
employees save and invest for retirement through regular contributions during
the year. In contrast, many other options allow contributions only from the employer (SEP-IRA) or employee (IRAs), but not both. Under this program, employees authorize the employer to deduct a certain amount of money from each
paycheck before taxes, and the employer may kick in a similar amount. These
funds are then invested in familiar stocks, bonds, and mutual funds, under the
company 401(k) plan.
Individual Retirement Account (IRA) Plans
There are over 10 different types of IRA plans now available, which are briefly
summarized below.
A traditional IRA is available to those under the age of 70.5 who are currently earning income. Earnings are tax-deferred until withdrawal, and withdrawals
must begin at age 70.5, or penalties are assessed. Contributions may or may not
be tax-deductible, depending upon many factors, but the earnings grow tax-free
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 157
over time. When it’s time to begin taking distributions from the plan, however,
amounts received are treated as taxable income (although tax rates in retirement
will likely be lower than they are now). IRAs are mostly for individuals (as opposed to small businesses). In fact, employers may not contribute to IRAs, only
employees.
A Simplified Employee Pension (SEP-IRA) is a traditional IRA set up by an
employer for employees. Here, the small business may contribute to the employee’s
IRA a maximum of 15 percent per year of each employee’s total compensation, if
the employee qualifies, as determined by the employer (seniority, etc.). Employees may not contribute to their own plans; only employers. SEP-IRAs are one of
my favorite tax-deferral plans.
A Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees’ IRA (SIMPLE-IRA) is actually not very simple. This is a traditional IRA initiated by a small business. The
business must make a matching contribution, which is a percentage of employee
pay (all contribution percentages must be the same).
A Group IRA, or Employer and Employee Association Trust Account, is a
traditional IRA, but for larger groups, such as unions.
A Roth IRA requires that contributions into the account not be deductible,
but distributions (that is, withdrawals) from the account are not normally taxable. IRAs are mostly for individuals (as opposed to small businesses).
An Individual Retirement Annuity is like an IRA, but is operated by a life
insurance company through a special annuity contract.
An Education IRA (EIRA) provides funds allowing a beneficiary to attend a
higher education program, or even for kindergarten- through 12th-grade education in public, private, or religious schools.
A Spousal IRA is funded by a married taxpayer, but in the name of his or her
spouse. Here, one married partner usually has a regular income, and the other
has minimal compensation. The working spouse may contribute to the Spousal
IRA and to his or her own IRA. This allows a small business owner to defer
more money out of the company.
An Inherited IRA is intended to be inherited by someone who is not the
spouse of the now-deceased IRA owner. This is yet another mechanism to encourage savings through tax deferral. Note that 401(k) investors (as opposed to
IRA investors) can usually defer much more income on a pretax basis, which
then increases even more after employers kick in their portion. It happens that
401(k)’s are another one of my favorites.
A Rollover (Conduit) IRA typically refers to an IRA only used to receive
funds from a different IRA plan distribution, which funds are then moved into
another qualified plan at some point in future. They are used in special situations, normally requiring retirement fund transfers.
These retirement plans are obviously complex and are only summarized briefly
in these pages. Check with an investment pro to learn what makes sense for your
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 158
small business. Although this may seem daunting to most small business owners,
large investment companies, banks, payroll services providers, and others who
sell these programs make it easy. Simply sign a few papers and program administrators establish the plan, help select investments, explain how to pump money
into the accounts quickly or automatically, provide information to employees,
and then do the administration, carrying out a variety of tax-reporting and
recordkeeping requirements.
Why do these investment companies want your money so badly? After all,
it’s merely on deposit and cannot be used for any purpose other than the specified investments. The reason is fees. The retirement savings of millions of small
business are eroded because of high fees charged to administer small business
retirement programs such as 401(k) plans. A recent study, for example, found
that investors in plans with 50 persons or less paid an average of 1.4 percent per
year in fees, and some paid as much as 3 percent. Large companies offering
similar programs to 1000-plus employees paid only 1.17 percent. Note, however,
that of the 400,000 401(k) plans now in operation, nearly 300,000 are plans with
fewer than 50 employees. Since fees of this nature are not regulated, anything
goes. This can make a huge difference over time, when the effects of compounding interest accumulate or when safer, low-risk investments are preferred.
The solution for some may be found among a new group of low-cost on-line
plans such as Fidelity’s “Online 401(k) or Invest N Retire’s “EFT 401(k)” (through
Charles Schwab Corp.’s brokerage services). (Christopher Oster and Karen
Damato, “Big Fees Hit Small Plans, Wall Street Journal, 21 October 2004, Section D.)
Once the plan is set up, where should the funds be invested? Like some
experts, I recommend throwing darts to decide among index funds, but that’s
another subject. Once the funds are in a retirement plan, investors will be able to
choose just about anything already familiar, such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds,
etc. The investment is the same—it’s just held in a different type of account.
To find out more about the tax side of this issue, get Publication 560 (Retirement Plans for Small Businesses) and Publication 590 (Individual Retirement
Arrangements) at www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and receive free copies by
mail.
Medical Expenses and Insurance
Medical expenses and insurance may generally be deducted against the income of small businesses, but this can be a bit complex.
For sole proprietorships or similar situations where the effects of the business flow to the individual’s personal income tax return (Form 1040), a deduction is allowed on Schedule A for the amount by which total medical care expenses
exceed 7.5 percent of adjusted gross income (AGI). Remember that expenses at
the personal level are considered after payroll taxes, so it’s more advantageous
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 159
for the small business owner to have the business pay these expenses. This is
possible, because the self-employed health insurance deduction percentage is
now 100 percent.
Offering medical insurance to employees is generally not required, but if a
company offers medical insurance to anyone, the same deal must be offered to
everyone. For example, the small business owner may not purchase a top-end
policy for himself and a low-end HMO plan for other employees.
For sole proprietors, partners in a partnership, or shareholders in an SCorporation, a deduction against income of up to 100 percent of medical insurance premiums may be allowed, and any remaining premiums may be tallied with
other medical expenses as an itemized deduction on Form 1040, Schedule A
(Personal Income Tax Return). This is not allowed in any month of eligibility in
an employer-sponsored subsidized health plan.
The expenses incurred by you—the small business owner—your spouse, and
your dependents are allowed.
What is a “medical expense”? This area is complex and easily could fill an
exciting book. Generally, the small business owner can include just about anything that seems medical-related. In the unlikely event of an IRS audit and challenge, the small business would pay back taxes, a penalty, and interest on
disallowed amounts.
Specifically, medical expenses include insurance premiums paid for medical
coverage including accident, health, and qualified long-term care insurance. A
deduction is not allowed for life insurance, for policies paying for lost income
due to medical problems, or for policies that pay a fixed periodic amount when
medical problems prevent a normal work schedule.
Medical expenses also include fees paid to doctors, dentists, chiropractors,
psychiatrists, and certain other medical professionals. Payment for hospital services, long-term care services, nursing services, and lab fees are also allowed.
Even expenses for services such as acupuncture, laser eye surgery, and substanceabuse (alcohol and drug) and inpatient treatment centers are deductible, along
with the cost of items such as prescription eyeglasses, contact lenses, false teeth,
crutches, hearing aids, wheelchairs, and more. The cost of insulin and prescription drugs is also deductible.
Expenses for fitness clubs, funerals, over-the-counter drugs, and most elective surgery are not allowed.
Don’t forget transportation costs associated with getting the medical care,
such as an ambulance, or fares for a taxi or bus. If a car is used, compute a
deduction using the standard mileage rate, or use actual expenses such as a portion of your total annual fuel, oil, parts, maintenance, etc., as previously discussed. In either case, also include parking fees and tolls. You may even deduct
meals and lodging charged by the hospital or medical service provider if the
reason for being there is to receive medical care.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 160
Be careful to deduct medical expenses actually paid during the year, regardless of when the services were provided. Total medical expenses for the year
must be reduced by any reimbursements received from insurance companies or
others, even if the reimbursement was paid to a doctor and not to you.
Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs)
Medical Savings Accounts (now renamed “Archer MSAs”) pay the costs of
routine medical expenses for small business employees as well as sole proprietors. There are two elements to these plans: a medical savings account and a
high-deductible health insurance policy. These may be especially useful to employees or owners of small businesses, because their medical insurance policies
are often less generous than those of larger firms or the government.
If a small business has fewer than 51 employees, the employer can pay for
everything or else let employees pay for the Medical Savings Account. If the
employer pays for the entire cost of the plan, the payments are not taxable to the
employee. The amount of employee (or individual) contributions can be claimed
as a deduction on Line 29 of Form 1040.
Similar to an IRA, income in these accounts accumulates tax free.
When medical problems do occur, Archer MSA distributions are tax free if
used to pay for qualifying medical expenses of the account holder, spouse, or
dependents. Qualifying medical expenses are costs that could otherwise be used
as itemized tax deductions on Schedule A.
Health Savings Accounts (HSAs)
Beginning in 2004, tax-deductible contributions were able to be applied to Health
Saving Accounts (HSAs) to pay for medical expenses. Similar to MSAs, they are
especially useful to employees or owners of small businesses, because medical coverage is often less generous than one gets through larger firms or the government.
An HSA is established either by an employer (for example, incorporated
small businesses) or an individual (such as sole proprietors or the owners of
corporations as individuals to supplement their company plans). They are set up
as custodial accounts or tax-exempt trusts to pay medical expenses not covered
by high-deductible health plans (the annual deductible is at least $1,000 for individuals and $2,000 for families). There are other rules of eligibility, too, so that
these plans cannot be maintained by individuals who receive medical insurance
through a spouse or Medicare. Also, HSAs don’t exist by themselves—they must
be combined with a high-deductible health insurance plan.
HSA rules are somewhat similar to rules concerning Individual Retirement
Accounts (IRAs). HSAs, for example, are “portable,” so that as a small business
owner or employee moves among different insurance plans over the years, the
HSA goes with the individual. HSAs are underwritten mostly by insurance companies and HMOs. Also, any eligible individual can set up an HSA in much the
same way as IRAs: Permission or authorization from the Internal Revenue
Service is not necessary.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 161
Although tax deductions are limited to the amount of the annual insurance
deduction (or the maximum deductible permitted under an Archer MSA), contributions to these plans are tax-deductible whether the individual itemizes or
not. Also, employer contributions are tax-free to employees. After funds are in
the account, earnings accumulate tax-free, and when medical problems arise,
distributions from the HSA are excludable from gross income.
For more information see IRS Publication 502 (Medical and Dental Expenses)
and Publication 969 (Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health
Plans) at www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and receive free copies by mail.
Flexible Spending Account (FSA)
Another new tax-savings device is the little-known Flexible Spending Account (FSA). It’s difficult to find information on this program, even at the IRS.
FSAs allow employees to take pretax dollars and deposit these funds into an
FSA with their small business employer. When medical problems or many other
related issues occur, employees submit receipts for reimbursement to the employer. Although the IRS has set the rules for FSAs, they are administered by
(small business) employers, which leaves substantial room for hanky-panky.
FSAs are financially advantageous because certain health-care related expenses are paid for with pretax dollars. Unlike similar medical savings plans,
these accounts are “use it or lose it” each year, so nothing accumulates. In other
words, small business owners who set up accounts for themselves should spend
all amounts accumulated within any given year.
Beyond regular medical expenses, the IRS recently added certain over-thecounter (OTC) medicines to the list of products eligible for coverage. Even common items such as allergy medicines, antacids, antifungals, botanicals, cough
and cold products, dietary supplements, herbals, minerals, pain relievers and
many other first-aid products are allowable. The general rule is that the IRS
allows use of the FSA when these items are needed to treat a current illness, but
not when used for general health purposes.
For more information, see IRS Publication 969 (Health Savings Accounts
and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans), Publication 535 (Business Expenses), and
Publication 553 (Highlights of Tax Changes) at www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-
4933 and receive free copies by mail.
Section 179 Depreciation Allowance
Small businesses typically purchase items with a useful life of more than
one year. This includes tangible property such as buildings (but not land),
computers, furniture, production equipment, telephone systems, tools, vehicles,
and even some intangible items such as patents, copyrights, and now even computer software.
It is often to the taxpayer’s advantage to show the full amount of the purchase in the year of acquisition; however, the IRS requires that the cost of this
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 162
depreciable property be spread out and deducted over a period of time associated with the useful life of the asset. Depreciation is a complex area not covered
here. Instead of depreciating these assets, most small businesses will be able to
take advantage of the “Section 179” deduction, where up to $100,000 in depreciable property may be expensed on IRS tax returns in the year of acquisition.
This amount has been significantly increased lately, and many small businesses
will be able to claim this deduction for virtually all of their asset acquisitions.
The advantages of using the Section 179 deduction are that it reduces taxable
income and income tax liability in the year of purchase, and simplifies bookkeeping because depreciation schedules are not needed.
Using the Section 179 deduction is not always advantageous to the small
business. Opting for this deduction instead of depreciating may adversely affect
Social Security coverage and eligibility to claim earned income credits. Also, if
business income is expected to increase in future years, expensing the asset under Section 179 will result in increased taxable income just when extra deductions are needed.
The total amount available under Section 179 is generally $100,000, but this
amount may be modified under a number of rules, so small business taxpayers
should understand how it works. Nevertheless, the $100,000 maximum is a dramatic increase from the previous figure of $24,000.
For more information, see IRS Publication 946 (How To Depreciate Property), Publication 551 (Uniform Capitalization Rules), and Publication 553 (Highlights of Tax Changes) at www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and receive free
copies by mail.
Additional Employee Benefits
Small business owners may offer a wide range of other benefits that allow the
company to purchase important goodies for themselves and their employees before amounts are subject to payroll taxes. Employees receive a double benefit
because the various plans are paid for with pre-payroll tax dollars, and pricing
for businesses is often better than pricing for the same services offered to individuals. Therefore, employees end up with a better plan. Still, entrepreneurs
must think carefully about what employees really need and value, because the
same package must often be offered to everyone or no one. These additional
benefits may include:
 Automobiles. Discussed separately in this book *
 Commissions and Bonuses. These are treated the same as salary; there is no
special tax advantage to calling compensation “bonuses,” “commissions,”
“wages,” or “salary”. *
 Dental and Vision Insurance. The best deal is often to simply add this to the
existing plan for medical insurance from the same carrier.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 163
 Dependent Care Assistance. Small businesses may pay for employee dependent
care and/or household services provided to employees subject to certain limits,
and if the policy does not favor highly compensated employees.
 Medical Insurance. Coverage for the employee and his/her dependents (also
discussed in Chapter 9).
 Meals. While meals provided to employees technically must be added to
income and are taxable, this may be excluded from income if the meals are
furnished at the main business location, and if meals are “furnished for your
convenience.”
 Non-Medical Insurance: Short Term Disability Insurance, Long Term
Disability Insurance, Life Insurance. If a worker is injured on or off the job,
these plans pay for some amount of lost income. In some states, minimal
amounts must be purchased for any employee and paid for via withholding
taxes (discussed further in Chapter 9).
 Paid Time Off, Paid Holidays, Sick Leave, Parental Leave, Bereavement
Leave, Personal Leave. Offering pay during time off for situations such as
these is not really a tax-deferral method but rather a way to keep employees
happy, and can be part of the overall benefits plan.
 Profit-Sharing Plans. Profit-sharing plans allow a small business to distribute
a portion of net income, gross margin, profits from a particular product line,
or whatever best improves productivity and morale, through an informal
company-designed plan. Profit-sharing plans can improve productivity
immediately (if the payout is not too far off), but the distributions are treated
as normal compensation and are subject to payroll taxes.
 Stock Ownership Plans (SOPs). Allow a small business to grant shares of
stock to employees. The IRS does not require that this benefit be for
“everyone or no one.” It may be offered only to selected top officers.
Corporations do not need to be publicly traded to consider this benefit. The
IRS regulations regarding stock options and stock ownership plans are complex
and depend upon a variety of factors. These plans can be used to defer income
until the stock is sold and will help employees take a longer-term interest in
the financial health of the small business.
 Tuition Reimbursement. Here, the employer pays for books, fees, supplies,
tuition, and equipment as part of an “Educational Assistance Program.” The
courses must be relevant to the activities performed by employees, and part
of a degree program. The Educational Assistance Program must also meet
the following requirements: It cannot favor highly compensated employees;
a maximum of 5 percent per year can benefit the small business owner;
employees cannot receive cash instead of the education; and all employees
must receive notice of the tuition reimbursement program.
 Officer Loans. Many firms defer taxes by setting up a loan through which
the small business owner borrows money from the company. This may work
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 164
to manage taxes, but ensure that everything is set up properly. Make sure
there is a written loan agreement between yourself and the company, where
interest is charged at market rates. Also, payments must be made back to the
business in accordance with the agreement, including interest and penalties
on delinquent amounts. Treat the loan as seriously as any other personal or
business obligation. The IRS looks at the substance and not the form of the
arrangement, and if they conclude that the loan is really a sweetheart deal
between the small business owner and himself, the loan may be declared a
sham. In that case, the IRS will recast the situation and declare that the
“loan” is really either (1) income to the recipient (therefore subject to payroll
taxes, but taxable income of the small business decreases accordingly); (2) a
distribution of capital back from the small business; or (3) a dividend (subject
to capital gains taxes to stockholders but not deductible by the company).
 Retirement Plans. Discussed in a previous section, retirement plans are a
great way to manage taxes, improve morale, and accumulate savings. Also
note that the cost of providing retirement planning advice and information to
employees—including yourself—is deductible.
* These items may be offered only to selected persons rather than to all
employees.
For more information, see IRS Publication 15B (The Employer’s Guide to
Fringe Benefits) at www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and receive free copies by
mail.
An employee and fringe benefits package to minimize taxes and improve
morale is another one of those areas where the entrepreneur may put a system
into place that’s good for everyone. Nevertheless, things change, so this area
should be revisited every year or two.
Sales and Use Taxes
Description
Everyone is familiar with sales taxes, money collected by sellers as a percentage of revenues on behalf of state and local governments. What is a use tax? It is
a means of ensuring that buyers who avoid sales taxes (usually by purchasing out
of state) still pay the same amount. It does this by taxing their usage of a product
in the tax jurisdiction in which the product is ultimately used.
For example, a fitness center opens in Tempe, Arizona, and purchases exercise equipment from all over the U.S. Equipment purchased in California and
moved out of state is not subject to California sales taxes. The business must
report the purchase to the state of Arizona, which then charges the buyer a use
tax. This tax is normally the same as the local sales tax. Technically, the small
businesses have no incentive to purchase out of state, and the local government
gets a piece of the action either way.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 165
As a practical matter, many small businesses purchase items out of state, do
not report the transaction, and do not pay use taxes. Enforcement of use-tax
laws is difficult because every small and large out-of-state purchase by consumers and businesses alike is subject to this tax, but taxing authorities have difficulty collecting this information.
Sales taxes are the inverse of use taxes: Small businesses must pay a certain
percentage on the sale of most products (but few services) to the state, which
then retains some of the funds and distributes the remainder to local governments. Businesses are authorized to collect this tax from buyers, but regardless
of whether sales taxes are charged, the business must pay the appropriate amount
to the state.
In addition to other business start-up and registration activities, all small
businesses should check with their CPA or call a local sales and use tax office to
see if a seller’s permit is needed. More than one permit may be needed depending upon the products sold, and the locations of the business. With this, your
company is on the radar of the state and will be able to submit and pay sales
taxes. Otherwise, the business may not legally sell products.
Sales taxes can be especially complicated for small businesses that sell products in many locations. In California, for example, there are many different rates
depending upon the county, city, and special district tax area, and so multilocation
or traveling sellers must prepare a summary of sales in different jurisdictions.
The situation may be a bit simpler for small businesses that ship products. Those
sellers may usually charge a single, local rate on sales (less shipping charges),
and not worry about the rates in use at the buying end if the seller has no physical
presence in the buyer’s area and if the product is shipped by a third party (and
not company vehicles). Technically, the buyer (business or consumer) must report the difference to the state and pay the use tax, but few do.
Not all products are taxable. In Pennsylvania, for example, businesses do not
collect sales taxes on clothing or food.
Further, small businesses do not normally pay sales and use taxes on items
purchased for resale (that is, inventory), or for raw materials that flow into the
cost of goods sold. In some situations, this is simple. For example, a toy maker
should not pay sales taxes for plastic wheels purchased for toy cars—but what
about the glue used to attach parts? The treatment of questions such as these
may vary widely. Most states allow small businesses to submit these questions,
and will research the matter and later provide a written ruling. This should be
accomplished up front because otherwise, the small business might pay sales
taxes unnecessarily, or owe for back taxes, penalties, and interest.
Sales and use tax regulations change frequently, and it is hard for most small
business owners to keep up-to-date. Reporting sales taxes may also be complex.
That is all the more reason to outsource the reporting and payment obligations
to a CPA or other accounting professional, and focus on growing the business.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 166
Rates
In many cases, there is a rate at the state level, augmented by other rates.
Sales and use tax rates vary across localities, from zero (in five states) to 7.25
percent plus local surcharges in California. Further, many states do not charge
sales taxes on food, prescription drugs, non-prescription drugs, or clothing. Information on the rates relevant to your small business must be obtained from
local governments.
As an example, sales taxes for purchases in Los Angeles are:
State of California .............................. 6.00 percent
County of Los Angeles....................... 0.25 percent
District tax .......................................... 1.00 percent
Local tax ............................................. 1.00 percent
Total .......................... 8.25 percent
How to Pay (Forms to Use)
Most states require that sellers submit a monthly or quarterly (depending
upon sales volume) return describing revenues, exemptions, and sales and use
taxes payable. If a quarterly return is needed, then estimated sales taxes are
often required in the two interim months. In all cases, a monthly form (estimated or full return) must be submitted to the state along with payment.
When to Pay (Schedule)
The returns are usually due within 30 days of the close of the reporting period. As always, tax boards are always delighted when small businesses pay late,
because penalties and interest are charged immediately.
How to Minimize
There are no significant strategies for minimizing sales taxes. The only way
this could be accomplished would be to underreport revenues, or reclassify product
revenues as services revenues (that is, sell the product for less money; charge a
lot for shipping and handling). As a practical matter, however, this is rarely seen.
Regarding use taxes, many small businesses simply do not report equipment
purchases and thereby avoid the tax. Care should be taken in this respect, however, since some large equipment purchases may show up in lien searches or
through property-tax reporting systems.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 167
Payroll Taxes
The third major area of taxation regarding small businesses is payroll taxes.
Employer Identification Number (EIN)
The first area of concern is the EIN. This is a special number issued by the
IRS upon request from new employers. The EIN is used in virtually all communications with the federal government. A similar identification number is probably needed at the state level. If the business form of ownership is a sole
proprietorship, then an EIN is not needed, since the sole proprietor’s Social
Security number is used instead.
The easiest and fastest way to get an EIN is to call the IRS at 1-800-829-4933
and the number will be issued immediately. Otherwise, fill out form SS-R (Application for Employee Identification Number) at www.irs.gov. The IRS will send
back your EIN in about a month.
Every small business (except sole proprietorships) should get an EIN because it is needed for any compensation paid by the firm, including amounts paid
to the owner.
W-4 and I-9 from New Employees
Immediately upon hiring new employees, small businesses should have the
employee indicate her filing status (single, married, etc.) and the number of dependents claimed. This is accomplished though Form W-4 (available at
www.irs.gov). The information provided here is needed to determine the proper
amount of income tax to withhold. Of course, employees may change this whenever they desire. The employee, not the employer, is responsible for reporting
correct information on this form.
Also, new employees must complete CIS Form I-9 (Employment Eligibility
Verification, Section 1) no later than the close of business on the first day of
work, and the new employer must finish Section 2 by the end of the employee’s
third day on the job. (CIS, or Citizenship and Immigration Services, was formerly known as INS, Immigration and Naturalization Services.) The employee
must provide associated original identification documents to support the situation, and the employer should inspect these for authenticity and correctness and
copy these to the employee file. Make sure your policy is consistent: Ask for the
same information from everyone, regardless of appearances.
Form I-9 establishes that the new employee is authorized to work in the U.S.
and that the employee who presents the employment authorization document is
the person to whom it was issued.
Obtaining Form I-9 may be a bit difficult: First, poke around at
www.uscis.gov or search at http://uscis.gov/graphics/exec/whereis/query.asp and
see if the form is available online; CIS has been updating this form and has not
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 168
yet established an availability date. If not, the next best alternative may be to
ask your CPA or a colleague for a copy. Calling INS at 1-800-375-5283 could
possibly be a time-consuming endeavor. An I-9 may be downloaded from
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Employers must keep this information for three years after the date of hire,
or one year after the date employment ends, whichever is later.
What Are Taxable Wages?
Wages include funds paid to employees for services performed, such as salary, wages, overtime pay, bonuses, commissions, sick pay, vacation pay, and special awards; but they may also include taxable fringe benefits and expense
reimbursements where the expense is not an allowed IRS deduction. Further, all
tips (cash and credit card) received by employees must be reported in accordance with IRS regulations.
Additionally, items such as clothing, books, tuition, inventory, equipment, or
services (“Stay late and finish those reports this month and we’ll pay for your
expenses next month at school”) are considered “wages paid in kind” and are
treated the same way as normal wages. The value of a wage payment in kind is its
fair market price on the day the payment is made. In the real world, it is difficult
for the IRS to enforce this.
Not subject to payroll taxes are expenses paid by employees (including you,
the small business owner) for the business. The best way to report this is to
submit a monthly expense report to the company showing the date, expense,
reason, and amount of all business expenses, signed by the employee (probably
you) and also approved by the employee’s manager or company owner (you again).
Then, receive a check back from the company for this amount. This clarifies that
the funds are for expense reimbursement and not taxable compensation. Some
small business owners use the expense report as a way of having the business pay
for personal expenses.
A business expense report in Microsoft Excel format is available for free
download at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
See Publication 15, Circular E (Employer’s Tax Guide) for more information on wages, tips, and other compensation.
Form W-2, Form W-3, and Form 1096
All persons working with your Small business must be sent a copy of W-2
(for employees) or Form 1099 (for independent contractors) by January 31 of
each year.
For employees, Copy A of Forms W-2 are tallied on Form W-3 (Transmittal
of Wage and Tax Statements). This is then sent by the last day of February to the
Social Security Administration (which then sends it to the IRS).
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 169
For independent contractors, Form 1096 (Annual Summary and Transmittal of U.S. Information Returns) is used to transmit Copy A of Forms 1099 to
the IRS.
FICA, Social Security, and Medicare Taxes
Once an employee is on board, it’s time to properly report and pay:
 Income Taxes. The employee pays this, but the employer must withhold
the proper amount from each paycheck, according to compensation
and the number of exemptions claimed on Form W-4.
 Social Security Taxes. The Federal Insurance Contribution Act
(FICA) requires that employers withhold both Social Security and
Medicare taxes from wages and non-monetary compensation paid to
employees during each payroll period. The small business must
withhold a matching amount. The FICA tax includes 6.2 percent for
Social Security taxes, and 1.45 percent for Medicare. The Social
Security portion is payable only until wages reach a certain limit,
currently $84,900; there is no limit on the Medicare portion. Another
way to look at this is that employers must withhold Social Security
and Medicare taxes at a rate of 7.65 percent (6.2 percent up to $84,900,
then 0 + 1.45 percent), but the employer pays 15.30 percent.
These funds must be deposited to certain authorized banks (ask your bank if
they accept payroll tax deposits) along with Form 8109 (Federal Tax Deposit
Coupon). Monthly or semiweekly deposits may be required. Rules governing the
deposit schedule are complex, and IRS publications or a CPA should be consulted to determine the best fit for your situation. Otherwise, payment may be
made with Form 941 instead of bank deposits if the net tax liability during the
quarter is less than $2,500.
Employers must then file a return reporting and reconciling amounts withheld, via Form 941 (Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return). The due dates
for Form 941 are as follows:
For The Quarter Due Date
January, February, March April 30
April, May, June Jul 31
July, August, September Oct 31
October, November, December Jan 31
If the taxes have been paid in full properly, an additional 10 days is allowed
for you to file Form 941.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 170
For more information, see IRS Publication 15, Circular E (Employer’s Tax
Guide) and Publication 15-A (Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide), at
www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-4933 and receive free copies by mail.
Unemployment Taxes (FUTA)
The Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) allows federal and state governments to work together in offering unemployment taxes to displaced workers. Most employers will pay this tax at both the federal and state levels. Employers
generally must pay unemployment taxes first at the state level, and these amounts
are then credited to amounts due under FUTA.
FUTA is paid only by the employer, not the employee. The rate is 6.2 percent
of the first $7,000 in wages (maximum, $434 per employee per year). These
amounts are payable via Form 940 (Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return), or the shorter and nicer Form 940-EZ, which most small
businesses will prefer.
Football Beats Payroll Taxes
Filing and paying payroll is easy for
some, but the special knowledge
required is usually acquired slowly
over time.
One Saturday I decided, enough
of paying outsiders to do this—I will
just learn it myself. Even though the
taxes were due on Monday, I figured that with my amazing accounting and financial skills, everything
would soon be under control.
I began by spreading out several federal and state forms, letters, and publications on the
kitchen table. Soon I was moving
along, but things got thick real
fast. The afternoon wore on. I was
not making good progress. A headache was underway.
I read just about all of the materials and still couldn’t answer
the question, “So where do I begin?” much less “What must be
finished by Monday?”
I reread some of the materials,
but my understanding of payroll
taxes was not coming into focus.
The headache pounded on, and I
wanted to do something else.
Then I had a great idea: I would
call back my accountant to finish
the returns due on Monday, watch
what she did, and with this extra
knowledge, I would know enough
for the future. In the meantime, a
football game was on TV.
Fortunately, I reached her on
time and everything was completed. But with the headache
gone and the filing crisis in the
past, I never took much interest
in doing payroll taxes again.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 171
Form 940, along with the payment, is due as follows:
For The Quarter Due Date
January, February, March April 30
April, May, June Jul 31
July, August, September Oct 31
October, November, December Jan 31
If the taxes have been paid in full properly, an additional 10 days is allowed
for you to file Form 940.
State unemployment tax programs vary, but the tax rate is often related to
your hiring-and-firing record. If an employer lays off employees frequently, the
unemployment tax rate will be higher.
Independent Contractors, Form 1099 MISC
Taxes are not withheld on amounts paid to independent contractors; however, if more than $600 per year is paid to any one person, the small business
must report this to the IRS via Form 1099-MISC (Miscellaneous Income). To
accomplish this, ask for the Social Security number (or EIN) of the contractor
as soon as the relationship begins, and ask the independent contractor to provide a completed Form W-9 (Request For Taxpayer Identification Number and
Certification).
If this is not completed, employers must withhold 30 percent of payments
due to the contractor as backup withholding.
Any and all amounts crossing the table from employer to contractor are
reported on Form 1099-MISC, regardless of whether it is for labor, services,
materials, or expense reimbursements. It is then the independent contractor’s
responsibility to report the details to the IRS, usually via their Schedule C (Profit
or Loss From Business).
Small business owners should not be capricious in classifying persons as independent contractors as opposed to employees. The IRS has long been aware
of abuses in this area. See Chapter 6 for rules and a complete discussion of this
issue.
Penalties and Paying Late
All of this is immensely complex, but if your small business screws up in
some way, the IRS and it’s state-level cohorts are not upset, since your business
will get hammered with large and immediate penalties, fees, and interest for items
such as:
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 172
 Failure to pay or make a deposit on time. The penalty for paying
late is usually 0.5 percent per month. Interest is charged on
penalties and unpaid interest.
 Failure to file a return on time. The penalty for filing late is usually
5 percent per month.
 Bounced check.
 Failure to file an information return.
 Failure to provide employees or independent contractors with a
copy of their W-2’s or 1099s on time.
 Failure to provide certain information on an information return,
such as taxpayer ID numbers.
If your small business is in trouble, don’t even think of slow-paying on payroll taxes. This is a great way to get into big trouble, and payroll tax liabilities
survive bankruptcy anyway.
Payroll Taxes: Getting It All Done Accurately and On-Time
Paying and reporting federal and state payroll taxes accurately and on time is
not easy or pleasant. Small business owners should consider the following ways
of ensuring that these important tasks are handled well.
Do It Yourself
For most small businesses, this is the least desirable option. For beginners,
meeting payroll tax responsibilities is a tedious, time-consuming and error-prone
undertaking. Most important, it ties up the small business owner and precludes
him from doing more important tasks, such as new business development or
recruiting.
A partial solution may be to consider a number of new electronic filing and
payment systems. Over six million small businesses are now using systems such
as Creative Solutions (www.creativesolutions.thomson.com), File Your Taxes,
(www.FileYourTaxes.com), Lewis Software Associates (www.lswonline.com),
LTtax (www.payrolltax.com), and others.
Doing payroll taxes in-house should probably be considered only if the small
business owner has already mastered this area and has sufficient free time to
keep on top of everything.
Accountant or CPA
Asking your CPA to make sure that payroll tasks are handled well is a great
alternative, because most already undertake this responsibility for other clients
and can accomplish it with minimal involvement of the small business owner. There
are additional benefits as well, because the CPA probably is concerned with
other corporate matters such as income taxes, and all of this can be done together.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 173
On the downside, there are often minor logistical problems such as getting
payroll information to outside accountants and getting back the completed returns for signature and mailing. These are nothing a courier can’t handle. Also,
using a CPA will likely cost more than other alternatives, although CPAs can
often assign lower-paid assistants to do the work. Finally, CPAs are not perfect;
they must sometimes be reminded that due dates are coming up and the work
must be completed a few days in advance, so that everything can be returned,
reviewed, printed, signed, paid, and mailed on time.
Automated Payroll Tax Services
Many banks and specialty companies such as ADP (www.adp.com), Paychex
(www.paychex.com), and SurePayroll (www.SurePayroll.com) offer automated
payroll tax payment and reporting services to small businesses. Each pay period,
hours are reported to these firms by telephone, fax, e-mail, or through the Internet.
The service provider then prints payroll checks and withholds the proper amounts
of local, state, and federal payroll taxes from both the employer and employee,
out of the small business’s bank account.
The employer is then in a good position to prepare, sign, and file the various
quarterly and annual tax returns. Outsourcing these headaches may be quite
valuable to many small businesses.
Fees amount to about $50 per pay period for 20 or fewer employees.
If standing in line at the bank is not enjoyable, and if your time is worth
something, these services are a great deal.
Many firms in this industry also offer related services such as retirement
plans (previously discussed), HR management, benefit administration, workers’
comp, Section 125 Flexible Spending Accounts (already described), plan administration, customized employee handbooks, and more.
Quickbooks and the Accounting System
Many small businesses use Quickbooks or similar PC-based accounting software. For a fee of about $200 per year, users subscribe to payroll tax tables that
make sure the program is loaded with the latest tax rates.
When it’s time to do payroll, the software calculates all relevant taxes, deducts employee and employer portions, and prints payroll checks and pay stubs.
And when it’s time to file reports, the software fills out state and federal tax
forms.
For an additional fee, Quickbooks offers an add-on Internet-based service
that allows users to e-file and e-pay Forms 940, 941, and 941 Schedule B.
This option doesn’t cost as much as other alternatives, but the small business
owner must stay aware of due dates and deposit dates to avoid fees, penalties, and
interest. Further, a working knowledge of payroll taxes in general is required so
that returns may be reviewed for obvious errors.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 174
Other Small Business Taxes
Several other taxes may be overlooked by small business owners, but this
doesn’t mean they go away—local governments sometimes take years to figure
out that a company is operating within their hunting grounds and then demand
payment for back taxes, penalties, and interest. Some small business owners use
alternate addresses and other means to circumvent these liabilities. Here we discuss the real-world pros and cons of these devices.
Business Licenses and Business Tax
Many cities require that any private business operating within the locale obtain a Business License or Tax Registration Certificate for the privilege of conducting business within the taxing jurisdiction. Even if there are no offices in a
particular location, a license or certificate is often needed if the firm conducts
business transactions. Many cities require each location to have a separate business permit, and each business activity must also obtain its own permit. If your
firm provides temp help in medical, clerical, and technology services out of offices in the north, south, east, and west sections of the city, then 12 (3 × 4)
permits may be needed.
Rates are often structured as a minimum fee, or as a percentage of gross
receipts, whichever is greater. “Gross receipts” means that the city gets a piece of
the action (say, 1 percent of revenues), regardless of whether the small business
sells products or services. Unlike sales taxes, however, these taxes are not normally passed on to the buyer.
Cities regularly check building directories and use other means to find small
businesses that conduct business but do not pay taxes within their domain, so
check in advance to learn your specific situation.
Taxes at the city level may well affect relocation decisions, so be sure to
include this when considering a move or expansion.
Special Permits
Permits may be required for some businesses such as restaurants, health and
beauty parlors, and massage parlors.
Police and fire permits may be required also, and to obtain these, small businesses must often pass an inspection to ensure that the premises are safe, contain
certain equipment, and have exit policies.
Special permits may also be needed by small businesses that do not have a
permanent location in a particular city, but sell on the street or on public property during various events.
It’s Okay to Hate Taxes 175
Professions and Occupations Tax
Some cities have a Professions and Occupations Tax as a kind of catch-all
revenue source. Indeed, one city defines this as “all other business activities not
specifically taxed by other sections,” so it’s hard to get around this one.
Check with colleagues and with your CPA to learn about this tax and to see if
it is actually paid by other small businesses. In some cities, large businesses must
do it right, but most small businesses either do not pay the tax at all or else
grossly underreport their tax liability.
Excise Taxes
Excise taxes are paid when specific goods are purchased, or upon certain
activities. In contrast to sales taxes, excise taxes are often included in the price of
the product. There are also excise taxes on activities, such as on wagering, or on
highway usage by trucks.
A small business may be liable for collecting excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, cigarette and tobacco products, gambling, gasoline, tires, energy resources,
activities associated with waste management or hazardous substances, recycling
fees, e-waste recycling fees (now in California), and even fishing tackle boxes.
Other Local Taxes
Local authorities have created too many taxes, fees, surcharges, and special
charges to be listed in any book, which is why each small business owner must
check with a CPA, vendors, associates in the industry, and local government
Websites (some of which are quite helpful) to learn the total tax picture.
For example, unforeseen local taxes may include any number of items such
as disposal fees, environmental fees, facility fees, generator fees, hazardous substance taxes, occupational lead-poisoning prevention fees, and even ballast-waste
water-management fees.

As noted in the beginning, taxes are the single largest expense for most small
businesses. There are many different types of taxes, and compliance, reporting,
and payment is often complex. Entrepreneurs may prefer to spend time in other
areas such as new product development or generating new revenues, but an
understanding of the tax picture is an important and productive investment of
time, too.
This page intentionally left blank 
177
Chapter 8
Getting Professional Help
Small business owners are often victims of the saying, “You can do anything,
but you can’t do everything.” Many attempt to keep their sales and operations
running at full throttle but inevitably run into legal problems, accounting and tax
concerns, the temptation to become self-styled computer gurus, or to otherwise
wear the hats of diverse professionals. Often, the small business owner does not
seek outside help at all. Many avoid professionals to save money; they may find
“professional types” intimidating; or they just don’t understand that there are
only 24 hours in a day. This chapter takes away some of the mystery in working
with outside professionals.
Attorneys
Attorneys are perhaps the most maligned professionals and the most intimidating to small business owners. We need to know how they work and when to
use them. It’s valuable to have a trusted business and contracts counselor ready
to go when potential legal issues arise.
Generally, attorneys are needed in three types of situations. These occur
when your small business is:
 The Defendant. This means your small business has received a demand
letter from the legal counsel of another party, or you’re being sued.
Usually, this involves disputes over unpaid bills, but it may also involve
breach of contract, ex-employee complaints, or other matters.
 The Plaintiff. Here, you are unable to get unreasonable parties to
listen to a problem and satisfactorily respond, and the legal system is
needed to force them to address the matter. This usually involves
clients who don’t take your bills seriously, but it may also involve
temperamental vendors, treasonous ex-employees, or theft of company
property.
 In Need of Information. Hard information is needed to avoid making
a mistake. For example, you are entering a new business area and
need an attorney to draft new sales agreements, or help is needed in
negotiating a lease for new premises, including zoning concerns.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 178
It’s better to get legal counsel involved sooner rather than later. Many small
business owners wait too long before seeking legal advice and paint themselves
into a corner by saying or writing too much to the other side.
Here are some other common areas of concern where legal help is frequently
needed:
 Should we set up a corporation or L.L.C.? We need the company
to be properly registered with the right legal documents.
 An agreement just arrived from a new big-time customer, but the
terms are unreasonable—so we need a legal pro to explain our
position to the client’s legal counsel.
 An ex-employee or competitor is saying bad things about our
services. Can we stop them?
 I delivered my product or service, but now a client says it’s not
right and won’t pay for it. We can’t take it back, and we must get
paid. We need help in getting the customer to take this seriously.
 Is the proposed lease on our new warehouse reasonable? How do
we get the landlord to make some changes?
 An unscrupulous attorney has filed a lawsuit against us. Should we
fight or give in to extortion?
 We’ve invested a lot in a new product. How do we get patent and
trademark protection?
 A factory across town is selling us a used piece of machinery. We
need a solid purchase agreement to make sure there are no liens
attached and that the title transfers properly.
 How do we set up retirement accounts, trusts, other businesses,
officer loans, and fund transfers to minimize taxes among the
owners?
 We’re buying land to build a new outlet. Help is needed in getting
the proper zoning, permits, insurance, bank loans, and sales
agreements.
 We want to get out of an agreement, but the other party says no.
Can we terminate early?
 We are getting into a new business area and need new contacts.
 The state passed a new law. Does it affect our small business, and
how do we avoid problems?
It’s only a matter of time until an attorney is needed. Although the legal
profession has been much maligned in recent years, most attorneys are
hardworking, honest, and sincerely want to provide value to help your small
business grow. It’s best to get aligned with the right person now.
Getting Professional Help 179
Beyond offering legal expertise, attorneys can get into the middle of tangled
and emotional disputes and sort out the issues and negotiate problems in a detached, rational manner. This is often of great benefit to small business owners
(who are normally very emotionally involved). In many cases, attorneys may
report the facts back to their respective clients, and when both sides understand
their positions from a legal counselor, things fall into place very quickly.
Finding the right business legal counsel is not difficult. Begin by asking your
CPA and colleagues, or a local chamber of commerce, or just do a Google or
Yahoo search for something like “Sacramento business attorney,” “Hartford
business litigation,” or “debt collection lawyer Pittsburgh.” Call around to see
who seems to be the best fit. Explain that you’ve got a particular issue today but
are really looking for a long-term relationship. Then consider criteria such as:
 Who returns your call, and how quickly?
 Is there a particular area of expertise? A debt collection attorney, for
example, may not be the best at patent issues. On the other hand,
your particular situation may be straightforward and not require
lengthy experience, and just about any competent attorney may work
out fine.
 How many years of experience does this particular attorney have?
Does the attorney have partners with more or less experience?
 Does the attorney understand the nuances of your situation, or are
you somehow not really getting through? Invoking small details at
the right time often makes all the difference in legal matters.
 How big is the law firm? (Most small businesses fit best with smaller
law firms.)
 Does the firm have paralegals or help available at lower billing rates
for legal research, routine filings, and clerical tasks?
 Are the rates affordable? Hourly rates range from about $100 to $400
per hour, depending upon the location, required expertise, and size
and prestige of the law firm. Of course, price-shopping may not be a
great idea when shopping for an attorney. Higher-voltage attorneys
can often get things done more quickly and less expensively.
 Are you comfortable in speaking with this attorney, or do the communications seem hurried and difficult to follow? (If this is experienced in the “selling” stage of the relationship, imagine what will
happen later.)
 Are references available? Does the attorney have a long record of
working for other local small businesses, especially in your industry?
(Of course, conflict-of-interest rules would prohibit this firm from
working with a small business if the firm has represented an adversary, so get this out of the way early by asking.)
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 180
If things don’t work out, it’s no big deal to change attorneys. Further, it’s
perfectly acceptable to switch attorneys when different issues arise.
Attorneys are licensed and regulated at the state level, so law firms may offer
different billing arrangements depending upon the situation and business considerations. These may include:
 Hourly Rates. Expect to sign a retainer agreement and put up about
$1,000 as a retainer fee. When this is burned off, expect to write another check. Most small business representation is accomplished with
hourly-rate agreements. Out-of-pocket expenses are also billed to
the client.
 Flat Fee. Many lawyers are able to estimate quite accurately the time
requirements for particular situations, and may therefore quote a flat
fee to remove uncertainty. For example, an appeal of a debt collection judgment may cost $2,000, or incorporating a new small business
may cost $1,500.
 Contingency. Some law firms may agree to a contingency arrangement, where they “work on spec” (speculation) and receive 25 percent to 40 percent of the judgment amount—if they win and the
judgment is actually collected (many times, the judgment is not paid).
This arrangement is most often seen in longer, more complex matters (such as class-action lawsuits). Most law firms do not favor this
form of compensation.
In all cases, an officer of the small business must sign a retainer agreement,
where the law firm is assigned the right to represent the firm in this matter, and
where the client agrees to pay for services including an up-front retainer.
Go to www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com. to see a sample retainer
agreement.
Here are some common questions and fallacies about working with the legal
system and attorneys:
 “Attorneys mostly work on retainers, so I don’t have to front any
money.” Wrong. Most of the time, you pay a retainer fee of $500 to
$2,000 and your legal counselor works by the hour. Contingency deals
are not popular for smaller matters, and besides, if you believe in
what you’re doing, why share it with an attorney?
 “My problem is complex, and I need a great attorney.” Actually, most
matters are very routine, and just about any attorney who understands
commercial law can handle the matter.
 “It’s rude to ask about fees.” Most attorneys understand that money
is important. It’s perfectly reasonable to ask, “What is your hourly
rate?” “Can we use an associate at a lower rate for research and other
work?” and “How much do you think this will cost, and how long will
Getting Professional Help 181
it take?” Most attorneys are ethical and are conscientious about the
rates they charge for their work, so they will not steer clients into
costly legal battles.
 “Can I recover my legal fees?” Maybe. Ask your attorney up front if
the court may award legal and collections fees as part of the judgment. Remember, getting the judgment is only half the battle. After
this comes the battle to collect, and the court will not help much in
this effort. Also, ask about the chances of losing—and paying the
legal bills of the other side.
 “Attorneys are no smarter than I am.” Most attorneys are actually
very intelligent. Law schools do a good job of ensuring that only those
who are intelligent and committed end up practicing law.
 “Justice is swift.” In civil matters especially, expect that most disagreements will grind on for a long time. It will sometimes take years
for both sides to answer questions, gather and present information,
and sort through the legal issues. To you, the answer is immediate and
crystal clear, but it still needs to be understood, processed, and digested by a dispassionate and meticulous legal system. Don’t expect
anything fast. Further, if a judgment is awarded, many more fees may
be incurred, forcing the other side to pay—and there is a good chance
of never collecting. That is why in many situations, legal remedies
don’t make sense: Why spend $5,000 in legal fees over two years to
collect $3,000? When the decision is made to “go-legal,” pace for the
long run. Having said all of this, stubborn adversaries sometimes settle
quickly when both sides are faced with legal fees.
 “There is little I can do because my problem is with a defendant who
is far away.” If a problem is in another state or even in another country, call around or use the Internet to find an attorney with an office
down the street from the bad guy. Many problems between small businesses occur when one party thinks that the other party cannot enforce the agreement. Merely receiving a call or letter from a local
(local to an adversary) attorney may bring quick results.
 “I can’t afford a long legal battle.” Sometimes, a scary letter from an
attorney is enough to get the other side to see things your way. This
provides notice to the bad guys that they may be able to fool around
with your small business, but they can’t ignore the legal system.
 “I don’t want to appear in court and testify.” Actually, most matters
never get to trial. Attorneys from both sides will sort out the issues,
tell everyone the strengths and weaknesses of their arguments, and
offer a deal reflecting each side’s chances of winning in court. There
is nothing to force stubborn clients to accept an out-of-court settlement, but they usually do, once tempers cool off and the prospect of
increasing legal bills becomes paramount.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 182
Joe’s Euro-Customer Says “Whoa” to the Deal
My small business was exporting
a large piece of equipment to a
small company in Geneva, which
had sold the same equipment to
a large company in Paris. Once everyone was connected, we signed
the documents and my company
commenced spending a large
amount of money to buy extra
parts and customize the machine.
This investment was for a very
special configuration, and everything would be lost if the deal fell
apart. We finished in plenty of time
and began planning the shipment.
I called the Geneva company
to work out shipping details and
left a message for the owner to
call me. He did not respond. Two
days later, I called again. I called
again the next day. No return
calls.
After some time, we finally connected. He told me he was sorry,
but he no longer needed the
equipment. He said his customer
had canceled the deal, and there
was nothing he could do. I was
not sure if this was true, or if he
had merely found a better price
from another seller. When I began
asking questions, he told me he
could no longer talk, because it
was time to go and attend to his
horses.
Over the next few days, I called
a few more times, but his secretary continually told me that the
company owner would not talk to
me because he was with his
horses. I realized that since I was
in far-away California, the large
amount of time and money I had
put into this deal did not bother
him a lot. So I took another route.
The next call regarding this matter was not from Los Angeles to
Geneva, but from a Swiss attorney specializing in small business
matters, with offices very close to
my horse-loving customer. The attorney quickly connected with my
customer and explained in the local language that the agreement
was enforceable, and that my company would sue if he did not perform.
My Swiss adversary suddenly
realized this was a serious matter. He could hang up the telephone on me, but now he was
being forced into a local court,
where he had no defense. Maybe
he feared that he would lose his
horses.
It took just this one telephone
call to get things moving again.
Suddenly, the deal came to life and
the big company in Paris wanted
the equipment again after all. We
then shipped our machine, and it
was received and installed without incident. Thanks to my new
attorney-friend in Switzerland, we
worked out special payment arrangements from the customer to
make sure the money went into
an escrow account before shipping, because we now had special concerns about the intentions
of my horse-loving customer in
Europe.
Getting Professional Help 183
Legal problems are all too common today, and since small businesses typically work with many customers and vendors, it’s only a matter of time before an
attorney is needed. Begin looking for the right legal counsel to help your small
business navigate through the uncertainties that will lie ahead.
Accounting and Certified Public Accountants (CPAs)
Most entrepreneurs will have a continuing need for professional accounting
services, even those with a good deal of expertise in the profession. Certified
Public Accountants (CPAs) offer many types of plans to meet the specific needs
of small businesses.
The title “CPA” means that the person you are dealing with is a professional
who has studied accounting theory and has passed a nationally standardized twoday exam. In most states, the designation also means that this professional has
passed a certain number of university-level accounting and finance courses and
has previous work experience in public accounting (perhaps two years’ minimum). Thus, we are assured that the professional is indeed competent to undertake the work and responsibilities needed by your small business. Referring banks,
clients, vendors, and taxing authorities to your CPA assures them that the information about your small business is correct and credible.
Many small businesses use their own PC-based accounting programs, which
offer immense in-house capabilities when compared with the ledger-based systems of the early 1980s or even software available only a few years ago. Small
businesses are encouraged to use this technology to keep their own set of books
with up-to-the minute information. Nevertheless, outside expertise will still be
needed as outlined later. Although hardworking, earnest, but inexperienced persons involved with a small business may work mightily at learning and applying
Quickbooks, Best Software’s Peachtree, or Microsoft’s Great Plains, there is
only so much a non-accountant can do.
Here are the areas in which professional accounting expertise offers great
value to the small business owner.
Bookkeeping and Records
A good CPA should set up the initial chart of accounts and make a number
of entries into the books so that beginning balances are set to the correct amounts,
and so that future entries are merely repetitions of earlier transactions. That
way, less experienced accounting, bookkeeping, and even clerical staff may handle
routine tasks and daily entries. At year-end, CPAs make certain non-routine
entries for depreciation, amortization, taxes, changes in officer-loan and equity
accounts, and so on.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 184
Further, state and local taxing authorities (and other agencies such as CIS)
require that employee, sales, and other records are kept for varying lengths of
time. The CPA will maintain many of these archives and advise as to which information should be stored at the office, and when it should be destroyed.
It’s a bit less expensive and easier to have a CPA or subordinates work in
their own offices and make entries into the books physically located on a PC at
your office, thanks to technologies such as CD burners, Symantec’s pcAnywhere,
and Citrix Online’s GoToMyPC.com. The latter two options allow distant users
to log in to the PCs or the network at your location and enter transactions directly into the accounting system.
A CPA should be involved in closing the books at year-end, in preparing
financial statements, and in special ad hoc projects, but the day-to-day tasks
should be handled by an in-house accounting staff. This may include a full complement of clerical, bookkeeping, accounting, and financial experts, or perhaps just
a spouse. Distributing the work in this manner will keep accounting expenses
low and allow critical information (such as cash balances) to be readily available
when needed. Even when work must be performed by a CPA, most should be
accomplished by lower-paid bookkeepers and accountants; the CPA should begin billing only when CPA-level skills are truly needed.
Tax Planning and Preparing Returns
The CPA should be involved with all taxes associated with the small business, including corporate income taxes, payroll taxes, sales and use taxes, other
taxes (excise, professions, etc.) and personal income tax returns. It is not normally productive for the small business to do much of this in-house. The CPA
already knows what’s going on since he or she is looking at the books and making
periodic entries anyway (as already discussed), and so they are in a perfect position to advise on how to minimize and defer taxes. To avoid problems, don’t
assume the CPA understands everything. Discuss exactly what is expected and
make sure a list is in place (something like the following):
The following applies to federal, state, and local taxes of concern to
our small business.
 Tell us when various information and reports are needed.
 Prepare monthly sales tax returns and send them to our office for
signature and payment.
 Prepare monthly payroll tax returns and tell us when to make
deposits; send us completed Form 8109 payment coupons and
state forms.
 Do all monthly, quarterly, and annual payroll tax returns.
Getting Professional Help 185
 Tell us when to send in estimated income tax payments.
 Complete the annual corporate income tax returns.
 When information or action is needed, please give us three days’
notice so that we will have time to react (for example, sign a return
and print the check). Do not expect us to drop everything and act
at the last minute!
 When new employees are hired, instruct them as to how to complete
forms W-4, I-9, and anything else that may be required. Keep
employee files with these records. Also, issue employee handbooks
and keep a journal of who has received them, and when.
 Handle all correspondence and communications with taxing
authorities.
CPAs are widely assumed to be well-organized and on top of things, but this
is often not true. An informal understanding such as the one already discussed
will avoid the common problem whereby a tax payment is missed, a large penalty
is incurred, or both parties were waiting for the other party to act.
Business Consulting
Since the CPA is involved in every part of your small business—and others—
it often makes sense to get advice on business matters such as how to obtain
financing for a special need, the best way to receive and account for credit card
payments, how to commence operations in a different state, and a wide range of
other concerns.
Auditing
Normally, the financial statements prepared by your CPA are “CPA Reviewed,” and not audited. This means the CPA has checked that the numbers are
in the right accounts (according to what you have communicated) and that they
balance, but there is no auditing to assure that what you have said is correct. For
example, certain year-end deposits may be classified as additional sales, when in
fact they are really draw repayments from the small business owner. Some lending institutions may require “CPA- audited statements,” and in that case, a sampling of deposits to the account would be traced, examined, and corrected. Results
from the sampling are extrapolated to the rest of your reporting. Therefore, if 10
percent of the deposit samplings are actually draw repayments, then 10 percent
of the total deposits would be reclassified, and sales would decrease by this
amount. Auditing services are normally managed by the CPA but performed by
less-experienced (and less-expensive) staff.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 186
There are many other types of financial, operational, and compliance audits
where a CPA may be involved. These could include situations where the IRS
arrives with its own auditors to check the books (usually not a good day), efforts
you direct to make sure internal policies and records are being kept properly,
and client or vendor audits in accordance with agreements (“We agree to pay
subcontractors in a timely manner at certain rates”). As the small business grows,
it’s best to let outside professionals handle these tasks, and especially a capable
and trusted CPA.
Finding a CPA that is right for your small business is not especially difficult
and is similar to looking for an attorney, as already described. Hopefully, you
will work with your CPA more than with your attorney, which is all the more
reason to look carefully.
Joe’s Rigorous Search for a CPA
My business was taking off, I
hired my first employees, and tax
time was approaching. It was time
to develop a long-term relationship with a CPA, but I knew no
one.
I figured that my business was
not that complicated, and I just
needed help with taxes, as do millions of other small businesses.
One of my most important criteria then was location. I had been
working with another CPA in a different business undertaking, but
this often required a lot of driving
for our monthly meetings.
I began right in my own office
building. I noticed that there were
several CPAs on the same floor,
and it was helpful that I could walk
right in and see everything in operation during the day.
For my first visit, I decided to
walk in unannounced and talk
with the CPA firm closest to my
office, about 10 yards away. I
came away certain that they could
do the job, but there seemed to
be too many people churning out
the numbers, and I felt it would
be a bit impersonal.
My next visit was a bit further
away—about 15 yards. Larry, the
CPA, was busy when I walked in
without an appointment, but he
made time for me anyway and we
talked. He was gregarious, decorated his office with model trains,
and told me he didn’t like taxes
very much. He was huge—over
300 pounds—and walked with a
cane. He made jokes about our
pompous landlord. I liked this guy.
He had one or two very experienced accounting people to help
out, and I felt this was about right
for my situation.
I decided to give it a try.
Ten years later, through many
ups and downs, we are still working together. And I still do like this
guy.
Getting Professional Help 187
To begin, ask for referrals from business colleagues or your attorney, or
check with the local chamber of commerce. You can also do a search on Google,
Yahoo, or another favorite site, using keywords such as “San Jose CPA” or
“CPA Memphis” Then, come up with a list of criteria, which may include:
 Who returns your call, and how quickly?
 Is there a particular area of expertise? (Chances are, just about any
CPA can handle the needs of your small business, unless special
expertise in e-commerce or another area is needed.)
 How big is the CPA firm? (Most small businesses fit best with
smaller firms.)
 Does the CPA firm have help available at lower billing rates?
 Are the rates affordable? Hourly rates range from about $75 to
$300 per hour. Ask for an estimate of monthly fees. Most CPAs will
be able to provide this information by asking how many checks and
deposits are made per month, and the number of employees.
 Are you comfortable in speaking with this CPA, or do the
communications seem hurried and difficult to follow?
Next, ask for references from other small businesses, and call to confirm that
your evaluations are correct.
Finally, visit the office and meet everyone who will be involved with your
company to verify that you’ll be comfortable in working with your new CPA for
a long time.

Many small business owners are confused in the beginning about using different types of accounting help, and who does what. So here is what you need to
know and how everyone should be managed:
 CPA (Certified Public Accountant). As already discussed, the good
news is that the CPA can do everything, including setting up a system, entering data, producing statements, and getting out the taxes—
but CPAs are relatively expensive ($75 to $300 per hour). Many CPAs
work with lower-level assistants who help with the grunt work (such
as data entry or reconciliations) at lower rates. It’s normally a good
idea for every small business owner to watch the books closely and
do as much as possible in-house, but business owners should make
sure that the CPA handles complex and special areas such as payroll
taxes, sales taxes, income (state and federal) taxes, and annual statements (often required by banks). When annual statements and tax
returns are finished, spend a few extra minutes and get the most out
of your CPA by asking for an explanation of the statements and hilight areas of special success or concern.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 188
Joe’s Bookkeeper Studies Accounting,
Check-Printing Chemistry, and Fraud
My service business was growing
rapidly, and I needed to hire a fulltime bookkeeper. I met Babs
through a help-wanted ad, and after the normal screening process,
including a credit and criminal
background check, she was hired.
Babs lacked some skills, but
pulled herself up by the bootstraps,
taking courses at a local college.
She learned a great deal at the office, too, and I took pride in her
rapid advancement.
Two years went by. She continued to improve and soon knew just
about everything. I kept careful
watch on the accounting system
anyway. Unfortunately, Babs had a
special fascination with white-collar
crime and thought long and hard
during the day about holes in our
accounting system. She soon found
one.
Our normal procedure was that
I authorized payments to vendors,
and then issued only the right number of checks to her for printing.
Babs printed the checks, gave them
to me for signing, and then I gave
them back to her to send out.
But Babs changed the system
slightly. She found that she could
supplement her income by using an
increasingly popular chemical to
wash the laser-printer toner (ink) off
the check, replacing the payee name
with hers, and then depositing
checks to her bank account.
In a few days, the program made
her a valued customer at a local
bank. But angry vendors began calling for their overdue payments. We
traced the letters and found that
Babs had never sent them. It didn’t
take long to figure out everything
from there.
The local police were disinterested in the case, even after my suggestion that—because I knew the
crime, the bad guy (girl), her address, and exactly what happened—
they could look good by quickly
solving the case and impress their
boss. After two months, they finally
arrested her, after I complained to
higher-ups.
The bank was concerned at first,
but their major priority was to determine if they were at fault. When
they determined that a fraud had
indeed occurred but there was no
bank liability, they lost interest in
helping. In fact, I needed to get an
attorney to force them to provide
information to the police. The bank
had no interest in helping my small
business or the police, but were
happy to charge fees when forced
to comply.
Earlier, I sometimes wondered if
I spent too much time looking at all
the numbers in the accounting system. Babs taught me a lesson here
about trusting accountants, printing chemistry, and fraud.
Getting Professional Help 189
 Accountant. The capabilities of and pricing for an accountant lies
between those of a CPA and a bookkeeper. You may want either an
accountant or a bookkeeper to enter transaction information into
your books. Accountants are supposed to understand accounting
theory and thus make decisions on how to handle irregular
transactions. However, accountants are not licensed, nor are they
even required to take a minimum number of accounting courses. When
reviewing resumes, remember that anyone with experience can call
himself an accountant. The person selected should convince you of
their ability to take on extra responsibilities and handle more complex
situations.
 Bookkeeper. A bookkeeper enters information into a preexisting system, and does not handle irregular transactions. Bookkeepers are
most needed in stable situations, where the same types of transactions are entered in large quantities every week, and only the numbers change. Bookkeepers should make entries only as directed by
accountants or CPAs. Finally, bookkeeper is the only word I know of
in the English language where there are three sets of repeating letters
in a row.
 Data Entry Clerks. Data entry clerks are not expected to know anything about accounting. They receive low pay and simply enter numbers from various media (for example, time cards or expense reports)
into spreadsheets or accounting programs.
 You. You must supervise everything. Never live in bliss, assuming
that everyone is doing the right thing. New issues requiring attention
arise frequently, and employees are both encouraged and impressed
when they see the small business owner taking an interest in their
work. Perhaps “attention” is the most important word here. Anyone
associated with the accounting system must see that you know what
is going on, or bad things will eventually happen. Don’t become a
full-time accountant, but spend at least some time every day looking
at different areas of the system to remain up-to-date on what is happening, to appear vigilant, and to make sure that no one is tempted to
take liberties.
Updated rates for different types of accounting expertise can be seen at
www.tsbom.com.
Computer Expertise
Information Technology (IT) is at the core of just about all businesses these
days, but as they say, “…IT happens;” and it’s only a matter of time before
something breaks. The immediate problem is not the device itself, but the lost
productivity of employees.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 190
When it comes to computers, small business owners usually fall into two groups:
those who have no interest, and those who fancy themselves as semiprofessional
computer technicians. Inevitably, however, outside IT expertise will be needed
as the business grows, and so we discuss here when to do it yourself and when to
call in a pro. We focus on what constitutes the best use of the entrepreneur’s
time, and when the risks of doing it yourself outweigh the cost savings.
All small businesses should have some in-house capabilities to fix common
problems, such as de-installing and reinstalling programs, attaching and detaching various cables, cleaning printers (the cause of many outages), and changing
toner cartridges. It’s important to fix even the smallest IT problems immediately
and competently to stop related problems from occurring, for employee morale,
and to maximize productivity.
Beyond this, it’s great to jump in and fix a problem if you’ve got technical
aptitude, but this must be tempered by the realization that it is indeed expensive
for a small business owner to spend four hours fixing a problem that could be
fixed in one hour—the right way—by an experienced IT technician.
Therefore, all small businesses should be able to handle common problems
in-house, but also have an ongoing relationship with a capable IT computer maintenance firm that knows your machines, peripherals, and overall structure. Call
for professional help after asking yourself the following questions:
 Is this problem really worth my time?
 Is this a one-time fix, or will this problem likely recur?
 Do I really want to learn how to fix this problem, or am I doing this
to escape from more important but unpleasant work?
Shopping for an IT pro is a bit different than finding a good attorney and
CPA (as already discussed). That is because attorneys and CPAs must hold university degrees, pass professional examinations, and gain licensing to practice,
but there is no such requirement among computer technicians. Although many
of these experts have gained a Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer (MCSE) or
similar certification, many practicing computer maintenance contractors have
not. There is no stopping these “learn on the fly when I’m not serving fries”
types from marketing themselves to your small business as the expert who can
fix anything in just a few minutes. Just to make things a bit more complicated,
there are actually many non-MCSE (or similar certification) experts offering
their services who are actually quite competent.
With all this in mind, here are some points to remember when evaluating
who should be called when technical help is needed:
 Who returns your call, and how quickly? This will help determine
how quickly the technician can be on-site to fix your equipment. Remember, the most expensive part of IT downtime is lost employee
productivity.
Getting Professional Help 191
 What response times are promised? Within four business hours or “it
depends what else is going on”? Most companies specializing in this
area will have backup experts to send in quickly when needed. Also
ask if maintenance can be accomplished before or after regular business hours (which further reduces intrusions on regular operations).
 Is there a particular area of expertise? Explain your operating system(s),
major installed programs, antivirus protection, backup systems, and
network setup. Note that even among MCSEs, one certification may
be more or less valuable for your situation. For example, a certification
gained when WIN 98 was king will be of less help if the company now
runs WIN XP, or in a Novell networking environment.
 How many years of experience does this particular IT expert have?
Can other expertise be called in when needed? (For example, if your
small business runs routers and switches beyond the expertise of a
particular computer repair technician, ask for the resume of a colleague who handles networking.)
 How big is the computer maintenance company? Many computer pros
work solo as freelancers or contractors—but can you afford waiting
for days until bigger clients are serviced and your problem is finally
resolved?
 The latest trend in small business systems maintenance is to resolve
problems via remote connections. Many issues can be repaired in that
way in just a few minutes, so you needn’t wait hours or days for an onsite visit. Can your system be maintained in this way? What happens
if a critical piece of equipment needed for remote maintenance (for
example, a router) goes down?
 When easy-to-fix problems occur, will the technician explain how you
may fix them in the future, or does this generate a surly response?
 What are the rates for on-site visits and remote maintenance, during
regular business hours, off-hours, and for emergency response? Hourly
rates range from about $55 to $200 per hour. As always, remember
that you often get what you pay for.
 Are references available? Hopefully, the references can affirm the
fast response times, reasonable rates, and competency of your chosen
computer maintenance vendor.
Beyond this, a few tips are offered here that will stop about 80 percent of
computer-related problems from ever occurring:
 Make sure that every machine is protected against viruses, trashware,
spyware, and Internet pop-up ads (as discussed in Chapter 14).
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 192
 Further, communicate to all employees what they should and should
not do to minimize the chances of infection. For example, never open
e-mail attachments without scanning first for viruses. Without good
protection, even new Internet-attached machines will experience problems very quickly.
 Communicate to all employees that programs, additional software, or
peripheral devices cannot be installed on any machine without the
explicit permission of an IT professional. Seemingly innocent “updates” are often the cause of serious problems.
 Many problems can be fixed simply by rebooting the machine. Help
should not be sought unless the problem recurs consistently after
rebooting. All machines should be rebooted at the end of each day, so
that they will be ready for a fresh start the next day.
 When Internet connections are lost, the problem can often be fixed
by unplugging all DSL modems, switches, and routers, waiting ten
seconds, and then restarting.
 Don’t be in a big hurry to install the latest drivers and software updates.
Remember the old adages, “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” and “Never
install any version of software ending in point zero.”
If an employee or a nephew is good at computer maintenance, think twice
about asking them to fix your machines. This exposes your IT systems to further
accidental or intentional damage, and compromises confidential information.
While firing a computer maintenance firm is easy, things are a bit more complicated when the relationship is not simply business-to-business.
Links to firms offering business computer services on a national level can be
seen at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Finally, as the small business grows beyond about 15 machines, working with
a computer maintenance company will likely become uneconomical, since a fulltime systems administrator will do a faster, less expensive, and better job for
your small business.
193
Chapter 9
Business Insurance
Insurance stands right up there with taxes as one of the least exciting aspects
of running a small business. The annual insurance review is often considered a
chore leading to a large purchase that will never be used. Most small business
owners understand what they are buying when the policies are up for renewal,
but then quickly forget the details. There is a very short “half-life” for retention
of insurance information. Still, any ongoing company needs various types of insurance to protect itself and to meet its obligations to others. Also, small business owners must know enough about insurance to understand when it is
acceptable and prudent to demand that vendors, customers, and other business
partners provide insurance protection to your small business. Note also that
some types of insurance allow tax-free transfer and provision of benefits to small
business owners and employees. Finally, one of the major benefits of business
insurance is that arcane and complex business-busting problems are effectively
outsourced to the insurance company.
Insurers receive their fair share of negative attention these days, but it’s
great when the problems discussed in this chapter are negotiated on your behalf
by teams of professionals (insurance adjusters, attorneys, and others), rather
than the stretched-thin staff of your small business. This chapter provides a summary of the most common small business insurance concerns. Although this
advice will generally be useful to just about all small businesses, insurance regulation and offerings vary significantly from state to state, so be sure to talk everything over with a local agent.
Business Insurance Agents
Most business insurance packages are all but indecipherable to those outside
the insurance priesthood, given that clients must wade though the thick legal
mumbo-jumbo in policies, riders, amendments, exceptions, declarations, supplementary declarations, notices, and more. But that’s not so much of a problem if
the agent representing the products really understands business insurance, and
your industry in particular.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 194
Insurance agents must be licensed in the state where they practice, and insurance companies are rather selective about who may represent their coverages. The majority of agents do understand their products quite well and work
hard to uphold industry standards of honesty and integrity. Most insurance professionals are concerned about doing a good job because they are capable people,
but also to keep their licenses in good standing and to retain the right to sell
various products. This provides great assurances to small business owners and
makes the buying process a lot easier; but as with everything, some are better
than others. It’s therefore important to find an insurance sales agent who knows
the products relevant to your industry, can comfortably explain them to you, and
ensure that your small business has adequate but not excessive or duplicate,
coverages.
To shop for an insurance agent, speak with industry colleagues for recommendations, check the Website of a local chamber of commerce, or ask your
CPA or attorney. Another productive source is your favorite Internet search
engine. Enter keywords such as “Philadelphia business insurance” and then examine the interesting links.
When it’s time to go shopping for insurance, tell the agent your situation and
concerns, and also provide the documents indicating that your small business
agrees to maintain certain levels of insurance coverages. For example, building
landlords usually demand that business tenants insure their premises (more on
this later). Other examples include covenants with banks, customers, and perhaps officers and directors. With this knowledge, an informed agent is also in a
position to recommend commonly used insurance policies for firms in your industry, and tell you when your small business should be named as an additionalinsured under the policies of customers or vendors.
A good agent can explain what is needed, as well as the risks, costs, and
coverages, and then show it to you in writing, when all the paperwork arrives.
This can save a lot of time that you can use more productively.
Finally, it never hurts to show your current policies to a competitive agent
two or three months before renewal time to check on the current market.
Business Insurance Types
Workers’ Compensation
“Workers’ Comp” is required in most states, and this protects the workers in
your business from injuries on the job. It does not cover injuries or illnesses that
occur outside of work; General medical insurance coverage is often offered for
this purpose (discussed later). Obviously, the source of a problem can be unclear, and when an employee with a medical issue asks for help, it’s great if the
employer can come through, regardless of the cause.
Business Insurance 195
Workers’ Comp rates are based on several factors, but primarily on the
following:
 The number of workers
 Total compensation paid by the company (including just about anything imaginable, including wages, bonuses, commissions, overtime,
sick pay, vacation pay, tool allowances, contributions to retirement
accounts, profit-sharing, housing, meals and more)
 The type of business (most important). For example, companies that
repair high-voltage transmission-line towers pay higher rates than
companies in the stamp collecting business. Workers’ Comp can usually be purchased in a package of other policies acquired from a general insurance provider, but in some cases, Workers’ Comp is acquired
directly from the state.
If independent contractors or subcontractors are used, be careful.
Most state laws hold that a contractor (in this case, your small business) is responsible for injuries to employees of subcontractors, in
the absence of other insurance. The exposure here occurs if the subcontractor does not have insurance, has inadequate insurance, or the
injured worker’s attorney figures that it costs nothing extra to name
your small business in a lawsuit against others. Also note that independent contractors without employees, whose duties closely resemble
those of an employee, may be considered an employee for insurance
purposes. Be prepared to ask subcontractors for proof of insurance.
If this can’t be provided, pay the Workers’ Comp premium for the
extra workers and charge the subcontractor. Don’t rely on language
in agreements that appear to pass insurance obligations off to others.
What about you? Executive officers in most states are considered employees
of their corporation and are therefore covered for injuries; however, they are
also included in calculating premiums.
Beyond this, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and related
state plans require employers to provide employees with a safe and healthy workplace. Enforcement of these regulations may include both civil and criminal penalties for non-compliance.
Workers’ Comp is no substitute for medical insurance, because it only covers problems occurring on the job, and even then, the claim must be legitimate.
Some states, such as California, have suffered for years under a system where
employers pay high Workers’ Comp rates but injured employees don’t receive
much compensation. The reason: The system pays out millions in claims for
administration of the program, for fake injuries, and for fake-injury attorneys.
It’s a bad system, but small businesses have no choice about buying Workers’
Comp insurance.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 196
Coverage is usually expressed as a number, such as “100/500/100.” This means
the policy pays:
Bodily Injury by Accident: $100,000 maximum for each accident.
Bodily Injury by Disease: a $500,000 policy limit.
Bodily Injury by Disease: $100,000 for each employee.
Think about your situation and make sure there is enough coverage under
likely scenarios. Remember that if an on-the-job accident occurs and the Workers’ Comp policy pays out to the limit, your small business will likely still be
liable for any deficiencies. This type of financial injury may be fatal to many
small businesses.
Property
Property insurance covers business assets, and not real property. These
assets may include equipment, tools, machines, furniture, fixtures, computers
and office equipment, and related property used to produce income. Besides
The Earthquake Hits Home
On January 17, 1994, the wild shaking
of the Northridge earthquake awakened
everyone in Los Angeles. Me included.
I soon began walking to my office about
a mile away, and I passed a 10-floor
office building that now had a few large
cracks running from the fourth floor
to the top. “Not too bad,” I thought,
but suddenly the police and a truckload of National Guard troops arrived
and surrounded the building. No one
was allowed in. Not even the dozens of
small business owners who operated
out of the building. (As you might imagine in Los Angeles, marriage counselors, psychologists, and psychiatrists
largely occupied the building.)
Over the next few days, city authorities decided the structural integrity of
the building was unknown, and no
one was sure if it would remain standing. Troops stood watch around the
building as crowds were kept away.
This included many small business
owners who begged to go into the
building to quickly grab important
records or property and cash. But no
one was allowed to enter.
Finally, a large crane with a wrecking ball arrived. The crane began
knocking down the building, starting
from the upper floors, as a large crowd
watched the depressing sight. Now
and then, someone would yell as the
wrecking ball hit his office and computers, furniture, and file cases fell
to the ground. Confidential papers
floated through the air for blocks
around. Some of the property seemed
recoverable, but no one was allowed
even to sort through the remains of
the destroyed building.
The earthquake resulted in a total
loss for all business owners in the
building. Those with adequate insurance at least gained financial reimbursement for their lost offices,
property, records, and valuables.
Business Insurance 197
tangible fixed assets, property insurance may cover inventory, accounts receivable, cash, and even business income. Make sure that if there is a fire, major
theft, or other peril and everything is lost, the business will receive enough insurance proceeds to restore everything. To accomplish this, get a list of all assets
(probably from your balance sheet), and then think about where your property
is—and goes—and ask the insurance sales agent to make sure there is adequate
coverage. For example, special riders may be needed for trade shows, inventory
in transit, vehicles parked off-site overnight, or equipment moved around to
customer premises. Also, be sure to know if the coverage causes problems most
likely to occur where the property is located. If a warehouse is located along a
river, for example, don’t assume there is protection against losses from floods.
Ask—and have an insurance company representative actually show you in the
policy where it says so in writing.
General Liability
If your small business rents its premises, just about all lease agreements require that the lessee (that’s you) pay for General Liability Insurance. Here is
typical language found in a lease:
Lessee shall, at Lessee’s expense, obtain and keep in force during
the term of this lease a policy of comprehensive public liability and
property insurance insuring Lessor and Lessee against any liability
arising out of the ownership, use, occupancy or maintenance of the
Premises and all areas appurtenant thereto. The limit of said insurance
shall not, however, limit the liability of the Lessee hereunder. Insurance
provided hereunder shall be in companies rated A+, AAA or better in
“Best’s Insurance Guide.” Such insurance shall be a combined single
limit in an amount not less than $1,000,000.
In this situation, the landlord requires $1,00,000 in coverage per incident
from a quality company that is sure to pay if a problem occurs. Note that the
small business remains liable for losses not paid by the insurance company.
In most cases, the lessor (landlord) asks to be named as “additional insured,”
so that if something terrible happens, the insurance company may pay the landlord directly. Insurance companies are then happy to provide a certificate of
insurance to the additional party to affirm this understanding.
Examples of terrible things might include a forklift that accidentally punches
a hole through a wall and into an adjacent business, or an electrical problem that
burns down your office and the entire building at night.
General Liability Insurance is often purchased in minimal amounts by small
business owners, but then results in inadequate payouts when problems occur.
For just a few dollars more, problems resulting in bankruptcy can be avoided, so
perhaps this is not the best place to skimp when purchasing insurance coverages.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 198
General Medical
In contrast to Workers’ Comp, General Medical protects employees from
illnesses and accidents that are unrelated to work. Although employer-paid medical
insurance is not required, IRS regulations hold that this expense is deductible
only if everyone gets the same deal. If medical insurance is offered to one person
in the firm (such as yourself), everyone else must received coverage under the
same plan.
Employers often pay for the medical insurance of their employees, because it
makes employees feel secure, creates a sense of gratitude, and assures employers that workers will not suffer financial problems and remain off the job for lack
of good medical care. This is especially important in these tumultuous times for
the medical services industry, as employees rightfully fear living without general
medical insurance.
Employers can buy insurance coverage for a relatively low cost, as compared
to the employee. (Yes, medical insurance is expensive from any perspective, but
it’s cheaper if purchased by the employer.) On top of everything, employees may
have a hard time finding coverage on their own, and the expense of this insurance is rarely tax-deductible by workers. If the employer pays for medical insurance, this important form of compensation basically passes to the employee free
of taxes. (See the Medical Expenses and Insurance section of Chapter 7, and the
IRS Section 125 Plans section at the end of this chapter.)
Under most plans, the employer pays a percentage of the premium, and employees have the option of buying in or not. For example, your small business
may agree to pay 80 percent of the cost of employee insurance, and 50 percent
for their dependents. The employer then deducts the employee contribution from
paychecks. Other employees may say, “No thank you, my spouse has a better
deal.” In that case, get a written statement from the employee affirming this
decision.
Employers are not supposed to notice that the cost of medical insurance
varies greatly depending upon who is hired. But some do. For example, the cost
of insuring a healthy male in his fifties with a wife and two children (that is,
employee and three dependents) may be eight times the cost of a single male in
his twenties. To learn the cost of adding someone to the company policy, call the
insurance provider and provide the name, age, and gender of the prospective
employee, the number of new dependents, and indicate whether there are any
preexisting medical conditions that will become the responsibility of the new
insurance carrier.
Most employer-sponsored medical insurance plans require a certain buy-in
percentage, meaning that the small business must recruit a certain portion of
the total employees into the plan. For example, many medical insurance plans
require that over 70 percent of eligible employees agree to participate. Related
to this, the employer must state in advance what percentage of the plan is paid
for by the employer. In addition, the employer must require that all employees
Business Insurance 199
wait for a stated period of zero to 90 days after hiring before coverage commences. Again, consistency is important here; everyone must get the same deal.
Medical insurance policies vary enormously in their coverage. At a minimum, the medical policy may pay a small percentage of only the most urgent
problems, or the sky may be the limit. Here are the three major cost determinants of medical insurance plans:
1. Types of Medical Services Included. Coverage for many products
and services may be offered, including medical and health care treatment, maternity care, orthopedic care, pharmaceuticals, dental care,
vision care, psychiatric counseling, chiropractic care, alternative medical coverage, and add-ons such as supplementary accident insurance
or dependent life insurance.
2. Type of Plan. Another way to improve the deal and run up the cost is
to dump less-expensive Health Maintenance Organization (HMO)
plans and buy into Point of Service (POS) or Preferred Provider
Organization (PPO) plans. HMO plans are out of favor with doctors
because reimbursements are low, and employees don’t like the red
tape required to receive treatment. POS and PPO plans allow employees greater flexibility in receiving care from different doctors, in
or out of the provider’s coverage area. There are also many hybrid
plans, and they are all expensive.
3. Financial Factors. The third major set of determinants involve how
much employees may pay to medical care providers. This primarily
involves the “co-pay” (the employees’ portion of a doctor’s office visit,
for example, $15 per visit); the deductible (“employees pay for 20 percent of costs after paying 100 percent of the first $1,000”), coinsurance,
which is the percentage of covered expenses for which employees are
responsible, and the maximum benefit. As employees pay more to
care providers, the overall cost of the medical insurance goes down.
Other business-specific factors that determine overall cost and eligibility are:
 Number of Employees in the Firm. The smallest plans require a
minimum of two employees. Usually, husband-wife teams count as
only one employee. Note that if there is only one other full-time
employee and he or she resigns, general medical insurance coverage
will normally be terminated.
 Pregnancies. When a small business applies for medical insurance,
the number of pregnancies usually must be reported to the new
insurance company.
 Industry. Under which SIC codes is the business classified? Again,
high-voltage transmission-line workers may pay higher rates than stamp
collecting firms. See www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com for
a list of SIC codes.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 200
All this may become a bit complex, so a good insurance sales agent may
really provide an important service here. The agent should know the pros and
cons of the different plans in the context of the needs of your small business, and
reduce the zillions of options down to just a few. It is certainly feasible to ask
representatives of the insurance providers very specific questions about different plans under consideration, but only the agent can effectively compare plans
across different medical insurance companies.
COBRA (Medical Insurance) Must Be Offered to Departing Employees
COBRA, the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, was passed
by Congress in 1986. The law allows certain former employees, retirees, spouses,
and dependent children the right to temporary continuation of medical insurance coverage under the plan and at the group rates paid by your small business,
plus 1 percent. The ex-employee must pay either the small business or the insurance company to exercise this option.
At first, this may sound like a good deal to ex-employees, but many then
realize that COBRA is more expensive than anticipated because your small business formerly paid a part of the premium but is not required to subsidize the
expense after employment ends. COBRA is ordinarily less expensive, though,
than individual health coverage.
COBRA coverage will likely be snapped up by healthy people who simply
need temporary health insurance, and by those who are pregnant, over 50, in
poor health, or attached to a specific doctor.
COBRA coverage need not be offered in firms with less than 20 employees,
or if the ex-employee was canned with cause, such as for gross misconduct. The
law sets no minimum types or levels of benefits. It does, however, require that
these plans have rules outlining how workers become entitled to the COBRA
program.
Small businesses must offer COBRA medical insurance coverage to all
ex-employees within 44 days of termination, but many forget. In that case, exemployees may get the attention of a government investigator, or sue your
company in federal court. But this will only be a problem if serious medical
problems have occurred. Otherwise, negligent employers must pay $110 per day
to the ex-employee.
Following notice, ex-employees have 60 days to accept COBRA coverage,
and then 45 days to make the first payment. If employees stop paying after the
program is underway, they have effectively canceled COBRA medical insurance
coverage. Your small business is not obligated to pay the medical insurance premiums and then beat on the ex-employee to get back the money. After 18 months,
continuation under the COBRA ends.
Also, note that many large medical insurance providers will directly contact
the ex-employee, go over all of this information, collect payments, administer
Business Insurance 201
the plan, and otherwise relieve your company of much work. Additionally, the
Group Administrative Manual printed by the insurer tells the small business
how to further manage the COBRA program.
Small businesses should be aware of their requirements under COBRA, but
they may be indifferent as to choices made by the ex-employee because this will
result in no additional revenues or expense to the company.
Directors and Officers (D and O)
D and O protects small business owners and other insured officers and directors against lawsuits where someone is trying to get past the business and into
personal assets. This may include customers claiming injury from your products
or services, vendors or creditors trying to collect in bad times, or a competitor
who claims damages for an unlawful action committed by your company.
D and O is generally not associated with problems arising out of alleged
sexual harassment, discrimination, or other employment-related areas. For this,
Employment Practices Liability Insurance (to be discussed) is needed.
This special protection is most valued by directors and officers who already
have great personal wealth. Outside directors may also demand it to protect
themselves from lawsuits, because the compensation received from your firm is
negligible. D and O is not frequently purchased by small businesses but should
be considered if large amounts of wealth have been transferred from the small
business into the personal accounts of officers and directors, or if the integrity
of the corporation was not well-respected and the corporate veil may be pierced
with relative ease.
Employment Practices Liability
Everyone these days has heard horror stories about entire businesses being
lost when an unhappy (current or former) employee teams up with an aggressive
plaintiff’s attorney. Any business with employees is exposed to lawsuits arising
out of harassment (sexual and otherwise), discrimination, disabilities, unlawful
hiring practices, wrongful termination, and more. This special insurance covers
not only the small business owner but also others in the company, even if they
are clearly guilty.
Perhaps the most chilling threat arises when, unknown to the small business
owner, two employees are having personal issues and decide to sue. For example,
a manager may be pressuring a subordinate quietly for sexual favors. In that
case, the bad news is that the small business can be sued and found liable—the
good news is that the company is defended in court and covered for losses and
damages with Employment Practices Liability insurance. The company is insured whether found innocent or guilty (except of course for criminal acts).
Another example is when an employer forgets to add a new employee to the
General Medical Insurance plan and a major medical problem arises. Or perhaps a manager is fired in violation of her employment agreement.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 202
This is one area where some attorneys have given a bad name to their profession. Some law firms take on dubious complaints on behalf of employees, and
basically shake down the employer, saying, “Look, it’s going to cost $100,000 to
defend against this frivolous claim, and there is a chance of losing $250,000, or
we can settle now for $150,000.” Many small businesses will be damaged seriously by this exploitation of the legal system, so this is one situation where a
small business owner may be angry for being the victim in a legal extortion scam,
but thankful that Employment Practices Liability insurance pays for everything
and makes the headache go away.
Few firms actually purchase this special coverage, which in most cases means
they are one shake-down away from bankruptcy.
Errors and Omissions
E and O is an especially important special coverage for those who provide
services (as opposed to products), such as computer programmers and IT consultants. This basically provides protection for cases where your small business
causes damages to others.
For example, perhaps a Web-design firm builds a site for a private religious
high school that accidentally links to a lingerie seller. The parents sue the school,
and the school wants your small business to pay. But E and O insurance offers
protection here. Another example is if an employee experiences medical problems, and then we find out that medical insurance was never acquired for this
person.
E and O claims greatly outnumber claims under Directors and Officers insurance and Employment Practices Liability. Many large clients demand E and
O from their small business vendors, but it might be a good idea, even if it’s not
required. Consider demanding proof of E and O insurance from certain vendors
who work for you.
Product Liability
In today’s litigation-happy environment, many lawsuits are based on claims
that manufacturers, importers, distributors, and sellers of products are liable for
the damages and injuries caused by just about any product. If your small business is somewhere along the chain of suppliers providing a product subject to
such a lawsuit, it costs the plaintiff just a few dollars more to name your firm as
a codefendant.
Product Liability coverage is often added to General Liability policies, but
don’t assume that your firm is insured for exposures in this area. Firms desiring
increased and special protection may purchase additional Product Liability
amounts. This may be especially relevant with older small businesses that have
sold larger numbers of products, and perhaps in times when regulations were
more relaxed.
Business Insurance 203
Cessna Carpet-Bombed by Product Liability Lawsuits
Perhaps the best-known horror story
in this area involves Cessna Aircraft,
long venerated for supplying smaller
airplanes to the civil aviation marketplace. FAA regulations changed over
the decades, but Cessna could not
retrofit its 100,000 previously sold
aircraft with modern safety features.
Accidents happen in aviation,
where something as simple as running out of gas can be fatal. Product Liability lawsuits against Cessna
increased dramatically; and the company often needed to defend products built 20, 30, or 40 years ago
against current regulations. Eventually, about 50 percent of the price of
a new Cessna aircraft was attributed
to Product Liability insurance, and in
the late 1980s, the company ceased
production of single-engine aircraft
entirely because of this problem.
For many years, it seemed that
this respected American icon had
been knocked out of the skies for
good. Finally, the regulatory environment changed for small aircraft makers and after a hiatus of well over a
decade, Cessna took off again with
new models.
Note that these policies do not include problems covered by Workers’ Comp
or Contractual Liability insurance, and exclude damage to work, intentional damages and injuries, liabilities from contracts, and recalls.
Operations in Progress and Completed Operations
Small businesses providing services must be concerned with coverage for
operations in progress as well as for completed projects.
The operations-in-progress exposure arises from claims associated with
projects currently being performed by a services contractor, where property damage or bodily injury allegedly occurs.
An easy example involves a plumbing contractor. Wenches-with-Wrenches
Plumbing, Inc., is installing copper pipe in an older building, and a major leak
and subsequent water damage occur at night resulting from a mistake WWW
made while working earlier in the day. This is probably covered under the General Liability policy, but make sure. Perhaps a special add-on is needed for your
industry. Ask the insurance agent how this ties in with your Workers’ Compensation policy.
Later, WWW completes the project. This is usually defined as when the
small business contractor has completed all contracted work, or when the work
associated with the damage or injury has been put to its intended use by parties
not associated with the small business subcontractor.
If the exact same problem occurs, “operations-in-progress” will no longer pay,
and the issue falls under “completed operations” insurance. WWW may or may
not be insured, so it is important to ask to see it in writing when the policies arrive.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 204
Note that WWW is responsible for all losses, regardless of whether the insurance company pays up. Many contractors and firms in the service industry
are required to carry these forms of insurance, so skimping here may put your
small business in default of a contract. As the small business grows and time
passes, this loss exposure increases because so many older projects quietly age
and come to the attention of plaintiffs with a keen interest in suing your small
business and winning the legal lotto.
Business Interruption
Disability insurance covers lost personal income, but what about the income
of your small business? Businesses may be put out of action by all sorts of causes—
from fires and floods, to the business shutdown of a big customer due to terrorist threats, to a runaway truck that crashes into a retail storefront.
This coverage may mean the difference between solvency and bankruptcy,
because the carrier would pay all the regular bills and expenses until your small
business is restored (although Business Interruption Insurance does not pay for
losses or damages). Business Interruption coverage may be included in the General Liability policy, but speak with the agent to ensure that the amount is sufficient for normal monthly income and expenses.
Not surprisingly, the definition of “Business Interruption” varies, so make
sure this coverage fits the situation of your small business. Note also that terrorist threats are increasingly not covered by conventional policies, but may be
purchased as an add-on.
Short- and Long-Term Disability
Disability insurance is usually considered a way to protect income—not cover
medical expenses or losses—if the insured is unable to work. Short-Term Disability is for a limited period of time, say two years. After these benefits are
exhausted, Long-Term Disability Insurance may be purchased, which usually
covers the worker until retirement, or age 65.
Short-Term Disability is often designed to cover the waiting period before
Long-Term Disability benefits begin. In most states, employers are required to
purchase Short-Term Disability Insurance, and this is paid for through deductions from employee paychecks. In some states, this insurance is not required
for the small business owner; however, it should be purchased because real medical
problems may occur and the benefits from state-sponsored plans are reasonable
(but not large), considering their price as compared with private Short-Term
Disability Insurance.
Note that the benefits here are offered on an after-tax basis, meaning that
they are effectively not subject to payroll taxes. As might be expected, older
workers will pay higher rates than younger ones.
Business Insurance 205
Disability Insurance policies are important to the small business owner, and
they also appeal to employees, helping to build morale and loyalty. All will sleep
better at night knowing that help in the form of cash will be coming if a workstopping medical problem occurs.
To decide how much coverage to buy, consider the level of income needed to
maintain present lifestyles, including rent or mortgage payments, food, automobiles, other loans, and other monthly expenses. The policies normally range from
60 percent to 70 percent of pretax income and may be critical because related
benefits from Social Security will not come close to covering these expenses.
State-sponsored plans are usually meager, so if this is not enough, consider purchasing additional insurance from a private carrier.
Disability Insurance policies come with an elimination period, which is similar to the deductible amount on other types of insurance policies. Typically, this
is 90 days, which means that workers (and you) must have the financial resources
to pay bills until these benefits kick in. As the elimination period increases, the
price of the insurance decreases, because many medical problems are well under
control by this time.
What, exactly, is a disability? Understand this well, since the description
varies among carriers and policies. There are two general definitions. “Own occupation” means that a worker cannot perform activities required for a particular occupation. This is more restrictive, but cheaper, than “any occupation.” If
the latter definition is used, an insured will receive benefits only if no incomeproducing activities at all can be performed.
There are many other bells and whistles that may be considered with both
Short- and Long-Term Disability Insurance, but one of the most important is
whether the policy is guaranteed to be renewable. This will be especially important to older workers. Renewals are not guaranteed unless premiums are paid
and “Non Can” (Non-Cancellation option) is purchased.
Disability Insurance may not normally be offered to workers or small business owners who are already disabled, have an existing medical problem, are
pregnant, or earn less than $18,000 per year. In that case, life insurance may be
the best answer.
Both Short- and Long-Term Disability Insurance may be offered through
conventional medical insurance carriers and companies offering payroll services.
To find a carrier, apply, and get a quote, type “Disability Insurance” into your
favorite search engine. The best source,however, is probably your insurance sales
agent, who is uniquely positioned to make sure the Disability policies tie in with
other forms of insurance paid by your small business.
“Key Man” or Life Insurance
Various forms of term and whole-life insurance (sometimes called “Key Man
Insurance”) are sometimes purchased by the owners of small businesses, where
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 206
one partner is compensated for the loss of another. A common example is when
business co-owners buy coverage such that if one dies, the others receive a payout. The thinking here is that in many small businesses, each person is critical,
and the business is not viable unless all are hard at work in their particular areas
of expertise. The surviving owners receive a payout to purchase the interests of
the deceased partner from the estate. Then, the company may be continued without distractions, or it may be sold.
Once again, your business insurance sales agent is well-positioned to recommend what is best here and to make sure that all serious risks are addressed
without purchasing duplicate or unnecessary coverages.
Insurance, Tax Advantages, and Cafeteria (IRS Section 125)
Plans
Insurance often provides a tax-free way to transfer benefits and constructive
income to the small business owner and employees. This is accomplished, for
example, when General Medical Insurance is paid for by the small business.
Employees receive this benefit free of payroll taxes.
Small business owners interested in using this allowance should investigate
IRS Code Section 125, which allows employers to pay for benefits offered to
employees, without reporting this as additional taxable compensation. Health
care, vision and dental care, group-term life insurance, disability, adoption assistance, flexible spending accounts to employees, and dependent care assistance
programs all may qualify as allowable under Section 125.
In return for these tax-free benefits, employees often agree to salary reduction agreements and then also contribute a portion of future salaries on a pretax
basis to pay for the qualified benefits.
One indirect benefit is that Workers’ Comp insurance rates decline, because
payroll decreases.
See Chapter 7 for more information on minimizing taxes, and learn more
about Section 125 Cafeteria Plans in IRS Publication 15-B (Employer’s Guide
To Tax Benefits) at www.irs.gov.

Honesty and accuracy are important in applying for all types of insurance. It
may be tempting to tell the insurer that a fire alarm and suppression system is
installed in your building because the rates will be less expensive; but at the end
of the day, most small business owners need to know that they are really insured.
Otherwise, when a real problem occurs, the insurer may declare the policy null
and void because the application was not correct.
Business Insurance 207
It is clear that business insurance is a complicated undertaking, so many
growing businesses retain professional insurance advisors to manage and coordinate all types of coverages. These consultants do not sell policies but make sure
that the small business has sufficient insurance to meet all contractual and regulatory requirements, check for duplicate coverages, shop for the best rates, negotiate payouts, and keep watch over changes and their effects inside and outside
of the business. Business insurance advisors are difficult to locate on the Internet,
but several are listed at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
There are many other types of insurance that may be relevant to your small
business, so ask your business insurance sales agent as well as industry colleagues
to make sure that your total insurance coverages are similar to others in the
industry and to help you sleep well at night.
This page intentionally left blank 
209
Chapter 10
Finding and Leasing a Business Location
This chapter is concerned with finding the right location for your small business and then negotiating a good deal to lease the new premises. It’s usually a
good idea to lease rather than buy, especially in the beginning, because needs may
change dramatically in the first few years of operations, and leasing offers greater
flexibility.
Using an Agent
There are many factors to consider in locating a property and negotiating a
deal. For most small business owners, this activity is rarely necessary, so working
with a professional real estate leasing agent who knows the geographical area,
market prices and trends, local customs, industry players, and normal lease terms
and conditions is highly recommended. Leasing agents also have access to data
on local demographics and average leasing rates. Further, while it’s possible to
find a good location just by driving around, most leasing agents have access to
virtually all available properties through on-line industry databases (with the exception of certain privately owned commercial developments that prefer the “doit-yourself” approach, and smaller sublease deals).
Most agents are paid through commissions and fees by the landlord after a
deal is signed. While some argue that leasing prices are then marked up accordingly for the new lessee, the counterargument is that landlords cannot get away
with charging more than the market rates. Many consider that the agent is merely
getting paid the same amount the landlord would have spent on selling expenses,
so there is no need to increase prices for the new lessee.
Be aware that compensation to the leasing agent is a function of square footage, term, and price per square foot of the new premises. An upscale boots merchant looking for a seven-year lease on a 3,000-square-foot retail site will likely
get much more attention than a parts distributor shopping for a three-year lease
on a 2,000-square-foot warehouse.
In most cases, commercial leasing agents must be licensed at the state level as
real estate brokers, and so a certain level of ethics and professionalism can be
expected.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 210
Finding a good leasing agent is not difficult. The best way to do this is to
drive around an interesting area and look for “Now Leasing” notices on a few
promising locations. Then call the agent shown on the notice, who will likely be
an expert on that particular neighborhood, and he or she will be able to advise
you on all kinds of arcane local deals and details that would be impossible to
know otherwise. Another way to find an agent is simply to adapt some of the
same techniques used to find an attorney or CPA (as described in Chapter 8).
Locating and leasing the right premises has significant long-term implications on the operations and success of any small business, and so a commercial
leasing agent is highly recommended.
Determining the Best Location
The right location is of critical importance to some but not all small businesses. Restaurants and retailers, for example, depend upon shoppers and foot
traffic; and the most important factor for an aluminum anodizing firm is fast
access to chemical suppliers. A doctor may prefer to operate in a building geared
to the medical profession near a prestigious hospital. But many service-oriented
or professional services firms may be more relaxed about location and concerned
about price and other factors. In e-commerce, successful firms are springing up
all over in very remote places.
Considering the following questions will help narrow-down the choice of
locations:
 What is the lease budget?
 What type of location is best?
 Does the location have the facilities and features needed by your
operations?
 Is the location properly zoned?
What Is the Lease Budget?
A quick way to narrow down locations is first to consider the budget. Hopefully, some research was completed on the type of facility needed and associated
leasing rates when the business plan was developed, as described in Chapter 2. If
new research brings in numbers that upset the financial models in the business
plan, this is cause for concern; perhaps the best move is to go back to the beginning and reconsider everything.
Landlords will be looking for a lease term of at least two years, and preferably five or more. The good news is that rental expenses will be quite predictable
once the lease is signed; the bad news is that signing a long-term lease before
sales revenues are pouring in is scary. Running a small business, however, is not
for the feint of heart anyway, so perhaps this is one of those times when conviction is needed.
Finding and Leasing a Business Location 211
What Type of Location Is Best?
If location is important, then your best thinking is required because this
decision may easily make or break the business. Shopper psychology plays a
huge role in whether things will work or not, and the most innocuous and seemingly unimportant factor may have a major impact on revenues in the first year
or two of business. After this, chances are that shoppers will be accustomed to
the location and keep returning.
If location can affect revenues, tell the leasing agent to narrow the search by
considering the following factors:
 Parking. Few shoppers like to pay for parking. The best location can
be a dud if customers don’t see a quick and free place to cool their
wheels.
The Cute Little Restaurant Where Joe Eats Every Five Years
Near my office is a chic neighborhood with lots of cute boutiques and
attractive, high-priced stores selling
jewelry, women’s shoes, antiques,
and exorbitantly priced items to furnish and decorate the home. A perfect place for restaurants, and
indeed, many are mixed in among the
other stores, which run along a colorfully lit and well-landscaped road
that slowly turns from north to west.
Cars arriving from the north first
see a cute restaurant with inviting
frontage including outdoor seating,
allowing diners to view other shoppers and stores. It seems an irresistible place to stop and enjoy a
leisurely meal; the perfect location.
Nevertheless, almost a dozen restaurants have opened and closed
here over the past 20 years, all of
them cute and inviting, but none successful. Every five years or so, I stop
in, enjoy a pleasant meal, and remind
myself to stop back soon. But I don’t.
The problem is very subtle, obviously overlooked by every new tenant, but boils down to uncomfortable
parking. Arriving visitors cannot see
the parking entrance until they have
passed the restaurant. The next free
parking area is a few hundred yards
down the street, but hungry shoppers parking here are usually diverted by other attractions and never
quite make it back.
The restaurants come and go as
each small business owner makes
the same mistake, and each loses a
huge amount of money as he continually invests in the cute little restaurant at the corner of the road.
 Proximity to Other Businesses. Sometimes, seemingly competitive
businesses may complement each other and create a critical mass
that attracts more shoppers than each could do individually. Further,
many small businesses prefer to be near anchor tenants or big-box
retailers who advertise heavily and attract huge amounts of traffic all
by themselves. Think this out carefully. It’s possible, for example,
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 212
that everyone will do better if your leather shop opens in an area with
many successful fashion boutiques, even if one already sells leather
goods. On the other hand, both may fail. This is where a critical market
analysis—and a little luck—can make all the difference.
 Price Points. Shoppers often expect to find certain types of pricing in
different areas, and surprising them is usually not a good idea. Discount
goods, for example, will probably not sell well in an upscale area, and
the store will certainly not be popular with nearby merchants. The
reverse is also true.
The perfect location does not exist, but analyze each site up and down and
left and right to see which is best. Even then it’s possible that none will really
work out.
Many books and university courses are designed around this very subject,
but none can substitute for your best efforts to understand the neighborhood
and the shoppers in a potential new location.
Checklist of Needed Facilities and Features
In addition to price and location, it’s important to list operations that will be
conducted at the new location, and the required supporting facilities. If a desirable location lacks certain requirements, this can be mitigated to some extent by
leasehold improvements, especially if paid for by the landlord (more on this
later). If major improvements or changes are needed, chances are that the deal
will not make sense because the landlord will need to pass on the costs to the new
tenant. Another nearby location may already have these improvements with no
extra markup. Further, landlords may seem nice during the negotiating stage of
the relationship, but asking for anything not explicitly agreed upon in the lease
after it is signed will likely turn out to be an unpleasant and expensive experience. Of course, each small business must develop its own list of special needs,
but the following sections discuss common concerns.
Electrical
If your firm uses three-phase machinery, 220-volt equipment, or just uses a
lot of electricity, make sure the building can handle your needs. Remember that
as more electricity is used, more heat is generated, creating the need for additional cooling systems, which use even more electricity. Adding more amperage
can be very expensive. Finally, many businesses these days run servers or other
machines where power surges or downtime due to electrical outages is unacceptable, so find out from the local utility company if this kind of problem is common. Either way, industrial-strength power-surge equipment and backup power
supplies may be a good idea to protect computers and other equipment.
Finding and Leasing a Business Location 213
Elevator Hours
Will the elevator work when needed to move people, equipment, inventory,
or supplies to your floor? In some modern buildings, elevators are restricted
during off-hours, but using them for supply purposes is also not allowed during
business hours.
Fire and Safety
Just because a building is for lease doesn’t mean that it’s in conformance
with local fire, building, and safety codes. You could be responsible for this.
Check with the fire department and other agencies to make sure expensive penalties, inspection fees, and construction will not be incurred.
Hazardous Substances
All kinds of substances may be considered hazardous, from medical supplies
to photographic chemicals to the small amounts of various substances found in
inventory samples. Most building leases explicitly disallow hazardous substances,
so a small business is automatically in default and at the whim of the landlord
from day one unless this is disclosed and agreed upon up front.
Hours
A 24/7 work week may be your normal schedule, but perhaps this is not
allowed in the lease. Make sure the building’s hours of operation are in accordance with business needs.
HVAC
Do the premises have sufficient heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning
equipment? If not, someone must pay for it; and after the lease commences, it’s
unlikely the building owner will agree.
A common scenario occurs when one business moves into the premises occupied by a previous operation that had few workers or machines. The new user
then notices that temperatures cannot be managed by the existing system, and
then learns that the current equipment is inadequate. Even office workers and
computers can knock an HVAC system off balance. Also, if your operations
require more capacity than the existing system, make sure that the situation is
discussed in the lease: Either the landlord pays for the new equipment, or the
small business must have the right to install what is needed. Further, make sure
the building has enough electrical and plumbing capacity to handle the additional HVAC load.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 214
An engineer may be needed to advise on this, or ask local HVAC contractors
for their recommendations.
Also, can the HVAC equipment be turned on and off during evenings and
weekends? Many office buildings are turned off during this time, so working
conditions may be uncomfortable.
Loading Dock
Can modern 53’-tractor-trailer combos dock at the new facility, or only smaller
vehicles for local delivery? Is the loading dock the same height as incoming and
outgoing vehicles? If it is shared, will there be congestion if other businesses
need it at the same time?
Noise
Will your operations produce noise from machines, public address systems,
music, or visitors? Make sure this is explicitly allowed in the lease, or get it
changed to avoid problems, fines, and possible eviction later.
Number of Workers
How many employees are allowed to work in the new premises? Watch out
for situations where the business plan calls for 20 employees in two years, but the
lease only allows 10. Options to lease extra space often do not make sense when
it’s time to expand. This is a common occurrence and can be mitigated by shortterm leases, or by leasing a second location for split operations (business office
and warehouse) until everything is consolidated.
Parking
Parking is a major issue in many locations, and it is not something that can
be fixed easily later. If the business plan calls for 20 employees but the office
lease allows for 14 parking spaces, then what happens? Many locations simply
do not have the extra spaces to sell, at any price. Further, zoning laws may
prohibit the number of employee and customer parking spaces really needed
for your small business to make it. If you sign a lease and there is insufficient
parking, “Checkmate.”
Plumbing
Restaurants, especially, must make sure that the plumbing system can handle
the incoming and outgoing water needs for food preparation, dishwashers, and
restrooms. And does the water heater have enough capacity?
Finding and Leasing a Business Location 215
Restrooms, Kitchens
If facilities are needed with running water or to serve food, get everything in
writing up front. Once the lease is signed, it’s a little late to ask for permission,
and the answer will likely be “Yeah, but it’s gonna cost ya.”
Telecom
Can the proposed location handle the number of telephone lines needed by
your small business? And what about T1 or DSL lines or a satellite antenna?
There’s a good chance the new premises will need to be rewired for telephone
lines and Ethernet (for computer networks), so get a bid and make sure it’s in
the budget.
Satellite/Antennas
If an antenna or satellite dish is needed, get permission up front. Digging up
the roof and running cables and electricity to install this equipment can be expensive, especially after the lease is signed and the landlord is approached, hat in
hand, asking for permission. Building owners don’t like anyone drilling holes in
the roof.
Shipping
Are daily shipments (in and out) allowed? Some building leases allow only
FedEx or UPS shipments, so if more is needed, this may be a problem. Other
buildings don’t allow small businesses that ship lots of equipment.
Signage, Advertising
If the small business expects to post signage anywhere on the new premises, get this included in the lease—and in great detail, including the size,
lighting and electrical needs, colors, and height. After the lease is signed, it’s
going to cost plenty to say, “Oh by the way, can we post just a small sign outside?” The landlord doesn’t mind at all. In fact, this will cause great happiness
when a big fee is charged for this privilege. Building leases should also describe
how the company name will be posted on the building directory, on doors, and
on parking spaces.
Visitors
What does the lease say about visitors? The nature of some small businesses
is that visitors equal revenues. Some locations are not designed for this type of
traffic and frequent visitors are not welcomed.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 216
Joe Is Upset as Stars Are Born
I once worked with a small business
that leased offices in a building catering to professionals such as CPAs,
psychologists, attorneys, and computer people. We all shared some
common areas, such as reception
and conference rooms. Most of the
occupants had occasional visitors
who went unnoticed, and life there
was serene, even though the facilities were a bit cramped.
One day, we noticed movers setting up furniture in an unused office,
including special lighting, cameras,
and furniture such as richly upholstered chairs and couches.
Soon, two young ladies were
busily rushing past us each morning, gulping down coffee as they ran
into their offices. A few days later,
we noticed that the reception room
was now bulging with many and—
different—types of visitors.
The reception room was constantly buzzing with excited talk and
laughter as we came in and out. The
visitors were of all ages, ethnic backgrounds, and appearances, but
none seemed to have very much material wealth, judging by their scruffy
appearance.
I finally asked, and found that this
new operation was in the business
of taking photographs of aspiring actors, actresses, and models. There
is no shortage of these types in Los
Angeles, and most are usually looking for work. The two young ladies
advertised by handing out flyers on
Hollywood Boulevard and other welltraveled places, and by tacking these
to telephone poles. There are many
such firms in the Los Angeles area,
but this one had a special twist: If
you were “accepted,” work was guaranteed within 30 days. This generated an increasing number of excited
new clients.
Soon we also noticed a number
of heated arguments coming from the
new offices. Some of the aspirants
did not seem too happy. As it turns
out, the guarantee of acting or modeling work did not turn out exactly as
many had hoped. Also, a number of
other building tenants with more
staid clientele were complaining.
One day, the offices were silent.
Soon we noticed that they had been
vacated. We asked the building
owner, who informed us that the new
business had not been completely
honest with the landlord about the
type and number of clients, and were
quickly and quietly evicted from the
building.
Zoning Rules
The planned facilities must adhere to local zoning rules. Even the perfect
location may be trumped if zoning laws come into play. In fact, zoning laws are
so important that we devote the next section to these considerations.
In general, don’t assume anything, but make lots of calls and perhaps get it in
writing to make sure that what you need will be available. But do assume that
unless something is explicitly discussed in the lease, it’s not allowed, and getting
permission after the lease is signed will be expensive.
Finding and Leasing a Business Location 217
For Each Special Facility and Feature Needed…
1. Is it technically possible?
2. Does the landlord agree to this in writing in the lease?
3. Is it in accordance with local planning and zoning laws?
Is the Location Properly Zoned?
Zoning laws (also referred to as land-use regulations or local ordinances)
control certain activities in specified areas. For example, liquor stores are frequently prohibited from opening within a certain distance of schools. But many
other situations are not quite as obvious.
As shopping for new premises advances and one starts to look appealing,
check with the city planning or zoning board to make sure that your business
activities are permissible. If the local zoning administrators object, there are
avenues for appeal. However, if these seem too unlikely, expensive, or timeconsuming, its time to move on to another location.
Even working from home may put a small business owner in violation of local
CC&Rs (covenants, codes, and restrictions), zoning laws, or other regulations,
although in many cases it’s unlikely this can become a major problem.
If a conflict arises between the small business and the local government, the
best move is to move on, since few small businesses have the time and resources
to slug it out with city attorneys. The only way forward is to make sure all bases
are covered before signing the lease and beginning operations. Otherwise, in the
worst case scenario, the new premises will need to be abandoned, but the small
business is still liable for lease payments. If this is a possibility, consider requesting a contingency clause in the lease, allowing a bailout—without this being a
cause of default—if zoning decisions do not rule in favor of this location.
It may be obvious by now that small business owners are usually not well
equipped to analyze and negotiate commercial leases, ensuring that they are consistent with business needs and local laws. Because it needs to get done right, call
in an attorney. We will discuss this further.
Zoning to Control Businesses
Local officials concerned with land-use typically zone different parts of the
city for different purposes. Many areas are zoned for residential usage and developments only, with supporting retail needs nearby. Other areas may be for
commercial, business, light industrial, heavy industrial, warehouse/distribution,
manufacturing, shipping, agricultural, or other purposes.
This seems simple enough, but problems may arise when the activities of
your small business fall between the cracks. For example, an engineering firm
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 218
may design products but build a small number of prototypes using special metals
for testing. Should the firm be classified as engineering or light manufacturing?
And are hazardous substances being used, even if in microquantities?
Zoning to Control Activities
Zoning regulations are also concerned with specific activities, such as signage,
hazardous wastes, parking, traffic, aesthetics, pollution (air, water, noise, and
light) and more. Further, some districts allow only a designated number of competing firms in a particular area to limit competition and enhance chances of
survival. For example, a business office development may limit the number of
cleaners, restaurants, or printing companies.
In some cases, an activity may be allowed if the new tenant spends a lot of
money to solve associated problems. For example, the city may say that a new
warehouse is allowed if streets are widened and traffic lights installed to accommodate incremental traffic. Yes, the city is gouging the small business for problems they had anyway, but see if it makes sense.
As noted previously, don’t assume that just because the landlord is asking
you to sign the lease, everything has been investigated and found to be correct.
Also, don’t assume that a small business can walk away from the lease if there is
a conflict; make sure everything is right in advance of signing.
Finally, remember that just because another tenant is overtly conducting
certain activities doesn’t mean it will be acceptable for other parties to do the
same. “Grandfathered” tenants in certain areas are frequently granted exceptions to zoning rules, but newcomers are not. “I thought it was okay because the
last tenant was allowed parking on the sidewalk” will likely fall on deaf ears.
Zoning laws are usually invoked not by prowling bureaucrats but by complaints from tax-paying neighbors. If a small business is in violation of a rule, the
problem may be handled by making friends with neighbors and not putting the
problem in the face of city officials. For example, some areas have meticulously
detailed regulations regarding the size, placement, colors, and lighting of signs.
If a sign is not in conformance, neighboring businesses are less likely to complain if the sign owner is otherwise active in looking out for the interests of the
entire development.
Resolving Zoning Problems
When zoning problems are encountered, some actions may be taken if the
new premises look especially promising. Keeping the time and budget in mind,
there are additional options available to get things changed.
First, make friends; then request a change, exemption, or variance. Local
government may actually appreciate your business, its potential to pay local taxes,
and the prospect of a new small business hiring local workers who will pay even
more taxes. In some areas, in fact, local government will go to great lengths and
Finding and Leasing a Business Location 219
offer tax breaks, zoning changes, and other incentives to land new businesses.
Learn about the local situation from a savvy attorney, business colleague, or city
official, and make a zoning argument at the next appropriate planning meeting.
If at first you don’t get what you want, consider appealing the adverse decision. An appeal is strengthened by petitions signed by local voters and by expert
testimony regarding the prohibitive costs and adverse results on the local economy
if the city does not reconsider its current rules. If there is opposition to plans, try
to make friends and strike a deal with the bad guys before the hearing. Because
you are the newcomer here, the battle is theirs to lose.
Finally, consider filing a lawsuit against local governing agencies.
A legal proceeding cannot be filed because of unhappiness with previous
decisions. Instead, a legal argument must be developed. For example, perhaps
state laws are being superceded by local laws, or maybe local officials are improperly interpreting existing regulations. Learn right up front how long this is
going to take, how much it’s going to cost, and the chances of winning (remembering that victory cannot be guaranteed, even if the city is dead wrong). Also,
how long can the city hold up the new deal in appeals? To get a good fix on this,
ask an experienced local attorney who knows both the system and local personalities. Chances are, a lawsuit won’t make sense, and win or lose, the hapless
small business will still be stuck with the legal bills.
When approval of the new premises is held up by zoning concerns, this is
likely a bad omen; the best option is to move on to a more business-friendly
locale.
Leases for Commercial Property
Signing a lease for commercial premises is a serious undertaking. This could
be the largest financial commitment of a small business, and the fit between the
location and needs can greatly affect ongoing happiness and success.
Unlike many consumer-oriented documents, commercial leases are nonstandard in form and are usually customized to the needs of a particular location. Further, the language heavily favors the landlord throughout. Remember
that there are few laws protecting businesses from making dumb mistakes—if a
lease is signed that heavily favors the landlord, you’re probably stuck with it and
will be forced to comply for the full term (it’s uncommon to break a commercial
lease without paying heavy penalties). On the other hand, remember that many
of the terms and conditions are negotiable.
It is unlikely, however, that a small business owner who negotiates a commercial lease every few years or so will really understand all the implications of
the document and be able to effectively negotiate changes. Before signing, find
an attorney with local experience in commercial leasing, and get a review of the
documents when the deal looks promising, still leaving plenty of time to work
things out or find another location if the landlord is not reasonable enough.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 220
Chances are, the legal counsel used by a small business for other legal matters
will not be the best in this case, since industry-specific knowledge is important.
The attorney should provide a written review of the lease, comments on whether
it is reasonable (given local customs and practices), and notes on suggested
changes. Finally, the attorney should negotiate changes because it’s unlikely that
you’ll be as convincing as a good attorney in explaining to a savvy and marketaware landlord why changes should be made. Investment in a legal review of the
lease is well worth the $1,000 to $2,000 expense.
Regardless of what the attorney negotiates, however, the following are the
most common areas of concern when evaluating commercial leases.
Lease Agreement Terms and Conditions Checklist
 What is the base rent?
 Is this a gross lease, triple-net, or full-service lease? The determination is
made by who pays for increases in expenses associated with the property,
such as building maintenance, janitorial services, fees, repairs, property taxes,
security, utilities (water, gas, electrical), and extra personnel hired by the
landlord. In a gross lease, the landlord pays for these items; the tenant pays
in a triple-net lease. Triple-net deals are typically for longer periods of time
and may involve substantial tenant improvements (discussed later). Of course,
the rent should be a bit lower in a triple-net situation, because the small
business must still pay for the property expenses previously described. A
full-service agreement is a triple-net lease and then some; for example, the
building provides telephone answering services, furnished offices, copiers,
and mail handling. Full-service deals may also be known as executive office
suites.
 Related to the previous question, do you want to maintain restrooms, contract
janitorial and security services, and pay separate utility bills? (This can amount
to a lot of work, and landlords can often handle these potential headaches
more efficiently.)
 What rent increases are allowable during the term, and what is the method of
calculating the increases? Are rent increases capped or unlimited? Can rent
increases start immediately, or after one year?
 What insurance is required by the landlord?
 Is there a “build-out allowance” or allowable “tenant improvements” (TIs),
where the landlord will pay to construct additions such as walls, partitions,
lighting, doors, windows, electrical and plumbing improvements, painting,
carpeting, HVAC, etc.? And who owns them at the end of the lease? Buildouts are common in longer-term leases, since landlords have more time to
recover their investments. Remember that most building managers are more
agreeable to build-outs that can be used by future tenants rather than
customized construction that will likely be ripped out at the end of the lease.
Finding and Leasing a Business Location 221
Finally, note that build-outs are often a thinly disguised financing method to
help the new tenant move in quickly and easily. The landlord is not being nice
by offering this, so expect the rent to increase commensurately. For example,
if the build-outs cost $12,000 and the lease is for 60 months, then the rent
includes $200 per month to repay the TIs (plus a little more for interest and
margin). On the other hand, if TIs are not needed, ask for a discount.
 How many parking spaces come with the leased property? Are more available
if needed?
 Is subleasing allowed? (This is a desirable right if moving on to bigger premises
before the term is finished is a possibility.)
 What is the term of the lease?
 What are the options concerning renewal, expanding, and right of first refusal
if a neighboring tenant moves out?
 What happens at the end if the small business must remain an extra month or
two (“holdover rent”)?
 What are the renewal options?
 Does the landlord have the right to move the small business to a different
location (common in office leases where new tenants may want an entire
floor)?
 What is the security deposit; when and how is it returned?
 Exactly what areas constitute “the premises,” including the number of square
feet? Does this include common areas and wall thickness? Does the landlord
commit to the square footage, or is it an estimate? (In any case, it’s always
better to measure it yourself.)
 On moving in, who pays for changed locks, keys, marking the parking spaces,
and directory signage?
 On moving out, who gets to keep improvements such as lighting, HVAC
equipment, the security system, and electrical improvements? Don’t assume
that tenant improvements such as these may be uprooted and moved—if
these extra items are needed, make sure this is allowed in the lease.
 Is each of the “Lease Facilities and Features Checklist” concerns described
here successfully resolved and written into the lease?
 What are the events of default? (Bankruptcy is normal; being one day late on
rent payment is not.)
 When disputes arise, are they handled in court, through mediation, or through
arbitration?
 Are the premises in compliance with ADA (Americans with Disabilities
Act), and if not, who pays for items such as building ramps and outfitting
restrooms?
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 222
 Does the landlord agree not to lease nearby space to competitors? (This is
relevant, for example, in a small shopping center where two office supply
outlets would be ruinous.)
 Some landlords will allow a “bailout clause,” where lower lease payments or
even lease cancellation is allowed if revenues do not reach certain targeted
amounts. Be careful though. In some cases, asking for this will simply scare
the new landlord into thinking that the new small business could fail.
 Similar to a bailout clause, a co-tenancy clause allows the lessee to cancel the
deal and move on if an anchor tenant ceases business at the same location
(this is mostly relevant in retail shopping malls, where small businesses feed
off the traffic attracted by big-name tenants).
Some of the items discussed previously are negotiable, and some are not.
The landlord will have more or less interest depending upon whether space is
tight in the area, the size of the deal, whether there seems to be a fit between you
and the other property tenants, and the prestige of the new business. Regardless,
it’s a great idea to lay all of this out in a spreadsheet to evaluate the status of the
many alternative premises under consideration.
There are a few options to be played out if fast growth is expected, along with
the possibility of outgrowing the premises. One possibility is to sign a short-term
lease with options on extra space; but the landlord will likely consider this as merely
a short-term lease and will expect a higher rent. This may well be acceptable.
A second option is to insist on the right to sublease. Then, when it’s time to
move on to bigger premises, find another company to take over the lease for the
remainder of the term. Make sure the sublease tenant is going to pay, however,
because your small business is still on the hook for the rent and other expenses if
problems occur.
A third and final option is simply to rent a second location, where each site
specializes in certain functions. For example, location 1 is the business office,
and location 2 is for manufacturing. Or location 1 is the restaurant, and location 2 becomes the warehouse.
More information on locating and leasing commercial space is available at
The Society of Industrial and Office Realtors (www.sior.com).
223
Chapter 11
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM
(Other People’s Money)
This chapter deals with money: how to choose a bank, the most common
sources of financing, and how to prepare a loan package that will be needed by
most lenders. (Investors will need a business plan instead of a loan package; this
was discussed in Chapter 1.)
Choosing a Bank
Choosing a bank is one of your most important business decisions. A businessoriented bank will provide needed services quickly and never be more than a
phone call away. The bank should also stay in the background until needed and not
get in the way. Within the industry, banks may specialize in retail (consumeroriented) banking, commercial lending, real estate, and other areas, so first
look for a bank that specializes in working with small businesses. You will
know this quickly if a bank officer is assigned as your personal representative
and asks detailed questions about the business, so that the appropriate bank
products may be discussed. Listen carefully because not all banks offer all products to all businesses.
Factors to Consider When Choosing a Bank
Most small business owners just look at the fees structure when considering
a bank, but this should not make a difference. Instead, weigh the following factors when deciding which bank will best meet your needs:
 Convenience. This is actually a huge factor because time is so valuable. The
bank that is within walking distance trumps a similar bank located across
town. Beyond location, consider related factors such as branch offices,
parking, ATMs, on-line access (more on this), and hours. A bank may
overcome the convenience factor by offering courier services, where they
pick up deposits or deliver important documents. Couriers usually are
banned from carrying cash, so this may limit their usefulness to retail
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 224
businesses or those needing cash to pay expenses. It is worth repeating that
time is valuable. Do you want to spend extra time driving across town to
save on fees, or generating extra revenues?
 Relationships. This intangible factor can mean a lot. Sometimes, small
business owners and bankers feel good about each other, and sometimes
they don’t. Banks won’t bend rules just because everyone likes each other,
but the relationship can make a difference in marginal situations. Further, it
is good to deepen relationships among others at the bank because employee
turnover is always a possibility.
 Fees. Ask up front about the fees related to the most-needed services, and
don’t worry about the rest. Further, don’t become obsessed with fees, because
the bank is merely charging for services which it is actually providing. If the
profitability of your business is significantly affected by bank fees, this is not
a good sign. Business-oriented banks can normally perform an analysis and
recommend a particular group of products and services along with an estimate
of fees, after receiving copies of three or more recent bank statements. Of
course, as average balances at just about any bank increase, the fees and
overall deal get better.
 Line of Credit (LOC) Needed? Many small businesses need cash from time
to time, and most business-oriented banks offer this in the form of a revolving
line of credit. It is relatively easy to get this approved when a new relationship
is started with a bank, because you are providing them with much of the
needed information anyway—and because they want the business. There is
some truth to the old saying, “Banks only lend money when you don’t need
it,” so why not apply for a revolving line of credit when the banking
relationship commences? See more on LOCs in a later discussion.
 On-line Services. Most banks allow small business owners to see account
details through the Internet without any special software or connections.
Just about any Internet browsing program (such as Microsoft Internet
Explorer) should work. The following are some special features to ask about,
beyond access to the checking account:
 Can you see details of money market and loan accounts?
 Can you execute on-line transfers between accounts (for example,
pay down the LOC)?
 Can you request stop payments or wire-transfers on-line?
 Are there levels to the security? (For example, you, the owner, may
transfer funds, but bookkeepers may only see and download
account ledgers.)
 Finally, for on-line banking, make sure the address bar is an “https”
and not “http” (https://www.nicebank.com is a secure connection,
whereas http://www.nicebank.com is not encrypted and may be seen
more easily by hackers).
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 225
The Four Cs of Credit
Banks are in operation to make profits through loans. Fees pay for a portion
of the expenses, but without interest income from loans, banks could not survive. Therefore, banks want to lend money—if the deal makes sense. This section provides an understanding of how banks and other lenders evaluate deals.
The lending business has been around for a long time now, and there is a right
way and lots of wrong ways to evaluate loan proposals. Lenders usually evaluate
each new lending opportunity against “The Four Cs of Credit”:
Capacity. This sometimes just comes down to another “C” letter—Cash.
Does your business have the capacity, or cash, to pay down a new loan? For a
profitable and established business that needs a little extra funding to pay for a
piece of equipment that generates even more business, this will be easy—especially if cash flow from the existing business covers the new loan payments. If the
capacity to make the new loan payments comes from revenues generated from
the new piece of equipment, this is somewhat trickier: What if plans do not
develop as expected? And if a new small business needs a loan to finance entry
into a business, the only lender likely to approve this deal would be the Mafia.
Banks will conduct a detailed analysis of the financial information provided to
determine capacity to repay the loan, so take this seriously.
Credit. Some businesses have lots of cash and can easily pay their bills—but
they don’t. They find that profitability increases if they do not disburse cash to
others. Other small businesses find a way to pay everyone, even in lean times.
Lenders will check both personal and business credit to see if you actually pay
your bills. Credit is especially important in line-of-credit or unsecured lending
situations, where there is little or no collateral available to the lender.
Collateral. Collateral means business or personal assets that are offered to
the lender as security for the loan. Banks and other lenders sleep better at night
when they know that just in case there is a problem in repaying the loan, they can
grab other assets, sell them, and recover unpaid loan balances. Many lenders
specialize in this area, known as asset-based lending or collateralized loans (to
be discussed). Other lenders will attach available collateral to strengthen line-ofcredit or other lending arrangements. For more information, see the discussion
on Business Equipment (Collateralized) Loans.
Character. When all else checks out, lenders will take a look at the character
of the persons involved in the loan. This includes factors such as family situation, education, judgments and lawsuits, tax problems, and comments gained
from reference checks with vendors and customers. Sorry if this seems politically incorrect, but banks know that character does affect the probability of loan
repayment.
Finally, before approaching a bank for a loan, consider that the deal must
make sense—bankers make deals based upon actual results and history, not on
hope. Related to this, all lenders will be looking at the owner’s investment in the
small business in relation to the loan. There is no fixed rule, but if the balance
sheet shows total equity of $20,000, don’t bother applying for a $200,000 loan.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 226
Joe’s Management Declines a Customer Loan Request After
Meeting in a Strip Bar
Many years ago, my cohort Tony
and I traveled through many Appalachian states to offer assetbased loans to small businesses
in the mining and construction
businesses.
Most were diligent, hardworking
industry veterans desiring to grow
equity in their small businesses
and feed their families.
One day, we were at lunch in
a small diner in eastern Kentucky with papers spread over
the table, when Arnie introduced
himself to us.
“It looks like you boys are in
the strip mining business just like
me,” he said. We talked for a few
minutes and he wanted to continue the conversation at the Pink
Greyhound, which he said was
nearby. We had other plans, but
agreed to talk on the phone about
a new deal.
Over the next few days, Arnie
explained that he needed a large
amount of financing for some heavy
equipment—just the kind of deal we
were looking for. He sent us a loan
package and the deal was moving
along.
Our management wanted to approve the new loan request, but
only after meeting Arnie, because
he had requested a large amount
of financing and this was our first
loan to him.
Arnie insisted that we all meet
at the Pink Greyhound. We drove
from Pittsburgh with a senior loan
officer and were chagrined to see
that the restaurant featured
“Showgirl Dancers” at lunchtime.
This was not the style of our conservative management.
During lunch, we talked to Arnie
about mining equipment and the
market for coal at local power
plants, but he seemed more interested in relaxing and chatting with
the servers—who were not fully
dressed. He lectured us on the nutritional value of the grapefruit juice
and vodka he was enjoying. He invited us to do the same, but we
declined.
Our senior manager cut the
lunch short and remarked that he
had not brought the loan documents after all. He excused himself
and said he would need further approval from the home office.
Apparently, Arnie didn’t pass
the “Character” test with our senior loan officer, who later told us
that Arnie didn’t seem very concerned about operating his small
business and paying bills. He
questioned Arnie’s commitment if
things turned difficult. The deal was
declined. We were instructed to inform Arnie about this on the telephone and avoid any future
meetings at the Pink Greyhound.
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 227
Small Business Financing Sources
Most small businesses need access to outside funding, whether to set up and
begin operations, to help complete a big job, or perhaps to buy extra equipment
and grow.
Because all means of acquiring capital require large amounts of time and
effort that cannot readily be delegated to others, it is important to know all the
options and decide on just one or two. Some options are mutually exclusive. For
example, once a small business has entered into an agreement to borrow funds
on a bank line of credit—which requires a first lien on all business assets—an
SBA loan probably cannot be considered.
The many financing options covered in this chapter describe the principal
ways small businesses gain access to capital.
Most of theses methods involve debt financing in one form or another, but
gaining capital through the sale of a portion of the stock (or equity) in a small
business is also described (Venture Capital and Angel Investing). Remember
that debt financing allows small business owners to walk away from the relationship when the funds are paid back, but equity-related capital involves giving up a
portion of the ownership and control of the company, and investors may or may
not agree to sell back their interest.
Note also that your small business is, after all, a business, and is therefore
not protected by the large body of laws and regulations sheltering consumers.
The law considers businesses to be more sophisticated than consumers, better
able to protect themselves, and able to pay for legal and attorney fees. Besides,
businesses can’t vote. It is entirely possible to enter into a bad agreement at a
very high price with a disreputable financing firm, and when the worst happens,
there may be no way out of the deal except to take it on the chin.
Bank Lines of Credit Lines and Revolving Loans
Perhaps the most common bank lending product for small businesses is the
revolving loan account, or bank lines of credit (LOCs). Basically, this arrangement works like a credit card, or as overdraft protection on a checking account.
The big differences are that bank LOC rates are much lower than credit card
rates (but higher than collateralized loans), and the normal monthly payment is
“interest only.”
Bank credit lines are similar to credit cards, where funds may be drawn by
writing an LOC check to a vendor or by depositing an LOC check in the business checking account. Most banks will require a personal guarantee from the
small business owners. LOCs are ideal for providing the short-term financing
that may be needed to pay expenses on a big job before collecting from customers, or to cover expenses for seasonal businesses during slow times. If additional
equipment, furniture, computers, or other assets are needed, a secured loan or
equipment lease may be the better alternative.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 228
Most profitable businesses more than three years old can easily get approved
for $100,000 in LOC financing. Applications for more than this amount will meet
much greater scrutiny.
The fee for all of this is normally 1 percent of the approved balance, plus
maybe $500 in processing fees (which may be waived for new accounts and for
good negotiators). For a $100,000 LOC, expect to pay about $1,500 in up-front
fees.
Small businesses use many sources to obtain credit:
Personal credit card ................................................ 46 percent
Business credit card ............................................... 34 percent
Line of credit ............................................................ 28 percent
Vehicle loan .............................................................. 21 percent
Owner loan ............................................................... 14 percent
Mortgage loan .......................................................... 13 percent
Equipment lease ...................................................... 11 percent
Equipment loan ........................................................ 10 percent
Other ......................................................................... 10 percent
Source: “The Great Money Hunt,” Wall Street Journal, 29 November
2004, Section R, sourced from Small Business Administration, Office
of Advocacy.
Trade Credit
Trade credit is a financing arrangement whereby a small business orders and
receives raw materials, inventory, parts, and supplies from vendors and pays
later, such as on net 10-, net 15-, or net 30-day terms.
Trade credit is a great way to extend finances, further establish a good reputation, and makes life easier because paying by cash is no longer needed.
Most vendors will want to see the purchase history of your small business
before even considering trade credit, so don’t be offended when you learn that
the relationship with a new vendor will begin on a cash-only basis. After a few
checks are in the bank and everyone knows each other a little better, it may be
time to ask about trade credit.
Some types of vendors operate almost completely on trade credit; others can’t
make this work because their margins are too low. Before approaching a vendor,
make sure trade credit is commonly offered to customers in that industry.
To gain approval, most vendors will ask for a bank reference and three trade
references. They will then get a report and see additional information from
Dunn and Bradstreet (http://www.dnb.com/us/). Rather than fill out the vendor’s
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 229
application, many small businesses respond to this request with a professionally prepared Bank and Credit Reference Summary, where all the information
is presented neatly on a single page document. (For a sample see
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.) This looks better than filling in a
form by hand, and is a lot faster. In either case, the small business must provide
complete contact information on each reference, including the account number,
the nature of the relationship (“purchase spare parts for machines”), and the fax
number (because many companies require a formal, signed, written request to
provide a credit reference).
If your small business is just getting started, ask the new vendor to look at
the personal credit of the principals, and also explain that for now, all that is
needed is a small credit line that will be used heavily (read: “We will buy a lot”)
and paid diligently to establish good business credit. Of course, this will most
likely be approved after speaking with a well-placed sales rep or someone higher
up in the company rather than a clerk in the credit department.
Personal Credit Lines and Credit Cards
Personal credit lines and credit cards are used more frequently among small
businesses these days and have gained acceptance among vendors as a preferred
payment method for items such as inventory, parts, and certain services. Small
businesses often prefer losing the 2 percent or 3 percent from their invoice
amounts and seeing the remaining funds hit their bank account within a day or
two, rather than run the risk of getting paid on standard net 30-day invoicing
terms. In a way, this is an alternate form of accounts receivable factoring, as
discussed shortly. An increasing number of small businesses will not extend trade
credit to customers, but will accept credit cards.
Small business owners should be prepared to use their personal credit cards
and credit lines as a short-term financing method under the following conditions:
 Credit cards often carry interest rates as high as 18 percent. Carrying
balances past 30 days can affect your personal credit even if paid in a
timely manner. The small business must reimburse you or pay off
each credit card in full before interest charges kick in (usually 30
days after the statement arrives).
 The accounting must be correct; if it isn’t, there is a chance the IRS
will demand that your small business incur payroll taxes on credit
card reimbursements to owners and employees, even though the
payments are not compensation but rather expense reimbursement.
This is often accomplished through an “Officer Loan Account.”
 If the business cannot afford to pay off personal credit accounts in
full at the end of the month, this is a danger signal. Financing the dayto-day operating expenses of a small business with personal credit
can be tricky and may lead to big-time credit trouble.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 230
An additional advantage to using credit cards, however, is the benefit of the
warranty on any products and services purchased. Many credit cards allow purchasers to return products or receive refunds for services, beyond what the vendor offers. Unsatisfactory business purchases may be returned with the help of
the credit card dispute process. In contrast, purchases paid for in cash or on
vendor accounts offer less protection.
If a card or credit line is used frequently, it may be a good security measure
to call customer service every few months and request that the current account
be closed and reopened under a new account number. Further, use cards with
low credit lines so that credit card thieves will not get far when messing with your
accounts.
More information on the credit card payments system and accepting credit
cards for payments is found in Chapter 13.
Asset-Based Lending and Business Equipment (Collateralized) Loans
Asset-based lending is a great alternative for small businesses in need of
capital equipment. Lenders need collateral for the loan, so the purchased equipment and perhaps other business and personal assets are used as security for this
purpose. The small business signs a number of documents, including a:
 Conditional Sales Contract. The sale is conditional on making all the
loan payments, and title to the equipment does not transfer to the
borrower until the loan is repaid.
 Security Agreement. Assets are pledged to the lender. This document also details what happens in case of default, and the borrower
agrees that the lender may seize the assets if default occurs. Other
important borrower requirements, such as maintenance and insurance, are also detailed.
 UCC1 Financing Statement. This is a government form where the
pledged assets are recorded in the office of the secretary of state, so
that others may see this publicly available information. The UCC1
perfects the lender’s security interest in the named collateral and
establishes priority in case of default or bankruptcy.
Ironically, asset-based lenders prefer “low-tech” equipment rather than
computers or high-technology assets, since the value of the equipment declines
much more slowly. Desktop computer systems, for example, often decline in
value 5 percent per month, whereas boring old backhoes may not decline in
value at all.
For most collateralized loans, the value of the equipment remains above the
unpaid loan balance for the duration of the loan. As a result, these deals are a bit
safer than others, and so the interest rate is less than for unsecured financing.
Further, collateralized loans have frequently allowed small businesses to build
equity slowly and steadily. At first, the payments may seem burdensome, but as
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 231
the loan is finally paid off, owners find they are sitting on assets of significant
value (such as construction equipment, machine tools, and printing equipment).
You may apply for a collateralized or asset-based loan by preparing the loan
package (discussed shortly). There is no need to add an extra section analyzing
the collateral because the lenders do it themselves. Note that when the UCC1 is
filed, elements of the lending arrangement may be seen by anyone searching
UCC records. Further, it is illegal to use the same assets as collateral in more
than one loan unless properly disclosed to, and approved by, all secured parties.
The reason these lending instruments are referred to as “asset-based” or “collateralized” loans is because if the borrower defaults, the lender may gain legal
permission to enter the premises physically, remove the assets, sell them, and
keep the proceeds.
In some situations, the collateral is the basis of the loan, and if lenders see a
strong ratio of collateral to the loan balance, the loan may be approved even if
the small business is relatively new. In other cases, lenders will ask for a lien on
all unencumbered business assets, even if they really consider the arrangement
to be “unsecured” (such as bank lines of credit). Lenders often ask for this just
to make the deal a little stronger. Think about your potential needs first, however, because pledging all business assets to one lender means that nothing is
then available to other lenders.
Asset-based lenders are not difficult to find. Ask an equipment vendor for a
referral, because these lenders often work with equipment sellers to refer business. Many equipment vendors offer programs to finance the purchase of their
own equipment (which are often sold back to asset-based lenders as soon as the
equipment is shipped, since equipment vendors usually want to stay out of the
lending business).
Some firms specialize in a form of asset-based lending for inventory, sometimes known as floor-financing. This is more complex, because the lender must
keep track of the large amounts of inventory coming in and out of the retail
location, making both interest rates and fees higher.
Equipment Leasing
Many small businesses are strapped for cash and need equipment to expand,
but they have difficulty with the financing. Other companies need tax advantages, and still others want the flexibility to change. In these cases, equipment
leasing may be the best alternative, rather than purchase. Equipment leasing
differs from purchasing in many respects, as described in this section.
In a lease, the small business (“lessee”) usually instructs the leasing company (“lessor”) to purchase a shopping list of equipment, parts, supplies, and
perhaps even pay for delivery, installation, associated software, and maintenance
(the “equipment”) from one or more vendors. The lessor then owns and retains title to the equipment; however, the equipment is delivered and used by
the lessee during the term of the lease. At the end of the lease, everything must
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 232
be returned to the lessor. The lease documents describe how certain rights and
responsibilities are conveyed to the lessee, with others retained by the lessor.
Benefits to the lessee usually include the ability to use, maintain, and perhaps
upgrade the equipment, and claim the entire lease payment (net of sales and use
taxes) as a tax deduction. The lessee’s responsibilities may vary, and this is a
point of concern when assessing the lease documents, but normally the lessee
must insure and maintain the equipment in good working order, keep the equipment in a specified geographical area, and at the end of the lease term, de-install,
pack, and return the equipment to a location specified by the lessor.
Further, the lessee may or may not have the right to purchase the equipment
at the end of the lease. In a “True Lease” the lessee may purchase the equipment
only at Fair Market Value (FMV), which is not known and cannot be specified
when the lease documents are signed. But lessees often want additional assurances, such as “FMV not to exceed $10,000.” Adding this language may be dangerous, however, because the IRS could then rule that the lease is not really a
lease but a purchase, and the lessee must restate the transaction as such. The
actual rules are quite complex, but basically, if the lessee pays for more than 90
percent of the net present value of an asset, the “lease” may be ruled as a purchase, regardless of the intent of the parties to the transaction. Unpleasant surprises such as this are complicated and costly, because back taxes, penalties, and
interest may perhaps be charged by the IRS. The lessee wants assurances that
the lessor will not take advantage of the situation and overstated FMV, and the
lessor may claim that IRS regulations and Financial Accounting Standards Board
(FASB) guidelines do not allow this type of assurance.
Lessees (again, that’s you, the small business owner) often feel better if the
FMV is better defined. The default language in many leases will say something
such as:
Lessee may purchase the equipment from lessor, at fair market
value, as determined by lessor.
What if the lessor has an inflated opinion of FMV? For thinly traded machines, for example, the lessee may see listings for $5,000, but the lessor may say,
“We have it on our books for $50,000, and we cannot sell it for less.”
In that case, a clever option is to return the lessor’s equipment and then
purchase and reinstall a similar model. Of course, small businesses do not like
the disruption associated with repairing equipment to “good working order,”
packing it, returning it to the lessor, and at the same time purchasing, shipping,
and reinstalling a similar machine. Lessors know this, and at times take advantage of the situation. Further, some lessors are quite difficult about equipment
return and lease termination procedures. For example, some leases provide that
the lease term will automatically renew for one-year periods at the end of the
term unless the lessor is properly notified not less than 30, but not more than 90,
days before the end of the lease. Other lessors may demand that lesees return
the exact equipment on the original equipment schedule, right down to the serial
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 233
number of a small, obscure component. If the small business has upgraded the
equipment, the lessor may not accept the return at the end of the lease term. In
that case, the lessee should have negotiated “like-kind or better” language into
the return provisions of the lease.
Equipment leasing was the rage until the 1986 Tax Reform Act, in which
certain special tax benefits were revoked. Despite all this, equipment leasing
remains a popular financing alternative and accounts for about one-third of all
equipment acquisitions by small businesses. Here are the most common reasons
to lease rather than purchase equipment:
 You can’t afford to pay cash or make monthly financing payments. Lease
payments are usually lower than financing payments for a similar lease term.
As an example, for equipment that cost $100,000, a small business would pay
$2,125 per month under a 60-month Conditional Sales Contract arrangement;
after the last payment, title to the equipment automatically reverts to the
small business. For a 60-month lease, the monthly payment should, at maximum, be the Lease Rate Factor, or LRF, of .01979 x $100,000, or $1,979 per
month. If the equipment has a very long expected life and retains its value
well after 60 months, the payment might be dramatically lower. If the equipment had an FMV at this point of, say, $50,000, then the LRF could be around
.01467, and the resulting monthly payment would be $1467.
 You need equipment for only a portion of its expected productive life. Small
businesses often need equipment right away, with the expectation that they
will grow and need larger or better models long before the equipment is obsolete. In that case, equipment leasing may be a great alternative. But watch out
for technology-related items, such as computers. Small businesses may prefer to trade up three-year-old PCs for newer models, but so does everyone
else! Lessors cannot miraculously sell old equipment for high prices, offer
low lease payments, and provide the flexibility to trade up for better models.
When computers or other rapidly changing equipment is needed, leasing rarely
makes sense, and it is better to purchase and then to scrap these items when
the time comes to change.
 You need additional up-front tax effects. Leases are treated differently than
purchases for accounting and tax purposes. Here is a summary:
Acquisition Method Purchase for Cash Finance Lease
Depreciation Deduction? Yes Yes No
Interest Expense Deduction? n/a Yes No
Lease Payment Deduction? n/a n/a Yes
Show Asset On Balance Sheet? Yes Yes No
Show Debt on Balance Sheet? n/a Yes No
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 234
Note that at the beginning of a lease, the expenses for financing (vs. leasing)
seem highest, because the combined effects of depreciation and interest expense
exceed the lease payment deduction. This will dampen the spirits of bankers and
tax authorities, because net income is dragged down. On the other hand, profitable small businesses like this, because taxes are deferred (that is, taxes are
pushed into later years and don’t have to be paid now). Later in the lease, the
effects are reversed, and the fixed lease payment exceeds the diminishing depreciation and interest expense effects from financing the purchase. The crossover
point and overall effects are determined by the term of the transactions, the
FMV of the equipment, and interest rates.
Finally, note that we discussed how asset-based loans allow small businesses
to build equity in their businesses slowly and steadily. This is not the case, however, with equipment leasing, where the small business owner has no interest in
the asset at the end of the lease term.
A few final notes about equipment leasing:
 Lease payments are normally scheduled “in advance,” like office rent,
rather than “in arrears,” like equipment loans or automobile payments.
 Many items appearing on a lease cannot actually be leased at all! The
documents may say “Equipment Lease” in a hundred places, but the
IRS may demand that the transaction be treated as a purchase. For
example, installation fees and shipping cannot be leased—the customer
is really paying for this over a period of time. Although software has
appeared on leases for many years, look closely at the software
vendor’s agreement—the vendor is not selling the software but
licensing it to your small business. Neither the lessee nor the lessor
can “own” a licensed product. It appears on the lease, however, to
make the overall acquisition more palatable.
 Finally, what is the difference between renting and leasing? Renting
usually is done for short periods of time, such as renting a frontloader for two weeks on a particular job. Leasing is for the longer
term, such as leasing a machine for a year or more for use over many
jobs. This can be confusing because leases often refer to rental
payments, rental term, etc.
AR Factoring—Ouch!
Small businesses offering trade credit to their clients often experience liquidity issues even when the business is profitable. In some cases, selling your
accounts receivable, or AR factoring, may be the right tool. Although invoices
may turn into cash within hours, AR factoring is expensive, and it is often difficult to get out of it.
Here is how it normally works. A cash-hungry small business realizes that it
has a continuing stream of invoices from commercial clients. The invoices are
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 235
assigned or factored to an AR factoring company. The factor then examines the
invoices to make sure they are acceptable (more on this shortly) and wires 70
percent to 95 percent of the amount due to the small business. Later, the client
pays the invoice by sending a check to the address shown on the invoice—which
is not the small business address but the AR factor’s location—so the factor
receives payment directly from the customer.
Before all this begins, however, the small business owner must sign lots of
documents with the AR factor, for example, assigning to them the right to deposit customer checks into their account. The factor must also be given the right
to place a lien on all of the accounts receivable—and maybe other assets—of the
small business. Most factors also want an all-or-nothing deal. That is, all invoices
must be assigned to the factor after the paperwork is finished; and “cherry picking” (holding on to the biggest and best invoices) is not allowed. The AR factoring company, however, is allowed to cherry pick. They do this by examining all
invoices before funding to make sure that each is:
 Payable to your small business from U.S.-based commercial clients.
 Within the minimum and maximum amounts allowed in the
agreement.
 Not aged more than 30 days.
 Not from known deadbeat customers.
 Other restrictions.
It is unlikely the factor will release this lien until all amounts due to them
have been repaid. Many small businesses find it difficult to stash enough money
in the bank to walk away from the factor and then survive for 30 or more days
until customer payments commence again. This becomes even more difficult for
fast-growing small businesses, because the amount of operating capital needed
to bridge the 30 days or so from invoice until payment keeps growing.
When other small business financing instruments such as loans and credit
are limited, some small business owners will turn to AR financing. But is this
right for your business?
Here are some pros, cons, and misconceptions about AR financing.
Reasons to Consider AR Factoring
 Outsource the Accounts Receivable Department. Most AR factors have very
capable staffs. They will make sure that your small business does not extend
credit to known deadbeats. Once the business starts flowing, they will do the
bookkeeping and follow-up to get invoices paid on time. This may give your
business a more professional edge. But why care about prompt payment if the
invoice is now the problem of the AR factor? Because most factors will kick
back deadbeat invoices (aged 90 days or more) to clients, take back the advanced funds, and then it’s your problem once again. Even if invoices are paid
but beyond established terms, the factor will charge a lot for fees and interest.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 236
 Fast Cash. Many small businesses find themselves profitable but strangled
for cash and unable to pay bills, expand, or take on bigger jobs, often because
too much capital is locked up in receivables. In that case, AR factoring may
be the solution.
 Easy Entry. AR factoring will not require the extensive loan package described above. The time from the first phone call until cash arrives can be just
a few days.
 Nothing Personal. Many Small business owners know their customers personally, and it doesn’t help the relationship when one friend calls another to
say, “Hey, pay me the money!” It’s also a bit awkward to follow up this demand with “Hey, what happened to that deal we were talking about last week—
are you going to award us the new business?” Speaking with friends and
not-so-friendly customers will now be the work of the AR factor.
 Lean on the Strength of the Customers’ Credit. The AR factor is looking at
the credit of customers with invoices up for collection, and not the small
business. They are therefore not especially concerned if your firm pays bills a
little slowly.
 Better Credit. Since your small business will have more cash, paying bills
should be easier, thus improving the firm’s credit rating and making room for
even more business credit.
 Grow Fast. AR factoring may provide the working capital you need to grow,
which might otherwise be unavailable.
Reasons to Avoid AR Factoring
 AR Factoring is Expensive. There are many discounts, fees, and charges
associated with this form of financing, and many surprise and confuse small
business owners. When the dust settles, get ready to pay an interest rate of 25
percent to 40 percent per year.
 Breaking Up Is Hard. Once AR factoring is in place, it’s difficult to break
away, as described earlier in this section.
 Clients May Be Surprised. Some clients may consider this to be a sign of
financial weakness—especially if AR factoring is not common in your industry.
What types of small businesses may gain the most from AR financing? Consider this especially if your firm is growing quickly, is unable to get needed funds
from cheaper sources, or is in bankruptcy or in difficult financial times.
AR factoring is especially popular in parts of the apparel industry, manufacturing, trucking, temp agencies, employee leasing, the recruiting industries, and
others.
Finally, we have already noted that consumer protection laws do not apply to
small businesses, so don’t look for help in getting out of a bad deal. Note that not
even banking regulations apply to AR factoring companies, and so small businesses have even less protection if problems occur.
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 237
AR Crunching and AP Stretching
Small businesses should always pay bills on time to build good credit—and
because it’s the right thing to do. But if things are getting tight, stretching the
payables and crunching receivables may be an alternative to consider.
This is not complicated, and there are only two things to do. First, call customers with outstanding invoices and say:
I am just calling to make sure you received our latest
invoice. Please be sure to pay this on time because we
have had some problems with other customers and we
must now assess late charges on all late payments. I am
calling all of our customers to warn everyone about this.
Obviously, this is not the type of call that will make a lot of new friends, so
it’s better to request that these calls be made by an accounting, clerical, or even
a receptionist-type employee. This is especially true if new business may be expected from these same customers. Most companies believe it is good business
practice to separate the sales and accounting functions as much as possible, and
this situation helps explain why. It is a little awkward for a small business owner
to call a client and ask for payment on a late invoice, and then call back an hour
later asking for a new order.
Many small businesses also offer special discounts to customers who pay
early, such as:
I can reduce the invoice by 5 percent if we can pick up the
check later today.
This all depends on how badly the money is needed.
The second part of this strategy is easy, because it actually requires no action
at all. Payments made to vendors must be held for an extra week, month, or
perhaps even more until the finances even out and some big payments are collected from customers.
“Crunching and stretching” is a short-term strategy designed to get through
difficult times and is not a long-term strategy, because discounting invoices due
from customers may eventually become very expensive. In addition, it is not
acceptable to pay other vendors on a consistently late basis.
SBA Loans
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) was formed in 1953 from the
vestiges of a 1932 federal government program aimed at helping businesses recover from the Great Depression. The SBA is charged with the mission to “promote and assist small businesses by providing financing assistance through loan
guarantees, management counseling and training, and assistance in obtaining
government procurement contracts.” The SBA now manages over 200,000 loans
to small businesses, totaling $45 billion. Beyond lending to small businesses, the
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 238
SBA is also involved in providing disaster loans and conducting minority outreach programs. Our concern here is whether SBA loans make sense to you.
Small businesses do not communicate directly with the SBA but deal with
various SBA-approved banks (Certified Lenders and Preferred Lenders) that
discuss borrower needs, take the application, and work to gain approval. If the
loan is approved, the deal is made directly between the borrower and the SBAapproved bank, and the SBA guarantees to the bank that a portion of the loan
will be repaid (usually 50 percent or 75 percent). The SBA repays the bank only
in the event of default.
SBA loans can be used to:
 Construct, expand, or modernize commercial buildings, or purchase
existing facilities for use by the borrower (and not for investment,
rental, or speculative purposes)
 Purchase machinery, equipment, inventory, furniture and fixtures,
or leasehold improvements
 Finance increased receivables and working capital
The SBA and its banking affiliates are not chumps, and this is not a source of
easy government money. SBA loans may vary from $250,000 to $2,000,000, and a
full-blown loan package such as the one described in this chapter will be needed.
The application will be studied to make sure that a loan to your small business
make sense and that the loan can be repaid from existing—not projected—cash
flows. (Note that this precludes the argument, “Well, I don’t have enough money
now, but if you make the loan, I will be able to repay from the new revenues.”)
Further, the SBA normally takes all or some business assets as collateral, and
usually requires a personal guarantee. If repayment terms are not met, the SBA
and its banking partners repay the bank, but it will also seize and sell all pledged
business and personal assets to recover as much as possible. During the approval
process, loan committees will look to see if the principals are of good character
with strong management skills, consider the net worth of the small business against
the loan amount, and make sure other financial ratios are consistent with industry averages.
Not surprisingly, Small Business Administration loans are only for small businesses, and the SBA defines “small” as:
 A business that is independently owned and operated, and is not
dominant in its field.
 Manufacturing: generally up to 500 employees.
 Wholesale: maximum of 100 employees.
 Services: varies by industry from $2.5 million to $20 million in
annual revenues.
 Construction: $7 million to $17 million in annual receipts.
 Agriculture: from $500,000 to $9 million in annual receipts.
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 239
Following are details on the two main SBA lending programs and the small
business investment company equity investment program.
Section 7(a) Loan
The 7(a) program is the largest SBA arrangement, where over 70,000 loans
totaling over $12 billion are funded each year. The average loan size is about
$150,000, with a $2 million maximum. Section 7(a) lenders are flexible about how
the funds can be used and will consider purchases of equipment, buildings, real
estate, furniture and fixtures, inventory, or working capital if the deal appears to
be strong. Among the factors they consider are existing cash flow, collateral,
management talent, and owners’ equity (15 percent to 35 percent of the total
loan amount). Variations of the 7(a) program allow special deals for exporters,
pollution control programs, credit lines for contractors, bridge financing to cover
seasonal cash-flow needs, and ESOPs (Employee Stock Ownership Plans).
Interest rates are normally prime plus 2.25 percent to 4.75 percent, in addition to many fees, including a one-time “guarantee fee” of as much as 2.25 percent and an “annual service fee” of up to 0.50 percent. These fees are somewhat
negotiable but may significantly increase the real cost of the loan.
504 Loan
The 504 program funds about 30 percent of the amount of the Section 7(a)
program, because it is intended for narrower purposes: 504 loans are directed
toward small businesses that may increase or retain jobs or otherwise meet public policy goals. Loans may range from $200,000 to $10 million. About 8,000 504
loans are funded per year (in contrast to 70,000-plus Section 7(a) loans). Funds
are typically used to provide long-term financing for the construction or renovation of buildings, equipment, real estate, leasehold improvements, parking lots,
and landscaping. 504 loans may be more difficult to obtain because small businesses must go through the normal loan approval process but also jump through
a complex set of political hoops.
Small businesses usually invest 10 percent of their own funds into a project, a
commercial lender provides 50 percent, and a Certified Development Company
(CDC) puts up the remaining 40 percent. CDCs are non-profit organizations
that put the project together for the other parties. A list of CDCs is available at
www.sbc.gov. Note that the 10 percent small business contribution is less than
required in other programs.
As for rates and fees, commercial lenders are able to provide funds at normal
commercial rates because the deal is safer, and because of their first lien on
collateral. Similarly, the CDC charges 0.50 percent to 0.75 percent below commercial rates because the SBA guarantees this amount. However, the SBA
charges 3 percent of the guaranteed amount as a one-time fee, thus significantly
increasing the real cost of funds.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 240
In summary, if a small business is having trouble gaining financing from traditional lenders who want a longer history and more assets, the SBA process may
also prove to be time-consuming, onerous, and in the end, not fruitful. The SBA
is not a likely financing source for new businesses, but may work especially well
for established firms seeking expansion capital or equipment. Remember, too,
that you must be willing to put all unencumbered assets—business and personal—
on the line as collateral. For those who can jump through all these hoops, the
benefits of working within the SBA program include longer terms (up to seven
years for working capital, 10 to 15 years for equipment, and up to 25 years for
real estate), good interest rates, flexible repayment options, and acceptable fees
and costs.
SBA Small Business Investment Companies (“SBIC”) Program
Since 1958, small businesses considering venture capital financing have been
able to look for the right “match-up” through the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBIC) Program. SBIC calls itself “the nation’s largest fund of funds”
because it does not provide financing directly but instead sets up venture capital
investors with small businesses. SBIC investors provide 8 percent of all venture
financing amounts and over 60 percent of all seed (start-up) financings according to the U.S. Small Business Administration.
Venture capital investors are not meek and will consider needs that would
petrify most lenders, including seed financing, start-up capital, early stage investments, expansion financing, later-stage financing, and even management of
leveraged buyouts and other forms of acquisition financing.
Funds from SBICs may come in a variety of forms, including equity, longterm loans, or more exotic financial instruments. SBICs often also provide management expertise in special areas.
Similar to conventional SBA loans, SBIC investments are not from the SBA
but from privately owned investment firms that are in business to make serious
money by investing in winners. SBICs do not distribute government largess, and
this is not the place for businesses with anything less than great expectations.
Outback Steakhouse, Intel, Apple, FedEx, AOL, and Compaq are all a part of
the SBA’s SBIC legacy.
The SBA Website (http://www.sba.gov/INV/) allows small businesses to search
directories and find the SBICs most likely to consider particular opportunities.
Different investors prefer different types of deals depending upon industry, type
of financing needed, and geographical location, so a short list must be culled
from the various directories.
Small businesses may contact investors directly, and later send a professionally prepared business plan and make personal presentations. Expect to spend a
large amount of time over a number of months to do all this.
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 241
SBIC financing may be provided only to eligible firms, generally, small businesses with a net worth of $18 million or less and an average after-tax net income
of $6 million or less in the last two years.
The following two sections of this chapter offer additional information on
this subject.
Venture Capital (VC)
Here is the lowdown on venture capital: It seems glamorous, but it’s not
easy, cheap, or pleasant. With that positive introduction out of the way, let’s see
exactly what venture capital is.
Venture capitalists are institutional risk takers and may be groups of wealthy
individuals, government-assisted sources, or major financial institutions. Most
specialize in one or a few closely related industries, so it’s important to target the
right ones.
Venture capitalists are active equity investors in small businesses. Their capital
is invested in very specific types of investment opportunities for shares of stock—
meaning partial ownership—and not as a loan. Capital invested in a business
certainly improves the chances of additional debt financing because equity increases and the assets of the company are not offered directly as collateral. Still,
giving up ownership and control often is not easy. Unlike conventional equity
investors, venture capitalists seek to be actively involved in the management of
their various investments. These firms have special expertise in many areas and
will normally require one or more seats on the board of directors.
VC financiers are looking for small businesses with explosive growth potential and the ability to generate compounded investment returns of 25 percent to
40 percent. This usually requires a compelling new product or service in a bleeding-edge type of business area, including many high-technology business niches.
To get such financing, you must first write a very formal, M.B.A.-style business
plan, requiring immense amounts of time and effort, and present this numerous
times to some very serious people.
Even with this, less than 1 percent of venture capital candidates ever get the
funding they desire. For those that do, about 80 percent fail to deliver the required returns. In that case, most VC agreements allow the investors to fire the
small business owner and take control of the company. This happens in the majority of cases. The converse is not true: If the small business wants out of the
deal with the VC investor, it normally can’t be done without buying back the
VC’s stock shares for a huge return. If your small business needs funding this
badly, the Mafia may be a more appealing source of funds.
Angels: Hitting Up Rich People Works
Perhaps the most common form of outside small business investment comes
from “angel” investors. Angels are basically any people with money to invest or
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 242
loan, including business colleagues, friends-of-friends-of-friends, professional
investors, or the proverbial rich uncle. These are often semiretired businesspeople
with special interests and talents—or best yet, perhaps other small business
owners just like yourself.
Groups of angels often work together to examine, invest, and manage new
investment opportunities. Here, the “archangel” often directs the relationship
with your small business and communicates back to the investor-angels.
Although the relationship here may be less formal, assume that whoever your
angels are, they seek high returns from working with hot new business concepts
and capable management. In many cases, the angels want to participate in the
day-to-day operations of the small business by consulting, teaching, mentoring,
and inspiring the company in areas of special expertise. This could be of great
benefit.
Angels should at first be approached as venture capital investors: Be prepared to deliver a formal business plan and a ready-for-prime-time presentation
on why your small business is a great money-making opportunity. Also, suggest
an investment vehicle such as stock ownership with a cash-out plan, or a highinterest loan convertible to stock. It doesn’t look professional to say, “We’ll
consider any idea that is fair.”
In many cases, prudent small business owners will demand that before discussing anything, the not-yet verified angel must agree not to divulge, disclose, sell, or
commercially benefit from the business concept, except through your small business. In not so nice words, don’t discuss anything before gaining assurances that
your idea will not be stolen. (A non-disclosure agreement dealing with this subject
may be downloaded from www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.)
Finding and romancing an angel is an art; the relationship is by definition
special and apart from that with more formal venture capitalists, SBICs, and
others. The best way to find an angel is to work your social and business circles,
pound the telephones, and employ conventional networking techniques.
Angels are normally hard-nosed investors with plenty of options, so the deal
must make sense; but personal factors come into play if the business plan and
personal chemistry are especially attractive. Here, these investors may be the
best financing alternative by providing great energy under attractive financing
terms.
Home Equity Loans
Most small business owners cringe at the idea of putting their home on the
line for the business, but the pros and cons of this financing alternative should at
least be considered. The business actually has little to do with the financing, and
the small business owner simply applies for a home-equity loan (usually referred
to as a Home Equity Line of Credit, or HELOC) just like any other homeowner.
When the loan is approved, funds may be transferred from the HELOC to the
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 243
small business, usually by writing checks. Then, funds are disbursed from the
business to vendors. In an accounting sense, the transfer of funds to the small
business is considered a loan from the small business owner. The journals of
many firms refer to this as an “officer loan” account, and this should appear in
both the business (balance sheet) and personal financial statements when assembling a loan package. Be sure to keep the IRS at bay by writing a promissory note between yourself and the business to document the loan, interest rate,
and repayment terms. (A sample loan agreement may be downloaded at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.)
Here are some other points to consider regarding the use of HELOC funds:
 Since HELOCs are associated with your home, the interest charges
are tax-deductible to the small business owner personally.
 HELOC loan interest rates are very low compared with just about
any other form of financing.
 HELOC credit lines may end up as significantly greater than what
your business could otherwise receive, depending upon the value of
the home and the first mortgage amount. For early-stage small
businesses, this may be the only way to borrow cash.
 If worse comes to worse and your business tanks, your home is indeed
on the line and there is a real possibility that hungry creditors may
eventually seize and sell it.
Business Credit Cards?
Small business owners will often receive mail solicitations offering something such as the following:
Mr. Jones, as a business owner, we are authorized to offer you this
opportunity to apply for our no-annual-fee Business Platinum Card.
or
You have been chosen to receive this offer for a KapitalBank Business
Card, including a credit line of up to $100,000 and a variable rate as
low as 7.9 percent.
Sometimes, the advertisement will include a credit card with your company
name imprinted on it.
Look carefully and read the fine print. In most cases, the business has not
been preapproved for anything, but the small business owner is merely applying
for a credit card like any other chump. This can be seen in the signature area of
the application, where there is usually language that reads something like:
On behalf of the Company and myself, I have read the Important
Disclosures and Offer Terms…and I agree on behalf of the Company
and myself that the Company and I will be bound as specified therein.
You are authorized to check the Company’s (and my) credit record…
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 244
When we dig through the envelope and put aside the numerous offers and
other stuffing, we finally find the “Important Disclosures and Offer Terms.”
And buried deep within this, we find that:
…the Company and the Authorizing Signatory (that’s you!) will be liable
for all transactions made with all cards and checks on the account,
and anyone issued a card on the account as an Authorized User will
also be liable for all transactions made with their card. I agree that all
cards and checks will be used solely for business or commercial
purposes and not for personal, family or household purposes.
Note that the business and the small business owner here are personally
liable for any and all charges. Also, personal credit records will reflect the fact
that you have applied for this card and show whether it was approved or not, and
unlike regular credit cards, it cannot be used for non-business purposes. This is
probably not a very good deal, and if credit of this sort is needed, just use personal credit cards—they are much less restrictive.
Should You Offer a Personal Guarantee?
Small business owners are often confronted with the question of whether to
offer a personal guarantee on obligations of their business.
A personal guarantee (PG) allows financing partners to place a lien on personal assets, and if your small business cannot pay the bills, the lender may seize
and liquidate items such as automobiles, pleasure craft, furniture, jewelry, antiques, investments, and anything else that will sell in a public auction, including
your home. The first liquidation proceeds are used to pay the lenders’ balances,
including interest, late charges, collection expenses, and expensive attorneys.
Any remaining amounts would be returned to you. Lenders must follow certain
rules to attempt to obtain a reasonable value for your personal assets, but no
minimum amounts are assured. If grandmother’s ’65 Mustang sells for $1, there
is little you can do.
In some agreements, an “event of default” (allowing the lender to move on
the personal guarantee and personal assets) is bankruptcy; in other cases, “default” may mean that you simply do not pay amounts that are due.
Of the financing alternatives discussed in this chapter, most may ask for a
PG in one form or another.
Small business owners usually loathe this suggestion because many are born
risk-takers but still balk at putting their home and personal assets on the line.
Further, many formed their small businesses as corporations with limited liability in mind, and a PG seems to defeat this purpose. And indeed it does.
The reality is, however, that access to large amounts of outside financing
will improve when a personal guarantee is available to lenders. For new businesses especially, the PG will make or break a deal. Collateral-based lenders,
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 245
for example, may not see enough assets in a small business borrower until the
PG is added. Also, lenders know it is easy enough for borrowers to walk away
from certain small businesses, but the loss of a home ups the stakes.
In good times, a personal guarantee may seem like a low-risk proposition and
the new funding may be enough to propel your small business into much greater
profitability—allowing you to pay off the lender and live happily ever after. But
if things get difficult before the loan is paid off, a PG offered to a lender may
result in lost sleep at night, and a lost home.
The Loan Package
Many of the financing arrangements described in this chapter require large
amounts of documents and supporting information from the borrower. There
are two ways to do this: Give each item to the lender in piecemeal fashion as
additional information is requested, or prepare a professional-looking loan package. A loan package is a lot of work to prepare, but in the end it saves time and
will impress lenders. Once this is prepared for one lender, the exact same package may be given to others for competitive quotes.
Here are the contents you should assemble for a professional-looking loan
package. In fact, this may even be used as the loan package table of contents.
Contents of a Loan Package
 Requested Financing
 Background of Company
 Loan Application (signed)
 Marketing Materials and Partial Customer List (past and present)
 Company Management and Staffing
 Year-to-Date Financial Statements
 Accounts Receivable Aging Schedule
 Accounts Payable Aging Schedule
 Business Income Tax Returns (from the last three years)
 Personal Income Tax Returns (from the last three years)
 Personal Financial Statement of Owners
 Business Bank Statements (from the last three months)
 Personal Bank Statements (from the last three months)
 Projected Financial Results (for the next one to three years)
 Certificate of Secretary and Articles of Incorporation (or related
documents from non-corporate entities)
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 246
If your small business has developed the business plan described earlier in
this book, then many of these tasks have been completed. If that is the case, the
business plan may be slightly modified and inserted in place of various sections,
including Requested Financing, Background of Company, Marketing Materials,
Company Management and Staffing, and Financials.
Requested Financing
The requested financing section leads off most loan packages and is one of
the few sections actually created from scratch by the small business owner. This
should be easy: Write a few sentences about why your small business is seeking
additional financing.
The reason for funding could be anything from the need to pay bills on projects
in advance of customer payments, to purchases of additional equipment. Be sure
that the requested financing is consistent with the operations of your current
business. For example, the bank will look favorably upon a pizza shop’s plans to
purchase larger ovens, but may not be wild about plans to expand into the garage
next door and purchase automotive diagnostic equipment. Keep it simple, as in
the following example:
Aaardvark provides computer programming services to local
companies and has worked with many of its clients for almost a
decade. Aaardvard charges its clients on a per-hour basis and in
turn pays its contactors on a per-hour basis. Our clients manage
the projects and our contractors, and so Aaardvark simply bills by
the hour and we do not commit to specific deliverables. And when
projects are finished, Aaardvark has no continuing financial,
contracting, or employment commitment to contractors.
Our main asset is receivables from well-known companies that
have established a strong payments record.
Aaardvark’s rapid growth in recent times may be impeded
without receivables financing, a large line of credit, or both.
The Company is submitting this loan package to several lenders.
Criteria for selecting a new financing partner will be (in this order):
(1) How can Aaardvark obtain the maximum amount of financing?
(2) How can Aaardvard minimize bank fees and interest charges?
and (3) What is the most convent banking alternative?
Aaardvark and its owner desire a long-term and mutually
profitable relationship for both business and personal banking
activities and look forward to working with you as we grow.
Background of Company
The business description should be very simple—just a few lines. Or print
out a few pages from your Website. This gives the bank a flavor of the business
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 247
and its special place in the market. Emphasize stability and controlled growth
in an established business segment, if possible. The following example may be
helpful:
Aaardvark was formed in 1996 and is now experiencing
accelerated growth, largely as a result of its entry into a rapidly
growing area of the computer services industry: TDX Programming.
The typical customer may be a large local company or a Fortune
1000 firm (see attached customer list).
In 1996, several Aaardvark clients approached us about the
shortage of TDX professionals available to support the $1 million to
$25 million investments in their TDX mission-critical systems
(example: U.S. Treasury IRS). These clients asked us to provide
them with TDX programmers.
Aaardvark ventured into this very rapidly growing business
area, which we call “Aaardvark PS,” or “Aaardvark Professional
Services.”
The nature of this business is that Aaardvark enters into
contracts with TDX contractors and normally pays them two times
each month, net 10 days from receipt of invoice. But we can only
invoice our larger corporate clients once per month on net 30 terms.
And Aaardvark cannot invoice its customers until time and expense
information is received from our contractors. The business is quite
profitable, but sometimes almost 60 days have passed since the
time work was performed and when we are paid. During this time,
we have paid our contractors four times. Thus, cash is needed to
finance the difference between our accounts payable and accounts
receivable cycles.
Aaardvark operates in a well-known and established business
segment. Since the 1960s many other firms have offered contract
computer programmers and some have grown to be large publicly
traded firms. But few understand Aaardvark’s special niche in TDX
programming ,and this is where we excel.
Aaardvark booked profits in all years except 2000 and 2001,
when the business downturn caused a decline in TDX-related
revenues.
Aaardvark PS revenues began increasing in September 2001
and continue to grow. Aaardvark revenues have increased at a 15-
percent rate in the several years since 2001, and future growth is
expected at the same rate for the foreseeable future.
Aaardvark PS growth in TDX will continue to be driven by
business use of the Internet, e-commerce, and business-tobusiness (“B2B”) systems, which are solid and rapidly growing
areas of our economy.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 248
Loan Application, Signed
The bank or lender will provide a loan application, which must be signed and
returned. Without a signature, the bank cannot begin work on your loan request.
Marketing Materials
Banks feel most comfortable working with established businesses, and this
can be accomplished by providing marketing materials such as brochures, mailers, or even flyers or copies of newspaper and magazine ads. Consider also printing a few pages from your Website. You may also want to provide a list of major
customers, if this is relevant.
Make sure all the materials are reduced or folded to standard 8.5" × 11" size
so that they may be spiral-bound with the rest of the package; they should not
stick out. Undersized materials such as post-card mailers may be copied onto
8.5" × 11" paper.
Company Management and Staffing
Many small business owners do not put much effort into this section, assuming that the numbers provided elsewhere speak for themselves. But take this
seriously, because bankers are looking to ensure that you and other management
are capable of handling the small business—and the lender’s funds! Many bankers say that it is infinitely better to work with good management in a lackluster
business than the other way around. Provide a resume for all top management,
highlighting longevity and success in the business and the ability of others to step
in, should the current regime become disabled.
Year-to-Date Financial Statements
Bankers live to review financial statements, so this part of the loan package
is critical. More often than not, the deal turns on these numbers. Having said
this, there is little that can be done beyond neatly copying all of the required
statements, because the past cannot be changed.
In the loan package, include the income statement (also known as profit and
loss, or P and L), balance sheet, and statement of cash flows for the last three
full years. These are the three most important and most commonly used financial statements. In some cases, signed business tax returns may be substituted
for CPA-prepared financial statements. Most lenders will not accept internally
prepared statements for credibility reasons, except for year-to-date results.
CPAs can normally prepare these statements very quickly with the help of
accounting software, especially if the tax returns are finished. A signed “CPAreviewed” letter must be returned with the statements, basically stating that a
CPA prepared the statements but did not audit the underlying information.
The bank is comforted to know that a CPA is familiar with your business.
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 249
CPA-reviewed statements are far less expensive than audited tax returns, which
require a close examination of records to test the accuracy of the numbers.
Note that banks love to see slow, steady growth of maybe 5 percent to 15
percent per year. If results fluctuate a lot and if they trend down in the last year
or two, this will not help, and a written explanation may be a good idea. If the
business has not been around for three years, ask the lender if the application
can be considered at all.
Accounts Receivable Aging
This is a list of all current customers, showing the amounts owed by each and
the age of the receivable. Banks like to see a lot of customers, all of whom pay
within 30 days. Lenders are uncomfortable when a small business relies upon
just one or two clients, especially when invoices are not paid on time. The AR
aging schedule is a standard report that can be run off on any computer-based
business accounting program. Only one schedule is needed, printed within 30
days of the time of the loan application.
Accounts Payable Aging
The AP aging schedule is a list of all bills and payments due within 30 days.
Bankers like to see that all bills are paid on time; they will be understandably
upset if your small business does not pay amounts due. Similar to the AR aging
schedule, the AP report is easily produced from any computer-based accounting
program and should be printed within 30 days of the loan application.
Interim Financial Statements
If the accounting year-end is more than three months after the date of the
last business tax returns, year-to-date interim financial statements (income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow) will be needed. Internally prepared statements are normally acceptable here, which means they can be produced from
any business accounting program. It’s still a good idea to have your CPA look
them over to make sure there are no glaring problems. Most CPAs know what
banks are looking for and can advise on how to “window dress” for the best
possible outcome. (For example, pay down accounts payable to reduce current
liabilities, which increases the working capital ratio.) Make sure that the numbers all work together. For example, if the balance sheet shows total accounts
payable of $20,000, then the AP aging schedule should show the same amount.
Finally, sign each page before copying.
Business Income Tax Returns
This is an easy one. Just copy the business tax returns for the last full three
years. Make sure the IRS forms have been signed.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 250
Personal Income Tax Returns
Include the personal tax returns (IRS Form 1040) of all owners/partners for
the last three years. These are important, because the bank wants to see if your
personal financial situation is acceptable, and to learn the strength of personal
guarantees.
Personal Financial Statement of Owners
Lenders will provide a form that can be completed, copied into the loan
package, and even accepted by other lenders. This statement is similar to a personal balance sheet, and basically requires a list of all personal assets and debts.
The difference is equity, and a big number here makes lenders happy. Assets
such as real estate and investments in mutual funds are easily understood; banks
do not seriously consider assets such as art, coin collections, or furniture. Again,
the bank will verify some of the information presented here to learn the strength
of personal guarantees. Allow time to gather credible information on all important assets, because this may be the most tedious part of the application. The
bank may also want copies of statements supporting amounts invested in securities and retirement accounts.
Business Bank Statements
For important business checking accounts, copy the last three months for
insertion into the loan package. Banks want to see average balances, how many
checks are written each month, and the number of deposits, credit card debits
and credits, fees, and other transactions. They also want to see that the bank
statements support the financial statements. So if the P and L shows $50,000 in
sales per month, deposits into the business checking account should be about
the same. If the balance sheet shows bank deposits of $100,000, the bank statements must support this amount.
Personal Bank Statements
Again, just copy the last three months of your main personal checking account
for insertion into the loan package. Some lenders will look here to trace transactions between the small business owner and the business. These should tie in with
the personal financial statement and business financial statements. If your personal financial statement lists $10,000 in checking account balances, this should be
about the average balance in your personal checking account statements.
Corporate Documents
In this section, include documents such as the Certificate of Secretary and
Articles of Incorporation. These documents were produced when the business
was incorporated. For DBAs, partnerships, and other entities, similar documents
Finance, Banking, and Getting OPM (Other People’s Money) 251
will be requested. Bank underwriters need to see when and where the business
was incorporated (or registered to do business), and they need to see the names
of officers and directors and verify that they are authorized to negotiate and
execute loan agreements.
Banks will also ask for a declaration from the board of directors attesting
that an officer (likely, you) is charged with entering into a lending agreement.
For most small businesses, this amounts to a short letter written by the chairman
of the board of directors (you), stating that a meeting was held and naming the
president (you) as the officer authorized to negotiate the deal. The letter would
be signed by—you. (A sample authorization letter from the board of directors is
available at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.)
Projected Financial Results (For the Next One to Three Years)
Some banks will ask for one to three years of projections, or estimates, of
future business. This is easy to do with spreadsheets, and a sample financial
model may be downloaded from www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com. If
the business is losing money, rosy projections won’t help, because most banks
make their decisions based upon your history.
Summary
Once everything is assembled, make the package look good by going to a local
copy shop and having it spiral-bound using a plastic see-though front cover, where
the front page is a nice letter explaining the request, or the table of contents.
Once the loan package is prepared, why not go just a bit further and apply to
several banks? This simply requires asking the copy shop to make five or 10
copies rather than one. Pick up everything the next day. Then call competitive
lenders and give the same package to everyone.
Alternatively, in situations where the need is not critical, it may be a better
idea to apply to just one lender at a time and learn their reaction. Then adjust the
package accordingly, and submit it to competitive lenders. For example, a loan
underwriter may ask why revenues have decreased. A convincing written explanation of this may then be included in later versions of the loan package.
Providing the bank with all the information they require is a lot of work.
There is no way around this. But preparing a professional looking loan package
is a lot easier and more professional than waiting for the lender to ask and then
dropping off another box full of papers. Lenders will appreciate your professionalism in providing a comprehensive and easy-to-read loan package, and this may
well result in a better deal.
Outside consultants may be valuable in helping assemble a loan package for
your small business. Look for someone who is familiar with financial statements,
spreadsheets, and legal documents, and who understands how various lenders
think. For more help on this, see www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
This page intentionally left blank 
253
Chapter 12
Offering Credit to Customers
I Mean, Why?
In some industries, offering credit to customers may separate one small business from less sophisticated and more fragile competitors; in other industries, a
firm just won’t sell anything if customers must pay in cash. Offering credit has its
risks, so we review in this chapter how to evaluate credit decisions, how to set up
the credit approval process, and what to do if they don’t pay.
To answer the question, “Should I offer credit to my customers?” look at
competitors: If this is an industry norm, your small business must follow suit. If
other companies do not offer credit, maybe this says something, too: Maybe it’s
been tried and found to be a bad idea.
Offering credit is a great way to make it easy for others to buy from your
small business, but it’s expensive, too. Here are some considerations:
 The small business must set up a credit approval process. After this
is established, new customers must apply for credit, which normally
takes a few days and costs time and money.
 If standard credit terms are net-30, then the seller must somehow
carry 30 days of sales out of available funds or by borrowing. This
also means lost interest income on the free 30-day loans now
offered to customers.
 An accounts receivable system must also be set up to make sure
invoices are quickly sent to customers and to follow up and make
sure they are paid.
 Some customers will not pay, so the seller is stuck with the lost
receivable and maybe legal and collections costs.
Some small businesses mitigate the financing problem by working with AR
factoring companies (see Chapter 11), or by taking a credit card as a backup in
case the customer does not pay. AR factoring companies are very expensive, and
when the dust settles, an effective interest rate of 25 percent to 40 percent can be
expected. Dishonest customers who don’t pay invoices know how to handle credit
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 254
card companies, too: They have nothing to lose by disputing charges for the
feeblest of reasons, and there is a good chance that the seller will lose and suffer
a charge-back (see Chapter 13).
The Credit Approval Process
With this cheerful news out of the way, let’s focus on setting up the credit
approval process. First, the customer must complete an application in which
they state the business name, and, most important, the type of ownership. If a
company is a sole proprietorship, the business and the owner are on the hook to
you; if the business is a corporation, there is no personal recourse if the new
customer declares bankruptcy. In the case of partnerships, the business and all
general partners are liable.
All of this is nice to know, but it gives no special rights in case of problems.
The seller’s position is therefore strengthened if the application is beefed up and
some legal language is added through which the new customer agrees to certain
items such as:
 Payments are due in full within 30 days of the date of this invoice.
 The small business may invoice for late charges at the highest rate
permissible by law or 18 percent, whichever is less.
 Applicant states under penalty of perjury that he or she is an authorized
officer of the company (and then signs the application, including date
and title).
 Other standard but important legal mumbo-jumbo: “This Agreement
shall be considered as executed in CITY, STATE and shall be construed for all purposes in accordance with the substantive laws thereof.
The local, state and federal courts of STATE shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over any and all disputes relating to this Agreement, other
than the granting of equitable relief to enforce the Agreement. If any
provision of this Agreement is declared void or unenforceable, such
provision shall be severed from this Agreement, which shall otherwise remain in full force and effect. In the event any suit or other
action is commenced to construe or enforce any provision of this
Agreement, the prevailing party, in addition to all other amounts such
party shall be entitled to receive from the other party, shall be paid by
said party reasonable attorney’s fees, collections expenses, and court
costs. This Agreement constitutes the entire Agreement between the
parties with respect to the subject matters addressed herein. The
Agreement may not be amended or modified except in writing and
signed by both parties.” (Regarding CITY and STATE above, this
usually refers to the location of the small business; however, it is best
to consult an attorney.)
Offering Credit to Customers 255
This language may be added to the application, which then also becomes an
agreement if signed by both parties. Many small businesses will want more
substantive language than this to cover other matters, and in that case, a separate and formal legal agreement is needed. (Ask a local attorney, or see
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.)
Note, however, that most business credit is unsecured. This means that the
receivable is backed only by the credit of the customer, and in case of bankruptcy, your small business stands in line with other unsecured creditors. After
all major assets are sold and all secured creditors are satisfied and paid in full,
the remainder is divided up and distributed evenly to unsecured creditors. Usually, this takes six to 18 months, and there is little left after attorneys’ fees. Unsecured creditors are often happy to receive 10 cents on the dollar against the
original outstanding balances.
As noted in Chapter 11, credit managers often weigh the “4 C’s of Credit”
when evaluating a new applicant.
With this in mind, set up a credit approval process for new customers. Ask
new customers to sign an application similar to the one described, and then contact the applicant’s bank and at least three credit references for credit and payment information. When considering sole proprietorships, a credit and criminal
background check on the owner is of immense help (although be sure to get the
credit applicant’s permission to do this; see Chapter 6), and for customers who
are just starting out in business, don’t be afraid to ask for a personal guarantee.
Many credit managers rely upon Dunn and Bradstreet (www.dnb.com/us/)
to provide a great deal of useful information on the creditworthiness of potential
new business customers. Reports include credit information, a credit rating, financial statements, background and historical data, information regarding outstanding liens and judgments, and verification that a company is registered to do business
and in good standing in a particular state (if a firm does not pay taxes or incurs
other government-related problems, it may lose its “good standing” status). D&B
often provides critical information that is otherwise unavailable, but in other cases
may have little information on small businesses that choose not to cooperate.
Business Credit USA (www.businesscreditusa.com) offers similar business
credit information on over 14 million U.S. and Canadian small businesses.
In some cases, it may be possible to pass the fees for credit and criminal
background checks or credit reports on to customers. This depends upon industry norms.
Finally, in situations where the numbers are bigger, it may be acceptable to
ask new applicants for financial statements, tax returns, and interim financial
statements. Again, this mostly depends upon the particular situation.
When in doubt, many small businesses approve new customers for small
amounts of credit and then increase this later if additional credit will result in
significant new business, if payments are received in a timely manner, and if the
overall business relationship has been good.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 256
A sample credit application, and credit and criminal background
check release forms in Microsoft Word format are available at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com. Also, get a DUNS number, consider
listing your small business with Dunn and Bradstreet, and learn more at
www.dnb.com/us/.
What If They Don’t Pay?
Some customers just will not pay. In some cases, dishonest new customers
will understand that only a small balance is owing and it is not economical for a
small business to pursue this through the legal system. In other cases, valued and
established longtime customers will run into troubled waters and just be unable
to pay.
When customers won’t pay, legal action may eventually be considered, but
other remedies must be exhausted before the courts will consider the matter.
First, note that small business collections issues are generally not governed
by the FTC Fair Credit Reporting Act (which is mostly concerned with consumers), so just about anything goes.
If invoices are not paid on time, most small businesses proceed with a polite
but cordial phone call to the accounting department of the customer, and verify
that all invoices were received. For example, sometimes invoices are sent to the
wrong location. Then, explain that payment is delinquent and ask why, under the
assumption that the problem is a mere misunderstanding or bureaucratic snafu.
Also, ask about the payment process at this company, including the following
questions:
 Where do invoices go after receipt?
 Is the customer mailing payments to the correct address?
 Are you in their system as an approved vendor?
 Which persons must approve the invoices?
 Are invoices stacking up on the desk of a manager who travels
frequently?
 When are checks cut, signed, and mailed?
 On what exact date will your check be printed (and available for
pick up)?
Ask these questions in a collegial manner to prevent the client from getting
defensive. Explain that there is no need to bother the wrong people over these
issues; your job is to make sure payments are received in a timely manner, and
understanding the customer’s processes is helpful to all.
It is often not a good idea for the small business owner to be involved at this
point. It’s a little difficult to place a collections call at one point in the day and
Offering Credit to Customers 257
then call for additional business later. Also, the customer may want to settle any
outstanding amounts with an accounting person quickly, in the hopes that you,
the small business owner, are unaware that a delinquency issue is at hand. Facesaving measures such as this can often allow a small problem to remain just a
small problem.
Sometimes, invoices may arrive at the correct address, be routed to the right
manager, and just sit until someone calls looking for payment. Perhaps all that is
needed is to find and call the manager to get things moving.
Find out if the customer has a problem with the goods or services provided.
Don’t provide them with an excuse to withhold payment by asking if they are
satisfied with everything, but listen to make sure that there is not a problem. If it
is an issue, ask for partial payment until disputed amounts are resolved. Throughout the conversation, politely emphasize that your small business is not in a
position to lend money, that cash is short all over, and that you expect timely
payment of invoices from all customers. Many customers will pay slowly if it
appears that no one is concerned, but most are thinking about their reputation
and will pay quickly if politely reminded. Sometimes, a few calls in the beginning
can set the relationship on a positive course for a long time to come.
Regardless of what is promised (for example, “The check is in the mail”),
make sure that invoices and monthly statements (including late charges) continue to be mailed in a timely manner. Also, keep careful notes on “who says
what” during collections calls. At the 60- and 90-day delinquency dates, send
letters to the company, expressing concern that payments are overdue. This better sets the stage for legal action in the future (sample collections letters are at
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com).
Many small businesses assume that dealing with large customers is a panacea
for late-payment issues, but the opposite is often true. Large customers, including some of the most well-known household names, methodically pay their bills
15, 30, or even 60 days late. These customers can hide behind the excuse, “It’s
just our bureaucracy.” Many also reject late charges (which are actually hard to
enforce). Many large companies feel that this is part of the price for the privilege
of doing business with them, and will quickly suggest that small businesses that
don’t like this can go elsewhere. Even in this case, polite but diligent collections
efforts can make a difference.
Sometimes, a customer has more bills than cash, so some vendors will get
paid and others will not. If you sense that this is indeed the situation, it may be
appropriate to inform the customer that future business will be cut off if payment is not made; in other cases, this will not be effective. At this point, there is
little downside to making lots of telephone calls, so keep the pressure on. The
squeaky wheel often does get the grease.
Some customers always seem to use the wrong address, or their checks are
always lost in the mail, despite the fact that the post office delivers more than 99
percent of other mail correctly. Get results now by saying, “Someone will be
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 258
Joe Is Dazzled by a Dot-Com Deadbeat
In the days of the dot-com boom, it
seemed that nothing could go wrong when
dealing with the multitudes of high-tech
start-up firms, no matter how far-fetched
their business plans.
Our small business was happy to be
nearing the close of a big deal with one
such company, when a number of seemingly small contractual issues arose at the
last minute.
Soon, I was on the telephone with the
legal counsel of the glorious dot-com, and
we agreed on several points. Finally, he
said he could not agree to paying 18 percent on delinquent invoices. “We just don’t
pay late charges,” he said.
I laughed and replied, “Well, I’m not
very comfortable with this then, because
it seems as if you’re telling me up front
that you intend to be a payment problem.”
We were under pressure to get moving,
so the deal was signed—without a penalty for late charges.
Sure enough, our new client simply did
not pay invoices. Why should they? We
were basically offering them a free loan,
which helped their desperate cash flow. I
soon became concerned as our receivables zoomed north of $100,000.
Legal action was premature, so we
decided to cut off services to the client. I
was a bit worried that we were being too
harsh, but then I was informed that they
had beaten us to the punch by unilaterally canceling our agreement, even
though this was an egregious breach of
the contract.
I immediately called my attorney and
told him to do something. “I can’t really
do anything yet,” he said. “They are less
than 90-days delinquent. This is going to
look premature.”
“I don’t care,” I said. “Just do something. Start writing them mean letters and
make idle threats or something. This company is going broke, and we’ve got to be
ahead of everyone else.”
I was especially concerned about getting the money in quickly, because any
payments made by firms within 90 days
of filing for bankruptcy may be called back
by the bankruptcy court. In bankruptcy,
we were likely to receive only a few pennies on the dollar because a dot-com
would have few assets that could be sold
and distributed to creditors.
The attorney began to write a series
of mean letters and make tough phone
calls with lots of idle threats about suing
for breach of contract, and suggesting that
the world would know that this mighty dotcom could not pay its bills. We apparently
hit home when the firm became upset
that it’s sterling reputation would be damaged. They quickly agreed to pay us all
amounts due if we agreed to keep quiet,
and a check was express-mailed the next
day. It was deposited within hours.
I watched the calendar, concerned
that the dot-com would declare bankruptcy within 90 days and the funds would
be called back. The dot-com’s stock had
sunk from $135.50 to less than $1 as it
barely struggled past the 90-day mark,
still in business. I breathed a sigh of relief, but wondered if the large amounts of
time and legal expense had been worth
the effort. Maybe I should have relaxed
and tried to go with the flow. We would
have been paid anyway, I figured.
But only 20 days later we learned the
news—our arrogant dot-com client had
declared bankruptcy that morning. The
huge amount of effort put into collections
had paid off. We later learned that we
were one of the few, and last, companies to be paid outside of the bankruptcy
process.
Offering Credit to Customers 259
driving near your office tomorrow. Do you mind if we just stop in and pick up a
replacement check?” If this is not possible, say, “We’ll be around there the next
day, too,” and “The day after that is fine too.” They will get the message, and you
will get the check.
At some point, however, customers run out of excuses, and the realization
comes that this is going to be a problem. As the receivable grows, it is often
necessary to cut off these customers to minimize possible losses. It is also necessary to increase collections efforts.
Remember that there is little regulation regarding business-to-business collections efforts (unlike the many laws that protect consumers). Don’t let up on
the calls. One common technique is to increase the number of calls gradually
until customers are embarrassed and annoyed into paying. Some businesses do
not like their employees and others to be concerned that financial problems may
be developing, and these customers will pay just to stop the receptionist from
taking yet another message that “Jim from ABC Photography called again about
the outstanding invoice.” Obviously, a message in this case may be more effective than voice mail. A related technique is to fax the invoice continually with a
polite payment reminder message to the main fax number (not the accounting
department) of the slow-paying customer.
Get an Attorney and Go Legal
The next step is to begin the legal process by asking your attorney to send a
demand letter to the customer. In this communication, the customer is ordered
to pay or legal action is threatened. A demand letter is a standard document that
requires little customization and can be prepared quickly. This will not cost very
much and frequently results in immediate satisfaction. (A sample demand letter
may be seen at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.)
If the demand letter goes unanswered, ask your attorney to call the customer
and see what’s going on. Customers will often level with an attorney and explain
the real problem. The attorney can then advise you as to what’s really happening
and attempt to settle the matter quickly. If an agreement is reached, be ready to
sign a release letter, where partial payment is accepted in full and complete settlement of the matter.
Finally, legal action may be considered. If the problem involves less than
$3,000 or so and your attorney says that winning in court is possible but you are
still responsible for legal and collections expenses, the best move is probably to
cut off the customer and write off the account. Legal expenses will likely mean a
net loss even with a win in court. For larger amounts, the legal system may be a
feasible option, especially if the customer has signed an agreement where, in a
dispute, the loser pays for legal expenses. Remember though, winning in court is
merely one step in collecting, since many cash-strapped clients will not pay even
as demanded by a court judgment.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 260
Figure out what to do by asking the attorney:
 What is the buyer’s defense? Is the buyer’s defense real or
frivolous?
 What is the timetable for a court date?
 What is the timetable including appeals?
 If a judgment is awarded, could this include legal and collections
expenses?
Assuming the deadbeat customer will not pay even after a judgment, what
will the attorney charge for postjudgment actions, such as a hearing to determine
creditor assets? How long will it take to identify and seize assets? Are the assets
worth the effort?
With this information, the small business is in an informed position to decide
whether to pursue legal channels to collect monies owed.
Small Claims Court
Another option that often makes sense is using a small claims court. Check
the Website of your local city or county government to see how “small claims” is
defined in the area. If a small claim is, for example, a maximum of $5,000 and
amounts due are for a smaller amount, then so far, so good. Next, consider whether
the deadbeat customer is local or not. If the deadbeat is located far away, there
is a good chance that no one representing the defense will appear in court and
you may hope for a default judgment. Remember, though, that a default judgment may have little meaning to someone in another state, and it will not be easy
to collect.
Next, fill out the paperwork and enter the small claim into the court system.
At this point, a legal argument is not needed, and simply writing one or two lines
such as “Defendant purchased goods from plaintiff and failed to pay despite
continued written and telephone collections efforts” is good enough to get the
case registered with a court date.
Once the case is registered, the defendant must be served with court papers
describing the problem and notifying the deadbeat of the date, time, and place of
the small claims hearing. These papers must be delivered in a timely manner to
the right defendant, which is called “service.” The small claims court office will
likely offer service by a sheriff or professional process server for a small fee.
Carefully enter the address and the right contact person at the deadbeat’s business. Owners and officers are always safe bets, or an attorney may advise on the
proper persons to be served. Delays in service may result in delays or reregistering of the small claims case.
When the court date arrives, you are an attorney-for-a-day. Prepare your
case, but expect to speak no more than five minutes. Also be prepared for the
judge to allow only one minute. Judges often step in and begin asking questions
Offering Credit to Customers 261
of both parties. Judges do not like speeches about how the other party is a jerk,
because being a jerk is not against the law. Stick to points of law, and speak in a
collegial manner, even when it’s time to ask questions of the deadbeat customer.
Remember that in our court system, the defendant is innocent until proven guilty,
so you must prove that goods or services were provided but not paid for. Take
originals and at least three copies of all relevant documents, such as invoices,
proof of delivery, canceled checks, etc. Defendants often win merely by confusing the issue, such as claiming that goods and services were not properly received, or that payment was applied to the wrong invoices. Another common
technique is for the defendant to say that not one but several invoices are unpaid, and the matter is therefore out of the authority of the small claims court
system. Judges do not like to sift through all of this and will often wave off the
matter—meaning that you lose.
Once a judgment is gained, many customers still will not pay. In that case,
your attorney will advise on how to proceed, including a “hearing on assets,”
where the customer must disclose all assets—including equipment, bank accounts,
and receivables—that could be available to liquidate and pay the delinquent invoices. Then, your small business may seize these assets to liquidate and settle
against amounts due. Again, however, legal expenses should be paramount in the
decision to sue, and asset seizures often are not economical. And opther liens
may get in the way.
Dunn and Bradstreet and other agencies will see and record this judgment
eventually, which smears the credit record of the deadbeat customer. Once a
judgment is issued, the customer may no longer claim to others that this is
merely a payment dispute. Pressures of this sort also encourages the deadbeat
client to pay.
Assigning Bad Debts to Collections Agencies
A related alternative is to assign uncollectible invoices to a collections firm.
The collections company will ask a small business to enter into an assignment
agreement, where uncollectible invoices are assigned to professional collectors,
who then write a series of letters and make telephone calls to deadbeat customers. The agreement calls for the collections firm to keep 35 percent to 50 percent
of the invoice(s) amount—when they get paid. Invoices that remain unpaid revert back to the issuing small business after a fixed period of time, usually 90 to
180 days. Unfortunately, most collections firms will not initiate legal action against
a customer unless the small business pays the additional fees. Savvy deadbeats
know that there are no real adverse consequences to ignoring pressure from
collections companies, except for the embarrassment factor and perhaps negative credit ratings.
Most collections companies do not really want to buy a single invoice, but
look for a continuing relationship with small businesses where delinquent invoices are turned over methodically to the collectors every month.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 262
Additional information on credit and collections, including a directory of
firms that may be able to help your small business, is available through the Association of Credit and Collection Specialists, http://www.acainternational.org.
Offering credit to customers may be an essential tool in growing the revenues of a small business, but there are many potential pitfalls. Proceed with
caution in setting up and administering credit approval, invoicing, and collections activities.
263
Chapter 13
Accepting Credit Cards
Your small business is considering accepting credit and debit cards as a new
form of payment. It seems like a good idea because so many customers, even
businesses, prefer to pay by credit card these days. Many firms like credit or
debit cards because customers who pay by plastic tend to purchase a bit more,
sales on the Internet or via telephone are now possible, there is no risk of bounced
checks, and your small business enjoys enhanced credibility. All of this is correct, but it’s a bit complicated, and there are costs and risks to accepting credit
cards. In this chapter we review issues thoroughly.
The chapter deals with credit cards and is especially oriented to on-line payments. Most of the information is the same for standard retail credit card purchases, debit cards, and some of the newer forms of payment, such as PayPal.
Definitions
Here are some important definitions that will be needed in this chapter and
in conversations with credit card service providers:
 Acquiring Bank (also known as “Merchant Bank” or “Sponsoring Bank”)—
open merchant accounts for businesses accepting credit cards. The bank, in
effect, is sponsoring the small business, or “merchant,” so that they may accept
credit cards. These banks must be members of the Visa/MasterCard Network.
Small businesses must select a merchant bank, gateway, and processor as
vendors in order to accept credit card payments.
 Address Verification Service (AVS)—an Internet-based system for verifying
the addresses of cardholders, in order to minimize risks and deter fraud. This
service is especially important in Internet/mail-order/telephone-order
transactions.
 Approval. After a transaction is authorized (to be discussed), an approval
request is put through the system. Upon approval, an approval code is issued,
and the funds for this sale begin moving towards the merchant account
(checking account) of the small business.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 264
 Authorization. An authorization must be obtained for every sale and is the
first part of the credit card payment process where the cardholder account is
checked to make sure funds are available to cover the amount of the transaction. At this time, funds for the sale are reserved from the cardholder’s credit
line, but the funds are not transferred to the small business’s merchant account until the transaction is approved.
 Authorization Response. When a merchant requests authorization of a transaction, the issuing bank responds with “approved,” “declined,” or “call center” (call the credit card center for approval pending receipt of satisfactory
additional information).
 Authorization Code. When the authorization response is “approved,” merchants receive an authorization code from the issuing bank. This code is
important and must be kept as proof of the issuing bank’s approval.
 Bank Card—a credit card issued by a bank sponsored through Visa or
MasterCard, but not cards issued directly through the issuer, such as
American Express, Discover, Diners Club, JCB, and others.
 Batch. Merchants normally generate a number of credit card payments
each day, from many different cardholders and issuing banks. These are
processed, consolidated, and deposited in one batch to the merchant’s bank
account.
 Card Not Present (also known as “Mail-Order/Telephone-Order” or
“MOTO”)—an important concept for small businesses engaged in credit
card sales. Here the buyer, and the credit card, are not physically present.
This arises with e-commerce, mail-order, and telephone-call transactions.
“Card not present” sales do not require standard credit card processing equipment such as card-swiping devices and terminals, but there is an increased
risk of fraud, so a higher discount rate is customarily charged.
 Cardholder. Cardholders are your customers. They are approved for credit
and issued credit cards from issuing banks.
 Chargeback. A chargeback occurs when a cardholder disputes a transaction
(for example, dissatisfaction, product never delivered) after the amount has
been settled. The money is then yanked from your merchant account and not
returned unless the resolution process sides with the small business. Even
though cardholders are urged to communicate with merchants to resolve
problems before disputing a transaction with their issuing bank, many do
not, and this can soil the reputation of merchants. Chargebacks are bad for
small businesses in many ways, which are detailed in this chapter.
 Credit Card Merchant—organizations that sell goods and services and accept
payment through credit cards. Credit card merchants (small businesses) work
with their sponsoring banks to open merchant accounts.
Accepting Credit Cards 265
 Debit Card. Similar to credit cards, debit cards allow payment to merchants
in much the same manner, except funds are withdrawn directly from the
cardholder’s checking account rather than a credit card account. Debit cards
are becoming increasingly popular.
 Discount Rate—the percentage taken off the sales amount by the merchant
bank, and retained and distributed among the various parties in the credit
card processing network. A typical discount rate is perhaps 2.5 percent.
 Dispute. Customers purchasing goods and services from a small business
may be unhappy with the results, and the first step in the complaint and
chargeback process is when the cardholder files a dispute with the issuing
bank. Issuing banks are required to investigate every dispute, no matter how
frivolous. A typical dispute is, “I want my money back because the product
does not really have certain features promised to me by the merchant.”
 Gateway. Small businesses accepting credit card payments in “card not
present” situations talk to the credit card processing system only through
their gateway. The gateway to most small businesses involves logging on to a
special Website to see credit card transactions. The gateway is effectively an
on-line credit card terminal, and allows merchants to authorize, settle, and
manage electronic transactions via standard servers and personal computers. Small businesses must select a merchant bank, gateway, and processor
as vendors in order to accept credit card payments.
 Independent Sales Organization (ISO). These organizations are ubiquitous
in the credit card processing industry, and act as sales agents for banks,
processors, and related vendors. ISOs usually perform no services after the
credit card processing arrangements are completed. There is a good chance
your small business will deal with an ISO, which will recommend a solution
that may include anything from POS terminals to PC-based credit card processing software, and e-commerce systems to secure payment gateways.
 Issuing Bank. These banks accept credit card applications from cardholders,
process and approve or decline the applications, and then issue credit cards
to future customers, the cardholders. The issuing bank is effectively approving
cardholders for a loan, up to the amount of the credit limit. If the cardholder
buys something from a small business and does not pay and does not dispute
the transaction, the issuing bank is on the hook for the unpaid balance.
 Merchant (see Credit Card Merchant).
 Merchant Account. Credit card merchants (small businesses like you) open
merchant accounts (normally a checking account) with their sponsoring bank.
Credit card payments are deposited into this merchant account from issuing
banks, as directed by processors, usually through the Visa/MasterCard
network.
 Merchant Bank (See Acquiring Bank).
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 266
 Merchant Identification Number (MID). This important account number is
used as the merchant’s identity for transactions processed through the credit
card payments system. To log in to accounts, or when problems occur, the
first request is often, “Please enter your MID number.”
 Mail Order/Telephone Order (MOTO) (See “Card Not Present”).
 Processors—companies that communicate among merchants, issuing banks,
and merchant banks to authorize credit card transactions, and then direct
the banks to credit and debit the various accounts. Small businesses must
select three vendors in order to accept credit card payments: a merchant
bank, a gateway, and a processor.
 Net Settlement Amount—the amount of a sale, less credit card fees (discount
amount).
 Non-Real Time Processing—the traditional, now old-fashioned way of
accepting credit card payments. Here, merchants capture credit card
information by swiping or imprinting, and although cardholders usually leave
with their purchases, authorizations and approvals are not obtained until
they are submitted at a later time. The problem here is that there is little
hope of stopping credit card thieves, and the merchant gets stuck with the
losses.
 Processor. Behind gateways or credit card terminals are processors, which
route authorization requests between the merchant and Visa/MasterCard.
After the authorization is received, the processor directs funds to be sent
from the issuing bank to the merchant bank. Small businesses may select
merchant banks and many third-party firms as processors. Small businesses
must often select a merchant bank, gateway, and processor as vendors in
order to accept credit card payments.
 Real-Time Processing. In this modern method of working with credit cards,
cardholders or merchants enter identification information; authorizations
and approvals are then obtained on the spot. The transaction does not move
forward until everyone knows the cardholder is approved, which is
accomplished in a matter of seconds. Real-time processing slows down (but
hardly stops) credit card thieves. A secure payment gateway is an essential
component of real-time processing.
 Reserve Account. The bane of new and fast-growing small businesses, reserve
accounts are sales proceeds that are held back by the merchant bank. Reserves
are used to help banks mitigate against fraud and credit risks (for example,
bankruptcy). If a small business, for example, accepts large amounts of sales
deposits and then disappears without shipping the products to cardholders,
the merchant bank is on the hook. Normally, merchants perform well, and
after a time, the risk is reevaluated. If the merchant has a satisfactory level of
chargebacks and a good record for covering returns, the reserve account
may be released. Reserve accounts are often set at around 20 percent of
expected monthly processing volumes.
Accepting Credit Cards 267
 Sales Draft (Ticket). This is the small slip of paper that is signed by the
cardholder when making the purchase (or more frequently now, captured
electronically). The sales draft is a legally binding obligation on the cardholder
to pay the issuing bank.
 Secure Payment Gateway. As the Internet increasingly becomes the hunting
grounds for snoopers and scammers, secure communications are essential.
Secure payment gateways, using secure socket layer (SSL) technology allows
gateways, cardholders, merchants, processors, and others to encrypt and safely
communicate sensitive and confidential data over the Web. (See also “SSL
Certificate.”)
 Secure Payment Software/Software Module/Payment Module. These are
software modules that allow Web-based merchants, electronic shipping carts,
and other applications to execute credit card authorizations and approvals
via encrypted communications. A secure host system is offered to customers
by the gateway provider to conduct secure business on the Internet (see also
“Real Time Authorization”). Merchants may then also connect to the secure
payment gateway host and see their own account information, use a “virtual
terminal” to execute transactions for retail or call-in customers, control
administrative tasks, and generate reports.
 Settlement. This is the process whereby the merchant submits a daily batch
of all transactions from all cardholders and issuing banks to the credit card
payments network for processing and then payment. For bank cards, the
issuing bank pays the merchant (less discount and other fees) with funds
from Visa/MasterCard. For non-bank cards (Discover, American Express,
Diners Club, etc.) the issuing bank pays the merchant bank directly (again,
less fees), and the cardholder is then billed. The large number of transactions is then consolidated into just a few large bank deposits, with detailed
reports available as needed. (See also “Bank Cards”).
 Sponsoring Bank (see “Acquiring Bank”).
 SSL Certificate—a small electronic file that uniquely identifies individuals
and servers on the Internet. SSL certificates allow the Web browser to authenticate an Internet site before entering confidential information such as
user names and passwords. Typically, digital SSL certificates are issued by
“certification authorities,” who are trusted and independent third parties,
such as VeriSign (www.Verisign.com) that ensure validity. When on SSL
pages, browsers normally see a padlock on the status bar at the bottom right
of their browser windows. Double-clicking on this padlock icon then returns
additional information. In the world of small businesses, SSL is relevant because customers must know they are entering credit card information to a
valid e-commerce system, and not to a scam site that is pretending to be
legitimate. In addition, e-store administrators must know that they are logging into a real credit card gateway and not to a site set up by scammers that
merely looks familiar.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 268
How Does the Credit Card Transaction Processing System
Work?
With all these definitions in mind, it will be much easier to describe what
happens when everything is set up and customers begin buying with credit cards.
When a cardholder makes a purchase, the transaction is first sent through
the gateway to the processor as an authorization request. The processor then
taps the Visa/MasterCard network, which—within seconds—asks the issuing bank
if the account is valid and if there is sufficient credit available. A hold is also
placed on the cardholder’s account, and the transaction amount is subtracted
from the credit limit pending approval or rejection—so no one can get at these
funds except you.
After authorization, the issuing bank tells the processor and Visa/
MasterCard network that the transaction is approved, and the processor then
directs that funds be transferred from the issuing bank to your merchant bank
account. The funds appear as a deposit one to three days after the transaction
is completed.
At this time, your small business is committing to many parties—the merchant bank, processor, Visa/MasterCard, the issuing bank, and the cardholder—
that it will make good on the products or services being purchased. This promise
must be honored. If not, the funds will be snapped from the merchant account
and your company is one step closer to being bounced from the credit card
payment acceptance system. Note that the merchant often is also accepting responsibility for the transaction if it is fraudulent. If the real cardholder later
reports that the card had been stolen at the time the purchase was made, your
small business may be on the hook for the problem. All of this is important
because, as can be seen, even though the transaction is “approved,” many strings
are attached; and if just about anything happens, the “approval” evaporates. We
will discuss this further.
Fees are also deducted from the transaction amount before the net settlement amount is deposited.
Now let’s talk about trust.
What’s All This About “Trust”?
The entire credit card payments system is built upon trust. Understanding
this will help the small business owner make better decisions about managing
this important revenue source.
To begin, when the merchant submits a deposit transaction, the system trusts
that your small business will deliver the goods and services promised to the
cardholder. No one asks if the cardholder did indeed receive what was purchased.
Everyone trusts the merchant and expects an acceptable level of performance.
Accepting Credit Cards 269
The merchant (small business) also works on trust, since merchants must
ship, deliver, or release the goods or services before payment is actually received.
After an authorization and approval are obtained, the merchant trusts that the
funds will be properly deposited into the proper merchant account. But there
are strings attached to this promise of payment, because long after the deposit
has landed in the account (up to 180 days in some situations), the cardholder
may claim that the products or services did not meet expectations, or were not
provided at all. Further, although the merchant trusts the credit card system to
deposit funds after approvals and authorizations are provided, the small business is still at risk if the card was stolen. In these cases, the funds will be pulled
from the merchant checking account weeks or months later, without notice.
The merchant and the entire credit card payments system are also trusting
the cardholder, because it is easy to claim that the goods arrived but were damaged. Or, if the shipment is sent to the customer’s business address rather than
the home address (used for credit card billing purposes), the customer may claim
that the shipment was never actually received, but was stolen. In most cases, the
customer will win these types of disputes. While few take advantage of this trust
for dishonest purposes, credit card scamming is a big and growing business, and
in many cases, just one credit card rip-off can easily wipe out an entire day of
profits. Small business owners must understand and work the system to minimize fraud. We’ll talk more about this later.
Chargebacks and the Credit Card Dispute Process
When problems occur (real, imagined, dumb, or fraudulent), the cardholder
is encouraged first to contact the merchant and work things out. Take this seriously, because at this point, the situation may be controlled; later, your small
business is at the mercy of others. Many cardholders simply skip this step and go
directly to disputing the transaction with their issuing bank.
The disputed transaction is then formalized by the issuing bank into a dispute or retrieval request, which is sent to the processor and then to the merchant. Before receipt of the retrieval request, the funds are withdrawn from the
merchant account and are held pending resolution of the problem. Now you are
at the mercy of others.
The small business must then respond to the dispute by proving that the
products or services were properly provided. This is often accomplished with
shipping documents, where the cardholder has hopefully signed for the package,
or with other documents supporting the merchant’s side of the case. For example, if a small business sells a copier to a customer, proof of delivery by UPS
or another shipping firm must be provided to help resolve the dispute. If the
customer claims that the machine only produces 10 copies per minute instead of
the expected 20, the merchant needs to provide sales literature from the manufacturer verifying that it produces 10 copies per minute. Here, the matter is
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 270
rather straightforward, but things can get complicated if the cardholder then
says, “I don’t care what the brochure says, the salesperson told me 20 copies per
minute.” That is why it’s important to meet customer expectations and to disclose everything before the credit card transaction goes through.
If disputes are resolved in favor of the cardholder, this normally results in a
chargeback to the merchant. Chargebacks are bad for several reasons.
First, the small business probably expended the same amount of time, effort,
and money to fulfill a chargeback transaction as a normal one. Now more resources are expended to undo the transaction and perhaps test or inspect and
put the item back into stock. That’s a lot of work to end up with nothing.
Second, part of the collateral damage of chargebacks is the creation of unhappy customers. Again, why go to all this effort if your small business ends up
with no sale and displeased customers?
Third, if too many chargebacks occur, your merchant bank will begin rethinking its trust in you. Most banks will allow a certain amount of chargebacks,
understanding that sometimes good companies make mistakes, that some customers are fickle, and that misunderstandings occur. After this level, however,
the bank will begin suspecting that maybe the merchant is not quite right. At that
point, the merchant bank may ask to audit records, and perhaps demand a reserve account or shut down the account entirely. When this occurs, the termination is entered into a database accessible to all merchant banks worldwide, and it
is unlikely that any other merchant bank will then sponsor the maligned merchant; accepting credit cards will be a thing of the past.
Avoiding Chargebacks and Fraud
A small business must do everything possible to keep fraud and credit card
chargebacks to a minimum. Here are some guidelines to help you.
Verify That the Credit Card Belongs to the Cardholder
This sounds simple, but it is an effective first line of defense against credit
card scammers. In retail situations, ask for a second form of identification, and
then see if the names and signatures from the ID, credit card, and sales slip all
match. Note that if a small business does not properly verify the information, an
“approval” then disappears if the customer reports that a card was stolen, even
months after the transaction occurs.
In card-not-present situations, make sure your e-commerce system requires
that customers enter one or more telephone numbers, and in suspicious situations call under the guise of telling the customer his order is about to be shipped,
but see if everything adds up. Scammers will often insist on expedited delivery
but will not give out much additional information, so watch out for this. At all
times, pretend that this is your own money and not that of the big anonymous
credit card system—because it is.
Accepting Credit Cards 271
Joe Nabs New York Scammers; Police Are Not Excited
A Los Angeles-based e-commerce and
telephone call-center operation were
shipping printers all over the U.S. out of a
warehouse in Memphis. Business was
brisk, and no one noticed when an order
was phoned in for delivery of a high-end
color printer to Queens in New York.
Just before shipment, however, the
customer (we’ll call him Charlie) called
and said he would be out of town. Charlie
asked if we could instead ship to his neighbor. We agreed. Big mistake. But the shipment went out.
Three months later, we received a retrieval request. A cardholder with a Chicago billing address had filed a dispute
with her issuing bank and was upset that
her card had been used for this purchase.
She claimed the card was stolen and that
she knew nothing of this transaction.
I was befuddled. I said, “But how could
she wait this long to report a stolen card?”
And, “But we had an approval.” Too bad,
said the processor, you did not ship to
the billing address.
We called the cardholder and were
convinced she was not one of the
scammers, although she could not explain why she had waited so long to report the problem. Oddly, the scammer
made only two purchases on this stolen
card.
Next, one of my fast-talking telephone reps called the bad guys in their
Queens apartment. It was a tense moment on a dark and dreary night:
“Hi, this is Bob from PrinterCom Marketing. Is Charlie there?”
“No, he’s not here right now.”
“Well, we’re doing a marketing survey and we want to know if that PC 4992
color printer he received from us a few
months ago is working okay.”
“Yep, it’s working fine,” said Charlie’s
roommate.
“Do you think he is satisfied with his
purchase?”
“Sure, he seems to like it.”
“And can you answer one more question, please. Look at the printer and tell
me the serial number.”
That was the big moment. But as we
waited, the bad guy’s roommate read the
correct serial number of the stolen printer.
Now, the problem is what to do next.
The credit card people were not interested in the story, because we had not
filed a police report, and even then it
seemed the chances of any action were
slim. “We’re just too busy these days,”
they said.
The Los Angeles police told us the
matter was not in their jurisdiction and
suggested we call New York.
We had a lot of trouble actually speaking with anyone relevant at NYPD, but finally a detective said something such as,
“Well, let’s see, you’re in Los Angeles, the
printer was shipped from Memphis on a
stolen credit card from Chicago to a New
York address. I can take a report, but I
doubt if we can do anything about this.”
The problem was very complicated for
such a small amount of money, and the
NYPD had bigger things to do.
We protested and argued “but we
know exactly who did it, and the stolen
equipment is in their apartment. All you
have to do is go there and verify. No investigation is required.” We also argued
that this could be a major operation
where the bad guys are ripping off many
people in small transactions every day.
“But we’ll have to get a search warrant,” said the detective.
We knew it was a lost cause and so
we completed the police report, informed
the credit card company, and moved on.
We lost the money, endured a
chargeback, and are still waiting for action by an NYPD SWAT team.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 272
Address Verification System (AVS)
Most processors these days offer an AVS, or address verification system,
where card-not-present merchants may verify that the customer shipping address is the same as the billing address. When the addresses are not the same,
look further to see if this could be a fraudulent transaction.
Working the AVS is more than just a nice thing to do. An AVS address
match is required in many situations, or the merchant automatically loses the
dispute if the card is later reported as stolen. The chargeback hits your merchant
account, and there is no argument with any of the parties involved in the credit
card payments system. You lose. Case closed.
Merchants who ship to businesses are often in a pickle here, because many
employees or small business owners use their personal credit cards and request
that shipments be sent to their office. In those cases, the cardholder may be
called to check whether the person answering is a scammer or a real customer;
or you might suggest that the cardholder call the credit card issuer and add the
business address as an alternative “ship-to address.” If the shipment is sent to
the business address, however, a dishonest customer can claim it was stolen by
the person who signed for it, and the merchant will lose that dispute, too. And
no, there will be no investigation of the person who signed.
Finally, note that AVS only works in the U.S. and not with international
shipments.
Fraud Detection Systems
Many credit card processors and gateways now offer sophisticated tools to
help vendors detect fraud. These systems collect past data and from this suggest factors that result in increased fraud. For example, fraud occurs more
often at night, in certain locations, for certain products, and for certain dollar
amounts. These Internet-based systems allow on-line merchants to check each
transaction against the different parameters as determined by the merchant.
For example, purchases for business products occurring in the day for under $50
are shown as green lights, whereas fashionable and expensive consumer products
ordered at night in New York City, where no phone number is provided, may be
flagged in red.
Since merchants are ultimately responsible for fraud, these systems are of
great utility. If properly worked, Web-based fraud detection services will generate large amounts of savings by avoiding scam transactions.
Get Signed Delivery Receipts
Another best practice for reducing chargebacks is to ship with carriers that
provide a signed delivery receipt, or proof of delivery. UPS, FedEx, the U.S.
Postal Service, and other major package and express shipping firms all offer this
alternative. Even with this, it may be necessary to insist on a signature by the
actual cardholder, since package receipt by roommates, friends, guys next door,
Accepting Credit Cards 273
and others will not impress the issuing bank investigating the dispute, and it is
not practical to call around to see if someone received but forgot to give the
package to the customer—especially if the customer is a scammer.
Keep the signed receipts for at least a year in case a retrieval request still
comes up, or in case the merchant bank requests an audit. And for card-present
situations, keep a signed copy of the sales draft for three years.
Ship First, Then Deposit
The credit card agreement requires that the sale be fulfilled before the
cardholder’s account is charged. In many cases, this makes little difference, because credit card processing and shipping take place on the same day. If items
are back ordered and the waiting customer becomes unhappy, the sale may be
disputed and the investigation may reveal that a violation of the credit card agreement occurs when the merchant deposits the sales proceeds before fulfillment.
This is also true of custom-built products.
Many small businesses engaging in e-commerce are in a dilemma these days,
because many sellers don’t ship from inventory but merely place drop-ship
orders with distributors. If the distributor does not ship on time, the small
business is exposed to a chargeback if a dispute occurs.
Be Careful About International Shipments
Many people from other countries love Americans, partly because it’s so
easy to get away with credit card scams. In fact, credit card scamming is a major
industry in some countries, and the small business is usually on the hook when
problems occur.
Call to ask for a list of problem shipping locations. Certain countries are
black-listed, and shipments to them are not covered by fraud protection policies.
Even if everything seems to check out, if the card is later reported as stolen, the
small business automatically loses the dispute and gets a chargeback.
Finally, for all international shipments, get insurance, tracking, and a signed
delivery receipt. In many countries, including Europe, employees of the shipping
companies and postal services supplement their incomes by stealing attractivelooking packages.
A final suggestion: Ship in plain, boring-looking boxes with a minimal
amount of printed information. Boxes with advertisements such as “Your Beautiful Jewelry From Needless-Markup in America Has Arrived!” will probably
never arrive.
Don’t Expect Help From the Authorities
Police have little interest in credit card fraud. Even other parties in the credit
card payments system take the attitude that if your small business is dumb enough
to be tricked, then learn a lesson.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 274
Inform Cardholders of Returns, Exchange, and Warranty Policies
Many customers these days assume that anything can be returned at any time
for any reason, and problems occur if they don’t get their way. One way to avoid
this is to inform buyers constantly of your policies as they purchase on the
Internet, telephone your call-center, or browse through the printed catalog. This
is especially true of small businesses that are attempting to be the low-price
leader, but must sacrifice on customer service for this model to work. Cardholders
may still complain and file disputes, but fewer will be decided in favor of the
unhappy customer.
Avoid a Confusing Seller Name
Some small businesses advertise and promote under one name, but use a different name for credit card billing purposes. Many e-commerce companies, for
example, operate many different e-stores but use just one credit card processing
account. When the cardholder purchases a gift from FrenchBabyClothes.com
but sees a charge from LKL Enterprises a month later on their credit card statement, confusion may result, and the transaction will be disputed. Resolving this
is normally easy, but the extra time and alarm will be appreciated by no one.
This credit card scamming attempt was so obvious I won’t even
try to pretend we didn’t catch it
immediately.
One morning, an accounting
person came to me and said,
“You’ve got to look at a special
sale we had last night and decide
whether we’ll approve it.”
The customer had purchased
not one, but five digital cameras
in the middle of the night. The
cameras were one of our most expensive models. Lots of accessories were also ordered. Money
seemed like no object to this
buyer. There was no phone number. The address sounded like a
Joe Outsmarts Another Credit Card Scammer
post office box in a grimy area of
New York City.
For just a moment I was
puzzled, when the accounting person said, “Not sure Joe? Did you
see the e-mail address?”
I quickly looked at the screen
again and in an instant announced to all, “Okay, this one is
a definite reject!”
The customer wanted us to
ship next-day express (yet another
red flag) and send the tracking
number to imascammin@aol.com
(the real e-mail address is very
close to this, but cannot be
printed since it contains additional profanity).
Accepting Credit Cards 275
Keep Information Confidential
A final best practice in reducing chargebacks is to keep all information
associated with credit card vendors, and customers, confidential. Your small
business is responsible for the safety of terminal equipment, merchant IDs, passwords, and access to the gateway. Keep equipment in a safe place and turned off
when not in use, and make sure employees have access to cardholder information on a “need to know” basis only. After the transaction is completed, take
measures to make sure that sensitive cardholder information is not available at
all. For example, lock and encrypt spreadsheets and blank-out database fields
displaying this information.
Of course, your small business is backing up data every night (Chapter 14),
so make sure the data is encrypted during backup and stored in a safe place off
the premises. Also, use the features available in modern operating systems
such as Windows 2000 Server or Windows XP to limit access to certain folders
on the Local Area Network, and tell employees they may use only their assigned PC.
This may seem like a lot of work, but if an employee steals such information
and sells it to a credit card scammer, the results would be catastrophic and your
small business might lose its right to accept credit cards. Also, credit card auditors often look into this area when examining the operations of merchants.
IP Address Tracing
Make sure the e-commerce system in use records the cardholder’s IP address (Chapter 14). This can sometimes be used to trace the transaction down to
a particular place, date, and time. More important, however, announce this on
your Website to scare away the bad guys. Unfortunately, IP address tracing is
mostly a scare tactic, because law enforcement authorities will not be enthusiastic about pursuing this matter, regardless of the evidence provided.
Fraud Warnings
Place scary statements throughout the e-store saying that in order to keep
prices low, attempts at fraud are tracked and pursued to the maximum extent
allowed by law. Upon reading this, some of the bad guys will drift off to other
places.
Remaining a Merchant in Good Standing
The survival of many small businesses depends upon the credit card processing and payments system. But this is a bit complex and requires the constant
attention of the small business owner. Allocate some time and be sure to do the
following:
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 276
 Read the agreements from the merchant bank and processor very
carefully. They are not all the same, and include important additional
details on your responsibilities.
 Protect the security of customers by limiting access to the on-line
system and printed records on a “need to know” basis only. Watch
for common employee-related problems such as skimming, where
dishonest employees use their own card readers, or even just a pencil
and paper, to write down customer credit card information. This information is typically sold to other bad people for credit card and
identity theft. Your small business may be fined or terminated if this
problem occurs.
 Only charge for goods and services clearly purchased by the
customer—be careful about taking liberties and increasing charges
or adding fees.
 The merchant bank may audit vendor records, so keep everything
organized and up-to-date.
 Review credit card transactions on a daily basis to make sure all transactions are processed properly. This prevents common problems such
as shipping and not collecting the payment, or collecting the payment
and not shipping. Make sure the totals in your system match the
amounts processed, and later trace the daily batch amounts to actual
deposits into the bank account. Things can happen. Further, these
problems are time-consuming and tedious to deal with if handled
immediately, but accounting problems only get worse when accountants must go back and fix old problems at a later time.
Selecting Credit Card Vendors
Small businesses need to choose a merchant bank, gateway, and processor
before accepting credit card payments. The best place to begin is to ask the bank
now hosting your checking account if it offers credit card merchant banking
services; it will also recommend related providers such as the gateway. Of course,
ask other local banks or get recommendations from business colleagues with
experience in this area. Credit card services vendors are easy to find, and a personal reference from a friend or business colleague is comforting but hardly
necessary.
Beyond this, if your small business is setting up an on-line store, ask the software or services provider which gateways are compatible with their system; not all
processors work with all e-stores. That is good in a way, because these vendors
have presumably qualified the integrity of the credit card services providers.
To find even more vendors, just search for “Credit Card Processor” through
a favorite search engine, and literally millions of links will be returned.
Accepting Credit Cards 277
Be careful, however, since exaggeration and hyperbole are a fact of life in the
credit card processing industry, especially among the many ISOs. Watch out for
this and the many creative garbage-fees that may turn a good deal into an expensive one. These may include:
 Account Setup Fees
 Annual Fees
 Bank Card Setup Fees
 Bank Setup fees
 Cancellation Fees
 Chargeback Fees
 Customer Service Fees
 Daily Batch Fees
 Daily Closeout Fees
 Gateway Access Fees
 Minimum Monthly Service Charge Fee
 Network Access Fees
 NSF (Non-Sufficient Funds) Fees
 Over Limit Fees
 Pass Through Fees
 Retrieval Fees
 Software Licensing Fees
 Statement Fees
 Technical Support Fees
 Termination Fees
 Voice Authorization Fees
 Voice Address Verification System Fees
 Website Access Fees
Just about every service will demand some of these charges, but compare
closely to separate the good deals from the bad. Most small businesses simply
consider the discount rate, but sometimes the real money is in the fees.
Credit cards are a powerful and increasingly significant form of revenues
collection by many small businesses, but knowledge and vigilance are required to
set up and successfully manage the many relationships necessary to fully exploit
the advantages of this complex and important payments system.
This page intentionally left blank 
279
Chapter 14
Everything You Need to Know About
Computers in Just a Few Pages
We begin by asking readers to translate the following VBA code into Java
Script:
Sub VariableN1Dim ()
Dim IX as Integer
Range (“N1:L12”).Select
ActiveCell.Offset (0,3).Select
For IX = 1 To 3
Range ((“N1”), Range(“N1”).End(x1Down)).EntireRow.Copy
Next I
End Sub
Just kidding.
Keeping Computers in Perspective
This is not a technical discussion. The purpose of this chapter is to equip
small business owners with the information that is necessary to purchase and
operate the machines needed to manage the business. There is a lot to know, but
you don’t need to know it all. This chapter is called “Everything You Need to
Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages,” because small business owners
don’t need to know everything. The focus here is on getting by with the least
possible involvement with computers and other technology and keeping the
focus on the business itself. Our concern is with what to buy, security (much
on this), and how to manage a small IT infrastructure.
Computers are ubiquitous, and it is not easy to keep up with the latest hardware, software, Internet services, and concepts. In fact, it can easily become a
major distraction for the small business owner when time is better spent doing
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 280
other things. Over the years, I have come to recognize two approaches to technology and computers by small business owners: There are the “techno” types,”
who consider themselves to be amateur gurus, and the “Jed Clampett” types,
who look at a keyboard with disinterest. I have not formally studied this area but
would wager that the Jed Clampett types are the most successful over time. The
reason is that computers are an immensely powerful tool in business, but they
can also absorb huge amounts of time (studying, purchasing, installing, configuring, updating, fixing, maintaining, learning, tweaking, and just fooling around
with all of the various products and services). This chapter reviews what every
small business owner absolutely must know about information technology to get
by in the world today and run a business—and nothing more. The author has the
license to say these things after having invested over 15 years of his career in
various ends of the IT industry. If you already know a lot about IT, skip this
chapter. On the other hand, many small business owners will find this chapter a
useful guide.
Joe Meets the Jed Clampett of Computers
I recently had a meeting with the
founder and president of a very
successful cosmetics-industry
small business. I will call him
“Jed.”
Jed started the business 20
years ago and now employs over
50 people on two continents. We
talked about various aspects of
the business. As a computer
buff, I couldn’t wait to get to the
question: “So what type of Customer Relationship Management
system is used here Mr.
Clampett?”
“I’m not sure,” he responded
uncomfortably, “but my sales
and marketing VP tells me it’s
one of the best.”
“Okay. Well what is your accounting software?”
“Umm. I know we upgraded
to something really good a while
back and it’s working great
now.”
I thought, “Wow, he doesn’t
know!”
I ventured one more question: “I can probably guess the
software being used here if you
tell me what kind of hardware
you’re running. So what is the
biggest machine here? A UNIX
server, or maybe an AS/400?”
Jed came clean. “I don’t
know that kind of stuff,” he
said. “I just hire good people to
figure that out for me and I buy
what they want. Then I get back
to work and close some more
business.”
You can’t argue with success.
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 281
Definitions
There are terabytes of IT words these days, and they keep changing. But to
get through this chapter, we’ll need to know just a few:
 Browser. A computer application that displays Web pages on computer
workstations. Microsoft Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox are the most
popular browsers in use today.
 Cookies. Small files placed on the computers of Internet users allowing
Websites to remember the user and personalize the experience. Cookies may
also be used for nefarious purposes and often are unknowingly saved on
computers when Internet browsers visit certain sites.
 Domain Naming System (DNS)—Internet databases which translate domain
names and IP addresses back and forth. See chapter 5 for more information.
 Firewall. A protective barrier (hardware or software) between the Internet
and the computers and network within a small business.
 https. A Website that encrypts transmitted data and starts with “https”, rather
than the normal “http”. These sites are especially safe and secure from
snoopers. Example: A credit card holder enters the account number and
receives back a page of recent transactions. In more technical terms, https
uses SSL, or the secure socket layers protocol, where a frequently changing
private key encrypts data that is undecipherable except at the sending and
receiving locations.
 Gigabyte (GB). Computer storage is often measure in bytes. One byte is
simply one character of data. For example, the number “7” is one byte, and
“77” is 2 bytes. A Gigabyte is 1,073,741,824 bytes (2 raised to the 30th power,
or 230). One GB is equal to 1,024 MB (Megabytes). A new computer
workstation should have at least 40 GB of hard disk space, and 512 MB (or
0.5 GB) of memory. As a very rough rule of thumb, a typical employee may
need about 5 GB to 10 GB of storage for workstation system files, applications,
and data.
 Internet Protocol (IP) Address. Information is transferred throughout the
Internet in packets, enveloped by IP addresses. IP addresses take the form of
four digits of up to three characters in length, such as 111.222.333.444 or
987.65.43.2.
 IMAP. See Post Office Protocol
 Local Area Network (LAN). See Network.
 Network (or LAN, Local Area Network). In this context, a network is a group
of client computers (also known as workstations or PCs) connected via
Ethernet cable or wireless devices within a small business environment. Servers
and peripheral devices such as printers are also part of the network. The
LAN is within a closed environment and does not include the Internet.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 282
 Peer-to-peer network. A group of networked computers where any machine
can be, at the same time, both a client and/or a server. Although all machines
are clients, no machine is a dedicated server. All machines have the ability to
access files on all other machines. In simpler terms, a group of workstations
simply connected together via Ethernet or wireless devices is a peer-to-peer
network. Microsoft’s Windows for Workgroups and Artisoft’s LANtastic are
the best known peer-to-peer products.
 Phishing. An Internet user receives fake e-mails (usually warning employees
of fake problems) linking to fraudulent Websites. The e-mail queries are intended to fool recipients into divulging personal financial data such as account sign-in names, passwords, credit card numbers, Social Security numbers,
etc. Phishers then log in to the stolen accounts and transfer funds, make
purchases, steal identities, and further enrich themselves through illegal or
criminal activities.
 Post Office Protocol (POP3). A protocol for retrieving e-mails, stored on a
central repository (or server). Programs such as Microsoft Outlook and
Microsoft Outlook Express are based on POP3. SMTP (Simple Mail Transport Protocol) is used to route e-mail among servers. POP3 remains the most
popular e-mail protocol, but some users now opt for the newer IMAP4
(Internet Message Access Protocol).
 Scum ware, spy ware, trash ware, trojans, mal ware, ad ware, browser hijackers, tracking components, pop-ups, data-miners, etc. Different forms of
badly or maliciously designed software, that fall short of being viruses, but
generally reduce the performance and productivity of computers. For the
most part, these small programs send information to advertisers who then
send back advertisements as pop-up ads and in other forms. The programs
use the disk and processing resources of small business workstations and may
seriously distract employees when the advertisements become overbearing.
Often, clicking on an ad to “remove” the program only makes matters worse.
Scum ware and others are often buried in free downloads of other programs
and work in the background without a user’s knowledge.
 Servers. Computers in a client/server architecture that supply files or services (either to the Internet or to LAN users), and also perform administrative and support functions such as nightly backups, antivirus administration,
software installs, updates (pushed to other computers), and more. Servers are
often kept in secure environments and are more robust than workstations.
 Virus(Computer Virus). Unlike the scum ware and related trash previously
described, viruses are designed to cause harm to computers. These are small
programs that infiltrate systems through e-mail, floppy disks, CDs, network
connections to other machines, and other means. There are thousands of
known computer viruses, and dozens more are found each month. A computer virus can quickly and silently destroy important information on a computer, or render it useless.
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 283
 Workstations (also called “Clients” or “PCs”). Connect to servers and other
workstations and peripherals to request files, services, printing, and other
functions. The client may request file transfer, remote log-ins, printing, or
other available services. Workstations are the machines that do the actual
production work, such as word processing, spreadsheets, accounting, e-mail,
Internet browsing, etc.
A great source for quickly looking up other IT terms is www.webopedia.com.
What Kind of Computers Are Really Needed?
What to Buy
There is a lot to know about buying computers for a small business; and
prices, configurations, and options are always changing. It is true that this market changes so quickly that even the experts have trouble keeping up. What is
the small business owner to do when it’s time to buy new machines?
Actually, the answer is simple: Go into a favorite PC store and buy whatever
is in the middle of the product lineup. Virtually every machine has several times
the power that will ever be needed to run most business applications (such as
word processing, accounting, and spreadsheets), and all have the capability of
connecting to the Internet. Rather than becoming concerned with processor
speeds, processor cache, memory-read rates in nanoseconds, disk-spin rates and
the rest of the technobabble, just get a quick understanding of prices and then
pick something in the middle.
Computers are much more standardized these days, and the chances of buying the wrong machine are about the same as buying a color television that doesn’t
work in a particular home; it’s pretty unlikely. Pricing everywhere is very competitive, which works to the advantage of the small business owner. Fortunately,
“You get what you pay for.” If one machine is a bit more expensive than another,
there is a reason. Chances are, it is a reason that is not relevant to small business
computing needs.
Is there a chance of spending a few dollars extra on unneeded capabilities?
The answer is yes, it’s a virtual certainty. But these machines are so productive,
it won’t matter; so don’t belabor the issue.
New PCs are a great way to improve employee morale. Everyone loves to
work on a hot, new machine, so be sure to take this into account. Also, employees
appreciate working on the latest hardware and software to keep their skills keen
and current.
Finally, note that it is consumers—not small businesses—that need the extra
horsepower, bells, and whistles on computers. Extra capabilities are needed to
run many modern PC-based video games, and the home PC is increasingly
melding into the heart of the home-entertainment center. Most businesses need
only be concerned about running stodgy old office and accounting programs
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 284
and connecting to the Internet—none of which require special capacities. Don’t
feel bad for not buying the most glitzy machines in the shop, because high-end
configurations are just not needed.
Where to Buy
Now that you know what to buy, where is the best place to shop? Many small
businesses simply purchase on the Internet, through well-known sites such as
Dell.com, Gateway.com, Hewlett-Packard (hp.com) and many others, including
eBay. Most buyers browse online and then call to order, which is a great alternative. The main advantage of buying from big-name companies is that products
are well-engineered and reliable, and warranties include one- to three-years’ parts
and labor, 24-hour toll-free help lines, and Internet-based support. Remember,
though, that warranty support covers broken parts and technical mismatches,
not questions such as “How do I set up my email?” Finally, note that while shipping fees are often charged, there is a good chance that sales tax will not be
incurred (especially from smaller vendors), because out-of-state buyers are supposed to report the purchase to local authorities and instead pay a use tax.
Another alternative is a local retailer. Here also, prices are very competitive
(markups are usually 5 percent to 15 percent), immediate delivery with no shipping
charges are the norm, but sales taxes are charged in most states. It’s possible to get
to know the retailer a bit and gain the benefits of a relationship. Most retailers will
stand by their products to keep the business, but of course PC stores come and go.
Don’t expect huge discounts from a local dealer, because there is little margin to
play with. Also, local retailers can normally send or refer technical experts to
visit your site and fix problems, for a price. But of course, all small businesses
should have this type of technical expertise on-call anyway (see Chapter 8).
Finally, there are the big-box stores such as Best Buy and Circuit City. Here,
prices are also competitive. The selection may be a bit larger, but the level of
help and expertise is a little less.
Is there a chance that a machine purchased at FreddieTheGeekPCs.com cannot
be supported by a local fix-it contractor? The answer is no. All machines these days
are made of standard components and everything is easily available everywhere.
In conclusion, prices are competitive just about everywhere, the purchase
decision may come down largely to time and convenience, and it’s hard to make
a mistake in deciding where to buy.
“Must Have” Business Computer Programs
Operating System
The operating system is the overall unifier of the components of any computer, from hardware to software and everything in between. For all practical
purposes, a small business should choose only one operating system; it’s just way
too much work to learn and support more than this.
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 285
Many operating systems are available for different types and sizes of machines. These include Microsoft Windows XP (and predecessors such as Windows 2000 and Windows 98), Linux, Apple MAC OS, UNIX (in several versions),
and others.
The criteria for purchasing an operating system are:
 Can I run all of the hardware and software needed on this OS?
 Is it easy to find outside support?
 What is the price?
Does this question require a lot of analysis? The answer is no. Just go with
Microsoft’s latest operating system for business machines, currently XP Pro. It
is true that Microsoft and Windows have experienced their share of controversy
over the years, but this is inherent in any product that controls the market. Ironically, the reason to go with Microsoft is that it does indeed control the market.
The system has its share of flaws, but every major business software vendor
writes its programs first for Microsoft, and if this is a success, then the program
may be rewritten for the other operating systems. For small business owners,
this translates into lots and lots of software to do just about anything, and battalions of capable support people available at reasonable prices for installations,
support, fixes, and maintenance.
A possible exception is firms in the advertising or creative areas, where perhaps the industry norm is Apple-based systems. If most of the programs used in
your industry are Apple-based, and if employees are more comfortable with Apple,
then this must be considered against Windows.
A Small Step Forward, Every Day
It is important for small business
owners to understand how to use an
operating system and the business
applications programs described
here. Although the theme of this chapter is “Everything You Need to Know”
rather than “Everything There Is to
Know,” the programs described here
are so commonplace that small business owners risk being out of touch
if not familiar with the operating system, word processing, e-mail, Internet
browsing, and perhaps other applications, such as spreadsheets.
Here is a great tip: There is too
much to learn all at once, so every
day, learn one new feature of one
program, no matter how small. For
example, learn how to center text in
the word processing program. The
next day, learn how to use the spellcheck feature.
Also, keep a mental list of other
concepts to learn later. Learn the feature either from the Help sections or
by asking someone. For a list of features and interesting things to know,
press the F1 key and print some
pages from the Help section to read
in the evening.
Small business owners may become immensely productive through
this small investment of time in their
IT systems.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 286
Business Programs
Almost all business machines should be capable of running programs for the
following functions: word processing, electronic spreadsheets, e-mail, viewing
pictures, and a browser to see pages from the Internet.
Word Processing, Spreadsheets, and More: Microsoft Office
There are many products on the market, but once again, most Small businesses should simply go with the Microsoft offerings. These include Microsoft
Word for word processing, Excel for electronic spreadsheets, Picture Manager
(previously known as Photo Editor) for viewing pictures, Outlook or Outlook
Express for e-mail, and Internet Explorer for browsing the Internet.
Microsoft groups these products together, and the packaged price is far less
than buying each component separately. The suite of products is called Microsoft
Office, which comes in different versions and price points depending upon the
products included. All the products work together, so there is no concern about
transferring information between them. Moreover, a large majority of vendors,
customers, and others use these same products, so your small business will be on
an equal footing with the rest of the world and there will be no need to translate
documents as they are sent or received.
To learn more about the latest product groupings and prices, see
www.microsoftoffice.com. Microsoft does not sell directly to small businesses.
Instead, buy these products from a computer vendor (hopefully installed upon
purchase), from most big-box electronics stores, or just shop on-line.
For Internet browsing, there is no need to purchase anything, because
Microsoft includes Internet Explorer in the operating system (to be discussed
shortly).
Some hold that Microsoft’s products are not the best, but they are used by
far more clients than all other competitors combined. Further, few users ever
need or learn the advanced features anyway. These are older, mature products
now. It’s been a long time since anyone came out with an exciting new word
processing or similar feature, and these products will work just fine for just about
any small business. They are also reasonably easy to learn, and acceptably priced.
It’s easy to find all types of support, including books in just about any store, help
from www.microsoft.com, or the services of local contractors who can install,
train, and maintain these applications.
E-mail
E-mail is an essential form of communication, and every small business owner
should use it. Those who do not are increasingly marginalized from the mainstream of any business.
There are two basic forms of e-mail: POP3 (or alternatively SMTP) and
Web-based. In POP3 (Post Office Protocol, Version 3), e-mail is delivered to a
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 287
workstation for viewing; Web-based e-mail remains on another server but is
viewed from the local workstation using a browser such as Internet Explorer.
The most ubiquitous POP3 e-mail program is Microsoft Outlook, or its little
brother, Outlook Express (next paragraph). Outlook is normally sold together
with other products, such as Microsoft Word, as previously described. It is a
solid, proven program, and most small business owners should go with this offering because it is well-integrated with other Microsoft products and other thirdparty software; it is cheap and painless to learn; and support is easy to find.
There are other great e-mail programs, but Outlook is a good default if there are
no other preferences.
Outlook Express is a free e-mail program included with Microsoft Internet
Explorer (also free). It works just fine but has fewer features than Outlook.
Outlook Express does not include a fully integrated calendar, a tasks or notes
folder, or spam filters. These features are not important to most users, and so
Outlook Express is a good choice. Big brother Outlook is used in most small
business situations because it is packaged in the Microsoft Office suite of products, and because Outlook Express cannot retrieve e-mail from a Microsoft exchange server (used in more formal small business settings for e-mail and
collaborative work).
Web-based e-mail does not require a special program but is simply viewed
through an Internet browser. Free e-mail accounts are available from many sources,
including Yahoo (www.yahoo.com), MSN (www.MSN.com), and Netscape
(www.netscape.com). A good Web-based e-mail alternative will offer free storage of 250MB or more (useful for temporary storage of files), a service that
scans e-mails for viruses (but don’t rely solely upon this for protection), filters
to stop spam, and an address book. Another important advantage of Web-based
e-mail is that new and old messages may be viewed anytime, anywhere, as long as
the user has Internet access. POP3 e-mail is installed and delivered to a particular machine, and some serious reconfiguring is required to receive e-mail elsewhere. E-mail already received and sitting on one workstation cannot be viewed
at all from other machines.
At many small businesses, POP3 e-mail can also be viewed through an Internet
browser, but technical expertise is required to make this available.
Many people have two or more e-mail accounts for different purposes, both
POP3 and Web-based. Users may then send e-mail to themselves (handy when
traveling, for work performed at home, and for other reasons).
Internet Browser
For most people, the browser is just the big blue “e” that is clicked to go on
the Internet. This is Microsoft Internet Explorer (www.microsoft.com/windows/
ie), which has ruled the browser world since it dethroned Netscape Navigator in
the 1990s.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 288
IE does the job just fine, but as a result of its near universal acceptance,
Explorer has been heavily targeted by hackers and virus writers. Some have been
critical of the security flaws in IE and its many updates and patches, so about 10
million users have switched to Mozilla Firefox. Firefox (information at
www.mozilla.org ; download at www.download.com) claims that its product works
faster, and with greater safety, than IE. In fact, both products work fine, except
that Explorer users must be much more conscientious about security. And both
are free.
Internet browsers allow users to decide upon certain security, privacy, and
content settings. Ask someone who knows about this somewhat complex area to
set these options in the best way for your situation. Also, learn about deleting
cookies and unneeded files to make sure time spent on the Internet is a productive experience.
Antivirus
The breach of computer security is a growing threat and poses real risks to
small business owners. It’s only a matter of time before any small business is
threatened by outside attacks that either render machines unusable or steal confidential company or customer data.
Many books are available on how to protect business networks from outside
attack. These are written for computer security experts, and as a small business
grows, the time will come when this talent is needed. For now, much of this can
be condensed into a few simple procedures. Protecting your investment in IT
equipment is actually not difficult, and requires just a little understanding of the
different types of threats and how to manage them.
Computer viruses are small programs that cause intentional harm to computers. Most arrive these days via e-mail, but viruses can enter machines from
other points, such as floppy disk drives, zip drives, CDs brought in by employees, and other means.
Fortunately, viruses are easy to stop if the right measures are taken. Two
types of measure are required: antivirus (AV) software protection and informed
employees.
For antivirus protection, use offerings from either Symantec
(www.symantec.com, formerly known as Norton Antivirus) or McAfee
(www.mcafee.com). Both are solid products with a large user base, so it will be
easy to find support.
Every workstation and server in a small business must be protected, first by
installing the AV program and then by telling the machines to continually check
with the vendor to see if there are new antivirus definitions.
What’s the difference between the antivirus program and the antivirus definitions? Look at it this way. Doctors (the program) examine patients (computers) for problems, but then the doctor needs the latest medicines (the antivirus
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 289
definitions) to treat the latest infections. The best doctor in the world cannot
help much without knowing about the latest infectious diseases and the medicines for treatment. It’s the latest viruses that pose the greatest problems.
Both the Symantec and McAfee products can be configured to call-home to
their respective antivirus definitions servers weekly, or even daily, to see if there
is anything new to worry about. This is normally scheduled to take place at night,
when the machines are not busy.
A small business is still exposed, however, if a new virus outbreak occurs just
after the latest antivirus definitions file is downloaded. Then, if someone opens
an infected file attached to an e-mail (or on a floppy drive, etc.), the virus executes and does its dirty work on that machine. It can also jump around and
infect every other machine on the Local Area Network.
The damage can usually be undone by following the instructions downloaded
from the AV vendor, but this often requires considerable time from a computer
pro, and downtime as employees sit idle, waiting for everything to be fixed.
PCs are also exposed to computer viruses when a malicious or well-meaning
but dumb employee screws with the AV program. The program may be deinstalled or configured in a bad way, such that the machine becomes easy prey to
any virus, new or old.
This exposure may be resolved by using a slightly different model, where all
workstations are “locked-down” and managed by a server. Employees then cannot de-install or reconfigure the AV program; only the administrator has the
right to do this. Symantec calls their version of this product “Symantec Antivirus
Corporate Edition” or “Small Business Edition” and McAfee’s is “McAfee
VirusScan ASaP”.
If a small business has more than three or four workstations in a peer-topeer architecture, it’s time to get a server and upgrade to the more secure versions of these AV products.
Programs to Stop Scum Ware, Spy Ware, Trash Ware, Trojans,
Mal Ware, Ad Ware, Browser Hijackers, Tracking Components,
Pop-Ups, Data-Miners, Etc.
As noted in the definitions section at the beginning of this chapter, these
maliciously designed programs can bring a computer to its knees and stop all
productive work, as employees are overwhelmed with advertisements. Anyone
browsing the Internet without protection from scum ware and others will quickly
be bombarded with ads and unable to continue working.
Without permission or knowledge, these recklessly designed and distributed
nuisances track Internet surfing habits, use computing assets to send this data to
others, watch shopping habits, force Internet browser to use advertisers’ sites as
their home page, and change important system files. There are obvious and frightening privacy and security implications to all of this.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 290
Joe Succumbs to Ad-Bombardment During Big Sales Presentation
I recently met with the owners of a
small business to give a sales pitch
on a concept developed for a
Website and e-store. The client was
a bit naïve about computers but told
me in advance I would get to use
their newest workstation.
I arrived and after some small
talk, it was time for the big show. Of
course, I had prepared everything
in advance, and my materials were
located on various Internet-based
servers.
The first task was to open a
browser window and go to the first
Internet site of my presentation. I
never got that far. The workstation
was new, but the Internet browser
had very lax security settings. One
of the employees had already done
a bit of Internet product-pricing and
marketing research for a competitive analysis. To scum purveyors on
the Internet, this looked like plainold shopping.
I connected to the Internet,
opened the first browser window,
but could get no further. As I began typing the address of my first
Internet site, a blizzard of pop-up
ads appeared. I tried to close a few,
but they were popping open far faster
than I could close them. I soon gave
up and shut down the machine.
When I restarted, the first job
was not my sales presentation but
configuring the machine so that it
could properly work on the Internet.
I had to take several measures to
get around the problems temporarily,
because the solution to these disturbances were actually on the
Internet.
After an hour or so, I had set up
an antivirus program, scanned the
machine, and fixed an infection.
Then I installed a program to protect the machine from scum ware
and its evil cousins, and scanned
the machine and deleted dozens of
data-mining cookies and related
trash. Along the way, I increased the
security settings in the browser and
deleted a few malicious processes
that ran silently in the background.
No doubt about it, I was a hero.
The machine had been useless, but
I had brought it back to health. It
could now roam the Internet, hold
its own, and defend itself from all
the bad things out there.
The only problem is that the patience of my hot prospects had worn
thin. They had a limited clock for
things-computer anyway, and were
getting hungry. “Let’s just talk it
over at lunch,” they said.
I was unenthusiastic about
skipping my big presentation, but
hunger ruled. We discussed the
idea for a few minutes at lunch, but
without the visual impact of the
Internet. Because one of their few
Internet experiences was my hijacked presentation, where advertisements derailed everything, the
initial excitement faded away and
the deal was put on the backburner, unlikely to come to life
again anytime soon.
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 291
All workstations should therefore have protection from this blight, through
programs such as ZoneAlarm Pro (from Encore Software, and available at
www.download.com), or Lavasoft Ad-aware Professional SE (available at
www.lavasoft.com and also at www.download.com). The programs run in a similar manner to the antivirus programs previously described, where the latest definitions must be downloaded periodically. Then a scan is performed and the trash
may be removed.
Pop-up ads are a related nuisance, and Internet users are bombarded with
advertising windows that open on the computer screen faster than they may be
closed. The ZoneAlarm program already described contains a pop-up blocker to
resolve this problem. Another simple alternative is available for free from Google
in a small program that may be downloaded and installed from http://
toolbar.google.com. Or just go to Google.com and search for “google pop up
stopper.” Finally, Earthlink offers a free combination pop-up stopper and antiPhishing toolbar, as described in the “No Phishing” section. This is available at
www.earthlink.net/earthlinktoolbar/download/.
Contact Manager
A contact manager is a database dedicated to keeping track of all persons,
businesses, and communications of importance to a small business. Contact
managers may sound unnecessary to entrepreneurs used to manual systems, but
these powerful tools are easy to learn and can offer a critical competitive edge.
Two contact managers dominate the market for small businesses: ACT by
Best Software, and Goldmine from Frontrange Solutions. Both are capable products and have similar features.
At the simplest level, a contact manager keeps tracks of names, addresses,
and telephone numbers. Other fields in the database may be filled in such that
users can ask questions such as, “I met this customer from Florida a few years
ago and forget the company name but remember that they sold truck parts. What
is the name, company, address, telephone number, and Website of the person I
met, and what communications did we exchange?”
These applications can keep records of all telephone, fax, mail, e-mail, and
advertising communications, and can sort names to build mailing lists, print customized letters and mailing labels, and send faxes and e-mails directly to selected
groups.
New contacts may be entered or changed at any time, and lists may be purchased from outside sources such as InfoUSA (see also Chapter 4) and merged
with existing records. This is a great way to quickly build an effective sales prospect list.
Many small businesses use these products to manage salespeople and marketing campaigns. The typical setup involves a contacts database that can be shared
by everyone simultaneously. Sales reps may be assigned accounts, and managers
can easily monitor all sales activities, including call notes and correspondence.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 292
Setting this up may be a bit complicated, so small business owners may delegate the task to a knowledgeable pro. But learning to use the program after
setup is easy and intuitive.
Protecting and Maintaining IT Investments
Rules for Employees
All employees should be informed about the dangers of using computers and
the Internet, and follow certain rules regarding use of IT equipment. If just one
person screws up one time, all the machines at a small business can be put out of
action for days until a computer maintenance pro is paid a lot of money.
These guidelines could be incorporated into the employee handbook (Chapter 6) but must be distributed and continually promoted so that all are aware:
 Employees may not add or install any programs, Internet services, or
even update programs without permission in advance. Programs and
updates may contain embedded viruses, or inadvertently cause
problems with other hardware or software. Scum ware often describes
itself as a “critical update” to benevolent programs.
 Everyone should check twice a day to make sure the antivirus
protection on workstations is indeed working. Ditto for the anti-scumware program and antiphishing programs. (More on this later.)
 E-mails often arrive with files attached. Employees should immediately
delete and never open files from unknown sources (because much is
scum-ware-laden spam). But there is no danger in simply viewing email messages.
 Extreme caution should be used when opening files even from known
persons, because many viruses burrow into a friend’s machine, and in
seconds then send themselves to everyone in the friend’s address book.
(See “Joe Gets a Virus From a Nice Friend.”)
 Do an anti-scum-ware scan and then reboot at the end of each business
day, so the machine is fresh the next morning.
 Watch the Web-browser toolbar to see known Phishing fraud websites.
Be alert for new ones.
Rules for Small Business Owners
 Have a network administrator and troubleshooter who is always
available by cell phone, and who can be at the site within a few
business hours. Pay this person to take an inventory of your systems
so that the original layout is known when trouble occurs.
 Back up every machine every day. (More on this later.)
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 293
 Maintain all IT investments with the “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it”
strategy (except for security-related items).
 Install the following security tools on every computer: antivirus,
anti-scum-ware, and antiphishing (as described previously).
 Check on-line accounts regularly and look for unexplained activity.
 Consider changing account numbers, or opening and closing new
accounts, when employees leave or if the information is otherwise
compromised.
 Change passwords every 30 days, but don’t be predictable about the
exact time or the new passwords.
 Make sure that Internet browsers and Internet firewalls are always
up-to-date with the latest security patches.
 Educate employees about the dangers of using the Internet.
Joe Gets a Virus From a Nice Friend
A very knowledgeable and savvy computer pro was helping me with a
project, and one morning he sent me
an e-mail with a small file attached.
The short note said to open the file.
This was unexpected and looked
a bit suspicious, but hey, this guy was
a pro and knew much more than me.
There was no way he would send me
a virus.
I clicked on the program and saw
dozens of lines of strange computer
code flash on the screen. I knew it
was a virus, but before I could react,
the program completed and the computer seemed normal again. After a
few minutes, though, I knew something was terribly wrong. I could not
browse the Internet because strange
sites kept popping up, the e-mail program was disabled, and other programs crashed. Then the computer
froze.
A coworker ran in a few seconds
later and said he had the same problem. I acted surprised. I was embarrassed to tell him that it was because
I had uncorked a virus, and it jumped
around our network and infected all
of the other machines. The normal
procedure when this occurs is to
panic, and then research the problem at the Internet site of the antivirus
program vendor. But this was not possible, because the virus blocked their
site.
We fixed the problem over the next
eight hours by begging a neighbor to
allow us to research the problem on
one of his workstations. With this, we
disconnected the cables going to
each of our machines, executed a tedious checklist of complex tasks, and
then put our network back together.
An entire day of work was lost by eight
people.
My friend was not at fault, because
he did not know that the virus had
infected his machine and had sent
itself out to every person in his address book. I was embarrassed to tell
him, because he assumed that I
would not fall victim to such a wellknown way of getting infected.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 294
Death to Phish
Phishing is a very rapidly growing scam these days, and employees should be
on the alert for e-mails from even the most trusted sources. Phishing occurs
when an inattentive, busy, or just dumb employee responds to a message such as
the following, and your account and money are now under the exclusive control
of someone really bad.
Joe No Fool With Phishing
The following is an e-mail Phishing scam. I didn’t respond,
but make sure no one at your small business gets fooled by
something like this:
Dear Big Fee Bank Customer,
We recently reviewed your account and suspect that it may
have been accessed by an unauthorized third party. Protecting the security of your account and of the small business
bank network is our primary concern.
Therefore, as a preventive measure, we have temporarily
limited access to sensitive account features. To restore your
account access, please take the following steps to ensure that
your account has not been compromised:
1. Log in to your big fee Internet banking account.
In case you are not enrolled in Internet banking,
you will have to fill in all the required information,
including your name and account number.
2. Review your recent account history for any
unauthorized withdrawals or deposits, and
check your account profile to make sure changes
have not been made. If any unauthorized activity
has taken place on your account, report this to
the big fee banking staff immediately.
To get started, please click the following link:
www.BigFee.com (Fake link to small business bank but really
goes to Phishers). We apologize for any inconvenience this
may cause, and appreciate your assistance in helping us maintain the integrity of the entire big fee banking system.
Sincerely,
The Big Fee Banking Team
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 295
Phishing is now the rage among Internet scammers, and large Internet merchants, including well-known banks, merchants, major on-line retailers, credit
card vendors, and other household names, are incensed that their good names
and logos are being used on a wholesale basis to trick customers into revealing
sensitive account information and becoming the victims of identity theft and
fraud. Phishing scams typically convince an astonishing 5 percent of recipients
into responding. This could be you or anemployee.
One of the most frustrating dimensions of Phishing is that you, the legitimate
owner of the account, must then convince the bank, credit card service, or vendor that you are the real owner, since the Phisher now has exclusive access to the
account.
The best way to stop Phishing is never to click links in e-mails. Instead, open a
new browser window and type in the correct address yourself.
The risks of Phishing can be further reduced by installing a Web-browser
toolbar on every workstation to warn against known Phishing fraud websites. A
good one is the Earthlink ScamBlocker (part of their browser and pop-up stopper toolbar) available for free at www.earthlink.net/earthlinktoolbar/download.
Small business owners and all e-mail users must still remain vigilant to Phishing
schemes.
Data Backups
More and more small business owners recognize that their most valuable
asset is information; and most information is stored on workstations and servers
and is not backed up until a disaster occurs. This is like the proverbial closing of
the barn door after the horse runs away.
Think of the many different ways your small business may experience losing
important data, such as the accounting system. These may include:
 Fire
 Earthquake, flood, hurricane
 Theft (and resale of your data and equipment)
 Virus attack, hackers
 Power surge
 Accidental overwrite
 Deleted files by employee sabotage, or even by well-meaning
employees
 Disk crash
It is only a matter of time before a small business falls victim to one of these
threats, so if you run a serious business, data backup should be of paramount
concern.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 296
One of your most important tasks is to decide which data to back up, and
how frequently. Remember that the newest data is always the most important.
The best answer is to schedule a backup of all data every night, or at least back
Backing Up the Small Business
Owners Manual
This book was produced on a PC probably much like yours. The writing took
about 600 hours over about six months,
in sessions of about three hours each.
The author did not want to lose work
due to the computer problems described above or for any reason, so the
following measures were taken:
1. Enter text.
2. Text immediately backed up on
mirrored SCSI (business
grade) disk drives.
3. Tape backup every night on 20
rotating tapes. Remove tape
and store off-site the next day.
4. All files synchronized between
home and office machines
every two days.
5. All files compressed,
encrypted, and sent to an online backup service provider
every week.
Note that all of these measures were
automated except Step 1.
Indeed, a disk crash wiped out the
entire book a month before the first
draft was finished, but everything was
easily restored. Only an area-wide meteor hit could destroy all of the copies.
up files that have changed recently.
This is increasingly possible and
affordable with modern backup
systems for small businesses. To
accomplish this, additional hardware, software, and media may be
needed.
A backup device (such as a
tape drive) should be installed on
a server, but it can run on workstations. This chapter assumes
that backups will be run from a
server. Backup software allows
data to be collected from all machines on a network. During the
collection process, data may be
checked for viruses, verified for integrity, encrypted, and compressed
to save space.
Many businesses forget to
backup laptops, even though
laptops are especially vulnerable
to theft and accidents; so include
laptop backups in your plans.
Hardware and Media
Tape backups have always
been my favorite. Data written to
tape has been around since the
1950s, and for decades was the
only feasible backup device. Tape
is easy to use, has a huge capacity
(up to 160 GB per 8mm tape), and
can be quickly removed and stored
off the premises. Here is a comparison of various devices:
 Tape. Tapes are cheap, durable, and can be removed from the premises
and stored in a safe location. Industrial strength backup software is
available from many vendors, allowing different jobs to be saved and
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 297
scheduled for quiet times of the day. Tapes may also be encrypted
and checked for viruses. But tape write and recovery times are relatively
slow—and tapes hate magnets. Magnets may silently corrupt data,
and this can remain unknown until restoration time. Capacity: up to
160GB (170,000 MB) per 8MM tape (there are several other formats;
all are fine).
 Zip-Drives. Tens of millions of zip-drives have been sold to both
consumer and small business users since the zip was introduced in
1995. They are popular because the capacity is six times greater than
that of a floppy. It is also faster and the media is durable, easy to
store, and can be password-protected. Different jobs can be saved
and scheduled through backup software. Capacity: 0.7 GB or 750 MB.
 CD ROMs. A popular alternative among small businesses, but maybe
not the greatest idea because the process is manual (cannot be
scheduled automatically), write times are lengthy, the CD media is
cheap but a bit delicate, and multiple CDs must be used for all but the
smallest jobs. As business grows, a large off-premises storage location
and good organization will be needed (try finding one lost document
among 1,000 CDs with cryptic labels). Security may also be a problem
because just about any thief will have a computer capable of reading a
CD. Capacity: 0.61 GB or 650 MB capacity.
 DVDs. This alternative is much the same as CDs except that DVDs
have a much larger capacity. DVDs are now sold in five different
formats that are not cross-compatible, and this can be a headache.
DVDs are also much more expensive than CDs. Capacity: 4.7 GB or
5,000 MB.
 Removable Hard Disk. Hard Drives were once delicate; but rugged,
portable disks are now available in huge capacities. The drives are not
expensive, and prices are always headed south, so these devices may
someday replace tape, especially since write and recovery speeds are
much faster. Professional backup software may be used to set up and
run jobs, with features including data encryption, virus checks, and
password protection. But removable hard drives are tempting to steal,
and data may easily be seen by anyone with a PC, a little knowledge,
and a few minutes. Capacity: Up to 60 GB or 64,000MB.
Prices cannot be discussed here because they change often, and because
they vary, depending upon the device age and capacity. For example, an older
Exabyte tape drive may be found on eBay for $25, but a newer model may sell
for $1,000.
A good range of backup devices, including current pricing, can be seen at
www.iomega.com. See www.exabyte.com for tape backup alternatives.
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 298
Two backup devices should be purchased at the same time, in case one later
fails. Otherwise, it may take significant time to find, purchase, and receive a
compatible piece of hardware.
Backup Software
Backup software is not essential in the beginning, but as the business becomes more formidable, it will be important to use professional products so that
the backup process can be scheduled and automated. In this way, important files
will not be forgotten, and the backups run automatically at night when you’re
home sleeping.
Operating systems from Microsoft normally include backup capabilities, but
they’re not very good, and few stick with the Microsoft option for long. Veritas
Backup Exec is a great product used by many small businesses. BEX is normally
installed on a server, and runs every night when the machines are quiet by methodically moving around to each machine and pulling files through the server
and onto tape.
Backups are “differential,” “incremental,” or “full.” Differential and incremental backups include only the files changed or created since the last full
backup, so they are smaller and take less time. Full backups include all files,
but several tapes over several nights may be needed. Note that during the backup
process, a virus check is normally performed, and files are encrypted in case a
tape is stolen.
The next morning, tapes are removed and then stored off the premises in
case of disaster.
The objective for most small business owners is to purchase a server with the
backup devices already installed, or add to an existing machine. A computer pro
should set up the hardware and software, because this is a complex one-time
operation. Then, explain your operation and let the computer maven set up automated backup jobs. When everything is ready to go, get a short presentation
on how to use the software, insert and remove media, and how to recover files.
This part is not difficult.
On-Line Backup Services
A different approach to backups is to use Internet-based solutions, where
backup jobs run from local machines at night (as previously described), but files
are sent to a remote server. The information is then held at an off-site location
until needed, and can then be downloaded and restored to the original machine
or a new one.
The advantages here are that no additional hardware, media, or off-site
storage locations are needed. Small business owners also do not need to worry
about loading and unloading tapes or disks every day, and there is much less
Everything You Need to Know About Computers in Just a Few Pages 299
maintenance. Security is tight also because data may be encrypted, and most
locations claim that access to the secure locked server rooms with airconditioning
and high-quality electrical power is tightly controlled.
Pricing may be an issue, however, especially as more and more data accumulate over time. The average monthly bill may vary from $35 to $350 per month,
averaging about $50. This depends upon the number of machines backed up, and
the quantity of data. You may also need to pay more for a faster Internet uplink
connection.
Additional information and alternatives may be found by searching for
“Online Backup Service” on a favorite search engine, or by visiting
www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Data Recovery
Many small businesses methodically back up their machines on a regular
basis, but when disaster strikes, they are chagrined to find that data recovery is
not possible, usually due to minor misunderstandings.
For this reason, it is important to do test backups, and then recover files to
make sure that everything is working as expected.
Also, make sure employees know that backups are taking place at night, and
encourage them to ask for needed files that have somehow disappeared.
One area we have not reviewed here is building a Website and e-store; this is
discussed completely in Chapter 5.
This chapter tells you, the small business owner, what you need to know
about computers and computing to run your small business. There will always be
an endless array of distracting new products, services, and software streaming
onto the market, but entrepreneurs need to keep everything in perspective and
focus on running the business with computers rather than letting computers run
the business.
This page intentionally left blank 
301
Afterword
In the first few sentences of this book we heard that “success is 90 percent
perspiration and 10 percent inspiration.” Nowadays, this expression may be adjusted to “success is 90 percent information and 10 percent perspiration.” Hopefully, you opened this book with a lot of information about your particular area
of business expertise, and now close it with a lot more about all of the different
hats you must wear as a small business owner—from insurance pro to recruiting
expert.
But now it’s time for just a few words on the inspiration and perspiration
parts.
For decades, there has been an endless stream of books on how to cut through
it all and just get rich, usually by working for yourself as a small business owner.
There are two variations of this book: one type encourages hard work; the other
provides a strategy where hard work is minimized by working smarter or tougher
so that others do the hard work. I have read my share of the latter (often wondering how they puffed up an idea that can explained in 25 pages into a 200-page
book), and while some of the information is useful, there is no getting around the
hard work.
Even more amusing are the dozens of “get rich” infomercials on late-night
television. I often watch them for a few minutes after working late into the night,
before going to bed. I learn new ways to spend a few hundred dollars, skim
through some manuals and tapes, and get into a small business that will quickly
yield the easy lifestyle we all want—a huge beachfront house with yachts and
parties and family all around. In this scenario, I would make a few phone calls
every morning in my Hawaiian shirt and then have lunch by the pool before a
game of golf. None of the people in these infomercials seem all that smart, yet
they are wealthy and don’t work very hard.
Don’t expect it to be that way. The world is too competitive these days, and
small business owners must work hard, fast, and smart to keep ahead. There is
no letting up and there is no finish line where it’s time to relax and count the
money. Just when revenues begin coming in from a new product, it’s time to beef
up the accounting system. Then it’s off to shop for a new warehouse or decide
THE SMALL BUSINESS OWNER’S MANUAL 302
how to finance a new piece of equipment. After that, deal with computer problems and meet with unhappy customers. All the while, the small business owner
must plan for the next product.
Everything is moving ahead at a faster and faster pace, so small business
owners must work hard just to keep up with the latest news and information.
As things get even busier, it’s time to find even more time in the day to
recruit, hire, and train new employees. The business is growing, and there is no
Small Business COO Works a Little Too Hard
A small business owner had grown
his firm to dizzying heights over a
20-year period, but was tired and
recognized that it was time to bring
in professional management. Like
many entrepreneurs, he had taken
the business as far as he could
and was not experienced in dealing with big numbers. We all gave
him credit for understanding it was
time to step back.
The new Chief Operating Officer
(COO) was a hard worker. I mean
really hard. I mean really really
hard. He regularly chewed out the
professional staff for not working
until 10 p.m. He scowled when others went to lunch while he ate a
microwaved potato at his desk. He
didn’t walk around the office, he
stormed. No one dared talk to him
or even make eye contact.
Once he corned me in a busy
hallway and asked me a number
from a financial statement that I
had calculated a month ago.
“I don’t remember,” I said. “I’ll
look it up and tell you.”
That wasn’t good enough. The
new COO was livid that I didn’t remember and told me so in front of
everyone.
But he was producing big and
fast-growing numbers, and it’s
hard to argue with success.
The one day he finally went too
far. He threw a tantrum when the
board of directors would not immediately agree to his plans to buy another company. He screamed at the
popular but ageing company
founder and demanded a huge bonus for his hard work over the last
two years.
Despite all his impressive numbers, management decided they
could no longer live with this megalomaniac; however, they needed a
good reason to terminate his
agreement. The legal counsel was
instructed to hire a private detective to follow him around and report things of interest. Finally, a
board meeting was held where the
COO was told that he no longer
possessed sound mental reasoning skills and, for this reason, he
was terminated (with a nice buyout
bonus).
His hard work had yielded a
huge increase in the company’s
value, but at a price too high for all
involved.
Afterword 303
time to relax. Grow or die. There is always something important to do. This will
never change. But rather than buy all those books and tapes, perhaps all you
need to do is keep these last few pointers in mind.
You must integrate your work into your family, spiritual, and personal interests. Hard work is critical because others are affected by the success or failure of
your small business, but cutting out your personal side will likely lead to a shorter
life without much meaning.
Work really hard all the time. If at first you don’t succeed, try again. Persistence pays. (Maybe you’ve heard this before?)
Find happiness in what you have right now. Everyone is disappointed that
things aren’t happening faster, and there will always be stress. But at least you
are working for your own dreams and well-being and not someone else’s. You
won’t have it all by the end of the day or even for many years to come. But all of
this perspiration is an investment in your own destiny.
Well, it’s late and I’m tired and I want to finish this and watch television for
a few minutes before going to bed. A new infomercial just started and it seems
there’s this new opportunity to make a lot of money without working very hard
by owning my own small business.
Meet me at www.tsbom.com
I want to hear your stories and feedback on this book,
and so do other small business colleagues. All of this can
be seen at www.TheSmallBusinessOwnersManual.com.
Also, don’t forget that buyers of this book also have “all
you can eat” download access to the growing number of
legal documents, letters, spreadsheets, links, and information of special interest to small business owners available at this site. Visit regularly because more information
and features are frequently added, and we want you to
be part of the community!
This page intentionally left blank