INTRODUCTION
Good thinkers are always in demand . A person who knows how may always have a job , but the person who
knows why will always be his boss . Good thinkers solve problems , they never lack ideas that can build an
organization , and they always have hope for a better future . Good thinkers rarely find themselves at the mercy
of ruthless people who would take advantage of them or try to deceive them , people like Nazi dictator Adolf
Hitler , who once boasted ,  “ What luck for rulers that men do not think .  ” Those who develop the process of good
thinking can rule themselves—even while under an oppressive ruler or in other difficult circumstances . In short , 
good thinkers are successful . 
I ’ ve studied successful people for forty years , and though the diversity you find among them is astounding , 
I ’ ve found that they are all alike in one way : how they think ! That is the one thing that separates successful
people from unsuccessful ones . And here ’ s the good news . How successful people think can be learned . If you
change your thinking , you can change your life ! 
WHY YOU SHOULD CHANGE YOUR THINKING
It ’ s hard to overstate the value of changing your thinking . Good thinking can do many things for you : 
generate revenue , solve problems , and create opportunities . It can take you to a whole new level—personally
and professionally . It really can change your life . 
Consider some things you need to know about changing your thinking : 
1 . Changed Thinking Is Not Automatic
Sadly , a change in thinking doesn ’ t happen on its own . Good ideas rarely go out and find someone . If you
want to find a good idea , you must search for it . If you want to become a better thinker , you need to work at it
—and once you begin to become a better thinker , the good ideas keep coming . In fact , the amount of good
thinking you can do at any time depends primarily on the amount of good thinking you are already doing . 
2 . Changed Thinking Is Difficult
When you hear someone say ,  “ Now this is just off the top of my head ,  ” expect dandruff . The only people who
believe thinking is easy are those who don ’ t habitually engage in it . Nobel Prize-winning physicist Albert
Einstein , one of the best thinkers who ever lived , asserted ,  “ Thinking is hard work ; that ’ s why so few do it .  ” 
Because thinking is so difficult , you want to use anything you can to help you improve the process . 
3 . Changed Thinking Is Worth the Investment
Author Napoleon Hill observed ,  “ More gold has been mined from the thoughts of man than has ever been
taken from the earth .  ” When you take the time to learn how to change your thinking and become a better thinker , 
you are investing in yourself . Gold mines tap out . Stock markets crash . Real estate investments can go sour . 
But a human mind with the ability to think well is like a diamond mine that never runs out . It ’ s priceless . 
HOW TO BECOME A BETTER THINKER
Do you want to master the process of good thinking ? Do you want to be a better thinker tomorrow than you
are today ? Then you need to engage in an ongoing process that improves your thinking . Irecommend you do
the following : 
1 . Expose Yourself to Good Input
Good thinkers always prime the pump of ideas . They always look for things to get the thinking process
started , because what you put in always impacts what comes out . 
Read books , review trade magazines , listen to tapes , and spend time with good thinkers . And when
something intrigues you—whether it ’ s someone else ’ s idea or the seed of an idea that you ’ ve come up with
yourself—keep it in front of you . Put it in writing and keep it somewhere in your favorite thinking place to
stimulate your thinking . 
2 . Expose Yourself to Good Thinkers
Spend time with the right people . As I worked on this section and bounced my ideas off of some key people 
( so that my thoughts would be stretched )  , Irealized something about myself . All of the people in my life whom I
consider to be close friends or colleagues are thinkers . Now , I love all people . I try to be kind to everyone I meet , 
and I desire to add value to as many people as I can through conferences , books , audio lessons , etc . But the
people I seek out and choose to spend time with all challenge me with their thinking and their actions . They are
constantly trying to grow and learn . That ’ s true of my wife , Margaret , my close friends , and the executives who
run my companies . Every one of them is a good thinker ! 
The writer of Proverbs observed that sharp people sharpen one another , just as iron sharpens iron . If you
want to be a sharp thinker , be around sharp people . 
3 . Choose to Think Good Thoughts
To become a good thinker , you must become intentional about the thinking process . Regularly put yourself
in the right place to think , shape , stretch , and land your thoughts . Make it a priority . Remember , thinking is a
discipline . 
Recently I had breakfast with Dan Cathy , the president of Chick-fil-A , a fast food chain headquartered in the
Atlanta area . I told him that I was working on this book and I asked him if he made thinking time a high priority . 
Not only did he say yes , but he told me about what he calls his “ thinking schedule .  ” It helps him to fight the hectic
pace of life that discourages intentional thinking . Dan says he sets aside time just to think for half a day every
two weeks , for one whole day every month , and for two or three full days every year . Dan explains ,  “ This helps
me ‘ keep the main thing , the main thing ,  ’ since I am so easily distracted .  ” 
You may want to do something similar , or you can develop a schedule and method of your own . No matter
what you choose to do , go to your thinking place , take paper and pen , and make sure you capture your ideas in
writing . 
4 . Act on Your Good Thoughts
Ideas have a short shelf life . You must act on them before the expiration date . World War I flying ace Eddie
Rickenbacker said it all when he remarked ,  “ I can give you a six-word formula for success : Think things through
—then follow through .  ” 
5 . Allow Your Emotions to Create Another Good Thought
To start the thinking process , you cannot rely on your feelings . In Failing Forward , I wrote that you can act
your way into feeling long before you can feel your way into action . If you wait until you feel like doing something , 
you will likely never accomplish it . The same is true for thinking . You cannot wait until you feel like thinking to do
it . However , I ’ ve found that once you engage in the process of good thinking , you can use your emotions to feed
the process and create mental momentum . 
Try it for yourself . After you go through the disciplined process of thinking and enjoy some success , allow
yourself to savor the moment and try riding the mental energy of that success . If you ’ re like me , it ’ s likely to spur
additional thoughts and productive ideas . 
6 . Repeat the Process
One good thought does not make a good life . The people who have one good thought and try to ride it for
an entire career often end up unhappy or destitute . They are the one-hit wonders , the one-book authors , the
one-message speakers , the one-time inventors who spend their life struggling to protect or promote their single
idea . Success comes to those who have an entire mountain of gold that they continually mine , not those who
find one nugget and try to live on it for fifty years . To become someone who can mine a lot of gold , you need to
keep repeating the process of good thinking . 
PUTTING YOURSELF IN THE RIGHTPLACE TO THINK
Becoming a good thinker isn ’ t overly complicated . It ’ s a discipline . If you do the six things I have outlined , 
you will set yourself up for a lifestyle of better thinking . But what do you do to come up with specific ideas on a
day-to-day basis ? 
I want to teach you the process that I ’ ve used to discover and develop good thoughts . It ’ s certainly not the
only one that works , but it has worked well for me . 
1 . Find a Place to Think Your Thoughts
If you go to your designated place to think expecting to generate good thoughts , then eventually you will
come up with some . Where is the best place to think ? Everybody ’ s different . Some people think best in the
shower . Others , like my friend Dick Biggs , like to go to a park . For me , the best places to think are in my car , on
planes , and in the spa . Ideas come to me in other places as well , such as when I ’ m in bed .  ( I keep a special
lighted writing pad on my nightstand for such times .  ) I believe I often get thoughts because I make it a habit to
frequently go to my thinking places . If you want to consistently generate ideas , you need to do the same thing . 
Find a place where you can think , and plan to capture your thoughts on paper so that you don ’ t lose them . When
I found a place to think my thoughts , my thoughts found a place in me . 
2 . Find a Place to Shape Your Thoughts
Rarely do ideas come fully formed and completely worked out . Most of the time , they need to be shaped
until they have substance . As my friend Dan Reiland says , they have to “ stand the test of clarity and
questioning .  ” During the shaping time , you want to hold an idea up to strong scrutiny . Many times a thought that
seemed outstanding late at night looks pretty silly in the light of day . Ask questions about your ideas . Fine tune
them . One of the best ways to do that is to put your thoughts in writing . Professor , college president , and U . S . 
senator S . I . Hayakawa wrote ,  “ Learning to write is learning to think . You don ’ t know anything clearly unless you
can state it in writing .  ” 
As you shape your thoughts , you find out whether an idea has potential . You learn what you have . You also
learn some things about yourself . The shaping time thrills me because it embodies : 
Humor : The thoughts that don ’ t work often provide comic relief . 
Humility : The moments when I connect with God awe me . 
Excitement : I love to play out an idea mentally .  ( I call it “ futuring ” it .  ) 
Creativity : In these moments I am unhampered by reality . 
Fulfillment : God made me for this process ; it uses my greatest gifts and gives me joy . 
Honesty : As I turn over an idea in my mind , I discover my true motives . 
Passion : When you shape a thought , you find out what you believe and what really counts . 
Change : Most of the changes I have made in my life resulted from thorough thinking on a subject . 
You can shape your thoughts almost anywhere . Just find a place that works for you , where you will be able to
write things down , focus your attention without interruptions , and ask questions about your ideas . 
3 . Find a Place to Stretch Your Thoughts
If you come upon great thoughts and spend time mentally shaping them , don ’ t think you ’ re done and can
stop there . If you do , you will miss some of the most valuable aspects of the thinking process . You miss bringing
others in and expanding ideas to their greatest potential . 
Earlier in my life , I have to admit , I was often guilty of this error . I wanted to take an idea from seed thought
to solution before sharing it with anyone , even the people it would most impact . I did this both at work and at
home . But over the years , I have learned that you can go much farther with a team than you can go alone . 
I ’ ve found a kind of formula that can help you stretch your thoughts . It says , 
The Right Thought plus the Right People
in the Right Environment at the Right Time
for the Right Reason = the Right Result
This combination is hard to beat . Like every person , every thought has the potential to become something
great . When you find a place to stretch your thoughts , you find that potential . 
4 . Find a Place to Land Your Thoughts
Author C . D . Jackson observes that “ great ideas need landing gear as well as wings .  ” Any idea that
remains only an idea doesn ’ t make a great impact . The real power of an idea comes when it goes from
abstraction to application . Think about Einstein ’ s theory of relativity . When he published his theories in 1905
and 1916 , they were merely profound ideas . Their real power came with the development of the nuclear reactor
in 1942 and the nuclear bomb in 1945 . When scientists developed and implemented Einstein ’ s ideas , the
whole world changed . 
Likewise , if you want your thoughts to make an impact , you need to land them with others so that they can
someday be implemented . As you plan for the application phase of the thinking process , land your ideas first
with…
Yourself : Landing an idea with yourself will give you integrity . People will buy into an idea only after they
buy into the leader who communicates it . Before teaching any lesson , I ask myself three questions :  “ Do I
believe it ? Do I live it ? Do I believe others should live it ?  ” If I can ’ t answer yes to all three questions , then I
haven ’ t landed it . 
Key Players : Let ’ s face it , no idea will fly if the influencers don ’ t embrace it . After all , they are the people
who carry thoughts from idea to implementation . 
Those Most Affected : Landing thoughts with the people on the firing line will give you great insight . 
Those closest to changes that occur as a result of a new idea can give you a “ reality read .  ” And that ’ s
important , because sometimes even when you ’ ve diligently completed the process of creating a thought , 
shaping it , and stretching it with other good thinkers , you can still miss the mark . 
5 . Find a Place to Fly Your Thoughts
French philosopher Henri-Louis Bergson , who won the Nobel Prize in literature in 1927 , asserted that a
person should “ think like a man of action—act like a man of thought .  ” What good is thinking if it has no
application in real life ? Thinking divorced from actions cannot be productive . Learning how to master the
process of thinking well leads you to productive thinking . If you can develop the discipline of good thinking and
turn it into a lifetime habit , then you will be successful and productive all of your life . Once you ’ ve created , 
shaped , stretched , and landed your thoughts , then flying them can be fun and easy . 
PORTRAIT OF A GOOD THINKER
You often hear someone say that a colleague or friend is a “ good thinker ,  ” but that phrase means something
different to everyone . To one person it may mean having a high IQ , while to another it could mean knowing a
bunch of trivia or being able to figure out whodunit when reading a mystery novel . I believe that good thinking
isn ’ t just one thing . It consists of several specific thinking skills . Becoming a good thinker means developing
those skills to the best of your ability . 
It doesn ’ t matter whether you were born rich or poor . It doesn ’ t matter if you have a third grade education or
possess a Ph . D . It doesn ’ t matter if you suffer from multiple disabilities or you ’ re the picture of health . No matter
what your circumstances , you can learn to be a good thinker . All you must do is be willing to engage in the
process every day . 
In Built to Last , Jim Collins and Jerry Porras describe what it means to be a visionary company , the kind of
company that epitomizes the pinnacle of American business . They describe those companies this way : 
1
A visionary company is like a great work of art . Think of Michelangelo ’ s scenes from Genesis on the
ceiling of the Sistine Chapel or his statue of David . Think of a great and enduring novel like
Huckleberry Finn or Crime and Punishment . Think of Beethoven ’ s Ninth Symphony or Shakespeare ’ s
Henry V . Think of a beautifully designed building , like the masterpieces of Frank Lloyd Wright or
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe . You can ’ t point to any one single item that makes the whole thing work ; it ’ s
the entire work—all the pieces working together to create an overall effect—that leads to enduring
greatness . 
Good thinking is similar . You need all the thinking “ pieces ” to become the kind of person who can achieve
great things . Those pieces include the following eleven skills : 
Seeing the Wisdom of Big-Picture Thinking
Unleashing the Potential of Focused Thinking
Discovering the Joy of Creative Thinking
Recognizing the Importance of Realistic Thinking
Releasing the Power of Strategic Thinking
Feeling the Energy of Possibility Thinking
Embracing the Lessons of Reflective Thinking
Questioning the Acceptance of Popular Thinking
Encouraging the Participation of Shared Thinking
Experiencing the Satisfaction of Unselfish Thinking
Enjoying the Return of Bottom-Line Thinking
As you read the chapters dedicated to each kind of thinking , you will discover that they do not try to tell you
what to think ; they attempt to teach you how to think . As you become acquainted with each skill , you will find that
some you do well , others you don ’ t . Learn to develop each of those kinds of thinking , and you will become a
better thinker . Master all that you can—including the process of shared thinking which helps you compensate
for your weak areas—and your life will change . 

1
Cultivate Big-Picture Thinking 
 “ Where success is concerned , people are not measured in inches , or pounds , or college degrees , or
family background ; they are measured by the size of their thinking .  ” 
—DAVID SCHWARTZ
Big-picture thinking can benefit any person in any profession . When somebody like Jack Welch tells a GE
employee that the ongoing relationship with the customer is more important than the sale of an individual
product , he ’ s reminding them of the big picture . When two parents are fed up with potty training , poor grades , 
or fender-benders , and one reminds the other that the current difficult time is only a temporary season , then they
benefit from thinking big picture . Real estate developer Donald Trump quipped ,  “ You have to think anyway , so
why not think big ?  ” Big-picture thinking brings wholeness and maturity to a person ’ s thinking . It brings
perspective . It ’ s like making the frame of a picture bigger , in the process expanding not only what you can see , 
but what you are able to do . 
Spend time with big-picture thinkers , and you will find that they : 
Learn Continually
Big-picture thinkers are never satisfied with what they already know . They are always visiting new places , 
reading new books , meeting new people , learning new skills . And because of that practice , they often are able
to connect the unconnected . They are lifelong learners . 
To help me maintain a learner ’ s attitude , I spend a few moments every morning thinking about my learning
opportunities for the day . As Ireview my calendar and to-do list—knowing whom I will meet that day , what I will
read , which meetings I will attend—I note where I am most likely to learn something . Then I mentally cue myself
to look attentively for something that will improve me in that situation . If you desire to keep learning , I want to
encourage you to examine your day and look for opportunities to learn . 
Listen Intentionally
An excellent way to broaden your experience is to listen to someone who has expertise in an area where
you don ’ t . I search for such opportunities . One year I spoke to about 900 coaches and scouts at the Senior
Bowl , where graduating football players participate in their last college game . I had the opportunity , along with
my son-in-law , Steve Miller , to have dinner with NFL head coaches Dave Wannstedt and Butch Davis . It ’ s not
often that you get such an opportunity , so I asked them questions about teamwork and spent a lot of time
listening to them . At the end of the evening , as Steve and I were walking to our car , he said to me ,  “ John , I bet
you asked those coaches a hundred questions tonight .  ”  
 “ If I ’ m going to learn and grow ,  ” Ireplied ,  “ I must know what questions to ask and know how to apply the
answers to my life . Listening has taught me a lot more than talking .  ” 
When you meet with people , it ’ s good to have an agenda so that you can learn . It ’ s a great way to partner
with people who can do things you can ’ t . Big-picture thinkers recognize that they don ’ t know lots of things . They
frequently ask penetrating questions to enlarge their understanding and thinking . If you want to become a better
big-picture thinker , then become a good listener . 
Look Expansively
Writer Henry David Thoreau wrote ,  “ Many an object is not seen , though it falls within the range of our visual
ray , because it does not come within the range of our intellectual ray .  ” Human beings habitually see their own
world first . For example , when people arrive at a leadership conference put on by my company , they want to
know where they ’ re going to park , whether they will be able to get a good ( and comfortable ) seat , whether the
speaker will be “ on ,  ” and if the breaks will be spaced right . When I arrive to speak at the same conference , I
want to know that the lighting is good , the sound equipment is operating effectively , whether the speaker ’ s
platform will be close enough to the people , etc . Who you are determines what you see—and how you think . 
Big-picture thinkers realize there is a world out there besides their own , and they make an effort to get
outside of themselves and see other people ’ s worlds through their eyes . It ’ s hard to see the picture while inside
the frame . To see how others see , you must first find out how they think . Becoming a good listener certainly
helps with that . So does getting over your personal agenda and trying to take the other person ’ s perspective . 
Live Completely
French essayist Michel Eyquem de Montaigne wrote ,  “ The value of life lies not in the length of days , but in
the use we make of them ; a man may live long yet live very little .  ” The truth is that you can spend your life any
way you want , but you can spend it only once . Becoming a big-picture thinker can help you to live with
wholeness , to live a very fulfilling life . People who see the big picture expand their experience because they
expand their world . As a result , they accomplish more than narrow-minded people . And they experience fewer
unwanted surprises , too , because they are more likely to see the many components involved in any given
situation : issues , people , relationships , timing , and values . They are also , therefore , usually more tolerant of
other people and their thinking . 
WHY YOU SHOULD RECEIVE THE WISDOM OF BIG-PICTURE THINKING
Intuitively , you probably recognize big-picture thinking as beneficial . Few people want to be closed-minded . 
No one sets out to be that way . But just in case you ’ re not completely convinced , consider several specific
reasons why you should make the effort to become a better big-picture thinker : 
1 . Big-Picture Thinking Allows You to Lead
You can find many big-picture thinkers who aren ’ t leaders , but you will find few leaders who are not bigpicture thinkers . Leaders must be able to do many important things for their people : 
See the vision before their people do . They also see more of it . This allows them to…
Size up situations , taking into account many variables . Leaders who see the big picture discern
possibilities as well as problems to form a foundation to build the vision . Once leaders have done that , 
they can…
Sketch a picture of where the team is going , including any potential challenges or obstacles . The
goal of leaders shouldn ’ t be merely to make their people feel good , but to help them be good and
accomplish the dream . The vision , shown accurately , will allowleaders to…
Show how the future connects with the past to make the journey more meaningful . When
leaders recognize this need for connection and bridge it , then they can…
Seize the moment when the timing is right . In leadership , when to move is as important as what you
do . As Winston Churchill said ,  “ There comes a special moment in everyone ’ s life , a moment for which
that person was born . … When he seizes it… it is his finest hour .  ” 
Whether building roads , planning a trip , or moving in leadership , big-picture thinking allows you to enjoy
more success . People who are constantly looking at the whole picture have the best chance of succeeding
in any endeavor . 
2 . Big-Picture Thinking Keeps You on Target
Thomas Fuller , chaplain to Charles II of England , observed ,  “ He that is everywhere is nowhere .  ” To get
things done , you need focus . However , to get the right things done , you also need to consider the big picture . 
Only by putting your daily activities in the context of the big picture will you be able to stay on target . As
Alvin Toffler says ,  “ You ’ ve got to think about ‘ big things ’ while you ’ re doing small things , so that all the small
things go in the right direction .  ” 
3 . Big-Picture Thinking Allows You to See What Others See
One of the most important skills you can develop in human relations is the ability to see things from the
other person ’ s point of view . It ’ s one of the keys to working with clients , satisfying customers , maintaining a
marriage , rearing children , helping those who are less fortunate , etc . All human interactions are enhanced
by the ability to put yourself in another person ’ s shoes . How ? Look beyond yourself , your own interests , and
your own world . When you work to consider an issue from every possible angle , examine it in the light of
another ’ s history , discover the interests and concerns of others , and try to set aside your own agenda , you
begin to see what others see . And that is a powerful thing . 
4 . Big-Picture Thinking Promotes Teamwork
If you participate in any kind of team activity , then you knowhowimportant it is that team members see
the whole picture , not just their own part . Anytime a person doesn ’ t knowhowhis work fits with that of his
teammates , then the whole team is in trouble . The better the grasp team members have of the big picture , 
the greater their potential to work together as a team . 
5 . Big-Picture Thinking Keeps You from BeingCaught Up in the
Mundane
Let ’ s face it : some aspects of everyday life are absolutely necessary but thoroughly uninteresting . Bigpicture thinkers don ’ t let the grind get to them , because they don ’ t lose sight of the all-important overview . 
They knowthat the person who forgets the ultimate is a slave to the immediate . 
6 . Big-Picture Thinking Helps You to Chart Uncharted Territory
Have you ever heard the expression ,  “ We ’ ll cross that bridge when we come to it ”  ? That phrase
undoubtedly was coined by someone who had trouble seeing the big picture . The world was built by people
who “ crossed bridges ” in their minds long before anyone else did . The only way to break newground or
move into uncharted territory is to look beyond the immediate and see the big picture . 
HOW TO ACQUIRE THE WISDOM OF BIG-PICTURE THINKING
If you desire to seize newopportunities and open newhorizons , then you need to add big-picture
thinking to your abilities . To become a good thinker better able to see the big picture , keep in mind the
following suggestions : 
1 . Don ’ t Strive for Certainty
Big-picture thinkers are comfortable with ambiguity . They don ’ t try to force every observation or piece of
data into pre-formulated mental cubby holes . They think broadly and can juggle many seemingly
contradictory thoughts in their minds . If you want to cultivate the ability to think big picture , then you must
get used to embracing and dealing with complex and diverse ideas . 
2 . Learn from Every Experience
Big-picture thinkers broaden their outlook by striving to learn from every experience . They don ’ t rest on
their successes , they learn from them . More importantly , they learn from their failures . They can do that
because they remain teachable . 
Varied experiences—both positive and negative—help you see the big picture . The greater the variety
of experience and success , the more potential to learn you have . If you desire to be a big-picture thinker , 
then get out there and try a lot of things , take a lot of chances , and take time to learn after every victory or
defeat . 
3 . Gain Insight from a Variety of People
Big-picture thinkers learn from their experiences . But they also learn from experiences they don ’ t have . 
That is , they learn by receiving insight from others—from customers , employees , colleagues , and leaders . 
If you desire to broaden your thinking and see more of the big picture , then seek out counselors to help
you . But be wise in whom you ask for advice . Gaining insight from a variety of people doesn ’ t mean
stopping anyone and everyone in hallways and grocery store lines and asking what they think about a given
subject . Be selective . Talk to people who knowand care about you , who knowtheir field , and who bring
experience deeper and broader than your own . 
4 . Give Yourself Permission to Expand Your World
If you want to be a big-picture thinker , you will have to go against the flowof the world . Society wants to
keep people in boxes . Most people are married mentally to the status quo . They want what was , not what can
be . They seek safety and simple answers . To think big-picture , you need to give yourself permission to go a
different way , to break newground , to find newworlds to conquer . And when your world does get bigger , you
need to celebrate . Never forget there is more out there in the world than what you ’ ve experienced . 
Keep learning , keep growing , and keep looking at the big picture ! If you desire to be a good thinker , that ’ s
what you need to do . 
Thinking Question
Am I thinking beyond myself and my world so that I process ideas with a holistic perspective ? 

2
Engage in Focused Thinking 
 “ He did each thing as if he did nothing else .  ” 
—SPOKEN OF NOVELIST CHARLES DICKENS
Philosopher Bertrand Russell once asserted ,  “ To be able to concentrate for a considerable time is essential to
difficult achievement .  ” Sociologist Robert Lynd observed that “ knowledge is power only if a man knows what
facts are not to bother about .  ” Focused thinking removes distractions and mental clutter so that you can
concentrate on an issue and think with clarity . Focused thinking can do several things for you : 
1 . Focused Thinking Harnesses Energy Toward a Desired Goal
Focus can bring energy and power to almost anything , whether physical or mental . If you ’ re learning how to
pitch a baseball and you want to develop a good curveball , then focused thinking while practicing will improve
your technique . If you need to refine the manufacturing process of your product , focused thinking will help you
develop the best method . If you want to solve a difficult mathematics problem , focused thinking helps you break
through to the solution . The greater the difficulty of a problem or issue , the more focused thinking time is
necessary to solve it . 
2 . Focused Thinking Gives Ideas Time to Develop
I love to discover and develop ideas . I often bring my creative team together for brainstorming and creative
thinking . When we first get together , we try to be exhaustive in our thinking in order to generate as many ideas
as possible . The birthing of a potential breakthrough often results from sharing many good ideas . 
But to take ideas to the next level , you must shift from being expansive in your thinking to being selective . I
have discovered that a good idea can become a great idea when it is given focus time . It ’ s true that focusing on
a single idea for a long time can be very frustrating . I ’ ve often spent days focusing on a thought and trying to
develop it , only to find that I could not improve the idea . But sometimes my perseverance in focused thinking
pays off . That brings me great joy . And when focused thinking is at its best , not only does the idea grow , but so
do I ! 
3 . Focused Thinking Brings Clarity to the Target
I consider golf one of my favorite hobbies . It ’ s a wonderfully challenging game . I like it because the
objectives are so clear . Professor William Mobley of the University of South Carolina made the following
observation about golf : 
One of the most important things about golf is the presence of clear goals . You see the pins , you know
the par—it ’ s neither too easy nor unattainable , you know your average score , and there are competitive
goals—competitive with par , with yourself and others . These goals give you something to shoot at . In
work , as in golf , goals motivate . 
One time on the golf course , I followed a golfer who neglected to put the pin back in the hole after he putted . 
Because I could not see my target , I couldn ’ t focus properly . My focus quickly turned to frustration—and to poor
play . To be a good golfer , a person needs to focus on a clear target . The same is true in thinking . Focus helps
you to know the goal—and to achieve it . 
4 . Focused Thinking Will Take You to the Next Level
No one achieves greatness by becoming a generalist . You don ’ t hone a skill by diluting your attention to its
development . The only way to get to the next level is to focus . No matter whether your goal is to increase your
level of play , sharpen your business plan , improve your bottom line , develop your subordinates , or solve
personal problems , you need to focus . Author HarryA . Overstreet observed ,  “ The immature mind hops from
one thing to another ; the mature mind seeks to follow through .  ” 
WHERE SHOULD YOU FOCUS YOURTHINKING ? 
Does every area of your life deserve dedicated , focused thinking time ? Of course , the answer is no . Be
selective , not exhaustive , in your focused thinking . For me , that means dedicating in-depth thinking time to four
areas : leadership , creativity , communication , and intentional networking . Your choices will probably differ from
mine . Here are a few suggestions to help you figure them out : 
Identify Your Priorities
First , take into account your priorities—for yourself , your family , and your team . Author , consultant , and
award-winning thinker Edward DeBono quipped ,  “ A conclusion is the place where you get tired of thinking .  ” 
Unfortunately , many people land on priorities based on where they run out of steam . You certainly don ’ t want to
do that . Nor do you want to let others set your agenda . 
There are many ways to determine priorities . If you know yourself well , begin by focusing on your strengths , 
the things that make best use of your skills and God-given talents . You might also focus on what brings the
highest return and reward . Do what you enjoy most and do best . You could use the 80 / 20 rule . Give 80 percent
of your effort to the top 20 percent ( most important ) activities . Another way is to focus on exceptional
opportunities that promise a huge return . It comes down to this : give your attention to the areas that bear fruit . 
Discover Your Gifts
Not all people are self-aware and have a good handle on their own skills , gifts , and talents . They are a little
like the comic strip character Charlie Brown . One day after striking out in a baseball game , he says ,  “ Rats ! I ’ ll
never be a big-league player . I just don ’ t have it ! All my life I ’ ve dreamed of playing in the big leagues , but I ’ ll
never make it .  ” 
To which Lucy replies ,  “ Charlie Brown , you ’ re thinking too far ahead . What you need to do is set more
immediate goals for yourself .  ” 
For a moment , Charlie Brown sees a ray of hope .  “ Immediate goals ?  ” he says .  
 “ Yes ,  ” answers Lucy .  “ Start with the next inning . When you go out to pitch , see if you can walk out to the
mound without falling down !  ” 
I ’ ve met many individuals who grew up in a household full of Lucys . They received little encouragement or
affirmation , and as a result seem at a loss for direction . If you have that kind of background , you need to work
extra hard to figure out what your gifts are . Take a personality profile such as DISC or Myers-Briggs . Interview
positive friends and family members to see where they think you shine . Spend some time reflecting on past
successes . If you ’ re going to focus your thinking in your areas of strength , you need to know what they are . 
Develop Your Dream
If you want to achieve great things , you need to have a great dream . If you ’ re not sure of your dream , use
your focused thinking time to help you discover it . If your thinking has returned to a particular area time after
time , you may be able to discover your dream there . Give it more focused time and see what happens . Once
you find your dream , move forward without second-guessing . Take the advice of Satchel Paige :  “ Don ’ t look
back—something might be gaining on you .  ” 
The younger you are , the more likely you will give your attention to many things . That ’ s good because if
you ’ re young you ’ re still getting to know yourself , your strengths and weaknesses . If you focus your thinking on
only one thing and your aspirations change , then you ’ ve wasted your best mental energy . As you get older and
more experienced , the need to focus becomes more critical . The farther and higher you go , the more focused
you can be—and need to be . 
HOW CAN YOU STAY FOCUSED ? 
Once you have a handle on what you should think about , you must decide how to better focus on it . Here are
five suggestions to help you with the process : 
1 . Remove Distractions
Removing distractions is no small matter in our current culture , but it ’ s critical . How do you do it ? First , by
maintaining the discipline of practicing your priorities . Don ’ t do easy things first or hard things first or urgent
things first . Do first things first—the activities that give you the highest return . In that way , you keep the
distractions to a minimum . 
Second , insulate yourself from distractions . I ’ ve found that I need blocks of time to think without
interruptions . I ’ ve mastered the art of making myself unavailable when necessary and going off to my “ thinking
place ” so that I can work without interruptions . Because of my responsibilities as founder of three companies , 
however , I am always aware of the tension between my need to remain accessible to others as a leader and
my need to withdraw from them to think . The best way to resolve the tension is to understand the value of both
activities . Walking slowly through the crowd allows me to connect with people and know their needs . 
Withdrawing from the crowd allows me to think of ways to add value to them . 
My advice to you is to place value on and give attention to both . If you naturally withdraw , then make sure to
get out among people more often . If you ’ re always on the go and rarely withdraw for thinking time , then remove
yourself periodically so that you can unleash the potential of focused thinking . And wherever you are… be there ! 
2 . Make Time for Focused Thinking
Once you have a place to think , you need the time to think . Because of the fast pace of our culture , people
tend to multi-task . But that ’ s not always a good idea . Switching from task to task can cost you up to 40 percent
efficiency . According to researchers ,  “ If you ’ re trying to accomplish many things at the same time , you ’ ll get
more done by focusing on one task at a time , not by switching constantly from one task to another .  ” 
2
Years ago Irealized that my best thinking time occurs in the morning . Whenever possible , Ireserve my
mornings for thinking and writing . One way to gain time for focused thinking is to impose upon yourself a rule
that one company implemented . Don ’ t allow yourself to look at e-mail until after 10 A . M . Instead , focus your
energies on your number one priority . Put non-productive time wasters on hold so that you can create thinking
time for yourself . 
3 . Keep Items of Focus Before You
Ralph Waldo Emerson , the great transcendental thinker , believed ,  “ Concentration is the secret of strength in
politics , in war , in trade , in short in all management of human affairs .  ” To help me concentrate on the things that
matter , I work to keep important items before me . One way is to ask my assistant , Linda Eggers , to keep
bringing it up , asking me about it , giving me additional information in reference to it . 
I ’ ll also keep a file or a page on my desk so that I see it every day as I work . That strategy has successfully
helped me for thirty years to stimulate and sharpen ideas . If you ’ ve never done it , Irecommend that you try it .  ( I ’ ll
tell you more about it in the section on reflective thinking .  ) 
4 . Set Goals
I believe goals are important . The mind will not focus until it has clear objectives . But the purpose of goals is
to focus your attention and give you direction , not to identify a final destination . As you think about your goals , 
note that they should be
Clear enough to be kept in focus
Close enough to be achieved
Helpful enough to change lives
Those guidelines will get you going . And be sure to write down your goals . If they ’ re not written , I can almost
guarantee that they ’ re not focused enough . And if you really want to make sure they ’ re focused , take the advice
of David Belasco , who says ,  “ If you can ’ t write your idea on the back of my business card , you don ’ t have a
clear idea .  ” 
Even if you look back years from now and think your goals were too small , they will have served their
purpose—if they provide you with direction . 
5 . Question Your Progress
Take a good look at yourself from time to time to see whether you are actually making progress . That is the
most accurate measure of whether you are making the best use of focused thinking . Ask yourself ,  “ Am I seeing
a return for my investment of focused thinking time ? Is what I am doing getting me closer to my goals ? Am I
headed in a direction that helps me to fulfill my commitments , maintain my priorities , and realize my dreams ?  ” 
WHAT ARE YOU GIVING UP TO GO UP ? 
No one can go to the highest level and remain a generalist . My dad used to say ,  “ Find the one thing you do
well and don ’ t do anything else .  ” I ’ ve found that to do well at a few things , I have had to give up many things . As I
worked on this chapter , I spent some time reflecting on the kinds of things I ’ ve given up . Here are the main
ones : 
I Can ’ t Know Everyone
I love people , and I ’ m outgoing . Put me into a room full of people , and I feel energized . So it goes against
my grain to restrict myself from spending time with lots of people . To compensate for that , I ’ ve done a couple of
things . First , I ’ ve chosen a strong inner circle of people . They not only provide tremendous professional help , 
but they also make life ’ s journey much more pleasant . Second , I ask certain friends to catch me up on what ’ s
happening in the lives of other friends . I usually do that when I ’ m traveling and can ’ t block out the time I would
need for focused thinking . 
I Can ’ t Do Everything
There are only a few exceptional opportunities in any person ’ s lifetime . That ’ s why I strive for excellence in a
few things rather than a good performance in many . That ’ s cost me . Because of my workload , I also have to
skip doing many things that I would love to do . For example , every week I hand off projects that I think would be
fun to do myself . I practice the 10-80-10 principle with the people to whom I ’ m delegating a task . I help with the
first 10 percent by casting vision , laying down parameters , providing resources , and giving encouragement . 
Then once they ’ ve done the middle 80 percent , I come alongside them again and help them take whatever it is
the rest of the way , if I can . I call it putting the cherry on top . 
I Can ’ t Go Everywhere
Every conference speaker and author has to travel a lot . Before I began doing much speaking , that seemed
like a glamorous life . But after logging several million miles , I know what kind of a toll it can take . Ironically , I still
love traveling for pleasure with my wife , Margaret . It ’ s one of our great joys . She and I could take ten vacations a
year and enjoy every one of them . Yet we can ’ t , because so much of my time is consumed doing what I was
called to do : help people to grow personally and to develop as leaders . 
I Can ’ t Be Well-Rounded
Being focused also keeps me from being well-rounded . I tell people ,  “ Ninety-nine percent of everything in
life I don ’ t need to know about .  ” I try to focus on the one percent that gives the highest return . And of the
remaining ninety-nine , Margaret keeps me aware of whatever I need to know . It ’ s one of the ways I keep from
getting totally out of balance in my life . 
Being willing to give up some of the things you love in order to focus on what has the greatest impact isn ’ t
an easy lesson to learn . But the earlier you embrace it , the sooner you can dedicate yourself to excellence in
what matters most . 
Thinking Question
Am I dedicated to removing distractions and mental clutter so that I can concentrate with
clarity on the real issue ? 

3
Harness Creative Thinking 
 “ The joy is in creating , not maintaining .  ” 
—VINCE LOMBARDI , NFL HALL OF FAME COACH
Creativity is pure gold , no matter what you do for a living . Annette Moser-Wellman , author of The Five Faces
of Genius , asserts ,  “ The most valuable resource you bring to your work and to your firm is your creativity . 
More than what you get done , more than the role you play , more than your title , more than your ‘ output ’ —it ’ s your
ideas that matter .  ” 
3 Despite the importance of a person ’ s ability to think with creativity , few people seem to
possess the skill in abundance . 
If you ’ re not as creative as you would like to be , you can change your way of thinking . Creative thinking isn ’ t
necessarily original thinking . In fact , I think people mythologize original thought . Most often , creative thinking is a
composite of other thoughts discovered along the way . Even the great artists , whom we consider highly original , 
learned from their masters , modeled their work on that of others , and brought together a host of ideas and
styles to create their own work . Study art , and you will see threads that run through the work of all artists and
artistic movements , connecting them to other artists who went before them . 
CHARACTERISTICS OF CREATIVE THINKERS
Perhaps you ’ re not even sure what I mean when I ask whether you are a creative thinker . Consider some
characteristics that creative thinkers have in common : 
Creative Thinkers Value Ideas
Annette Moser-Wellman observes ,  “ Highly creative people are dedicated to ideas . They don ’ t rely on their
talent alone ; they rely on their discipline . Their imagination is like a second skin . They know how to manipulate it
to its fullest .  ” 
4 Creativity is about having ideas—lots of them . You will have ideas only if you value ideas . 
Creative Thinkers Explore Options
I ’ ve yet to meet a creative thinker who didn ’ t love options . Exploring a multitude of possibilities helps to
stimulate the imagination , and imagination is crucial to creativity . As Albert Einstein put it ,  “ Imagination is more
important than knowledge .  ” 
People who know me well will tell you that I place a very high value on options . Why ? Because they provide
the key to finding the best answer—not the only answer . Good thinkers come up with the best answers . They
create back-up plans that provide them with alternatives . They enjoy freedom that others do not possess . And
they will influence and lead others . 
Creative Thinkers Embrace Ambiguity
Writer H . L . Mencken said ,  “ It is the dull man who is always sure , and the sure man who is always dull .  ” 
Creative people don ’ t feel the need to stamp out uncertainty . They see all kinds of inconsistencies and gaps in
life , and they often take delight in exploring those gaps—or in using their imagination to fill them in . 
Creative Thinkers Celebrate the Offbeat
Creativity , by its very nature , often explores off of the beaten path and goes against the grain . Diplomat and
longtime president of Yale University Kingman Brewster said ,  “ There is a correlation between the creative and
the screwball . So we must suffer the screwball gladly .  ” To foster creativity in yourself or others , be willing to
tolerate a little oddness . 
Creative Thinkers Connect the Unconnected
Because creativity utilizes the ideas of others , there ’ s great value in being able to connect one idea to
another—especially to seemingly unrelated ideas . Graphic designer Tim Hansen says ,  “ Creativity is especially
expressed in the ability to make connections , to make associations , to turn things around and express them in
a new way .  ” 
Creating additional thoughts is like taking a trip in your car . You may know where you are going , but only as
you move toward your destination can you see and experience things in a way not possible before you started . 
Creative thinking works something like this : 
THINK _ COLLECT _ CREATE _ CORRECT _ CONNECT
Once you begin to think , you are free to collect . You ask yourself , What material relates to this thought ? 
Once you have the material , you ask , What ideas can make the thought better ? That can start to take an idea
to the next level . After that , you can correct or refine it by asking , What changes can make these ideas better ? 
Finally , you connect the ideas by positioning them in the right context to make the thought complete and
powerful . 
Creative Thinkers Don ’ t Fear Failure
Creativity demands the ability to be unafraid of failure because creativity equals failure . You may be
surprised to hear such a statement , but it ’ s true . Charles Frankel asserts that “ anxiety is the essential condition
of intellectual and artistic creation .  ” Creativity requires a willingness to look stupid . It means getting out on a
limb—knowing that the limb often breaks ! Creative people know these things and still keep searching for new
ideas . They just don ’ t let the ideas that don ’ t work prevent them from coming up with more ideas that do work . 
WHY YOU SHOULD DISCOVER THE JOY OF CREATIVE THINKING
Creativity can improve a person ’ s quality of life . Here are five specific things creative thinking has the
potential to do for you : 
1 . Creative Thinking Adds Value to Everything
Wouldn ’ t you enjoy a limitless reservoir of ideas that you could draw upon at any time ? That ’ s what creative
thinking gives you . For that reason , no matter what you are currently able to do , creativity can increase your
capabilities . 
Creativity is being able to see what everybody else has seen and think what nobody else has thought so
that you can do what nobody else has done . Sometimes creative thinking lies along the lines of invention , 
where you break new ground . Other times it moves along the lines of innovation , which helps you to do old
things in a new way . But either way , it ’ s seeing the world through sufficiently new eyes so that new solutions
appear . That always adds value . 
2 . Creative Thinking Compounds
Over the years , I ’ ve found that
Creative Thinking Is Hard Work
but
Creative Thinking Compounds Given Enough
Time and Focus
Perhaps more than any other kind of thinking , creative thinking builds on itself and increases the creativity
of the thinker . Poet Maya Angelou observed ,  “ You can ’ t use up creativity . The more you use , the more you have . 
Sadly , too often creativity is smothered rather than nurtured . There has to be a climate in which new ways of
thinking , perceiving , questioning are encouraged .  ” If you cultivate creative thinking in an environment that
nurtures creativity , there ’ s no telling what kind of ideas you can come up with .  ( I ’ ll talk more on that later .  ) 
3 . Creative Thinking Draws People to You and Your Ideas
Creativity is intelligence having fun . People admire intelligence , and they are always attracted to fun—so
the combination is fantastic . If anyone could be said to have fun with his intelligence , it was Leonardo da Vinci . 
The diversity of his ideas and expertise staggers the mind . He was a painter , architect , sculptor , anatomist , 
musician , inventor , and engineer . The term Renaissance man was coined because of him . 
Just as people were drawn to Da Vinci and his ideas during the Renaissance , they are drawn to creative
people today . If you cultivate creativity , you will become more attractive to other people , and they will be drawn
to you . 
4 . Creative Thinking Helps You Learn More
Author and creativity expert Ernie Zelinski says ,  “ Creativity is the joy of not knowing it all . The joy of not
knowing it all refers to the realization that we seldom if ever have all the answers ; we always have the ability to
generate more solutions to just about any problem . Being creative is being able to see or imagine a great deal
of opportunity to life ’ s problems . Creativity is having options .  ” 
5
It almost seems too obvious to say , but if you are always actively seeking new ideas , you will learn . 
Creativity is teachability . It ’ s seeing more solutions than problems . And the greater the quantity of thoughts , the
greater the chance for learning something new . 
5 . Creative Thinking Challenges the Status Quo
If you desire to improve your world—or even your own situation—then creativity will help you . The status quo
and creativity are incompatible . Creativity and innovation always walk hand in hand . 
HOW TO DISCOVER THE JOY OF CREATIVE THINKING
At this point you may be saying ,  “ Okay , I ’ m convinced that creative thinking is important . But how do I find
the creativity within me ? How do I discover the joy of creative thought ?  ” Here are five ways to do it : 
1 . Remove Creativity Killers
Economics professor and humor author Stephen Leacock said ,  “ Personally , I would sooner have written
Alice in Wonderland than the whole Encyclopedia Britannica .  ” He valued the warmth of creativity over cold
facts . If you do too , then you need to eliminate attitudes that devalue creative thinking . 
Take a look at the following phrases . They are almost guaranteed to kill creative thinking any time you hear 
( or think ) them : 
I ’ m Not a Creative Person
Follow the Rules
Don ’ t Ask Questions
Don ’ t Be Different
Stay Within the Lines
There Is Only One Way
Don ’ t Be Foolish
Be Practical
Be Serious
Think of Your Image
That ’ s Not Logical
It ’ s Not Practical
It ’ s Never Been Done
It Can ’ t Be Done
It Didn ’ t Work for Them
We Tried That Before
It ’ s Too Much Work
We Can ’ t Afford to Make a Mistake
It Will Be Too Hard to Administer
We Don ’ t Have the Time
We Don ’ t Have the Money
Yes , But…
Play Is Frivolous
Failure Is Final
If you think you have a great idea , don ’ t let anyone talk you out of it even if it sounds foolish . Don ’ t let
yourself or anyone else subject you to creativity killers . After all , you can ’ t do something new and exciting if you
force yourself to stay in the same old rut . Don ’ t just work harder at the same old thing . Make a change . 
2 . Think Creatively by Asking the Right Questions
Creativity is largely a matter of asking the right questions . Management trainer Sir Antony Jay said ,  “ The
uncreative mind can spot wrong answers , but it takes a creative mind to spot wrong questions .  ” Wrong
questions shut down the process of creative thinking . They direct thinkers down the same old path , or they
chide them into believing that thinking isn ’ t necessary at all . To stimulate creative thinking , ask yourself
questions such as…
Why must it be done this way ? 
What is the root problem ? 
What are the underlying issues ? 
What does this remind me of ? 
What is the opposite ? 
What metaphor or symbol helps to explain it ? 
Why is it important ? 
What ’ s the hardest or most expensive way to do it ? 
Who has a different perspective on this ? 
What happens if we don ’ t do it at all ? 
You get the idea—and you can probably come up with better questions yourself . Physicist Tom Hirschfield
observed ,  “ If you don ’ t ask ,  ‘ Why this ?  ’ often enough , somebody will ask ,  ‘ Why you ?  ’  ” If you want to think
creatively , you must ask good questions . You must challenge the process . 
3 . Develop a Creative Environment
Charlie Brower said ,  “ A new idea is delicate . It can be killed by a sneer or a yawn ; it can be stabbed to
death by a quip and worried to death by a frown on the right man ’ s brow .  ” Negative environments kill thousands
of great ideas every minute . 
A creative environment , on the other hand , becomes like a greenhouse where ideas get seeded , sprout up , 
and flourish . A creative environment : 
Encourages Creativity : David Hills says ,  “ Studies of creativity suggest that the biggest single variable
of whether or not employees will be creative is whether they perceive they have permission .  ” When
innovation and good thinking are openly encouraged and rewarded , then people see that they have
permission to be creative . 
Places a High Value on Trust among Team Members and Individuality : Creativity always risks
failure . That ’ s why trust is so important to creative people . In the creative process , trust comes from
people working together , from knowing that people on the team have experience launching successful , 
creative ideas , and from the assurance that creative ideas won ’ t go to waste , because they will be
implemented . 
Embraces Those Who Are Creative : Creative people celebrate the offbeat . How should creative
people be treated ? I take the advice of Tom Peters :  “ Weed out the dullards—nurture the nuts !  ” I do that by
spending time with them , which I enjoy anyway . I especially like to pull people into brainstorming sessions . 
People look forward to an invitation to such meetings because the time will be filled with energy , ideas , 
and laughter . And the odds are high that a new project , seminar , or business strategy will result . When that
happens , they also know a party ’ s coming ! 
Focuses on Innovation , Not Just Invention : Sam Weston , creator of the popular action figure GI Joe , 
said ,  “ Truly groundbreaking ideas are rare , but you don ’ t necessarily need one to make a career out of
creativity . My definition of creativity is the logical combination of two or more existing elements that result
in a new concept . The best way to make a living with your imagination is to develop innovative
applications , not imagine completely new concepts .  ” Creative people say ,  “ Give me a good idea and I ’ ll
give you a better idea !  ” 
Is Willing to Let People Go Outside the Lines : Most people automatically stay within lines , even if
those lines have been arbitrarily drawn or are terribly out of date . Remember , most limitations we face
are not imposed on us by others ; we place them on ourselves . Lack of creativity often falls into that
category . If you want to be more creative , challenge boundaries . Inventor Charles Ket-tering said ,  “ All
human development , no matter what form it takes , must be outside the rules ; otherwise , we would never
have anything new .  ” A creative environment takes that into account . 
Appreciates the Power of a Dream : A creative environment promotes the freedom of a dream . A
creative environment encourages the use of a blank sheet of paper and the question ,  “ If we could draw a
picture of what we want to accomplish , what would that look like ?  ” A creative environment allowed Martin
Luther King , Jr .  , to speak with passion and declare to millions ,  “ I have a dream ,  ” not “ I have a goal .  ” Goals
may give focus , but dreams give power . Dreams expand the world . That is why James Allen suggested
that “ dreamers are the saviors of the world .  ” 
The more creativity-friendly you can make your environment , the more potential it has to become creative . 
4 . Spend Time with Other Creative People
What if the place you work has an environment hostile to creativity , and you possess little ability to change
it ? One possibility is to change jobs . But what if you desire to keep working there despite the negative
environment ? Your best option is to find a way to spend time with other creative people . 
Creativity is contagious . Have you ever noticed what happens during a good brainstorming session ? One
person throws out an idea . Another person uses it as a springboard to discover another idea . Someone else
takes it in yet another , even better direction . Then somebody grabs hold of it and takes it to a whole new level . 
The interplay of ideas can be electric . 
I have a strong group of creative individuals in my life . I make sure to spend regular time with them . When I
leave them , I always feel energized , I ’ m full of ideas , and I see things differently . They truly are indispensable to
my life . 
It ’ s a fact that you begin to think like the people you spend a lot of time with . The more time you can spend
with creative people engaging in creative activities , the more creative you will become . 
5 . Get Out of Your Box
Actress Katharine Hepburn remarked ,  “ If you obey all the rules… you will miss all the fun .  ” While I don ’ t think
it ’ s necessary to break all the rules ( many are in place to protect us )  , I do think it ’ s unwise to allow self-imposed
limitations to hinder us . Creative thinkers know that they must repeatedly break out of the “ box ” of their own
history and personal limitations in order to experience creative breakthroughs . 
The most effective way to help yourself get out of the box is to expose yourself to new paradigms . One way
you can do that is by traveling to new places . Explore other cultures , countries , and traditions . Find out how
people very different from you live and think . Another is to read on new subjects . I ’ m naturally curious and love to
learn , but I still have a tendency to read books only on my favorite subjects , such as leadership . I sometimes
have to force myself to read books that broaden my thinking , because I know it ’ s worth it . If you want to break
out of your own box , get into somebody ’ s else ’ s . Read broadly . 
Many people mistakenly believe that if individuals aren ’ t born with creativity , they will never be creative . But
you can see from the many strategies and examples I ’ ve given that creativity can be cultivated in the right
supportive environment . 
Thinking Question
Am I working to break out of my “ box ” of limitations so that I explore ideas and options to
experience creative breakthroughs ? 

4
Employ Realistic Thinking 
 “ The first responsibility of a leader is to define reality .  ” 
—MAX DEPREE , CHAIRMAN EMERITUS OF HERMAN MILLER , INC . 
As anyone knows who ’ s been out of school for a few years , there ’ s usually a huge gap between a college
education and the reality of the working world . Honestly , early in my career , I went out of my way to avoid too
much realistic thinking because I thought it would interfere with my creative thinking . But as I ’ ve grown , I ’ ve
come to realize that realistic thinking adds to my life . 
REALITY CHECK
Reality is the difference between what we wish for and what is . It took some time for me to evolve into a
realistic thinker . The process went in phases . First , I did not engage in realistic thinking at all . After a while , I
realized that it was necessary , so I began to engage in it occasionally .  ( But I didn ’ t like it because I thought it
was too negative . And any time I could delegate it , I did .  ) Eventually , I found that Ihad to engage in realistic
thinking if I was going to solve problems and learn from my mistakes . And in time , I became willing to think
realistically before I got in trouble and make it a continual part of my life . Today , I encourage my key leaders to
think realistically . We make realistic thinking the foundation of our business because we derive certainty and
security from it . 
Why You Should Recognize the Importance of Realistic Thinking
If you ’ re a naturally optimistic person , as I am , you may not possess great desire to become a more
realistic thinker . But cultivating the ability to be realistic in your thinking will not undermine your faith in people , 
nor will it lessen your ability to see and seize opportunities . Instead , it will add value to you in other ways : 
1 . Realistic Thinking Minimizes Downside Risk
Actions always have consequences ; realistic thinking helps you to determine what those consequences
could be . And that ’ s crucial , because only by recognizing and considering consequences can you plan for them . 
If you plan for the worst-case scenario , you can minimize the downside risk . 
2 . Realistic Thinking Gives You a Target and Game Plan
I ’ ve known businesspeople who were not realistic thinkers . Here ’ s the good news : they were very positive
and had a high degree of hope for their business . Here ’ s the bad news : hope is not a strategy . 
Realistic thinking leads to excellence in leadership and management because it requires people to face
reality . They begin to define their target and develop a game plan to hit it . When people engage in realistic
thinking , they also begin to simplify practices and procedures , which results in better efficiency . 
Truthfully , in business only a few decisions are important . Realistic thinkers understand the difference
between the important decisions and those that are merely necessary in the normal course of business . The
decisions that matter relate directly to your purpose . James Allen was right when he wrote ,  “ Until thought is
linked with purpose there is no intelligent accomplishment .  ” 
6
3 . Realistic Thinking Is a Catalyst for Change
People who rely on hope for their success rarely make change a high priority . If you have only hope , you
imply that achievement and success are out of your hands . It ’ s a matter of luck or chance . Why bother
changing ? 
Realistic thinking can dispel that kind of wrong attitude . There ’ s nothing like staring reality in the face to
make a person recognize the need for change . Change alone doesn ’ t bring growth but you cannot have growth
without change . 
4 . Realistic Thinking Provides Security
Any time you have thought through the worst that can happen and you have developed contingency plans to
meet it , you become more confident and secure . It ’ s reassuring to know that you are unlikely to be surprised . 
Disappointment is the difference between expectations and reality . Realistic thinking minimizes the difference
between the two . 
5 . Realistic Thinking Gives You Credibility
Realistic thinking helps people to buy in to the leader and his or her vision . Leaders continually surprised by
the unexpected soon lose credibility with their followers . On the other hand , leaders who think realistically and
plan accordingly position their organizations to win . That gives their people confidence in them . 
The best leaders ask realistic questions before casting vision . They ask themselves things like…
Is it possible ? 
Does this dream include everyone or just a few ? 
Have I identified and articulated the areas that will make this dream difficult to achieve ? 
6 . Realistic Thinking Provides a Foundation to Build On
Thomas Edison observed ,  “ The value of a good idea is in using it .  ” The bottom line on realistic thinking is
that it helps you to make an idea usable by taking away the “ wish ” factor . Most ideas and efforts don ’ t
accomplish their intended results because they rely too much on what we wish rather than what is . 
You can ’ t build a house in midair ; it needs a solid foundation . Ideas and plans are the same . They need
something concrete on which to build . Realistic thinking provides that solid foundation . 
7 . Realistic Thinking Is a Friend to Those in Trouble
If creativity is what you would do if you were unafraid of the possibility of failure , then reality is dealing with
failure if it does happen . Realistic thinking gives you something concrete to fall back on during times of trouble , 
which can be very reassuring . Certainty in the midst of uncertainty brings stability . 
8 . Realistic Thinking Brings the Dream to Fruition
British novelist John Galsworthy wrote ,  “ Idealism increases in direct proportion to one ’ s distance from the
problem .  ” If you don ’ t get close enough to a problem , you can ’ t tackle it . If you don ’ t take a realistic look at your
dream—and what it will take to accomplish it—you will never achieve it . Realistic thinking helps to pave the way
for bringing any dream to fruition . 
HOW TO RECOGNIZE THE IMPORTANCE OF REALISTIC THINKING
Because I ’ m naturally optimistic rather than realistic , I ’ ve had to take concrete steps to improve my thinking
in this area . Here are five things I do to improve my realistic thinking : 
1 . Develop an Appreciation for Truth
I could not develop as a realistic thinker until I gained an appreciation for realistic thinking . And that means
learning to look at and enjoy truth . President Harry S . Truman said ,  “ I never give ’ em hell . I just tell the truth and
they think it is hell .  ” That ’ s the way many people react to truth . People tend to exaggerate their success and
minimize their failures or deficiencies . They live according to Ruckert ’ s Law , believing there is nothing so small
that it can ’ t be blown out of proportion . 
Unfortunately , many people today could be described by a quote from Winston Churchill :  “ Men occasionally
stumble over the truth , but most pick themselves up and hurry off as if nothing has happened .  ” More recently , 
television journalist Ted Koppel observed ,  “ Our society finds truth too strong a medicine to digest undiluted . In
its purest form , truth is not a polite tap on the shoulder . It is a howling reproach .  ” In other words , the truth will set
you free—but first it will make you angry ! If you want to become a realistic thinker , however , you need to get
comfortable dealing with the truth and face up to it . 
2 . Do Your Homework
The process of realistic thinking begins with doing your homework . You must first get the facts . Former
governor , congressman , and ambassador Chester Bowles said ,  “ When you approach a problem , strip yourself
of preconceived opinions and prejudice , assemble and learn the facts of the situation , make the decision which
seems to you to be the most honest , and then stick to it .  ” It doesn ’ t matter how sound your thinking is if it ’ s
based on faulty data or assumptions . You can ’ t think well in the absence of facts ( or in the presence of poor
information )  . 
You can also find out what others have done in similar circumstances . Remember , your thinking doesn ’ t
necessarily have to be original ; it just has to be solid . Why not learn all that you can from good thinkers who
have faced similar situations in the past ? Some of my best thinking has been done by others ! 
3 . Think Through the Pros and Cons
There ’ s nothing like taking the time to really examine the pros and cons of an issue to give you a strong
dose of reality . It rarely comes down to simply choosing the course of action with the greatest number of pros , 
because all pros and cons do not carry equal weight . But that ’ s not the value of the exercise , anyway . Rather , it
helps you to dig into the facts , examine an issue from many angles , and really count the cost of a possible
course of action . 
4 . Picture the Worst-Case Scenario
The essence of realistic thinking is discovering , picturing , and examining the worst-case scenario . Ask
yourself questions such as : 
What if sales fall short of projections ? 
What if revenue hits rock bottom ?  ( Not an optimist ’ s rock bottom , but real rock bottom !  ) 
What if we don ’ t win the account ? 
What if the client doesn ’ t pay us ? 
What if we have to do the job short-handed ? 
What if our best player gets sick ? 
What if all the colleges reject my application ? 
What if the market goes belly up ? 
What if the volunteers quit ? 
What if nobody shows up ? 
You get the idea . The point is that you need to think about worst-case possibilities whether you are running
a business , leading a department , pastoring a church , coaching a team , or planning your personal finances . 
Your goal isn ’ t to be negative or to expect the worst , just to be ready for it in case it happens . That way , you give
yourself the best chance for a positive result—no matter what . 
If you picture the worst case and examine it honestly , then you really have experienced a reality check . 
You ’ re ready for anything . As you do that , take the advice of Charles Hole , who advised ,  “ Deliberate with
caution , but act with decision ; and yield with graciousness or oppose with firmness .  ” 
5 . Align Your Thinking with Your Resources
One of the keys to maximizing realistic thinking is aligning your resources with your objectives . Looking at
pros and cons and examining worst-case scenarios will make you aware of any gaps between what you desire
and what really is . Once you know what those gaps are , you can use your resources to fill them . After all , that ’ s
what resources are for . 
SUPER BOWL , SUPER DOME , SUPER SECURITY
Our country received lessons in realistic thinking following the tragedy of September 11 , 2001 . The
destruction of the World Trade Center buildings in New York City far surpassed any worst-case scenarios that
anyone might have envisioned . In the wake of that event , we now find that we don ’ t have the luxury of avoiding
or neglecting realistic thinking . 
I was reminded of that on Sunday , February 3 , 2002 , when I attended the Super Bowl in New Orleans , 
Louisiana . I had been to the big game twice before , to root for the home team—first San Diego and later
Atlanta—and had seen both teams lose ! But I had never been to a game like this . The occasion had been
designated a National Security Special Event . That meant that the U . S . Secret Service would be overseeing it ; 
military personnel would work with local law enforcement ; and security would be of the highest caliber . The
Secret Service brought in several hundred agents and secured the area . In preparation for the game , access to
the Super Dome was highly restricted , with intensified screening . Officials blocked off roads , closed the nearby
interstate , and designated the area a no-fly zone . 
We arrived early at the dome—officials suggested fans arrive up to five hours ahead of game time—and
we immediately saw evidence of the precautionary measures . Eight-foot fences surrounded the whole area , 
and concrete barriers prevented unauthorized vehicles from getting close to the building . We could see
sharpshooters positioned at various locations , including on the roof of some adjacent buildings . When we
reached a gate , police officers and security personnel patted us down and examined everyone ’ s belongings . 
After that they directed us to go through metal detectors . Only then did they allow us into the stadium .  
 “ That ’ s all well and good ,  ” you may be saying ,  “ but what would have happened had there been a terrorist
attack ?  ” The Secret Service had that covered too , because they had prepared for the worst-case scenario . 
Evacuation plans had been put into place , and personnel at the Super Dome had been drilled to make sure
everyone knew what to do in case of an emergency . 
New Orleans mayor Marc Morial said the day before the Super Bowl ,  “ We want to send a message to all
visitors that New Orleans is going to be the safest place inAmerica .  ” 
7 We got the message . We didn ’ t feel
the least bit worried . That ’ s what happens when leaders recognize the importance of realistic thinking . 
Thinking Question
Am I building a solid mental foundation on facts so that I can think with certainty ? 

5
Utilize Strategic Thinking 
 “ Most people spend more time planning their summer vacation than planning their lives .  ” 
—SOURCE UNKNOWN
When you hear the words “ strategic thinking ,  ” what comes to mind ? Do visions of business plans dance in
your head ? Do you conjure up marketing plans , the kind that can turn a company around ? Perhaps you
contemplate global politics . Or you recall some of history ’ s greatest military campaigns : Hannibal crossing the
Alps to surprise the Roman army , Charlemagne ’ s conquest of Western Europe , or the Allies ’ D-Day invasion of
Normandy . Perhaps , but strategy doesn ’ t have to be restricted to military action—or even to business . Strategic
thinking can make a positive impact on any area of life . 
PLAN YOUR LIFE , LIVE YOUR PLAN
I ’ ve observed that most people try to plan their lives one day at a time . They wake up , make up their to-do
list , and dive into action ( although some people aren ’ t even that strategic )  . 
Fewer individuals plan their lives one week at a time . They review their calendar for the week , check their
appointments , review their goals , and then get to work . They generally outachieve most of their daily-planning
colleagues . I try to take planning one step further . 
At the beginning of every month , I spend half a day working on my calendar for the next forty days . Forty
days works for me rather than just thirty . That way , I get a jump on the next month and don ’ t get surprised . I begin
by reviewing my travel schedule and planning activities with my family . Then Ireview what projects , lessons , and
other objectives I want to accomplish during those five to six weeks . Then I start blocking out days and times for
thinking , writing , working , meeting with people , etc . I set times to do fun things , such as seeing a show , 
watching a ball game , or playing golf . I also set aside small blocks of time to compensate for the unexpected . 
By the time I ’ m done , I can tell you nearly everything I ’ ll be doing , almost hour by hour , during the coming weeks . 
This strategy is one of the reasons I have been able to accomplish much . 
WHY YOU SHOULD RELEASE THE POWER OF STRATEGIC THINKING
Strategic thinking helps me to plan , to become more efficient , to maximize my strengths , and to find the
most direct path toward achieving any objective . The benefits of strategic thinking are numerous . Here are a
few of the reasons you should adopt it as one of your thinking tools : 
1 . Strategic Thinking Simplifies the Difficult
Strategic thinking is really nothing more than planning on steroids . Spanish novelist Miguel de Cervantes
said ,  “ The man who is prepared has his battle half fought .  ” Strategic thinking takes complex issues and longterm objectives , which can be very difficult to address , and breaks them down into manageable sizes . Anything
becomes simpler when it has a plan ! 
Strategic thinking can also help you simplify the management of everyday life . I do that by using systems , 
which are nothing more than good strategies repeated . I am well known among pastors and other speakers for
my filing system . Writing a lesson or speech can be difficult . But because I use my system to file quotes , stories , 
and articles , when I need something to flesh out or illustrate a point , I simply go to one of my 1 , 200 files and find
a good piece of material that works . Just about any difficult task can be made simpler with strategic thinking . 
2 . Strategic Thinking Prompts You to Ask the Right Questions
Do you want to break down complex or difficult issues ? Then ask questions . Strategic thinking forces you
through this process . Take a look at the following questions developed by my friend Bobb Biehl , the author of
Masterplanning . 
8
Direction : What should we do next ? Why ? 
Organization : Who is responsible for what ? Who is responsible for whom ? Do we have the right people
in the right places ? 
Cash : What is our projected income , expense , net ? Can we afford it ? How can we afford it ? 
Tracking : Are we on target ? 
Overall Evaluation : Are we achieving the quality we expect and demand of ourselves ? 
Refinement : How can we be more effective and more efficient ( move toward the ideal )  ? 
These may not be the only questions you need to ask to begin formulating a strategic plan , but they are
certainly a good start . 
3 . Strategic Thinking Prompts Customization
General George S . Patton observed ,  “ Successful generals make plans to fit circumstances , but do not try to
create circumstances to fit plans .  ” 
All good strategic thinkers are precise in their thinking . They try to match the strategy to the problem , 
because strategy isn ’ t a one-size-fits-all proposition . Sloppy or generalized thinking is an enemy of
achievement . The intention to customize in strate-gic thinking forces a person to go beyond vague ideas and
engage in specific ways to go after a task or problem . It sharpens the mind . 
4 . Strategic Thinking Prepares You Today for an Uncertain Tomorrow
Strategic thinking is the bridge that links where you are to where you want to be . It gives direction and credibil-ity today and increases your potential for success tomorrow . It is , as Mary Webb suggests , like saddling
your dreams before you ride them . 
5 . Strategic Thinking Reduces the Margin of Error
Any time you shoot from the hip or go into a totally reactive mode , you increase your margin for error . It ’ s like
a golfer stepping up to a golf ball and hitting it before lining up the shot . Misaligning a shot by just a few
degrees can send the ball a hundred yards off target . Strategic thinking , however , greatly reduces that margin
for error . It lines up your actions with your objectives , just as lining up a shot in golf helps you to put the ball
closer to the pin . The better aligned you are with your target , the better the odds that you will be going in the
right direction . 
6 . Strategic Thinking Gives You Influence with Others
One executive confided in another :  “ Our company has a short range plan and a long range plan . Our short
range plan is to stay afloat long enough to make it to our long range plan .  ” That ’ s hardly a strategy , yet that ’ s the
position where some business leaders put themselves . There ’ s more than one problem with neglecting
strategic thinking in that way . Not only does it fail to build the business , but it also loses the respect of everyone
involved with the business . 
The one with the plan is the one with the power . It doesn ’ t matter in what kind of activity you ’ re involved . 
Employees want to follow the business leader with a good business plan . Volunteers want to join the pastor with
a good ministry plan . Children want to be with the adult who has the well-thought-out vacation plan . If you
practice strategic thinking , others will listen to you and they will want to follow you . If you possess a position of
leadership in an organization , strategic thinking is essential . 
HOW TO RELEASE THE POWER OFSTRATEGIC THINKING
To become a better strategic thinker able to formulate and implement plans that will achieve the desired
objective , take the following guidelines to heart : 
1 . Break Down the Issue
The first step in strategic thinking is to break down an issue into smaller , more manageable parts so that
you can focus on them more effectively . How you do it is not as important as just doing it . You might break an
issue down by function . That ’ s what automotive innovator Henry Ford did when he created the assembly line , 
and that ’ s why he said ,  “ Nothing is particularly hard if you divide it into small jobs .  ” 
How you break down an issue is up to you , whether it ’ s by function , timetable , responsibility , purpose , or
some other method . The point is that you need to break it down . Only one person in a million can juggle the
whole thing in his head and think strategically to create solid , viable plans . 
2 . Ask Why Before How
When most people begin using strategic thinking to solve a problem or plan a way to meet an objective , 
they often make the mistake of jumping the gun and trying immediately to figure out how to accomplish it . 
Instead of asking how , they should first ask why . If you jump right into problem solving mode , how are you going
to know all the issues ? 
Eugene G . Grace says ,  “ Thousands of engineers can design bridges , calculate strains and stresses , and
draw up specifications for machines , but the great engineer is the man who can tell whether the bridge or the
machine should be built at all , where it should be built , and when .  ” Asking why helps you to think about all the
reasons for decisions . It helps you to open your mind to possibilities and opportunities . The size of an
opportunity often determines the level of resources and effort that you must invest . Big opportunities allow for
big decisions . If you jump to how too quickly , you might miss that . 
3 . Identify the Real Issues and Objectives
William Feather , author of The Business of Life , said ,  “ Before it can be solved , a problem must be clearly
defined .  ” Too many people rush to solutions , and as a result they end up solving the wrong problem . To avoid
that , ask probing questions to expose the real issues . Challenge all of your assumptions . Collect information
even after you think you ’ ve identified the issue .  ( You may still have to act with incomplete data , but you don ’ t
want to jump to a conclusion before you gather enough information to begin identifying the real issue .  ) Begin by
asking , What else could be the real issue ? You should also remove any personal agenda . More than almost
anything else , that can cloud your judgment . Discovering your real situation and objectives is a major part of the
battle . Once the real issues are identified , the solutions are often simple . 
4 . Review Your Resources
I already mentioned how impor-tant it is to be aware of your re-sources , but it bears repeating . A strategy
that doesn ’ t take into account resources is doomed to failure . Take an inventory . How much time do you have ? 
How much money ? What kinds of materials , supplies , or inventory do you have ? What are your other assets ? 
What liabilities or obligations will come into play ? Which people on the team can make an impact ? You know
your own organization and profession . Figure out what resources you have at your disposal . 
5 . Develop Your Plan
How you approach the planning process depends greatly on your profession and the size of the challenge
that you ’ re planning to tackle , so it ’ s difficult to recommend many specifics . However , no matter how you go
about planning , take this advice : start with the obvious . When you tackle an issue or plan that way , it brings unity
and consensus to the team , because everyone sees those things . Obvious elements build mental momentum
and initiate creativity and intensity . The best way to create a road to the complex is to build on the fundamentals . 
6 . Put the Right People in the Right Place
It ’ s critical that you include your team as part of your strategic thinking . Before you can implement your plan , 
you must make sure that you have the right people in place . Even the best strategic thinking won ’ t help if you
don ’ t take into account the people part of the equation . Look at what happens if you miscalculate : 
Wrong Person : Problems instead of Potential
Wrong Place : Frustration instead of Fulfillment
Wrong Plan : Grief instead of Growth
Everything comes together , however , when you put together all three elements : the right person , the right
place , and the right plan . 
7 . Keep Repeating the Process
My friend Olan Hendrix remarked ,  “ Strategic thinking is like showering , you have to keep doing it .  ” If you
expect to solve any major problem once , you ’ re in for disappointment . Little things can be won easily through
systems and personal discipline . But major issues need major strategic thinking time . What Thane Yost said is
really true :  “ The will to win is worthless if you do not have the will to prepare .  ” If you want to be an effective
strategic thinker , then you need to become a continuous strategic thinker . 
As I was working on this chapter , I came across an article in my local paper on the celebration of the Jewish
Passover and how millions of American Jews read the order of service for their Seder , or Passover meal , 
from a small booklet produced by Maxwell House Coffee . For more than seventy years , the coffee company
has produced the booklet , called a Haggada , and during those years it has distributed more than 40 million
copies of it .  
 “ Iremember using them all my life ,  ” said Regina Witt , who is in her fifties . So does her mother , who is
almost ninety .  “ It ’ s our tradition . I think it would be very strange not to use them .  ” 
9
So how did Maxwell House come to supply the booklets ? It was the result of strategic thinking . Eighty years
ago , marketing man Joseph Jacobs advised that the company could sell coffee during Passover if the product
were certified Kosher by a rabbi .  ( Since 1923 , Maxwell House coffee has been certified Kosher for Passover .  ) 
And then Jacobs suggested that if they gave away the Haggada booklets , they could increase sales . 
10
They ’ ve been creating the booklets—and selling coffee during Passover—ever since . That ’ s what can happen
when you unleash the power of strategic thinking . 
Thinking Question
Am I implementing strategic plans that give me direction for today and increase my potential
for tomorrow ? 

6
Explore Possibility Thinking 
 “ Nothing is so embarrassing as watching someone do something that you said could not be done .  ” 
—SAM EWING
People who embrace possibility thinking are capable of accomplishing tasks that seem impossible because
they believe in solutions . Here are several reasons why you should become a possibility thinker : 
1 . Possibility Thinking Increases Your Possibilities
When you believe you can do something difficult—and you succeed—many doors open for you . When
George Lucas succeeded in making Star Wars , despite those who said the special effects he wanted hadn ’ t
ever been done and couldn ’ t be done , many other possibilities opened up to him . Industrial Light and Magic 
( ILM )  , the company he created to produce those “ impossible ” special effects , became a source of revenue to
help underwrite his other projects . He was able to produce merchandising tie-ins to his movies , thus bringing in
another revenue stream to fund his movie making . But his confidence in doing the difficult has also made a
huge impact on other movie makers and a whole new generation of movie goers . Popular culture writer Chris
Sale-wicz asserts ,  “ At first directly through his own work and then via the unparalleled influence of ILM , George
Lucas has dictated for two decades the essential broad notion of what is cinema .  ” 
11
If you open yourself up to
possibility thinking , you open yourself up to many other possibilities . 
2 . Possibility Thinking Draws Opportunities and People to You
The case of George Lucas helps you to see how being a possibility thinker can create new opportunities
and attract people . People who think big attract big people to them . If you want to achieve big things , you need
to become a possibility thinker . 
3 . Possibility Thinking Increases Others ’ Possibilities
Big thinkers who make things happen also create possibilities for others . That happens , in part , because
it ’ s contagious . You can ’ t help but become more confident and think bigger when you ’ re around possibility
thinkers . 
4 . Possibility Thinking Allows You to Dream Big Dreams
No matter what your profession , pos-sibility thinking can help you to broaden your horizons and dream
bigger dreams . Professor David J . Schwartz believes ,  “ Big thinkers are specialists in creating positive
forward-looking , optimistic pictures in their own minds and in the minds of others .  ” If you embrace possibility
thinking , your dreams will go from molehill to mountain size , and because you believe in possibilities , you put
yourself in position to achieve them . 
5 . Possibility Thinking Makes It Possible to Rise Above Average
During the 1970s , when oil prices went through the roof , automobile makers were ordered to make their
cars more fuel efficient . One manufacturer asked a group of senior engineers to drastically reduce the weight of
cars they were designing . They worked on the problem and searched for solutions , but they finally concluded
that making lighter cars couldn ’ t be done , would be too expensive , and would present too many safety
concerns . They couldn ’ t get out of the rut of their average thinking . 
What was the auto maker ’ s solution ? They gave the problem to a group of less-experienced engineers . The
new group found ways to reduce the weight of the company ’ s automobiles by hundreds of pounds . Because
they thought that solving the problem was possible , it was . Every time you remove the label of impossible from
a task , you raise your potential from average to off the charts . 
6 . Possibility Thinking Gives You Energy
A direct correlation exists between possibility thinking and the level of a person ’ s energy . Who gets
energized by the prospect of losing ? If you know something can ’ t succeed , how much time and energy are you
willing to give it ? Nobody goes looking for a lost cause . You invest yourself in what you believe can succeed . 
When you embrace possibility thinking , you believe in what you ’ re doing , and that gives you energy . 
7 . Possibility Thinking Keeps You from Giving Up
Above all , possibility thinkers believe they can succeed . Denis Waitley , author of The Psychology of
Winning , says ,  “ The winners in life think constantly in terms of ‘ I can , I will and I am .  ’ Losers , on the other hand , 
concentrate their waking thoughts on what they should have done , or what they don ’ t do .  ” If you believe you can ’ t
do something , then it doesn ’ t matter how hard you try , because you ’ ve already lost . If you believe you can do
something , you have already won much of the battle . 
One of the people who showed himself to be a great possibility thinker in 2001 was New York mayor Rudy
Giuliani . In the hours following the World Trade Center tragedy , Giuliani not only led the city through the chaos of
the disaster , but he instilled confidence in everyone he touched . Afterward , he gave some insight and
perspective on his experience : 
I was so proud of the people I saw on the street . No chaos , but they were frightened and confused , and
it seemed to me that they needed to hear from my heart where I thought we were going . I was trying to
think , Where can I go for some comparison to this , some lessons about howto handle it ? So I started
thinking about Churchill , started thinking that we ’ re going to have to rebuild the spirit of the city , and what
better example than Churchill and the people of London during the Blitz in 1940 , who had to keep up
their spirit during this sustained bombing ? It was a comforting thought . 
12
Sixteen hours after the planes struck the buildings in New York City , when Giuliani finally returned at 2 : 30
A . M . to his apartment for a rest , instead of sleeping , he read the World War II chapters of Churchill : A
Biography by Roy Jenkins . He learned how Winston Churchill helped his people to see the possibilities and
kept his people going . Inspired , Giuliani did the same for his own people six decades later . 
HOW TO FEEL THE ENERGY OFPOSSIBILITY THINKING
If you are a naturally positive person who already embraces possibility thinking , then you ’ re already tracking
with me . However , some people , rather than being optimistic , are naturally negative or cynical . They believe that
possibility thinkers are naïve or foolish . If your thinking runs toward pessimism , let me ask you a question : how
many highly successful people do you know who are continually negative ? How many impossibility thinkers are
you acquainted with who achieve big things ? None ! 
People with an it-can ’ t-be-done mindset have two choices . They can expect the worst and continually
experience it ; or they can change their thinking . That ’ s what George Lucas did . Believe it or not , even though he
is a possibility thinker , he is not a naturally positive person . He says ,  “ I ’ m very cynical , and as a result , I think the
defense I have against it is to be optimistic .  ” 
13
In other words , he chooses to think positively . He sums it up this
way :  “ As corny as it sounds , the power of positive thinking goes a long way . So determination and positive
thinking combined with talent combined with knowing your craft… that may sound like a naïve point of view , but
at the same time it ’ s worked for me and it ’ s worked for all my friends—so I have come to believe it .  ” 
14
If you want possibility thinking to work for you , then begin by following these suggestions : 
1 . Stop Focusing on the Impossibilities
The first step in becoming a possibility thinker is to stop yourself from searching for and dwelling on what ’ s
wrong with any given situation . Sports psychologist Bob Rotella recounts ,  “ I tell people : If you don ’ t want to get
into positive thinking , that ’ s OK . Just eliminate all the negative thoughts from your mind , and whatever ’ s left will
be fine .  ” 
If possibility thinking is new to you , you ’ re going to have to give yourself a lot of coaching to eliminate some
of the negative self-talk you may hear in your head . When you automatically start listing all the things that can go
wrong or all the reasons something can ’ t be done , stop yourself and say ,  “ Don ’ t go there .  ” Then ask ,  “ What ’ s
right about this ?  ” That will help to get you started . And if negativity is a really big problem for you and
pessimistic things come out of your mouth before you ’ ve even thought them through , you may need to enlist the
aid of a friend or family member to alert you every time you utter negative ideas . 
2 . Stay Away from the “ Experts ” 
So-called experts do more to shoot down people ’ s dreams than just about anybody else . 
Possibility thinkers are very reluctant to dismiss anything as impossible . Rocket pioneer Wernher von Braun
said ,  “ I have learned to use the word impossible with the greatest of caution .  ” And Napoleon Bonaparte
declared ,  “ The word impossible is not in my dictionary .  ” If you feel you must take the advice of an expert , 
however , then heed the words of JohnAndrew Holmes , who asserted ,  “ Never tell a young person that
something cannot be done . God may have been waiting centuries for somebody ignorant enough of the
impossible to do that thing .  ” If you want to achieve something , give yourself permission to believe it is possible
—no matter what experts might say . 
3 . Look for Possibilities in Every Situation
Becoming a possibility thinker is more than just refusing to let yourself be negative . It ’ s something more . It ’ s
looking for positive possibilities despite the circumstances . Irecently heard Don Soderquist , former president
of Wal-Mart , tell a wonderful story that illustrates how a person can find positive possibilities in any situation . 
Soderquist had gone with Sam Walton to Huntsville , Alabama , to open several new stores . While there , Walton
suggested they visit the competition . Here ’ s what Soderquist said happened : 
15
We went into one [ store ]  , and I have to tell you that it was the worst store I ’ ve ever seen in my life . It was
terrible . There were no customers . There was no help on the floor . The aisles were cluttered with
merchandise , empty shelves , dirty , it was absolutely terrible . He [ Walton ] walked one way and I ’ d walk
the other way and we ’ d kind of meet out on the sidewalk . He said ,  “ What ’ d you think , Don ?  ” 
I said ,  “ Sam , that is the absolutely worst store I ’ ve ever seen in my life . I mean , did you see the
aisles ?  ” 
He said ,  “ Don , did you see the pantyhose rack ?  ” 
I said ,  “ No , I didn ’ t , Sam . I must have gone on a different aisle than you . I didn ’ t see that .  ” 
He said ,  “ That was the best pantyhose rack I ’ ve ever seen , Don .  ” And he said ,  “ I pulled the fixture
out and on the back was the name of the manufacturer . When we get back , I want you to call that
manufacturer and have him come in and visit with our fixture people . I want to put that rack in our stores . 
It ’ s absolutely the best I ’ ve ever seen .  ” And he said next ,  “ Did you see the ethnic cosmetics ?  ” 
I said ,  “ Sam , that must have been right next to the pantyhose rack , because I absolutely missed that .  
 ” 
He said ,  “ Don , do you realize that in our stores we have four feet of ethnic cosmetics . These people
had 12 feet of it . We are absolutely missing the boat . I wrote down the distributor of some of those
products . When we get back , I want you to get a hold of our cosmetic buyer and get these people in . We
absolutely need to expand our ethnic cosmetics .  ” 
Now , Sam Walton didn ’ t hit me on the head and say ,  “ Don , now what lesson did you learn from this ?  ” 
He had already hit me on the head by looking for the good , looking how to improve , striving for
excellence . It ’ s so easy to go and look at what other people do badly . But one of the leadership
characteristics of vision that he showed me , and I ’ ll never forget it , is look for the good in what other
people are doing and apply it . 
It doesn ’ t take a genius IQ or twenty years of experience to find the possibility in every situation . All it takes
is the right attitude , and anybody can cultivate that . 
4 . Dream One Size Bigger
One of the best ways to cultivate a possibility mind-set is to prompt yourself to dream one size bigger than
you normally do . Let ’ s face it : most people dream too small . They don ’ t think big enough . Henry Curtis advises ,  
 “ Make your plans as fantastic as you like , because twenty-five years from now , they will seem mediocre . Make
your plans ten times as great as you first planned , and twenty-five years from now you will wonder why you did
not make them fifty times as great .  ” 
If you push yourself to dream more expansively , to imagine your organization one size bigger , to make your
goals at least a step beyond what makes you comfortable , you will be forced to grow . And it will set you up to
believe in greater possibilities . 
5 . Question the Status Quo
Most people want their lives to keep improving , yet they value peace and stability at the same time . People
often forget that you can ’ t improve and still stay the same . Growth means change . Change requires challenging
the status quo . If you want greater possibilities , you can ’ t settle for what you have now . When you become a
possibility thinker , you will face many people who will want you to give up your dreams and embrace the status
quo . Achievers refuse to accept the status quo . 
As you begin to explore greater possibilities for yourself , your organization , or your family—and others
challenge you for it—take comfort in knowing that right now as you read this , other possibility thinkers across
the country and around the world are thinking about curing cancer , developing new energy sources , feeding
hungry people , and improving quality of life . They are challenging the status quo against the odds—and you
should , too . 
6 . Find Inspiration from Great Achievers
You can learn a lot about possibility thinking by studying great achievers . I mentioned George Lucas in this
chapter . Perhaps he doesn ’ t appeal to you , or you don ’ t like the movie industry .  ( Personally , I ’ m not a big
science fiction fan , but I admire Lucas as a thinker , creative visionary , and businessperson .  ) Find some
achievers you admire and study them . Look for people with the attitude of Robert F . Kennedy , who popularized
George Bernard Shaw ’ s stirring statement :  “ Some men see things as they are and say ,  ‘ Why ?  ’ I dream of
things that never were and say ,  ‘ Why not ?  ’  ” 
I know possibility thinking isn ’ t in style with many people . So call it what you like : the will to succeed , belief in
yourself , confidence in your ability , faith . It ’ s really true : people who believe they can ’ t , don ’ t . But if you believe
you can , you can ! That ’ s the power of possibility thinking . 
Thinking Question
Am I unleashing the enthusiasm of possibility thinking to find solutions for even seemingly
impossible situations ? 

7
Learn from Reflective Thinking 
 “ To doubt everything or to believe everything are two equally convenient solutions ; both dispense
with the necessity of reflection .  ” 
—JULES HENRI POINCAR ©
The pace of our society does not encourage reflective thinking . Most people would rather act than think . Now , 
don ’ t get me wrong . I ’ m a person of action . I have very high energy and I like to see things accomplished . But
I ’ m also a reflective thinker . Reflective thinking is like the Crock-Pot of the mind . It encourages your thoughts to
simmer until they ’ re done . As I go through this process , my goal is to reflect so that I might learn from my
successes and mistakes , discover what I should try to repeat , and determine what I should change . It is always
a valuable exercise . By mentally visiting past situations , you can think with greater understanding . 
1 . Reflective Thinking Gives You True Perspective
When our children were young and still lived at home , we used to take them on wonderful vacations every
year . When we got home , they always knew that I was going to ask them two questions :  “ What did you like
best ?  ” and “ What did you learn ?  ” It didn ’ t matter whether we went to Walt Disney World or Washington , D . C . 
I always asked those questions . Why ? Because I wanted them to reflect on their experiences . Children
don ’ t naturally grasp the value ( or cost ) of an ex-perience unless prompted . They take things for granted . I
wanted my children to appreciate our trips and to learn from them . When you reflect , you are able to put an
experience into perspective . You are able to evaluate its timing . And you are able to gain a new appreciation for
things that before went unnoticed . Most people are able to recognize the sacrifices of their parents or other
people only when they become parents themselves . That ’ s the kind of perspective that comes with reflection . 
2 . Reflective Thinking Gives Emotional Integrity toYour Thought Life
Few people have good perspective in the heat of an emotional moment . Most individuals who enjoy the
thrill of an experience try to go back and recapture it without first trying to evaluate it .  ( It ’ s one of the reasons our
culture produces so many thrill seekers .  ) Likewise , those who survive a traumatic experience usually avoid
similar situations at all costs , which sometimes ties them into emotional knots . 
Reflective thinking enables you to distance yourself from the intense emotions of particularly good or bad
experiences and see them with fresh eyes . You can see the thrills of the past in the light of emotional maturity
and examine tragedies in the light of truth and logic . That process can help a person to stop carrying around a
bunch of negative emotional baggage . 
President George Washington observed ,  “ We ought not to look back unless it is to derive useful lessons
from past errors , and for the purpose of profiting by dearly bought experience .  ” Any feeling that can stand up to
the light of truth and can be sustained over time has emotional integrity and is therefore worthy of your mind and
heart . 
3 . Reflective Thinking Increases Your Confidence in Decision-making
Have you ever made a snap judgment and later wondered if you did the right thing ? Everybody has . 
Reflective thinking can help to diffuse that doubt . It also gives you confidence for the next decision . Once you ’ ve
reflected on an issue , you don ’ t have to repeat every step of the thinking process when you ’ re faced with it
again . You ’ ve got mental road markers from having been there before . That compresses and speeds up
thinking time—and it gives you confidence . And over time , it can also strengthen your intuition . 
4 . Reflective Thinking Clarifies the Big Picture
When you engage in reflective thinking , you can put ideas and experiences into a more accurate context . 
Reflective thinking encourages us to go back and spend time pondering what we have done and what we have
seen . If a person who loses his job reflects on what happened , he may see a pattern of events that led to his
dismissal . He will better understand what happened , why it happened , and what things were his responsibility . If
he also looks at the incidents that occurred afterward , he may realize that in the larger scheme of things , he ’ s
better off in his new position because it better fits his skills and desires . Without reflection , it can be very difficult
to see that big picture . 
5 . Reflective Thinking Takes a Good Experience and Makes It a
Valuable Experience
When you were just starting out in your career , did it seem that few people were willing to give someone
without experience an opportunity ? At the same time , could you see people who had been on their jobs twenty
years who yet did their work poorly ? If so , that probably frustrated you . Playwright William Shakespeare wrote ,  
 “ Experience is a jewel , and it had need be so , for it is often purchased at an infinite rate .  ” Yet , experience alone
does not add value to a life . It ’ s not necessarily experience that is valuable ; it ’ s the insight people gain because
of their experience . Reflective thinking turns experience into insight . 
Mark Twain said ,  “ We should be careful to get out of an experience all the wisdom that is in it—not like the
cat that sits down on a hot stove lid . She will never sit down on a hot stove lid again—and that is well ; but also
she will never sit down on a cold one anymore .  ” 
16 An experience becomes valuable when it informs or equips
us to meet new experiences . Reflective thinking helps to do that . 
HOW TO EMBRACE THE LESSONS OF REFLECTIVE THINKING
If you are like most people in our culture today , you probably do very little reflective thinking . If that ’ s the
case , it may be holding you back more than you think . Take to heart the following suggestions to increase your
ability to think reflectively : 
1 . Set Aside Time for Reflection
Greek philosopher Socrates observed ,  “ The unexamined life is not worth living .  ” For most people , however , 
reflection and self-examination doesn ’ t come naturally . It can be a fairly uncomfortable activity for a variety of
reasons : they have a hard time staying focused ; they find the process dull ; or they don ’ t like spending a lot of
time thinking about emotionally difficult issues . But if you don ’ t carve out the time for it , you are unlikely to do any
reflective thinking . 
2 . Remove Yourself from Distractions
As much as any other kind of thinking , reflection requires solitude . Distraction and reflection simply don ’ t
mix . It ’ s not the kind of thing you can do well near a television , in a cubicle , while the phone is ringing , or with
children in the same room . 
One of the reasons I ’ ve been able to accomplish much and keep growing personally is that I ’ ve not only set
aside time to reflect , but I ’ ve separated myself from distractions for short blocks of time : thirty minutes in the
spa ; an hour outside on a rock in my backyard ; or a few hours in a comfortable chair in my office . The place
doesn ’ t matter—as long as you remove yourself from distractions and interruptions . 
3 . Regularly Review Your Calendar or Journal
Most people use their calendar as a planning tool , which it is . But few people use it as a reflective thinking
tool . What could be better , however , for helping you to review where you have been and what you have done
—except maybe a journal ? I ’ m not a journaler in the regular sense ; I don ’ t use writing to figure out what I ’ m
thinking and feeling . Instead , I figure out what I ’ m thinking and feeling , and then I write down significant thoughts
and action points .  ( I file the thoughts so that I can quickly put my hands on them again . I immediately execute the
action points or delegate them to someone else .  ) 
Calendars and journals remind you of how you ’ ve spent your time , show you whether your activities match
your priorities , and help you see whether you are making progress . They also offer you an opportunity to recall
activities that you might not have had the time to reflect on previously . Some of the most valuable thoughts
you ’ ve ever had may have been lost because you didn ’ t give yourself the reflection time you needed . 
4 . Ask the Right Questions
The value you receive from reflecting will depend on the kinds of questions you ask yourself . The better the
questions , the more gold you will mine from your thinking . When Ireflect , I think in terms of my values , 
relationships , and experiences . Here are some sample questions : 
Personal Growth : What have I learned today that will help me grow ? How can I apply it to my life ? When
should I apply it ? 
Adding Value : To whom did I add value today ? How do I know I added value to that person ? Can I follow
up and compound the positive benefit he or she received ? 
Leadership : Did I lead by example today ? Did I lift my people and organization to a higher level ? What
did I do and how did I do it ? 
Personal Faith : Did Irepresent God well today ? Did I practice the Golden Rule ? Have I “ walked the
second mile ” with someone ? 
Marriage and Family : Did I communicate love to my family today ? How did I show that love ? Did they
feel it ? Did they return it ? 
Inner Circle : Have I spent enough time with my key players ? What can I do to help them be more
successful ? In what areas can I mentor them ? 
Discoveries : What did I encounter today to which I need to give more thinking time ? Are there lessons to
be learned ? Are there things to be done ? 
How you organize your reflection time is up to you . You may want to adapt my pattern to your own values . Or
you can try a system that my friend Dick Biggs uses . He creates three columns on a sheet of paper : 
Year Turning Point Impact
This system is good for reflecting on the bigger picture . Dick used it to see patterns in his life , such as when
he moved to Atlanta and was encouraged by a new teacher to write . You could just as easily write “ Event ,  ”  
 “ Significance ,  ” and “ Action Point ” on a page to help you benefit from reflective thinking . The main thing is to
create questions that work for you , and write down any significant thoughts that come to you during the
reflection time . 
5 . Cement Your Learning Through Action
Writing down the good thoughts that come out of your reflective thinking has value , but nothing helps you to
grow like putting your thoughts into action . To do that , you must be intentional . When you read a good book , for
example , there are always good thoughts , quotes , or lessons that you can take away from it and use yourself . I
always mark the takeaways in a book and then reread them when I ’ m done with the book . When I listen to a
message , Irecord the takeaways so that I can file them for future use . When I go to a seminar , I take good
notes , and I use a system of symbols to cue me to do certain things : 
An arrow like this → means to look at this material again . 
An asterisk like this * next to a marked section means to file it according to the subject noted . 
A bracket like this [ means that I want to use what ’ s marked in a lecture or book . 
An arrow like this ← means this idea will take off if I work at it . 
When most people go to a conference or seminar , they enjoy the experience , listen to the speakers , and
sometimes even take notes . But nothing happens after they go home . They like many of the concepts they hear , 
but when they close their notebooks , they don ’ t think about them again . When that happens , they receive little
more than a temporary surge of motivation . When you go to a conference , revisit what you heard , reflect on it , 
and then put it into action ; it can change your life . 
Ultimately , reflective thinking has three main values : it gives me perspective within context ; it allows me to
continually connect with my journey ; and it provides counsel and direction concerning my future . It is an
invaluable tool to my personal growth . Few things in life can help me learn and improve the way reflective
thinking can . 
Thinking Question
Am I regularly revisiting the past to gain a true perspective and think with understanding ? 

8
Question Popular Thinking 
 “ I ’ m not an answering machine , I ’ m a questioning machine . If we have all the answers , howcome
we ’ re in such a mess ?  ” 
—DOUGLAS CARDINAL
Economist John Maynard Keynes , whose ideas profoundly influenced economic theory and practices in the
twentieth century , asserted ,  “ The difficulty lies not so much in developing new ideas as in escaping from the old
ones .  ” Going against popular thinking can be difficult , whether you ’ re a businessperson bucking company
tradition , a pastor introducing new types of music to his church , a new mother rejecting old wives ’ tales handed
down from her parents , or a teenager ignoring currently popular styles . 
Many of the ideas in this book go against popular thinking . If you value popularity over good thinking , then
you will severely limit your potential to learn the types of thinking encouraged by this book . 
Popular thinking is…
Too Average to Understand the Value of Good Thinking , 
Too Inflexible to Realize the Impact of Changed Thinking , 
Too Lazy to Master the Process of Intentional Thinking , 
Too Small to See the Wisdom of Big-picture Thinking , 
Too Satisfied to Unleash the Potential of Focused Thinking , 
Too Traditional to Discover the Joy of Creative Thinking , 
Too Naïve to Recognize the Importance of Realistic Thinking , 
Too Undisciplined to Release the Power of Strategic Thinking , 
Too Limiting to Feel the Energy of Possibility Thinking , 
Too Trendy to Embrace the Lessons of Reflective Thinking , 
Too Shallow to Question the Acceptance of Popular Thinking , 
Too Proud to Encourage the Participation of Shared Thinking , 
Too Self-absorbed to Experience the Satisfaction of Unselfish Thinking , and
Too Uncommitted to Enjoy the Return of Bottom-Line Thinking . 
If you want to become a good thinker , then start preparing yourself for the possibility of becoming
unpopular . 
WHY YOU SHOULD QUESTION THE ACCEPTANCE OF POPULAR THINKING
I ’ ve given you some broad reasons for questioning the acceptance of popular thinking . Now allow me to be
more specific : 
1 . Popular Thinking Sometimes Means Not Thinking
My friend Kevin Myers sums up the idea of popular thinking by saying ,  “ The problem with popular thinking is
that it doesn ’ t require you to think at all .  ” Good thinking is hard work . If it were easy , everybody would be a good
thinker . Unfortunately , many people try to live life the easy way . They don ’ t want to do the hard work of thinking or
pay the price of success . It ’ s easier to do what other people do and hope that they thought it out . 
Look at the stock market recommendations of some experts . By the time they publish their picks , most are
following a trend , not creating one or even riding its crest . The people who are going to make money on the
stocks they recommend have already done so by the time the general public hears about it . When people
blindly follow a trend , they ’ re not doing their own thinking . 
2 . Popular Thinking Offers False Hope
Benno Muller-Hill , a professor in the University of Cologne genetics department , tells how one morning in
high school he stood last in a line of forty students in the schoolyard . His physics teacher had set up a
telescope so that his students could view a planet and its moons . The first student stepped up to the telescope . 
He looked through it , but when the teacher asked if he could see anything , the boy said no ; his nearsightedness
hampered his view . The teacher showed him how to adjust the focus , and the boy finally said he could see the
planet and moons . One by one , the students stepped up to the telescope and saw what they were supposed to
see . Finally , the second to last student looked into the telescope and announced that he could not see anything .  
 “ You idiot ,  ” shouted the teacher ,  “ you have to adjust the lenses .  ” 
The student tried , but he finally said ,  “ I still can ’ t see anything . It is all black .  ” 
The teacher , disgusted , looked through the telescope himself , and then looked up with a strange
expression . The lens cap still covered the telescope . None of the students had been able to see anything ! 
17
Many people look for safety and security in popular thinking . They figure that if a lot of people are doing
something , then it must be right . It must be a good idea . If most people accept it , then it probably represents
fairness , equality , compassion , and sensitivity , right ? Not necessarily . Popular thinking said the earth was the
center of the universe , yet Copernicus studied the stars and planets and proved mathematically that the earth
and the other planets in our solar system revolved around the sun . Popular thinking said surgery didn ’ t require
clean instruments , yet Joseph Lister studied the high death rates in hospitals and introduced antiseptic
practices that immediately saved lives . Popular thinking said that women shouldn ’ t have the right to vote , yet
people like Emmeline Pankhurst and Susan B . Anthony fought for and won that right . Popular thinking put the
Nazis into power in Germany , yet Hitler ’ s regime murdered millions and nearly destroyed Europe . We must
always remember there is a huge difference between acceptance and intelligence . People may say that there ’ s
safety in numbers , but that ’ s not always true . 
Sometimes it ’ s painfully obvious that popular thinking isn ’ t good and right . Other times it ’ s less evident . For
example , consider the staggering number of people in the United States who have run up large amounts of
debt on their credit cards . Anyone who is financially astute will tell you that ’ s a bad idea . Yet millions follow right
along with the popular thinking of buy now , pay later . And so they pay , and pay , and pay . Many promises of
popular thinking ring hollow . Don ’ t let them fool you . 
3 . Popular Thinking Is Slow to Embrace Change
Popular thinking loves the status quo . It puts its confidence in the idea of the moment , and holds on to it with
all its might . As a result , it resists change and dampens innovation . Donald M . Nelson , former president of the
Society of Independent Motion Picture Producers , criticized popular thinking when he asserted ,  “ We must
discard the idea that past routine , past ways of doing things , are probably the best ways . On the contrary , we
must assume that there is probably a better way to do almost everything . We must stop assuming that a thing
which has never been done before probably cannot be done at all .  ” 
4 . Popular Thinking Brings Only Average Results
The bottom line ? Popular thinking brings mediocre results . Here is popular thinking in a nutshell : 
Popular = Normal = Average
It ’ s the least of the best and the best of the least . We limit our success when we adopt popular thinking . It
represents putting in the least energy to just get by . You must reject common thinking if you want to accomplish
uncommon results . 
HOW TO QUESTION THE ACCEPTANCE OF POPULAR THINKING
Popular thinking has often proved to be wrong and limiting . Questioning it isn ’ t necessarily hard , once you
cultivate the habit of doing so . The difficulty is in getting started . Begin by doing the following things : 
1 . Think Before You Follow
Many individuals follow others almost automatically . Sometimes they do so because they desire to take the
path of least resistance . Other times they fear rejection . Or they believe there ’ s wisdom in doing what everyone
else does . But if you want to succeed , you need to think about what ’ s best , not what ’ s popular . 
Challenging popular thinking requires a willingness to be unpopular and go outside of the norm . Following
the tragedy of September 11 , 2001 , for example , few people willingly chose to travel by plane . But that was the
best time to travel : crowds were down , security was up , and airlines were cutting prices . About a month after the
tragedy , my wife , Margaret , and I heard that Broadway shows had lots of seats and many New York hotel rooms
remained empty . Popular thinking said , stay away from New York . We used that as an opportunity . We got
cheap plane tickets to the city , booked a room in a great hotel for about half price , and got tickets to the most
sought-after show : The Producers . As we took our seats in the theater , we sat next to a woman beside herself
with excitement .  
 “ I can ’ t believe I ’ m finally here ,  ” she said to us .  “ I ’ ve waited so long . This is the best show on Broadway
—and the hardest to get tickets to .  ” Then she turned to look me in the eye and said ,  “ I ’ ve had my tickets for a
year and a half , waiting to see this show . How long ago did you get yours ?  ”  
 “ You won ’ t like my answer ,  ” Ireplied .  
 “ Oh , come on ,  ” she said .  “ How long ?  ”  
 “ I got mine five days ago ,  ” I answered . She looked at us in horror . By the way , she was right . It ’ s one of the
best shows we ’ ve seen in a while . And we got to see it only because we were willing to go against popular
thinking when everyone else was staying at home . 
As you begin to think against the grain of popular thinking , remind yourself that
Unpopular thinking , even when resulting in success , is largely underrated , unrecognized , and
misunderstood . 
Unpopular thinking contains the seeds of vision and opportunity . 
Unpopular thinking is required for all progress . 
The next time you feel ready to conform to popular thinking on an issue , stop and think . You may not want to
create change for its own sake , but you certainly don ’ t want to blindly follow just because you haven ’ t thought
about what ’ s best . 
2 . Appreciate Thinking Different from Your Own
One of the ways to embrace innovation and change is to learn to appreciate how others think . To do that , 
you must continually expose yourself to people different from yourself . My brother , Larry Maxwell—a good
businessman and an innovative thinker—continually challenges popular thinking by thinking differently . He says : 
Most of our people in sales and middle management come from businesses with products and
services different from ours . That constantly exposes us to new ways of thinking . We also discourage
our people from active participation in formal business and trade associations and fraternities because
their thinking is quite common . They don ’ t need to spend lots of time thinking the way everyone else in
the industry does . 
As you strive to challenge popular thinking , spend time with people with different backgrounds , education
levels , professional experiences , personal interests , etc . You will think like the people with whom you spend the
most time . If you spend time with people who think out of the box , you ’ re more likely to challenge popular
thinking and break new ground . 
3 . Continually Question Your Own Thinking
Let ’ s face it , any time we find a way of thinking that works , one of our greatest temptations is to go back to
it repeatedly , even if it no longer works well . The greatest enemy to to-morrow ’ s success is sometimes today ’ s
success . My friend Andy Stanley recently taught a leadership lesson at INJOY ’ s Catalyst Conference called 
 “ Challenging the Process .  ” He described how progress must be preceded by change , and he pointed out many
of the dynamics involved in questioning popular thinking . In an organization , he said , we should remember that
every tradition was originally a good idea—and perhaps even revolutionary . But every tradition may not be a
good idea for the future . 
In your organization , if you were involved in putting into place what currently exists , then it ’ s likely that you will
resist change—even change for the better . That ’ s why it ’ s important to challenge your own thinking . If you ’ re too
attached to your own thinking and how everything is done now , then nothing will change for the better . 
4 . Try New Things in New Ways
When was the last time you did something for the first time ? Do you avoid taking risks or trying new things ? 
One of the best ways to get out of the rut of your own thinking is to innovate . You can do that in little , everyday
ways : drive to work a different way from normal . Order an unfamiliar dish at your favorite restaurant . Ask a
different colleague to help you with a familiar project . Take yourself off of autopilot . 
Unpopular thinking asks questions and seeks options . In 1997 , my three companies moved to Atlanta , 
Georgia . It ’ s a great city , but traffic at peak times can get crazy . Immediately after moving here , I began looking
for and testing alternative routes to desired destinations so that I would not be caught in traffic . From my house
to the airport , for example , I have discovered and used nine routes within eight miles and twelve minutes from
one another . Often I am amazed to see people sitting on the freeway when they could be moving forward on an
alternative route . What is the problem ? Too many people have not tried new things in new ways . It is true : most
people are more satisfied with old problems than committed to finding new solutions . 
How you go about doing new things in new ways is not as important as making sure you do it .  ( Besides , if
you try to do new things in the same way that everyone else does , are you really going against popular thinking ?  
) Get out there and do something different today . 
5 . Get Used to Being Uncomfortable
When it comes right down to it , popular thinking is comfortable . It ’ s like an old recliner adjusted to all the
owner ’ s idiosyncrasies . The problem with most old recliners is that no one has looked at them lately . If so , 
they ’ d agree that it ’ s time to get a new one ! If you want to reject popular thinking in order to embrace
achievement , you ’ ll have to get used to being uncomfortable . 
If you embrace unpopular thinking and make decisions based upon what works best and what is right rather
than what is commonly accepted , know this : in your early years you won ’ t be as wrong as people think you
are . In your later years , you won ’ t be as right as people think you are . And all through the years , you will be
better than you thought you could be . 
Thinking Question
Am I consciously rejecting the limitations of common thinking in order to accomplish
uncommon results ? 

9
Benefit from Shared Thinking 
 “ None of us is as smart as all of us .  ” 
—KEN BLANCHARD
Good thinkers , especially those who are also good leaders , understand the power of shared thinking . They
know that when they value the thoughts and ideas of others , they receive the compounding results of shared
thinking and accomplish more than they ever could on their own . 
Those who participate in shared thinking understand the following : 
1 . Shared Thinking Is Faster than Solo Thinking
We live in a truly fast-paced world . To function at its current rate of speed , we can ’ t go it alone . I think the
generation of young men and women just entering the workforce sense that very strongly . Perhaps that is why
they value community so highly and are more likely to work for a company they like than one that pays them
well . Working with others is like giving yourself a shortcut . 
If you want to learn a new skill quickly , how do you do it ? Do you go off by yourself and figure it out , or do you
get someone to show you how ? You can always learn more quickly from someone with experience—whether
you ’ re trying to learn how to use a new software package , develop your golf swing , or cook a new dish . 
2 . Shared Thinking Is More Innovative than Solo Thinking
We tend to think of great thinkers and innovators as soloists , but the truth is that the greatest innovative
thinking doesn ’ t occur in a vacuum . Innovation results from collaboration . Albert Einstein once remarked ,  “ Many
times a day Irealize how much my own outer and inner life is built upon the labors of my fellow men , both living
and dead , and how earnestly I must exert myself in order to give in return as much as I have received .  ” 
Shared thinking leads to greater innovation , whether you look at the work of researchers Marie and Pierre
Curie , surrealists Luis Brunel and Salvador Dali , or songwriters John Lennon and Paul McCartney . If you
combine your thoughts with the thoughts of others , you will come up with thoughts you ’ ve never had ! 
3 . Shared Thinking Brings More Maturity than Solo Thinking
As much as we would like to think that we know it all , each of us is probably painfully aware of our blind
spots and areas of inexperience . When I first started out as a pastor , I had dreams and energy , but little
experience . To try to overcome that , I attempted to get several high-profile pastors of growing churches to share
their thinking with me . In the early 1970s , I wrote letters to the ten most successful pastors in the country , offering
them what was a huge amount of money to me at the time ( $100 ) to meet me for an hour , so that I could ask
them questions . When one said yes , I ’ d visit him . I didn ’ t talk much , except to ask a few questions . I wasn ’ t
there to impress anyone or satisfy my ego . I was there to learn . I listened to everything he said , took careful
notes , and absorbed everything I could . Those experiences changed my life . 
You ’ ve had experiences I haven ’ t , and I ’ ve had experiences you haven ’ t . Put us together and we bring a
broader range of personal history—and therefore maturity—to the table . If you don ’ t have the experience you
need , hook up with someone who does . 
4 . Shared Thinking Is Stronger than Solo Thinking
Philosopher-poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe said ,  “ To accept good advice is but to increase one ’ s own
ability .  ” Two heads are better than one—when they are thinking in the same direction . It ’ s like harnessing two
horses to pull a wagon . They are stronger pulling together than either is individually . But did you know that when
they pull together , they can move more weight than the sum of what they can move individually ? A synergy
comes from working together . That same kind of energy comes into play when people think together . 
5 . Shared Thinking Returns Greater Value than Solo Thinking
Because shared thinking is stronger than solo thinking , it ’ s obvious that it yields a higher return . That
happens because of the compounding action of shared thinking . But it also offers other benefits . The personal
return you receive from shared thinking and experiences can be great . Clarence Francis sums up the benefits
in the following observation :  “ I sincerely believe that the word relationships is the key to the prospect of a
decent world . It seems abundantly clear that every problem you will have—in your family , in your work , in our
nation , or in this world—is essentially a matter of relationships , of interdependence .  ” 
6 . Shared Thinking Is the Only Way to Have Great Thinking
I believe that every great idea begins with three or four good ideas . And most good ideas come from
shared thinking . Playwright Ben Jonson said ,  “ He that is taught only by himself has a fool for a master .  ” 
When I was in school , teachers put the emphasis on being right and on doing better than the other students , 
rarely on working together to come up with good answers . Yet all the answers improve when they make the best
use of everyone ’ s thinking . If we each have one thought , and together we have two thoughts , then we always
have the potential for a great thought . 
HOW TO ENCOURAGE THE PARTICIPATION OF SHARED THINKING
Some people naturally participate in shared thinking . Any time they see a problem , they think , Who do I
knowwho can help with this ? Leaders tend to be that way . So do extroverts . However , you don ’ t have to be
either of those to benefit from shared thinking . Use the following steps to help you improve your ability to
harness shared thinking : 
1 . Value the Ideas of Others
First , believe that the ideas of other people have value . If you don ’ t , your hands will be tied . How do you
know if you truly want input from others ? Ask yourself these questions : 
Am I emotionally secure ? People who lack confidence and worry about their status , position , or power
tend to reject the ideas of others , protect their turf , and keep people at bay . It takes a secure person to
consider others ’ ideas . Years ago , an emotionally insecure person took a key position on my board of
directors . After a couple of meetings , it became obvious to the other board members that this individual
would not positively contribute to the organization . I asked a seasoned leader on the board ,  “ Why does
this person always do and say things that hinder our progress ?  ” I ’ ll never forget his reply :  “ Hurting people
hurt people .  ” 
Do I place value on people ? You won ’ t value the ideas of a person if you don ’ t value and respect the
person himself or herself . Have you ever considered your conduct around people you value , versus those
you don ’ t ? Look at the differences : 
If I Value People If I Don ’ t Value People
I w ant to spend time w ith them I don ’ t w ant to be around them
I listen to them I neglect to listen
I w ant to help them I don ’ t offer them help
I am influenced by them I ignore them
I respect them I am indifferent
Do I value the interactive process ? A wonderful synergy often occurs as the result of shared thinking . 
It can take you places you ’ ve never been . Publisher Malcolm Forbes asserted ,  “ Listening to advice
often accomplishes far more than heeding it .  ” I must say , I didn ’ t always value shared thinking . For
many years , I tended to withdrawwhen I wanted to develop ideas . Only reluctantly did I work on ideas
with others . When a colleague challenged me on this , I started to analyze my hesitancy . I realized that
it went back to my college experience . Some days in the classroom I could tell that a teacher was
unprepared to lecture and instead spent the class time asking us to give our uninformed opinions on a
subject . Most of the time , the opinions seemed no better than mine . I had come to class so that the
professor could teach me . I realized that the process of sharing ideas wasn ’ t the problem ; it was who
was doing the talking . Shared thinking is only as good as the people doing the sharing . Since learning
that lesson , I have embraced the interactive process , and nowI believe it is one of my strengths . Still , I
always think about whom I bring around the table for a shared thinking session .  ( I ’ ll tell you my
guidelines for whom I invite later in this chapter .  ) 
You must open yourself up to the idea of sharing ideas before you will engage in the process of shared
thinking . 
2 . Move from Competition to Cooperation
Jeffrey J . Fox , author of Howto Become CEO , says ,  “ Always be on the lookout for ideas . Be completely
indiscriminate as to the source . Get ideas from customers , children , competitors , other industries , or cab
drivers . It doesn ’ t matter who thought of an idea .  ” 
18
A person who values cooperation desires to complete the ideas of others , not compete with them . If
someone asks you to share ideas , focus on helping the team , not getting ahead personally . And if you are
the one who brings people together to share their thoughts , praise the idea more than the source of the
idea . If the best idea always wins ( rather than the person who offered it )  , then all will share their thoughts with
greater enthusiasm . 
3 . Have an Agenda When You Meet
I enjoy spending time with certain people , whether we discuss ideas or not : my wife , Margaret ; my
children ; my grandchildren ; my parents . Though we often do discuss ideas , it doesn ’ t bother me if we don ’ t ; 
we are family . When I spend time with nearly anyone else in my life , however , I have an agenda . I knowwhat I
want to accomplish . 
The more I respect the wisdom of the person , the more I listen . For example , when I meet with someone
I ’ m mentoring , I let the person ask the questions , but I expect to do most of the talking . When I meet with
someone who mentors me , I mostly keep my mouth shut . In other relationships , the give and take is more
even . But no matter with whom I meet , I have a reason for getting together and I have an expectation for
what I ’ ll give to it and get from it . That ’ s true whether it ’ s for business or pleasure . 
4 . Get the Right People Around the Table
To get anything of value out of shared thinking , you need to have people around who bring something to
the table . As you prepare to ask people to participate in shared thinking , use the following criteria for the
selection process . Choose…
People whose greatest desire is the success of the ideas . 
People who can add value to another ’ s thoughts . 
People who can emotionally handle quick changes in the conversation . 
People who appreciate the strengths of others in areas where they are weak . 
People who understand their place of value at the table . 
People who place what is best for the team before themselves . 
People who can bring out the best thinking in the people around them . 
People who possess maturity , experience , and success in the issue under discussion . 
People who will take ownership and responsibility for decisions . 
People who will leave the table with a “ we ” attitude , not a “ me ” attitude . 
Too often we choose our brainstorming partners based on feelings of friendship or circumstances or
convenience . But that doesn ’ t help us to discover and create the ideas of the highest order . Who we invite to
the table makes all the difference . 
5 . Compensate Good Thinkers and Collaborators Well
Successful organizations practice shared thinking . If you lead an organization , department , or team , 
then you can ’ t afford to be without people who are good at shared thinking . As you recruit and hire , look for
good thinkers who value others , have experience with the collaborative process , and are emotionally secure . 
Then pay them well and challenge them to use their thinking skills and share their ideas often . Nothing
adds value like a lot of good thinkers putting their minds together . 
No matter what you ’ re trying to accomplish , you can do it better with shared thinking . That is why I spend
much of my life teaching leadership . Good leadership helps to put together the right people at the right
time for the right purpose so that everybody wins . All it takes is the right people and a willingness to
participate in shared thinking . 
Thinking Question
Am I consistently including the heads of others to think “ over my head ” and achieve
compounding results ? 

10
Practice Unselfish Thinking 
 “ We cannot hold a torch to light another ’ s path without brightening our own .  ” 
—BEN SWEETLAND
So far in this book , we ’ ve discussed many kinds of thinking that can help you to achieve more . Each of them
has the potential to make you more successful . Now I want to acquaint you with a kind of thinking with the
potential to change your life in another way . It might even redefine how you view success . 
Unselfish thinking can often deliver a return greater than any other kind of thinking . Take a look at some of
its benefits : 
1 . Unselfish Thinking Brings Personal Fulfillment
Few things in life bring greater personal rewards than helping others . Charles H . Burr believed ,  “ Getters
generally don ’ t get happiness ; givers get it .  ” Helping people brings great satisfaction . When you spend your
day unselfishly serving others , at night you can lay down your head with no regrets and sleep soundly . In
Bringing Out the Best in People , Alan Loy McGinnis remarked ,  “ There is no more noble occupation in the
world than to assist another human being—to help someone succeed .  ” 
Even if you have spent much of your life pursuing selfish gain , it ’ s never too late to have a change of heart . 
Even the most miserable person , like Charles Dickens ’ s Scrooge , can turn his life around and make a
difference for others . That ’ s what Alfred Nobel did . When he saw his own obituary in the newspaper ( his brother
had died and the editor had written about the wrong Nobel , saying that the explosives his company produced
had killed many people )  , Nobel vowed to promote peace and acknowledge contributions to humanity . That is
how the Nobel Prizes came into being . 
2 . Unselfish Thinking Adds Value to Others
In 1904 , Bessie Anderson Stanley wrote the following definition of success in Brown Book magazine : 
He has achieved success who has lived well , laughed often and loved much ; who has enjoyed the trust
of pure women , the respect of intelligent men and the love of little children , who has filled his niche and
accomplished his task ; who has left the world better than he found it , whether by an improved poppy , a
perfect poem , or a rescued soul ; who has never lacked appreciation of earth ’ s beauty or failed to
express it , who has always looked for the best in others and given them the best he had , whose life was
an inspiration , whose memory a benediction . 
When you get outside of yourself and make a contribution to others , you really begin to live . 
3 . Unselfish Thinking Encourages Other Virtues
When you see a four-year-old , you expect to observe selfishness . But when you see it in a forty-year-old , it ’ s
not very attractive , is it ? 
Of all the qualities a person can pursue , unselfish thinking seems to make the biggest difference toward
cultivating other virtues . I think that ’ s because the ability to give unselfishly is so difficult . It goes against the grain
of human nature . But if you can learn to think unselfishly and become a giver , then it becomes easier to develop
many other virtues : gratitude , love , respect , patience , discipline , etc . 
4 . Unselfish Thinking Increases Quality of Life
The spirit of generosity created by unselfish thinking gives people an appreciation for life and an
understanding of its higher values . Seeing those in need and giving to meet that need puts a lot of things into
perspective . It increases the quality of life of the giver and the receiver . That ’ s why I believe that
There is no life as empty as the self-centered life . 
There is no life as centered as the self-empty life . 
If you want to improve your world , then focus your attention on helping others . 
Yourself
Merck and Company , the global pharmaceutical corporation , has always seen itself as doing more than just
producing products and making a profit . It desires to serve humanity . In the mid-1980s , the company developed
a drug to cure river blindness , a disease that infects and causes blindness in millions of people , particularly in
developing countries . While it was a good product , potential customers couldn ’ t afford to buy it . So what did
Merck do ? It developed the drug anyway , and in 1987 announced that it would give the medicine free to anyone
who needed it . As of 1998 , the company had given more than 250 million tablets away . 
19
George W . Merck says ,  “ We try never to forget that medicine is for the people . It is not for the profits . The
profits follow , and if we have remembered that , they have never failed to appear .  ” The lesson to be learned ? 
Simple . Instead of trying to be great , be part of something greater than yourself . 
6 . Unselfish Thinking Creates a Legacy
Jack Balousek , president and chief operating officer of True North Communications , says ,  “ Learn , earn , 
return—these are the three phases of life . The first third should be devoted to education , the second third to
building a career and making a living , and the last third to giving back to others—returning something in
gratitude . Each state seems to be a preparation for the next one .  ” 
If you are successful , it becomes possible for you to leave an inheritance for others . But if you desire to do
more , to create a legacy , then you need to leave that in others . When you think unselfishly and invest in others , 
you gain the opportunity to create a legacy that will outlive you . 
HOW TO EXPERIENCE THE SATISFACTION OF UNSELFISH THINKING
I think most people recognize the value of unselfish thinking , and most would even agree that it ’ s an ability
they would like to develop . Many people , however , are at a loss concerning how to change their thinking . To
begin cultivating the ability to think unselfishly , Irecommend that you do the following : 
1 . Put Others First
The process begins with realizing that everything is not about you ! That requires humility and a shift in focus . 
In The Power of Ethical Management , Ken Blanchard and Norman Vincent Peale wrote ,  “ People with humility
don ’ t think less of themselves ; they just think of themselves less .  ” If you want to become less selfish in your
thinking , then you need to stop thinking about your wants and begin focusing on others ’ needs . Paul the Apostle
exhorted ,  “ Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit , but in humility consider others better than
yourselves . Each of you should look not only to your own interests , but also to the interests of others .  ” 
20 Make a
mental and emotional commitment to look out for the interests of others . 
2 . Expose Yourself to Situations Where People Have Needs
It ’ s one thing to believe you are willing to give unselfishly . It ’ s another to actually do it . To make the transition , 
you need to put yourself in a position where you can see people ’ s needs and do something about it . 
The kind of giving you do isn ’ t important at first . You can serve at your church , make donations to a food
bank , volunteer professional services , or give to a charitable organization . The point is to learn how to give and
to cultivate the habit of thinking like a giver . 
3 . Give Quietly or Anonymously
Once you have learned to give of yourself , then the next step is to learn to give when you cannot receive
anything in return . It ’ s almost always easier to give when you receive recognition for it than it is when no one is
likely to know about it . The people who give in order to receive a lot of fanfare , however , have already received
any reward they will get . There are spiritual , mental , and emotional benefits that come only to those who give
anonymously . If you ’ ve never done it before , try it . 
4 . Invest in People Intentionally
The highest level of unselfish thinking comes when you give of yourself to another person for that person ’ s
personal development or well-being . If you ’ re married or a parent , you know this from personal experience . 
What does your spouse value most highly : money in the bank or your time freely given ? What would small
children really rather have from you : a toy or your undivided attention ? The people who love you would rather
have you than what you can give them . 
If you want to become the kind of person who invests in people , then consider others and their journey so
that you can collaborate with them . Each relationship is like a partnership created for mutual benefit . As you go
into any relationship , think about how you can invest in the other person so that it becomes a win-win situation . 
Here is how relationships most often play out : 
I win , you lose—I win only once . 
You win , I lose—You win only once . 
We both win—We win many times . 
We both lose—Good-bye , partnership ! 
The best relationships are win-win . Why don ’ t more people go into relationships with that attitude ? I ’ ll tell
you why : most people want to make sure that they win first . Unselfish thinkers , on the other hand , go into a
relationship and make sure that the other person wins first . And that makes all the difference . 
5 . Continually Check Your Motives
François de la Rochefoucauld said ,  “ What seems to be generosity is often no more than disguised
ambition , which overlooks a small interest in order to secure a great one .  ” The hardest thing for most people is
fighting their natural tendency to put themselves first . That ’ s why it ’ s important to continually examine your
motives to make sure you ’ re not sliding backward into selfishness . 
Do you want to check your motives ? Then follow the modeling of Benjamin Franklin . Every day , he asked
himself two questions . When he got up in the morning , he would ask ,  “ What good am I going to do today ?  ” And
before he went to bed , he would ask ,  “ What good have I done today ?  ” If you can answer those questions with
selflessness and integrity , you can keep yourself on track . 
GIVE WHILE YOU LIVE
In the fall of 2001 , we all witnessed a demonstration of unselfish thinking unlike anything we had seen in the
United States for many years . Who can forget the events of September 11 , 2001 ? I had just finished teaching a
leadership lesson when my assistant , Linda Eggers , came into the studio to announce the tragic news . Like
most Americans , Iremained riveted to the television all day and heard the reports of the firefighters and police
officers who raced into the World Trade Center towers to help others , never worrying about their own safety . 
In the days following the tragedy , millions of Americans expressed a great desire to do something that
would help the situation . I had the same desire . My company was scheduled to do a training via simulcast on
September 15 , the Saturday following the tragedy . Our leadership team decided to add a one-and-a-half-hour
program titled “ America Prays ” to the end of the simulcast . In it , my friend Max Lucado wrote and read a prayer , 
expressing the heart ’ s cry of millions . Franklin Graham prayed for our national leaders . Jim and Shirley Dobson
gave advice to parents on how to help their children deal with the event . And Bruce Wilkinson and I asked the
simulcast viewers to give financially to the people injured on September 11 . Amazingly , they gave $5 . 9 million , 
which World Vision graciously agreed to distribute to those in need . Unselfish thinking and giving turned a very
dark hour into one of light and hope . 
Less than two weeks after the tragedy , I was able to travel to Ground Zero in New York City . I went to view
the site of the destruction , to thank the men and women clearing away the wreckage , and to pray for them . I
can ’ t really do justice to what I saw . I ’ ve traveled to New York dozens of times . It ’ s one of my favorite places in
the world . My wife and I had been up in the towers with our children many times before and have wonderful
memories of that area . To look at the place where the buildings had once stood and to see nothing but rubble , 
dust , and twisted metal—it ’ s simply indescribable . 
What manyAmericans didn ’ t realize is that for many months people worked diligently to clean up the site . 
Many were New York City firefighters and other city workers . Others were volunteers . They worked around the
clock , seven days a week . And when they came across the remains of someone in the rubble , they called for
silence and reverently carried them out . 
Since I am a clergyman , I was asked to wear a clerical collar upon entering the area . As I walked around , 
many workers saw the collar and asked me to pray for them . It was a humbling privilege . 
American educator Horace Mann said ,  “ Be ashamed to die until you have won some victory for humanity .  ” 
According to this standard , New York City ’ s firefighters are certainly prepared for death . The service they
perform is often truly heroic . You and I may never be required to lay down our lives for others , as they did . But
we can give to others in different ways . We can be unselfish thinkers who put others first and add value to their
lives . We can work with them so that they go farther than they thought possible . 
Thinking Question
Am I continually considering others and their journey in order to think with maximum
collaboration ? 

11
Rely on Bottom-Line Thinking 
 “ There ain ’ t no rules around here . We ’ re trying to accomplish something .  ” 
—THOMAS EDISON , INVENTOR
How do you figure out the bottom line for your organization , business , department , team , or group ? In many
businesses , the bottom line is literally the bottom line . Profit determines whether you are succeeding . But
dollars should not always be the primary measure of success . Would you measure the ultimate success of your
family by how much money you had at the end of the month or year ? And if you run a non-profit or volunteer
organization , how would you know whether you were performing at your highest potential ? How do you think
bottom line in that situation ? 
A NONPROFIT ’ S BOTTOM LINE
Frances Hesselbein had to ask herself exactly that question in 1976 , when she became the national
executive director of the Girl Scouts of America . When she first got involved with the Girl Scouts , running the
organization was the last thing she expected . She and her husband , John , were partners in Hesselbein Studios , 
a small family business that filmed television commercials and promotional films . She wrote the scripts and he
made the films . In the early 1950s , she was recruited as a volunteer troop leader at the Second Presbyterian
Church in Johnstown , Pennsylvania . Even that was unusual , since she had a son and no daughters . But she
agreed to do it on a temporary basis . She must have loved it , because she led the troop for nine years ! 
In time , she became council president and a member of the national board . Then she served as executive
director of the Talus Rock Girl Scout Council , a full-time paid position . By the time she took the job as CEO of
the national organization , the Girl Scouts was in trouble . The organization lacked direction , teenage girls were
losing interest in scouting , and it was becoming increasingly difficult to recruit adult volunteers , especially with
greater numbers of women entering the workforce . Meanwhile , the Boy Scouts was considering opening itself
to girls . Hesselbein desperately needed to bring the organization back to the bottom line .  
 “ We kept asking ourselves very simple questions ,  ” she says .  “ What is our business ? Who is our customer ? 
And what does the customer consider value ? If you ’ re the Girl Scouts , IBM , or AT & T , you have to manage for a
mission .  ” 
21 Hesselbein ’ s focus on mission enabled her to identify the Girl Scouts ’ bottom line .  “ We really are
here for one reason : to help a girl reach her highest potential . More than any one thing , that made the
difference . Because when you are clear about your mission , corporate goals and operating objectives flow from
it .  ” 
22
Once she figured out her bottom line , she was able to create a strategy to try to achieve it . She started by
reorganizing the national staff . Then she created a planning system to be used by each of the 350 regional
councils . And she introduced management training to the organization . Hesselbein didn ’ t restrict herself to
changes in leadership and organization . In the 1960s and ’ 70s , the country had changed and so had its girls
—but the Girl Scouts hadn ’ t . Hesselbein tackled that issue , too . The organization made its activities more
relevant to the current culture , giving greater opportunities for use of computers , for example , rather than
hosting a party . She also sought out minority participation , created bilingual materials , and reached out to lowincome households . If helping girls reach their highest potential was the group ’ s bottom line , then why not be
more aggressive helping girls who traditionally have fewer opportunities ? The strategy worked beautifully . 
Minority participation in the Girl Scouts tripled . 
In 1990 , Hesselbein left the Girl Scouts after making it a first-class organization . She went on to become the
founding president and CEO of the Peter F . Drucker Foundation for Nonprofit Management , and now serves as
chairman of its board of governors . And in 1998 , she was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom . 
President Clinton said of Hesselbein during the ceremony at the White House ,  “ She has shared her
remarkable recipe for inclusion and excellence with countless organizations whose bottom line is measured not
in dollars , but in changed lives .  ” 
23 He couldn ’ t have said it better ! 
WHY YOU SHOULD ENJOY THE RETURN OF BOTTOM-LINE THINKING
If you ’ re accustomed to thinking of the bottom line only as it relates to financial matters , then you may be
missing some things crucial to you and your organization . Instead , think of the bottom line as the end , the
takeaway , the desired result . Every activity has its own unique bottom line . If you have a job , your work has a
bottom line . If you serve in your church , your activity has a bottom line . So does your effort as a parent , or
spouse , if you are one . 
As you explore the concept of bottom-line thinking , recognize that it can help you in many ways : 
1 . Bottom-Line Thinking Provides Great Clarity
What ’ s the difference between bowling and work ? When bowling , it takes only three seconds to know how
you ’ ve done ! That ’ s one reason people love sports so much . There ’ s no waiting and no guessing about the
outcome . 
Bottom-line thinking makes it possible for you to measure outcomes more quickly and easily . It gives you a
benchmark by which to measure activity . It can be used as a focused way of ensuring that all your little activities
are purposeful and line up to achieve a larger goal . 
2 . Bottom-Line Thinking Helps You Assess Every Situation
When you know your bottom line , it becomes much easier to know how you ’ re doing in any given area . 
When Frances Hesselbein began running the Girl Scouts , for example , she mea-sured everything against the
organization ’ s goal of helping a girl reach her highest potential—from the organization ’ s management structure 
( which she changed from a hierarchy to a hub ) down to what badges the girls could earn . There ’ s no better
measurement tool than the bottom line . 
3 . Bottom-Line Thinking Helps You Make the Best Decisions
Decisions become much easier when you know your bottom line . When the Girl Scouts were struggling in
the 1970s , outside organizations tried to convince its members to become women ’ s rights activists or door-todoor canvassers . But under Hesselbein , it became easy for the Girl Scouts to say no . It knew its bottom line , 
and it wanted to pursue its goals with focus and fervency . 
4 . Bottom-Line Thinking Generates High Morale
When you know the bottom line and you go after it , you greatly increase your odds of winning . And nothing
generates high morale like winning . How do you describe sports teams that win the championship , or company
divisions that achieve their goals , or volunteers who achieve their mission ? They ’ re excited . Hitting the target
feels exhilarating . And you can hit it only if you know what it is . 
5 . Bottom-Line Thinking Ensures Your Future
If you want to be successful tomorrow , you need to think bottom line today . That ’ s what Frances Hesselbein
did , and she turned the Girl Scouts around . Look at any successful , lasting company , and you ’ ll find leaders who
know their bottom line . They make their decisions , allocate their resources , hire their people , and structure their
organization to achieve that bottom line . 
HOW TO ENJOY THE RETURN OF BOTTOM-LINE THINKING
It isn ’ t hard to see the value of the bottom line . Most people would agree that bottom-line thinking has a high
return . But learning how to be a bottom-line thinker can be challenging . 
1 . Identify the Real Bottom Line
The process of bottom-line thinking begins with knowing what you ’ re really going after . It can be as lofty as
the big-picture vision , mission , or purpose of an organizaion . Or it can be as focused as what you want to
accomplish on a particular project . What ’ s important is that you be as specific as possible . If your goal is for
something as vague as “ success ,  ” you will have a painfully difficult time trying to harness bottom-line thinking to
achieve it . 
The first step is to set aside your “ wants .  ” Get to the results you ’ re really looking for , the true essence of the
goal . Set aside any emotions that may cloud your judgment and remove any politics that may influence your
perception . What are you really trying to achieve ? When you strip away all the things that don ’ t really matter , 
what are you compelled to achieve ? What must occur ? What is acceptable ? That is the real bottom line . 
2 . Make the Bottom Line the Point
Have you ever been in a conversation with someone whose intentions seem other than stated ? Sometimes
the situation reflects intentional deception . But it can also occur when the person doesn ’ t know his own bottom
line . 
The same thing happens in companies . Sometimes , for example , an idealistically stated mission and the
real bottom line don ’ t jibe . Purpose and profits compete . Earlier , I quoted George W . Merck , who stated ,  “ We
try never to forget that medicine is for the people . It is not for the profits . The profits follow , and if we have
remembered that , they have never failed to appear .  ” He probably made that statement to remind those in his
organization that profits serve purpose—they don ’ t compete with it . 
If making a profit were the real bottom line , and helping people merely provided the means for achieving it , 
then the company would suffer . Its attention would be divided , and it would neither help people as well as it
could nor make as much profit as it desired . 
3 . Create a Strategic Plan to Achieve the Bottom Line
Bottom-line thinking achieves results . Therefore , it naturally follows that any plans that flow out of such
thinking must tie directly to the bottom line—and there can be only one , not two or three . Once the bottom line
has been determined , a strategy must be created to achieve it . In organizations , that often means identifying
the core elements or functions that must operate properly to achieve the bottom line . This is the leader ’ s
responsibility . 
The important thing is that when the bottom line of each activity is achieved , then THE bottom line is
achieved . If the sum of the smaller goals doesn ’ t add up to the real bottom line , then either your strategy is
flawed or you ’ ve not identified your real bottom line . 
4 . Align Team Members with the Bottom Line
Once you have your strategy in place , make sure your people line up with your strategy . Ideally , all team
members should know the big goal , as well as their individual role in achieving it . They need to know their
personal bottom line and how that works to achieve the organization ’ s bottom line . 
5 . Stick with One System and Monitor Results Continually
Dave Sutherland , a friend and former president of one of my companies , believes that some organizations
get into trouble by trying to mix systems . He maintains that many kinds of systems can be successful , but
mixing different systems or continually changing from one to another leads to failure . Dave says : 
Bottom-line thinking cannot be a one-time thing . It has to be built into the system of working and relating
and achieving . You can ’ t just tune into the desired result every now and then . Achieving with bottom-line
thinking must be a way of life , or it will send conflicting messages . I am a bottom-line thinker . It is a part
of my “ system ” for achievement . I practice it every day . No other measurements—no wasted efforts . 
Dave used to call members of his field team every night to ask the bottom-line question they expect to hear . 
He continually kept his eye on the company ’ s bottom line by monitoring it for every core area . 
When it comes right down to it , regardless of your bottom line , you can improve it with good thinking . And
bottom-line thinking has a great return because it helps to turn your ideas into results . Like no other kind of
mental processing , it can help you to reap the full potential of your thinking and achieve whatever you desire . 
Thinking Question
Am I staying focused on the bottom line so that I can gain the maximum return and reap the
full potential of my thinking ? 

ONE FINAL THOUGHT
I trust you have enjoyed this book . As you move forward , I wish you success and suggest that you keep in
mind…
1 . Everything begins with a thought .  
 “ Life consists of what a man is thinking about all day .  ” 
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON
2 . What we think determines who we are . Who we are determines what we do .  
 “ The actions of men are the best interpreters of their thoughts .  ” 
—JOHN LOCKE
3 . Our thoughts determine our destiny . Our destiny determines our legacy .  
 “ You are today where your thoughts have brought you . You will be tomorrowwhere your thoughts
take you .  ” 
—JAMES ALLEN
4 . People who go to the top think differently than others .  
 “ Nothing limits achievement like small thinking ; Nothing expands possibilities like unleashed
thinking .  ” 
—WILLIAM ARTHUR WARD
5 . We can change the way we think .  
 “ Whatever things are true… noble… just… pure… lovely… are of good report . If there is any virtue
and if there is anything praiseworthy ; think on these things .  ” 
