Introduction
If you ’ ve pulled this book down from the shelf or had it passed to
you by a friend or loved one as a gift , you don ’ t have to be psychic
to know something about your current business situation . You may
be in need of this book for any number of reasons : 
You saw Lehman Brothers ’ staff queuing outside their offices
with cardboard boxes and don ’ t want that to happen to your
business . 
A relative , hopefully a distant and elderly one , has died and
left you a pile of dosh and you don ’ t fancy leaving it to your
stockbroker to lose on your behalf . 
Your employer is in the middle of a major downsizing
operation as well as proposing to close its final salary
pension scheme and relocate to somewhere with lousy
schools and no healthcare facilities . 
You have a great idea for a world-beating product that no
one has ever thought of but every one of the world ’ s billion
Internet users desperately needs – when they hear the good
news they ’ re going to click a path to your website . 
Your brother , sister , father , mother or best friend – or worse
still , all of them – has started his or her own business and
retired to a chateau in France to breed horses , tend the vines
and sail on a luxury yacht . 
If your present situation is founded largely on luck and serendipity , 
that isn ’ t enough to get you through the business start-up process
unaided . Good ideas , hard work , relevant skills and knowledge
about your product and its market , though essential , on their own
aren ’ t enough . The 400 , 000 small firms that close their doors every
year in the United Kingdom , a figure that rose sharply in the recent
recession , are evidence enough that the process is a tough one . 
This book is aimed at you if you either want to start up a business or
to review your prospects in the small business world . It brings
together , from a wide variety of sources , the essential elements of
knowledge that are a prerequisite to understanding the world of
small business and to achieving financial and personal success
whatever the economic weather . 
Why You Need This Book
Most business failures occur within the first 18 months of operation . 
That fact alone has made it increasingly clear that small businesses
need special help , particularly in their formative period . The most
crucial needs for owners and managers include : 
Help in acquiring business skills in such areas as basic
bookkeeping and accounting . Most failing businesses simply
don ’ t know their financial position . Even if the order book is
full , the cash can still run out . 
Knowledge of what sorts of finance are available and how to
put themselves in the best possible position to raise money . 
Surprisingly , funds aren ’ t in short supply . Problems lie , 
rather , in the business proposition itself or , more often , in
the way in which the owner makes the proposition to the
financier . 
Information with which to make realistic market assessments
of the size and possibilities of their chosen market . Overoptimism about the size and ease with which a market can be
reached is an all too common mistake . 
Skills and tools to grow their businesses into valuable assets
to pass on to family members or to sell up and sail off into
the sunset . 
This book gives you help in all these areas . 
In addition , every business needs a business plan , a statement of
business purpose , with the consequences of each element of that
purpose spelt out in financial terms . You must describe what you
want your business to do – who its potential customers are , how
much they ’ re likely to spend , who can supply you and how much
their supplies cost . Then you must translate those plans and
projections into cash – how much your business needs , how much
you already have and how much you expect ‘ outsiders ’ to put in . 
This plan also helps you to avoid catching the ‘ common cold ’ of
small businesses – underestimating the amount of start-up capital
you need . Going back to a bank and asking for 30 per cent more
funding six months after opening your doors , and retaining any
credibility at all , is difficult if not impossible . And yet new
businesses consistently underestimate how much money they need
to finance their growth . 
Many people have never prepared a business plan , they don ’ t know
how to start and they need new knowledge . That ’ s where this book
comes in . In these chapters , I give you the information you need to
formulate and follow a business plan . 
The book is also invaluable to innovators , who have special
problems of communication and security when they try to translate
their ideas into businesses . All too often their inventions are left for
other countries to exploit , or they feel unhappy about discussing
ideas , believing that a patent is their only protection . But more often
than not , these business owners simply don ’ t know who to talk to , 
little realising that sophisticated help is often close at hand . Thus
this book illuminates a path from the laboratory to the marketplace
so that small firms and inventors can see a clear route . 
How to Use This Book
Starting a Business For Dummies can help you succeed no matter
what kind of business expertise you ’ re looking for . If you have a
great and proven business idea , you may want to plug straight into
finding out how to raise finance . If you need more than just yourself
to get your great business idea off the ground , then you may want to
discover how to find great employees or perhaps a business partner
to take some of the financial and emotional strain . This book is set
up so that you can dip in and out of it in a number of ways
depending on your situation . 
If you haven ’ t started a business before , or been profit
accountable for part of an enterprise , then you may want to
start at the beginning and work your way through . 
If you ’ re more experienced , then you may start by selecting
the areas you are less knowledgeable about to fill in the gaps
and work outwards from there . 
If you ’ re quite confident in the business world , you can use
the book as a guide and mentor to review a particular topic . 
You can even use it to plan to sell your business after it ’ s
established and move on to a different challenge . 
If you learn by example , you may want to flip through the
book , using the True Story icon as your guide . The text next
to this icon highlights ‘ straight from the horse ’ s mouth ’ 
examples of how successful entrepreneurs have tackled
specific situations , be it finding a partner , raising finance or
getting a free grant from the government . 
The next section tells you what the various parts of the book cover
so that you can turn to a certain part for a specific need . 
How This Book Is Organised
Starting a Business For Dummies is divided into five main parts based
on the major elements involved in planning , launching and running a
business . You don ’ t have to read all the parts , however , and you
certainly don ’ t have to read them in order . Each chapter is devoted
to a particular business start-up topic and you may need some
chapters more than others . Feel free to jump from section to section
and chapter to chapter ; pick and choose what really matters to you
and your business proposition . 
Part I : Getting Started
Before you get a business off the ground you have to do all the
preliminary legwork and make sure that you have a viable business
on your hands before you commit too much time and money . This
part gets you on track right away by helping you to gather crucial
information on your marketplace , potential customers and
competitors , and so test whether your idea is viable . It also provides
a chance for you to check out your skills and attributes to help you
establish the right business for you to start . 
Part II : Making and Funding Your Plan
To ensure that your business prospers you have to know something
about the legal structures under which you can trade and which
suits you best at the outset . You need a business plan to help you
both test the viability of your proposition and to share your ideas
and aspirations with others , including potential investors , bankers
or partners . You also want to review the financing options to make
sure that you get both the right amount and type of finance for your
business needs . You don ’ t have to do all this on your own , because
the chapters in this part list key organisations that offer advice and
help to business starters . 
Part III : Staying in Business
After you get going you ’ ll almost certainly need to employ staff
either full time , part time or on a temporary basis . This involves
legal responsibilities that you should be prepared for . A business
needs controlling in much the same way as a car or plane does . You
need to understand what the key control documents are , and what
they tell you about how your business is performing . You also need
to have a sound appreciation of your income , expenses and tax
liabilities , and how to minimise those liabilities legitimately . 
Part IV : Making the Business Grow
After you have your business up and running you want to see how
fast you can make it go without blowing a gasket or running off the
road . Part of this process is a bit like fine-tuning a car engine . But
part involves substantially changing everything , including the
products and services , the markets you serve and perhaps even the
very nature of your business operations . The process may even
involve adopting a strategy to franchise your business idea , bolt a
franchise onto your venture or form some other form of strategic
alliance . This part covers the ins and outs of expanding your
business safely and smartly . 
Part V : The Part of Tens
The Part of Tens presents four chapters . One is a collection of
warnings about the problems that most new businesses are likely to
encounter and how to counteract them . Another contains details of
the people you absolutely have to talk to before , during and after
you ’ ve started up . The third chapter gives vital details on how to cut
costs and so keep your business competitive . The final chapter
provides pointers on maximising the value of your business , finding
a buyer and then moving on to pastures new . 
Icons Used in This Book
To help you pinpoint vital information , I ’ ve placed icons throughout
the text to steer you to nuggets of knowledge . 
This icon calls your attention to particularly important points
and offers useful advice on practical topics . 
This icon serves as a friendly reminder that the topic at hand
is important enough for you to make a note of . 
Business , like any specialist subject , is awash with specialised
terms and expressions , some of which may not be familiar to
you . This icon draws your attention to these . 
This icon alerts you that I ’ m using a practical example
showing how another business starter has tackled a particular
topic . Often you can apply the example to your own business . 
This icon alerts you to a potential danger . Proceed with
caution ; look left and right before crossing . In fact , think
carefully about crossing at all when you see this icon . 
This icon refers to specialised business facts and data that are
interesting as background data but not essential for you to
know . You can skip paragraphs marked by this icon without
missing the point – but reading them may help you build
credibility with outside investors and partners . 
Where to Go From Here
Take a minute to thumb through the table of contents and get
comfortable with the topics the book covers . Pick a chapter that
strikes a particular chord with the aspect of starting a business
that ’ s uppermost in your mind . Read that and see where it leads
you . 
You can also use Chapter 6 ,  ‘ Preparing the Business Plan ’  , as a
framework for gathering knowledge and diving back into the other
chapters as you go . 
If all else fails , start at the beginning . That technique has a pretty
good track record . 
Chapter 3
Can You Do the Business ? 
In This Chapter
Understanding whether being your own boss is right for you
Checking out various ventures
Setting up your business at home
Figuring out your profit motive
Taking a skills inventory to identify any gaps
Governments are keen to foster entrepreneurship : new businesses
create jobs for individuals and increased prosperity for nations , 
which are both primary goals for any government . If those new firms
don ’ t throw people out of work when recessions start to bite , 
supporting them becomes doubly attractive . 
But people , you included , don ’ t start businesses or grow existing
ones simply to please politicians or to give their neighbours
employment . They have many reasons for considering selfemployment . The idea of escaping the daily grind of working for
someone else and being in charge of their own destiny attracts most
people . But despite the many potential benefits , they face real
challenges and problems , and self-employment isn ’ t a realistic
option for everyone . 
The questions you need to ask yourself are : Can I do it ? Am I really
the entrepreneurial type ? What are my motivations and aims ? How
do I find the right business for me ? This chapter can help you
discover the answers . 
Deciding What You Want From a
Business
See whether you relate to any of the most common reasons people
give for starting up in business : 
Being able to make your own decisions
Having a business to leave to your children
Creating employment for the family
Being able to capitalise on specialist skills
Earning your own money when you want
Having flexible working hours
Wanting to take a calculated risk
Reducing stress and worry
Having the satisfaction of creating something truly your own
Being your own boss
Working without having to rely on other people
The two central themes connecting all these reasons seem to
revolve around gaining personal satisfaction – making work as much
fun as any other aspect of life – and creating wealth – essential if an
enterprise is going to last any length of time . 
Even when your personality fits and your goals are realistic , you
have to make sure that the business you ’ re starting is a good fit for
your abilities . 
The following sections explore these reasons in more detail . 
Gaining personal satisfaction ( or , 
entrepreneurs just wanna have fun ) 
No one particularly enjoys being told what to do and where and
when to do it . Working for someone else ’ s organisation brings all
those disadvantages . When you work for yourself , the only person
to blame if your job is boring , repetitive or takes up time that you
should perhaps spend with family and friends is yourself . 
Another source of personal satisfaction comes from the ability to 
 ‘ do things my way ’  . Employees are constantly puzzled and often
irritated by the decisions their bosses impose on them . All too often
managers in big firms say that they ’ d never spend their own money
in the way the powers that be encourage or instruct them to do . 
Managers and subordinates alike feel constrained by company
policy , which seems to set out arbitrary standards for dealing with
customers and employees in the same way . 
The high failure rate for new businesses suggests that the
glamour of starting up on their own seduces some people who
may be more successful and more contented in some other line
of endeavour . 
Running your own firm allows you to do things in a way that you
think the market , and your employees , believe to be right at the
time . 
Making money
Apart from winning the lottery , starting your own business is the
only possible way to achieve full financial independence . But it isn ’ t
risk free . In truth , most people who work for themselves don ’ t
become mega rich . However , many do and many more become far
wealthier than they would probably have become working for
someone else . 
You can also earn money working at your own pace when you want
to and even help your family to make some money too . 
Running your own business means taking more risks than you do if
you ’ re working for someone else . If the business fails , you stand to
lose far more than your job . If , like most owner managers , you opt
for sole trader status – someone working usually on his own without
forming a limited company ( find more on business categories in
Chapter 5 ) – you can end up personally liable for any business debts
you incur . This can mean having to sell your home and other assets
to meet your obligations . In these circumstances , not only will all
your hard work have been to no avail , but you can end up worse off
than when you started . Also , winding up a business is far from fun
or personally satisfying . 
I don ’ t want to discourage you , just to apply a reality check . The
truth is that running your own business is hard work that often
doesn ’ t pay well at first . You have to be okay with those facts in
order to have a chance of success . 
Fighting poverty through trade
Traidcraft ’ s mission is to fight poverty through trade , practising and promoting
approaches to trade that help poor people in developing countries transform
their lives . The company has more than 450 different products sourced from
more than 100 producer groups in almost 30 developing countries , selling
through its nationwide network of fair traders and online shop . Traidcraft
raises funds and gives aid , help and advice to the tune of £1 . 5 million a year to
help enterprises in developing countries . Projects include improving market
access for women producers in Vietnam ; helping Indian tea workers achieve
sustainable livelihoods ; and analysing the dairy sector in Kenya , identifying key
constraints affecting smallholder dairy farmers and their access to markets . 
Traidcraft received the Queen ’ s Award for Industry for Sustainable
Development , along with a host of other awards . Oh , and it does a pretty good
job of making money too – with £15 million turnover each year , business has
been growing at an average of 18 per cent a year , making a return on capital of
10 per cent . More details are on the company ’ s website , 
www . traidcraft . co . uk / socialaccounts . 
Saving the planet
Not everyone has making money as their sole aim when setting up in
business . According to the government ’ s figures , around 20 , 000 
 ‘ social entrepreneurs ’ run businesses aiming to achieve sustainable
social change and trade with a social or environmental purpose . 
They contribute almost £25 billion to the national economy and
assist local communities by creating jobs , providing ethical
products and services using sustainable resources and reinvesting a
share of the profits back into society . 
Ethical businesses have some unique advantages . For example , 
according to those running such firms they can relatively easily
attract and retain intelligent people . Over 70 per cent of students
say that a potential employer ’ s track record is an important factor in
job choice . Customers also like ethical firms . According to a recent
European Union survey on sustainable consumption , 86 per cent of
those polled in the United Kingdom , Spain , Germany , Greece and
Italy said that they felt very strongly about wanting things to be
produced and marketed responsibly . They also blamed brands for
not providing more environmentally and socially friendly products . 
If you want to explore the prospects for starting a social enterprise , 
contact the School for Social Entrepreneurs ( website : 
www . sse . org . uk ; tel : 020 8981 0300 )  , which can help with specific
and tailored support . If you need funds to start a social enterprise , 
contact Bridges Community Ventures ( website : 
www . bridgesventures . com ; tel : 020 7262 5566 )  , a venture capital
firm with a social mission . Its founding principle is that all the funds
it invests go to businesses with a clear social purpose as well as
aiming to achieve financial returns for investors . 
Exploring Different Types of Business
At one level all businesses are the same – they sell something to
people who want to buy from them , while trying to make an honest
buck along the way . At another level many very different types of
business and ways of doing business exist , even within what
superficially can appear to be very similar fields . 
Selling to other businesses
Business-to-business ( B2B ) enterprises , such as those selling market
research , database management , corporate clothing , management
consultancy , telemarketing or graphic design , involve one
businessperson selling to another . The attractions are that you ’ re
dealing with other people who have a definite need and usually buy
in relative large quantities and at regular intervals . For example , an
individual may buy envelopes in packs of a dozen a few times a year , 
but a business buys scores , perhaps even thousands , and puts in an
order every month . Corporate customers are harder to win , but are
often worth more when you have them . And unlike private
individuals , businesses like to forge relationships that endure over
time . 
Some downsides exist too . Business customers expect credit , 
perhaps taking between 60 and 90 days to pay up . If they go bust
they may owe a lot of money and take some of their suppliers down
with them . You may have to attend exhibitions to make your
presence known , a costly and time-consuming process , or advertise
in trade directories . Check out these websites to find out more
about these topics : www . idealbusinessshow . co . uk and
www . b2bindex . co . uk . 
Opening all hours
Conventional shops , restaurants and the like have long opening
hours and have to meet the expectations of increasingly savvy
consumers , whose access to the Internet has made them aware of
competitive prices as well as high specifications and standards of
service . The upside of any form of retailing is that you ’ re almost
invariably paid up front . But just because you get the cash in your
hand doesn ’ t mean that you don ’ t have to meet exacting standards . 
Customers are protected in their dealings in a myriad of ways and if
you fall short of their legal entitlement you can end up with a bigger
bill than a simple cash refund .  ( I cover legal issues in Chapter 10 ,  
 ‘ Marketing Your Wares ’  .  ) In conventional retailing you also have to
rent premises and stock them with products , both factors that can
add significantly to the business risk . 
Increasingly , new retail business start-ups are Internet based . The
website is in effect the shop window and the stock of products being
sold may even be in a warehouse owned by a third party . This keeps
up-front costs down but means keeping abreast of fast-changing
technologies – the Internet , servers and computer hardware and
software .  ( I look at these in more depth in Chapter 15 .  ) 
Making products
One of the attractions of manufacturing is that you have a greater
degree of control over the quality , cost and specification of the end
product than a retailer or wholesaler might . But with those
advantages come some hefty penalties . Factories , equipment , stocks
of raw materials and employees are costly overheads . You have to
incur these expenses well before you ’ re certain of any orders – an
unlikely way into business for someone without previous
manufacturing experience and a deep wallet . Such owners also bear
some significant risks towards their employees . The UK
manufacturing sector reports over 32 , 000 work-related accidents to
the Health and Safety Executive each year . This figure includes over
6 , 200 major injuries such as fractures and amputations as well as
around 40 fatalities . 
A more likely route to manufacturing for a new business is
subcontracting , where you ’ re working for a manufacturer on part of
a product . The most common examples of subcontractors are
plumbers , electricians and carpenters in building work , metal and
plastic casing production and the like in civil engineering and a wide
range of activities in the information technology sector . 
Servicing customers
Service industries now dominate the British economy and account
for around 70 per cent of gross domestic product ( the value of the
goods and services that the country produces )  . Services include
financial intermediaries , hairdressing , real estate , computer
services , research and development , education , health and social
work , refuse disposal , recreational , cultural and sporting activities
and an extensive range of other activities where no physical goods
play a major part in any transaction . In truth , however , most
manufactured goods include a service element , though the business
functions are often separated . For example , manufacturing
businesses produce cars but are quite separate from the garage
chains that repair those vehicles . But some manufacturers go
further – Dell manufactures computers and also carries out delivery
and many other service functions . 
Service businesses require a high degree of personal involvement
and as such call for founders who see their people skills as pivotal . 
In a nutshell , if you don ’ t enjoy understanding the intimate details of
what makes customers tick and then going out of your way to meet
their needs , running a service business may be of little appeal . 
Working from Home
Few dedicated statistics exist on the number of people operating
home-based enterprises as distinct from those setting up in
dedicated premises . IDC , a US-based research firm , claims that
around 18 million of the 29 million owner-managed businesses in US
are home based . US census data shows that 17 . 6 million businesses
employ no one but the boss . Put these two facts together and
working on the reasonable assumption that the majority of homebased businesses are one-man ( and one-woman ) bands , then around
two thirds of all small business would appear to be home based . 
Even those not working from home now often start out from there , 
like the founders of Blooming Marvellous ( see the nearby sidebar )  . 
Blooming Marvellous
Judy Lever and Vivienne Pringle started Blooming Marvellous literally on a
kitchen table back in 1983 . Having attended a business start-up course in
Kensington , London run by the author , they put further flesh onto their big idea . 
Both were pregnant , and after searching for the kind of fashionable clothes
they used to wear and drawing a blank they guessed they ’ d found a gap in the
market . They kept on their day jobs and would meet after work every day at
Judy ’ s house to answer enquiries , send out leaflets and despatch products out
in the post every day . They outsourced work to a pattern cutter , a small
factory , some fabric suppliers and eventually to a small distribution centre . 
After a year or so of modest sales they felt confident enough to set up their
first business premises – a 1 , 200 square foot warehouse on a business park
staffed by four of the women who ’ d been working in their distribution centre . 
Eventually , the company employed 150 people in 14 shops and extended its
range to include nursery products , toys , themed bedroom accessories and a
separate brand called Mini Marvellous that catered for children aged 2 to 8
years . Over a third of sales came directly via their website . In July 2010 the
company was bought by Mothercare , which three years earlier had also
acquired the Early Learning Centre . 
Starting a business from home gives you a number of distinct
advantages over those plumping for premises straight away . A study
by the US Small Business Administration tracking the survival rates
on new businesses ( www . sba . gov / ADVO / research / business . html 
> Redefining Business Success ) concluded that starting from home
significantly improved a founder ’ s chances of succeeding . Other
studies coming from organisations less impartial suggest that homebased business are two thirds more likely to survive the crucial first
four years of trading and so establish a firm footing . 
Three big advantages that a home-based business has over its peers
that give it an edge are : 
Lower costs : Starting from home saves most of the £35 , 000
start-up costs that the average business incurs even before it
takes its first order . The chances are that you have nearly
everything you need to start up your business already
somewhere around your home . The kitchen table worked
fine for Blooming Marvellous ( see the nearby sidebar ) to
make their plans , pack up their first orders and do their
accounts from . You can press into service a garage , loft , 
spare bedroom or garden shed for a whole host of businessrelated tasks from holding stock to being a dedicated office
space away from the normal hustle of home life . Your
computer , however old , will almost definitely work just fine , 
unless you ’ re starting a business at the cutting edge of
design or on the Internet . 
More time : Money can buy lots of things , but time isn ’ t one of
them . However close to your business premises you are , 
you ’ ll spend an hour or more a day travelling to and from it . 
I ’ m sure if your shop , restaurant or office is only a couple of
miles away you won ’ t believe that proposition . How on earth
could it be possible to take an hour to travel just a mile ? 
Well , an immutable law says that the closer your home is to
your business premises , the more often you travel between
the two . Ergo , if you ’ re 20 miles away you go once a day , 
covering 40 miles , and if you ’ re only 5 miles away you come
home for lunch and return once or twice more each week to
collect things you ’ ve forgotten . Whatever the distance , the
average weekly travel time is about the same . Working from
home gives you back all that wasted time spent travelling
and you can invest the time in your business . 
Less stress : Commuting to work on a daily basis is stressful . 
In any vibrant and successful economic area road works , 
accidents , delays and traffic jams are pretty much the norm . 
Few people are fortunate enough to work in a car-free area or
where parking is never a problem . Even if you could find
such a paradise the chances are it would be useless as a
business proposition . Depopulated areas are equally devoid
of customers , suppliers and people to employ . 
Finding the space
As a first step list all the activities involved in getting your business
to the point where it has something to sell . If you ’ re going to run a
bookkeeping service this could be quite a short list . You need a
computer , some software and perhaps a leaflet setting out your
prices and the range of services on offer . But if you ’ re going to
repair musical instruments , say , then you may need much more
space including perhaps a workshop . 
Clearly , if you live in a cul-de-sac at the end of a narrow lane
surrounded by other houses you ’ re unlikely to be allowed to
manufacture using hazardous chemicals and have articulated
vehicles delivering and collecting in the middle of the night . You
also have to consider how your neighbours will be affected , even if
you ’ re legally allowed to operate your business . 
You don ’ t , of course , have to carry out every activity related
to your business yourself , nor do you have to do it all on your
premises . If you think about it you ’ ll see that no business does
everything itself . 
When you know how much space you need for business and what
you ’ ll be doing in that space you can start to scour your home and
garden for space to convert to business use . The following sections
outline some areas to consider – not an exhaustive list , but enough
ideas to kick-start your thinking . 
Using the garage
The most obvious discreet space that ’ s separate from the house and
likely to be free of family traffic is your garage ( if you have one )  . You
can move cars onto the drive or a neighbouring street , subject to
your insurance company being happy with that arrangement . 
According to the RAC Foundation , although 71 per cent of motorists
have a garage , only 41 per cent use it to park their car . Most people
use it as storage for junk or are too lazy to open the garage doors . 
The Garage Conversion Company has sample plans and information
on any possible restrictions that may apply 
( www . garageconversion . com ; go to Conversion Ideas and then
Home Office )  . 
Parking in the parking space
This area and any private drive could be used for a caravan-based
office , although you need to keep in mind that visitors , suppliers
and of course you and your family still need to get access to your
home . 
If you do think that a caravan is worth considering check out
that your house deeds allow you because covenants were
introduced into the title deeds of new properties from the 1960s
onwards to prevent people keeping caravans at home . Even if
you ’ re legally allowed to keep a caravan at home you should
consider any possible impact on your neighbours and discuss
your plans with them . Caravans that could be used as a home
office , though probably not as touring caravans , sell for
upwards of £1 , 000 . 
Planting yourself in the garden
You can install a shed up to 4 square metres without planning
consent under certain circumstances . The exact rules are a little
complicated ; for example the shed can ’ t be bigger than 50 per cent
of your garden , you can ’ t erect one in a conservation area and your
title deeds can ’ t expressly prohibit you . Great Little Garden 
( www . greatlittlegarden . co . uk ) and Leisure Buildings 
( www . leisurebuildings . com ) both offer advice on planning issues
and have sections on using garden sheds as home offices . Sheds
that you could use for home office purposes sell at garden centres
for £800 upwards . 
A further alternative , if space allows , is to rent or buy a portable 
 ‘ room ’  . Portakabin ( www . portacabin . co . uk ) and Foremans
Relocatable Building Systems ( www . foremansbuildings . co . uk ) have
selections of new and second-hand cabins for rent and sale . 
Climbing into an attic
Converting an attic to usable space is likely to be an expensive
option and something to consider later after your business is up and
running : £10 , 000 is the entry level price including a ladder and a
window ; double that if you want to include a WC , plastered walls
and a power supply . 
You may not need planning permission but as with garden
sheds the rules are complicated . Econoloft 
( www . econoloft . co . uk ; go to FAQ and Will I Need Planning ) and
UK Loft Conversion ( www . uk-loft-conversion . com ; go to FAQ
and Do I Need to Get Building Regulations and Planning
Approval ?  ) have information on the rules and much else
besides . 
Doubling up in the spare room
If you do have a spare or under-utilised room then your search for
office space is probably over . It will have heat , light and power and
may also be out of the way of general family traffic . If it ’ s currently a
bedroom you could get the best of both worlds by putting in a sofa
bed and desk with locked drawers . In that way occasional guests
can still use the room and you can have it for most of the time . 
Though far from ideal this can be a low cost option that you can
implement quickly . 
Options ( www . optionsfit . com ) provides guides and products
for turning your spare room into an office . 
Checking out the rules
Whatever business you plan to run from home and whether the
space you use is inside or outside of your property you need to
check out a number of important rules and regulations before you
start up . 
Planning consent and building regulations
The extent to which the use of your home and the land it stands on
changes determines whether or not you need planning consent or to
consider building regulations . You may need permission for any
structural alterations , increase in traffic , noise , smells or anything
such as operating unreasonable hours or any disturbance that could
affect your neighbours . 
You can find out informally from your local council before applying
and the Communities and Local Government website 
( www . communities . gov . uk ; go to Planning , Building and the
Environment ) has detailed information on all these matters . You can
also get free answers to specific questions using UK Planning ’ s
Planning Doctor ( www . ukplanning . com )  , a service supported by
some 20 UK councils . 
Guidelines for using space at home
Keep these factors in mind when deciding on an area of your home to work
from : 
The room or area needs to be well lit , warm in winter and cool in summer . 
The space shouldn ’ t be claustrophobic because you could be in it 12
hours a day . 
Somewhere you can close the door , shut your business off and get on
with normal family life will be a great asset . 
Allow room for some modest expansion . Try to anticipate what your
business might look like a year out and make sure the space you allocate can
accommodate that . Moving is disruptive , time consuming and expensive . 
You ’ ll need power , a telephone line and access to the Internet . 
Looking at health , safety and hazards
If you ’ ll be working with materials that are flammable , toxic , give off
fumes or are corrosive you should check on the website of the
Health and Safety Executive ( www . hse . gov . uk / risk ) where you ’ ll find
detailed guidance and advice on all aspects of safety at work . 
Considering insurance
Your home insurance policy won ’ t cover any business activity so
you must inform your insurer what you plan to do from home . You
can find out more about whether or not what you plan to do from
home needs special insurance cover and where to find an insurance
company on the Business Link website ( www . businesslink . gov . uk ; 
go to Health , Safety , Premises ; Insurance ; Insure Your Business and
Assets – General Insurances ; and then Business Insurance If You
Work from Home )  . 
Managing the mortgage
Unless you own fully the freehold your property some other party
such as a mortgage lender , landlord or freeholder may need to give
their permission for you to run a business from home . Even as a
freeholder you could find that a covenant has been included into
your title deeds to prevent you operating certain activities from
your home . 
Realising business rates
You currently pay council tax on your home , but after you start
using part of it or your grounds for business purposes you could be
liable to pay business rates on the part of the property you use for
work . You can see some examples of how business rating is applied
to home-based businesses on the Valuation Office Agency website 
( www . voa . gov . uk / council_tax / examples_working_from_home . htm )  . 
Some types of small business , particularly those in rural areas
providing products or services of particular benefit to the
community , are exempt from paying business rates , or pay at a
reduced rate . Your local council will have details of such schemes . 
Anticipating capital gains tax implications
Any increase in value of your main home is usually free of capital
gains tax ( CGT ) when you sell . However , if you set aside a room or
particular area solely for working in then you may be liable for CGT
on that proportion of any gain . If you expect to use a large ( over 10
per cent ) part of your home for business , take professional advice
from your accountant and check the HM Revenue and Customs
website ( www . hmrc . gov . uk / cgt ) for more information on CGT and
how to calculate any possible liability . 
Tax rates and their methods of payment are always in a state
of flux , more so since the government introduced emergency
measures in 2010 to reduce the country ’ s indebtedness . 
Readying for refuse
If your business will create additional or different refuse from that of
a normal domestic nature then you should check your local
council ’ s policy on collecting for businesses . Also check on NetRegs 
( www . netregs . gov . uk )  , the government website that provides free
environmental guidance for small businesses in the UK , what your
responsibilities are for disposing of waste and hazardous
substances . 
Keeping in with the neighbours
After you ’ ve satisfied yourself that you ’ re complying with all the
relevant rules and regulations you ’ d still be prudent to advise your
immediate neighbours of your plans . They may be concerned when
they see any unusual comings and goings from your home and a
timely word sets their minds at rest . Talking with neighbours will be
especially important if you ’ re doing building work . 
The Central Office of Information service Directgov has some
useful pointers on what might cause problems with neighbours
and how to resolve such issues ( www . direct . gov . uk ; go to Home
and Community , Your Neighbourhood Roads and Streets , and
then Neighbour Disputes )  . 
Dealing with the family
You might be inclined to slop around just because you ’ re working at
home . The dangers here are twofold : 
You ’ ll give out the wrong signals to everyone around you . As
far as they can see you ’ re just ‘ at home ’ and as such available
for more or less anything that they ’ d usually expect in a
domestic environment . 
You may not feel as though you ’ re at work yourself . The
operative word here is appropriate . That doesn ’ t have to
mean a suit and tie , but ‘ smart casual ’ is a good yardstick
and certainly a notch up from what you wear around the
house normally , say at weekends . 
Dress is a powerful way of sending signals to those around you that
you ’ re ‘ at work ’  . Here are some other tools to help harmonise
business and personal life while you work . 
Negotiating with your partner
Your spouse , partner or housemate , whether or not he has a part to
play in your business , will be affected and expect to be consulted on
how you plan to make use of what he probably sees as his premises . 
The effect is double if he ’ s picking up the financial slack until your
business gets going . These measures help keep them your loved one
onside : 
Tell him about your business ideas early on and why you
think you ’ ll succeed without disrupting home life
unreasonably . 
Discuss the space you need , why you need it and if necessary 
 ‘ trade ’ space . If you have to have one of the bedrooms , see
what can you offer as compensation . In one rather dramatic
case a boat builder needed all of the downstairs rooms for 12
months to build a prototype . The boat builder agreed to
build a patio and conservatory the year his first boat sold . 
See whether you can provide a ‘ quick win ’ for everyone in
your home . For example , if you need broadband Internet
offer access to everyone either by setting time aside on your
computer or by providing another wireless enabled
computer . Or if you ’ re painting and redecorating your office , 
get other rooms done too . 
Explain the upside potential of what success will mean for
everyone in your family when your business gets established : 
more money ; part-time employment for those who want it ; 
and eventually perhaps , a move to business premises . 
Handling children
One of the advantages of starting your business from home is that
you can adopt a great work–life balance from the outset . You can
take the kids to school , be home when they get back , share meals
with them and handle emergency trips to doctors and dentist
yourself , rather than having to call in favours from relatives and
friends . Few working more conventionally out of an office an hour or
more ’ s commute away can look after family matters with such
relative ease . 
Pre-school children who are going to be at home when you need to
work are a different matter altogether . Sometimes they ’ re asleep or
resting and you ’ re free to work at will . Otherwise you have two
options . The simplest is to have a nanny to cover your peak working
hours . Make sure the nanny knows you ’ re working and find
somewhere in the house where any noise won ’ t disturb you . 
Alternatively , find a childminder or nursery nearby . 
Vanquishing visitors
You may live in an area besieged by door-to-door salespeople , overfriendly neighbours who now know you ’ re working from home or
politicians after your vote . You can be certain than no one will be
calling uninvited to discus business . Dealing with an unwanted
visitor may only take a couple of minutes , but the interruption to
your work flow may add as much as 20 minutes to that wasted time . 
Three visitors a week and you ’ ve lost an hour ’ s output , mounting up
to nearly seven man days over the year . That ’ s probably equivalent
to half the amount of holiday you ’ ll be able to take in your first year
or so in business , so you need to find a way to isolate yourself from
such distractions . 
Assessing Yourself
Business isn ’ t just about ideas and market opportunities . Business is
about people too , and at the outset it ’ s mostly about you . You need
to make sure that you have the temperament to run your own
business and the expertise and understanding required for the type
of business you have in mind . 
The test at the end of this section requires no revision or
preparation . You may find out the truth about yourself and whether
or not running a business is a great career option or a potential
disaster for you . 
Discovering your entrepreneurial attributes
Business founders are frequently characterised as people who are
bursting with new ideas , highly enthusiastic , hyperactive and
insatiably curious . But the more you try to create a clear picture of
the typical small business founder , the fuzzier that picture becomes . 
In reality , the most reliable indicator that a person is likely to start a
business is that he has a parent or sibling who runs a business –
such people are highly likely to start businesses themselves . 
That being said , commentators generally accept some fairly broad
characteristics as desirable , if not mandatory . Check whether you
recognise yourself in the following list of entrepreneurial traits . 
Accepting of uncertainty : An essential characteristic of
someone starting a business is a willingness to make
decisions and to take risks . This doesn ’ t mean gambling on
hunches . It means carefully calculating the odds and
deciding which risks to take and when to take them . 
Managers in big business tend to seek to minimise risk by
delaying decisions until they know every possible fact . They
feel that working with out all the facts isn ’ t prudent or
desirable . Entrepreneurs , on the other hand , know that by
the time the fog of uncertainty has completely lifted , too
many people are able to spot the opportunity clearly . In fact , 
an entrepreneur is usually only interested in decisions that
involve accepting a degree of uncertainty . 
Driven to succeed : Business founders need to be results
oriented . Successful people set themselves goals and get
pleasure out of trying to achieve them as quickly as possible
and then move on to the next goal . This restlessness is very
characteristic . 
Hardworking : Don ’ t confuse hard work with long hours . At
times an owner-manager has to put in 18-hour days , but that
shouldn ’ t be the norm . Even if you do work long hours , as
long as you enjoy them , that ’ s fine . Enthusiasts can be very
productive . Workaholics , on the other hand , have a negative , 
addictive , driven quality where outputs ( results ) are less
important than inputs . This type of hard work is
counterproductive . Real hard work means sticking at a task , 
however difficult , until you complete it . It means hitting
deadlines even when you ’ re dead-beat . It means doing some
things you don ’ t much enjoy so you can work your way
through to the activities that you enjoy most . 
Healthy : Apart from being able to put in long days , 
successful small business owners need to be on the spot to
manage the firm every day . Owners are the essential
lubricant that keeps the wheels of small business turning . 
They have to plug any gaps when other people are ill or
because they can ’ t afford to employ anyone else for that
particular job . They can ’ t afford the luxury of sick leave . Even
a week or so ’ s holiday is something of a luxury in the early
years of a business ’ s life . 
Innovative : Most people recognise innovation as the most
distinctive trait of business founders . They tend to tackle the
unknown ; they do things in new and difficult ways ; they
weave old ideas into new patterns . But they go beyond
innovation itself and carry their concept to market rather
than remain in an ivory tower . 
Self-disciplined : Owner-managers need strong personal
discipline to keep themselves and the business on the
schedule the plan calls for . This is the drumbeat that sets the
timing for everything in the company . Get that wrong and
you send incorrect signals to every part of the business , both
inside and out . 
One of the most common pitfalls for novice businesspeople
is failing to recognise the difference between cash and profit . 
Cash can make people feel wealthy and if it results in a
relaxed attitude to corporate status symbols such as cars
and luxury office fittings , then failure is just around the
corner . 
Totally committed : You must have complete faith in your
business idea . That ’ s the only way in which you can convince
all the doubters you ’ re bound to meet along the route . But
blind faith isn ’ t enough . You have to back your commitment
up with a sound business strategy . 
Well rounded : Small business founders are rarely geniuses . 
Some people in their business nearly always have more
competence in one field than they could ever aspire to . But
the founders have a wide range of ability and a willingness to
turn their hand to anything that has to be done to make the
venture succeed . They can usually make the product , market
it and count the money , but above all they have the selfconfidence that lets them move comfortably through
uncharted waters . 
Working out a business idea that ’ s right for
you
Take some time to do a simple exercise that can help you decide
what type of business is a good match with your abilities . Take a
sheet of paper and draw up two columns . In the left-hand column , 
list all your hobbies , interests and skills . In the right-hand column , 
translate those interests into possible business ideas . Table 3-1
shows an example of such a list . 
Having done this exercise , balance the possibilities against the
criteria that are important to you in starting a business . 
Figuring out what you ’ re willing to invest
I ’ m not just talking about money here . How much are you willing to
invest of your time , your interest and your education , as well as
your ( and your investors ’  ) money ? 
Spending time
How much time are you willing to devote to your business ? That
may sound a basic enough question , but different businesses done
in different ways can have quite different time profiles . One business
starter I know started a French bakery in London . He was
determined to make his own croissants and did so for the first three
months . But making his own bread meant starting work at 4 a . m . 
Because he didn ’ t close until city workers passed his door on their
way home , by the time he cleaned up and took stock , he was
working a 15-hour day . But he still had the books to do , orders to
place and plans to prepare . He eventually settled for a 10-hour day , 
which meant that he had to buy in ready-baked croissants . 
Furthering your education
You may have identified a market opportunity that requires skills
over and above those that you currently have . There may , for
example , be a gap in the market for Teaching English as a Foreign
Language ( TEFL )  , but to do so requires a month of intensive study
plus a £1 , 000 course fee . Doing the TEFL certificate may involve you
in more skill upgrading than you want to commit to , at the outset at
least . So either you need to find customers who don ’ t require you to
have that qualification , or you need to think about a less
educationally challenging business . 
Keeping things interesting
If you want to start a restaurant and have never worked in catering , 
get a job in one . That ’ s the best way to find out whether you like a
particular type of work . You may find that a restaurant looks very
different from behind the chair as opposed to on it . Some
businesses are inherently repetitive , with activities that follow a
predictable pattern . If that suits you , fine , but if not then perhaps
you need to consider a business venture with a shifting range of
tasks . 
Weighting your preferences
After you have an idea of some of the businesses you may want to
start , you can rank those businesses according to how closely they
match what you want from starting a business . Go through the
standards you want your business to meet and assign a weight
between 1 and 5 to each , on a range from not important at all to
absolutely must have . Next , list your possible business
opportunities and measure them against the graded criteria . 
Table 3-2 shows a sample ranking for Jane Clark , an imaginary exsecretary with school-aged children who needs work because her
husband has been made redundant and is looking for another job . 
Jane isn ’ t in a position to raise much capital , and she wants her
working hours to coincide her children ’ s school day . She wants to
run her own show and she wants to enjoy what she does . 
Because minimal capital was an important criterion for Jane she
gave it a weight of 5 , whereas meeting interesting people , being less
important to her , was only weighted 1 . Jane gave each of her three
business ideas a rating , in points ( out of five ) against these criteria . 
A secretarial agency needed capital to start so she gave it only 1
point . Back-up typing needed hardly any money and she allocated 5
points to it . Her worked-out chart is shown in Table 3-3 . 
The weighting factor and the rating point multiplied together give a
score for each business idea . The highest score indicates the
business that best meets Jane ’ s criteria . In this case , typing authors ’ 
manuscripts scored over back-up typing , because Jane could do it
exactly when it suited her . 
Chapter 20
Ten People to Talk to Before You Start
In This Chapter
Identifying all the key people who can help you get started
Leveraging your network of contacts to maximum advantage
Taking advantage of free advice
Getting the lowdown on what people really think are your
strengths and weaknesses
Starting up a business can be a lonely endeavour , but you don ’ t
have to do it all on your own . Hundreds of people , some just a few
feet away , can give you useful insights into your skills and
attributes , and they may even have a useful perspective on the
viability of your business idea . 
Speaking with Your Spouse
Your spouse may not know a great deal about your great business
idea , but you can be sure she knows a lot about you . Your spouse
can remind you of your weaknesses and help you play to your
strengths . She also needs to be prepared for the long hours and lack
of holidays that are sure to feature in the early months and years as
you get your business established . This may mean that you need to
re-divide the existing sharing of household and family tasks , such as
taking children to school , family visits and painting and decorating , 
to reflect the new balance of work . That may prove contentious , so
talking the issues through at the outset may save conflict and
arguments when time constraints really start to bite . 
The money put into the business is going to have an impact on
the money available for other areas of family expenditure , so
your spouse also has to be comfortable with the financial
commitments you ’ re taking on . Unlike most other investments
you may have made – on houses and cars , for example – you
can lose all the money you put into a business irrevocably . 
One would-be entrepreneur who set out to open a bookshop was
reminded by her partner how she disliked dealing with the general
public . She loved books and delighted in visiting book fairs and
auctions . But when reminded that essentially the job entailed
opening and closing a shop six days a week , her enthusiasm level
took a dive . Better take a dive before you start up than have your
cash take a dive a few weeks afterwards . 
If you ’ re thinking of taking up some franchises – Chemical Express 
( www . chemicalexpress . co . uk )  , for example – then you may be asked
to bring your partner along to the initial interview even if she ’ s not
going to be involved in the running of the business . Chemical
Express wants to make sure that your partner is backing you 100 per
cent , both practically and emotionally . 
Making Use of Your Professional
Network
The people in your network of associates have large chunks of the
knowledge you need to get your business successfully launched . 
The ability to create and maintain strong professional relationships
is an important key to business success . Networking is a vital
business skill that lets you cultivate lasting business relationships
and create a large sphere of influence from which you can find new
clients , contacts , referrals and opportunities . 
You can use a network for just about anything , from finding a new
supplier to getting introductions to overseas sales agents . You can
find a reliable bank manager , a new accounting software package or
a great venue for your next business meeting . Your network
contacts , unlike almost everyone else in the business world , are
usually unbiased and authoritative . You should make few major
decisions without recourse to network contacts . 
Benefiting from Entrepreneurs Who
Started a Similar Business
People like nothing more than talking about themselves and their
successes . Obviously , if someone thinks you ’ re going to steal her
customers , she shuts up like a clam . But if the business you plan to
start is unlikely to infringe on their sphere of activities , most
established entrepreneurs are only too happy to pass on some of
their hard-earned tips . 
First establish that you ’ re not going to tread on the entrepreneur ’ s
toes . For example , if you plan to start up in the same line of business
30 miles away , you have little chance of causing each other much
trouble . You may even be able to open a shop at the far end of the
same town as a competitor without doing the entrepreneur any
serious damage . 
Use your common sense as to whom to approach and , to be on the
safe side , double the distance that you feel is a safe gap between
you . 
You may also find someone who ’ s had a business failure in the field
you plan to start up in and is prepared to talk . You can find such
people by scouring the press or talking to trade associations and
other operators in your sector . 
Don ’ t take everything entrepreneurs say , even the most
successful ones , as inevitably right . The five businesspeople
who comprise the dragons in the BBC programme Dragon ’ s Den , 
with a combined personal wealth nearing £1 billion , can
reasonably be expected to know a thing or two about new
business ideas . Andrew Gordon presented to them his invention
for propping up wobbly table legs and they unreservedly gave it
the thumbs down . Despite being ripped to shreds as a concept , 
his stabletable ( www . stabletable . co . uk )  , eight plastic leaves
pinned together , has sold in industrial volumes on the Internet . 
The device earned the 34-year-old in excess of £500 , 000 in his
first year and is now being sold in packs of 25 for use in
restaurants , hotels , pubs and cafes throughout the world . 
Andrew is an inspiration to all would-be business starters
whose ideas receive a less than rapturous reception from fellow
entrepreneurs . 
Events can be a valuable route to extending your business
network . Useful organisations include the following : 
The Glasshouse (  )  , founded in 1998 , 
holds networking events bringing entrepreneurs , financiers
and business advisers across all sectors together to provide
support , encouragement and inspiration to would-be
business starters . 
The Junior Chamber International United Kingdom 
( www . jciuk . org . uk ) is a personal development and
networking organisation for the under-40s . It ’ s part of the
global Junior Chamber International ( JCI )  , which has over
250 , 000 members in 100 different countries . 
Networking4business ( www . networking4business . com ) 
organises business-to-business networking events that
enable you to meet many other businesspeople without any
commitment and in a relaxed , informal atmosphere . 
Spending Time with a Friendly
Banker
Despite having had a bad press during the credit crunch , these guys
and girls have a lot to offer other than oodles of cash ( or not !  )  . 
Bankers see a lot of different people about a lot of different
businesses . You can draw on their wide range of knowledge and
experience . Your banker may be familiar with your type of business
or the location you ’ re interested in , or have advice on different
financing options . 
Start by talking with a bank manager you don ’ t want to borrow
money from . Begin the conversation by asking for advice , rather
than money . Only when you ’ ve convinced yourself that your
proposition is an appropriate one for a bank should you make a
pitch .  ( See Chapter 8 for more about banks and bank managers .  ) 
Tapping into Your Local Enterprise
Agency Director
Over 1 , 000 business experts are sitting in a local office somewhere
near you just waiting to offer advice , help , encouragement and
support to anyone thinking about starting a business . The even
better news is that the services they provide are either free or low
cost . Enterprise Agencies ( see Chapter 7 ) have been around for 25
years and are an initiative started by big business to help small
business . 
Bank managers , business executives on loan as part of their career
development and the occasional civil servant , accountant and
lawyer staff these agencies . Make sure that you grab your fair share
of this expertise . 
Communicating with Your Current
Boss
Talking to your boss about anything other than the job in hand is
always a tricky decision . Talk about your entrepreneurial vision too
soon and you may find yourself sidetracked for promotion and pay
rises and perhaps even first in line for the next downsizing event . 
Leave it too late and your boss may see your action as disloyalty at
best and betrayal at worst . 
If you plan to start up in the same line of work and possibly even try
to take some key accounts with you , then you ’ d better talk to a
lawyer rather than your boss . But if the climate is right and you can
talk to your boss , a number of valuable things may happen . You
boss can be a source of investment capital , a business partner or a
useful resource for business advice and contacts . 
Your boss may even become your first customer , if the businesses
are compatible . 
Calling Your Colleagues
Those you ’ ve worked alongside over the years have formed a view
about your talents . Your spouse has seen you after work , but
they ’ ve seen you at work . If they don ’ t know your strengths , 
weaknesses , foibles and desires , then no one does . At worst they
may tell you that you ’ re barmy and explain why ; at best they may
join you in the venture or invest their hard-earned savings in your
business . 
If you were thinking about taking on a partner , then casting your eye
around your colleagues is a good place to start looking . Remember , 
it cuts both ways . Although they may know a lot about how you
perform at work , you know as much about them . 
Bringing in Your Best Friend
On the assumption that your best friend isn ’ t your spouse , then she
represents someone else who should be able to tell you whether
you ’ re the right sort of person to start up the particular business
you have in mind . You can start out by asking your friend to review
your skills and knowledge inventory ( see Chapter 3 ) and so provide
a valuable crosscheck on your self-assessment . In fact , you should
always find someone who knows you really well to go through this
and the business idea-evaluation process ( also in Chapter 3 )  . 
Unfortunately , everyone ’ s capacity for self-deception is unlimited , 
and you shouldn ’ t miss any opportunity for a reality check . 
Reporting to an Accountant
You need an accountant in any event ( I explain the process of
finding one in Chapter 14 )  . However , don ’ t miss out on making the
maximum use of as many accountants as possible when researching
to establish your business . Take all the free advice you can get , 
because most accountants give you a free first meeting in the hope
of signing you up as a client . 
Pump the accountants as much as you can for any tips , pointers or
advice on the business you have in mind . 
Accountants are the first port of call for any
entrepreneur seeking help and advice , ahead of bank
managers , small firm advisers and business associates . As a
consequence , they ’ re the repositories of an enormous
amount of information on every aspect of business , not just
finance . 
Accountants draw an increasing amount of their revenue
from non-accounting tasks , and some even make more
money from providing general business advice than they do
from auditing . 
Most accountants are sole traders or in small partnerships
operating in much the same way as you plan to do when you
set up your business . So unlike bank managers , who all work
in large organisations , accountants can identify with your
problems and concerns . 
Talk to the Added Value Network ( website : www . avn . co . uk ; 
tel : 0845 226 2371 )  , a network of over 5 , 000 accountants working
in over 400 offices across the United Kingdom who are focused
on helping entrepreneurs start up and grow their businesses . It
offers a free ‘ Business Builder Review ’ tailored to suit your
needs but based on its experiences in helping 115 , 000 ownermanaged businesses . 
Plugging into a Business Angel
Network
Business angels ( see Chapter 8 ) have some attractive attributes . 
They aren ’ t as risk averse as venture capital firms ; they act more
quickly , putting up money in weeks rather than months ; and they
aren ’ t so fussy about your pedigree . But when it comes to giving a
helping hand , they ’ re absolute stars . Using the business angel
networks outlined in Chapter 8 you can find an angel with expertise
in the sector in which you have an interest . 
Chapter 22
Ten Steps to Prepare to Move On
In This Chapter
Deciding when to sell up
Putting a price on your business
Getting the best advice
Figuring out what to do next
However much you love your business , the time comes when you
want to realise some or all of the value tied up in the business . It
may be just that you want to buy a yacht and have the time for that
round-the-world adventure you ’ ve been promising yourself ; it may
be that you ’ ve taken the business as far as you can and to realise its
full potential it needs another skipper at the helm ; or it may be that
your backers , if you have any , want to bail out themselves – venture
capital firms often have itchy feet and want to take their profits from
one sector to pile them into the next big thing . Whatever the reason
for looking for an exit , to get the best value out of your business
follow these ten guidelines . 
Monitoring Market Prices
Timing is crucial when it comes to selling a business . Since 1900 , 27 
 ‘ bull ’ markets have existed , when company shares rise sharply , with
corresponding ‘ bear ’ markets , the latest example being in 2008–
2010 , when over-optimistic investors get mauled as the bottom
drops out of stock markets . These ups and downs can result in very
steep curves , with business values oscillating by as much as a 50
per cent and the changes in the market ’ s perception of value often
having little to do with the actual performance of businesses
themselves . 
Businesses listed on the stock market have no difficulty in working
out what their businesses are worth at any moment in time – share
prices are published daily in the financial press and every few
minutes on financial websites . But because most businesses , yours
in all probability included , aren ’ t listed on a stock market , you can ’ t
easily keep tabs on market sentiment for the value of your business . 
Step forward BDO Stoy Hayward and take a bow . BDO Stoy
Hayward ’ s Private Company Price Index ( PCPI ) tracks the
relationship between the current FTSE price / earnings ratio ( P / E ; 
check how to calculate this in Chapter 5 ) and the P / Es currently
being paid on the sale of private companies . Put simply , the PCPI
lets a company without a stock market listing get a reasonable idea
of what it may actually sell for now . Go to
www . bdo . uk . com / library / a-z > PCPI Private Company Price Index . 
Valuing Your Business
Setting a precise value on a business isn ’ t quite as simple as , say , 
determining the price of your home . One possible way is to add up
the assets , take away the liabilities and in theory the difference is
the value of your business . However , your assets comprise items
such as stock that may be hard to value , and debtors who may or
may not actually pay up .  ( I cover these terms in Chapter 13 .  ) 
Businesses are more usually valued using a formula known as the
price / earnings ratio ( I show how this is calculated in Chapter 5 )  . P / E
ratios vary both with the business sector and current market feeling
about that sector . The market as a whole generally trades with P / Es
of between 14 and 20 , with the average since 1870 being 15 . 
You can check out the P / E for your business sector either by
looking in the Financial Times , or at ProShare ’ s website 
( www . proshareclubs . co . uk , then click Research Centre , then
Performance Tables )  . You need to register to access the data on
the ProShare website , but registration is free . There you can see
the current P / E ratio for every company in your sector , as long
as they ’ re listed on the London Stock Exchange . If you want to
see how much interest exists in your business sector right now , 
visit Interactive Investor ( www . iii . co . uk , select Markets and
then Sectors )  . There you can see the sector whose shares
investors have bought and sold the most over the past day , 
month and year . 
Private companies don ’ t trade on as high a P / E multiple as
their big brothers on the stock market . So if a public company
in your sector is on a P / E of 12 , as a private company your
prospective P / E is around 8 , or a third less . Why ? Good
question . The simplest answer is that although shares in your
business are hard to dispose of , you can unload a public
company every business day by making a phone call to your
broker . In other words , the premium is for liquidity . 
Figuring Out Who to Sell To
Determining a selling price is one thing , but finding a willing buyer is
a much more challenging task . Price and buyer are inter-related
factors , because whatever equation you use to arrive at business
value , at the end of the day a business is only worth what someone
with the dosh can pay . These are your options : 
Sweetheart deal : Selling out to someone you know or do
business with is an easy option . Unfortunately , it ’ s not
always the way to get the best price for your business , 
because only one buyer is in the frame . Not only does it take
two to tango , but your sale works better if you have at least
two people interested in buying your business . 
Trade sale : This is when you sell out to another company , 
usually a much larger one with access to finance and other
resources that may enable your business to have a
continuing future . This involves publicising that you ’ re
selling up and creating the environment for several bidders
to enter the ring . You can sell the business yourself , perhaps
by advertising or by word of mouth . But usually you appoint
a business broker to handle the deal , much as you ’ d use an
estate agent to sell your house . 
Management buy-out ( MBO )  : You may be able to sell your
business off to your management team . That involves them
raising the money , perhaps from a venture capital firm ( I
cover this subject in Chapter 8 )  . You can find out more about
MBOs from the Centre for Management Buy-out Research 
( CMBOR )  , founded by Barclays Private Equity and Deloitte at
the Nottingham University Business School 
( www . nottingham . ac . uk / business / cmbor )  . 
Management buy-in : This involves selling the business to a
new management team , invariably with the financial backing
of a venture capital firm . The team is led by someone , usually
from a similar industry to yours , who ’ s proved successful in
building up and selling out a business before . 
BIMBO is a combination of a management buy-in and
buy-out , usually involving an external managing director
being brought in to run your business with your management
team and financial backing from a venture capital firm . 
Employee benefit trust : This involves forming a trust to hold
shares on behalf of employees , so that the employees can in
effect end up owning a substantial slice of the business . 
Some tax incentives are available to retiring owners who sell 
( or gift ) shares to such a trust . You can find out more about
this option from Employee Ownership Options ( 
www . employeeownership . co . uk / finance . htm )  . Its goal is to
raise awareness of the business options available to small
firms when they ’ re threatened with closure either as a result
of succession problems or as a result of divestment . 
Going public : This involves selling shares in the business to
the public through a stock market flotation . In that way you
can realise some of the value in your business gradually over
a period . This is a complicated and expensive process and
you need professional advice . AIM , the junior UK stock
market , has seen over 3 , 000 companies listed since it started
in 1985 , some of which have at best a modest trading record . 
Check out the London Stock Exchange 
( www . londonstockexchange . com / companies-andadvisors / aim / for-companies / joining / aim . htm ) for a full
description of the options , what ’ s involved , how much it
costs ( lots !  ) and who can advise . 
Passing on to the family : Less than 33 per cent of family
businesses are passed on to the second generation and
barely 13 per cent survive through to the third generation . So
much for the bad news – the ones that do can be very
successful . ALDI ( short for ‘ Albrecht Discounts ’  )  ; Michelin , 
controlled and run by François Michelin , his son Edouard
and their partner René Zingraff ; and Mars , founded by
Minnesotans Frank and Ethel Mars , who invented the Milky
Way bar , are among the world ’ s biggest family businesses 
( check out Family Business Magazine at
www . familybusinessmagazine . com , then Oldest Family
Companies for a full list )  . The Family Firm Institute 
( www . ffi . org )  , the International Centre for Families in
Business ( www . icfib . com )  , Peter Leach LLP ( www . peterleach . com )  , who started the Family Business Centre at
accountants BDO Stoy Hayward and now runs it as a standalone venture , and the Family Business Institute 
(  ) are organisations
dedicated to providing education and networking
opportunities for family businesses , as well as help with
succession planning . 
Selling the assets : If the business can ’ t be sold , perhaps
because it ’ s unprofitable , or because it ’ s a one-man band and
has no prospects of operating without the owner , then the
remaining option is to sell off the assets , pay out what ’ s
owed and pocket what ’ s left . 
You almost certainly already know the name of the buyer of
your business . Make a list of all the competitors , customers , 
suppliers and employees who you believe may benefit from
taking over your business . Then trawl the financial press to see
who else has bought or been involved in any way in the sale of a
company similar to yours . Check out Acquisitions Monthly 
( www . aqm-e . com ) to see what deals have been done and what
active buyers are in the market ; and Daltons Business 
( www . daltonsbusiness . com / SearchStat . asp )  , where you can see
the market demand statistics by different types of business . 
Dressing to Kill
Whoever you plan to sell your business to , you should plan ahead to
make the business look its best . Blemishes such as poor profit
performance , bad debts , credit downgrades and being dragged
through the courts by ex-employees claiming to have been unfairly
dismissed aren ’ t desirable . You should try to make the three years
prior to your exit look as good as possible . That means profit
margins should be consistently high , the sales and profit curve
should be heading upwards and strong financial control systems
should be in evidence . 
Check out these organisations to see how your business is
likely to appear to a would-be buyer . 
Inter Company Comparison ( www . icc . co . uk ) and Jordans 
( www . jordans . co . uk ) provide regularly updated online
company information services that enable users to access
and retrieve data on individual companies , directors and
shareholders . They also enable users to produce industry , 
group , peer and individual reports , allowing you to compare
your business ’ s performance with that of other similar
companies , as well as obtaining in-depth financial profiles . 
Creditgate . com ( www . creditgate . com ) and Credit Reporting 
( www . creditreporting . co . uk / b2b ) are among a growing
number of companies that offer a comprehensive range of
credit reports instantly online , including credit check , credit
rating , company profile , credit score , credit reference , credit
limit , company directors and county court judgments ( CCJs )  . 
You can get your own business rating from one of these
agencies to see how you appear to a would-be buyer . 
The Centre for Inter-firm Comparison ( www . cifc . co . uk ) helps
businesses of every kind improve their profitability and
productivity by providing expertise in benchmarking , 
performance measurement and financial control . It gathers
financial information on industries based on detailed
information that participating firms provide – in absolute
confidence – on a comparable basis . The Centre then
provides the information showing industry average and best
and worst performance standards , without , of course , 
revealing the individual participants ’ data . 
When you want to bring a purchaser to the negotiation table , 
you need to prepare an initial marketing document called a
sales memorandum . The management write the initial draft and
your corporate adviser then polishes it up . It should : 
Make the business sound attractive and feature product
literature , photographs , charts and tables . 
Be a source of solid information , but not over-full of numbers
and analysis . The buyer and their adviser will get your
accounts themselves . 
Show that the business has scope for improvement and
development if someone with more money and wider skills
and experience takes it forward . Otherwise it ’ s hard for
potential buyers to see what value they can add . 
Contain no detailed confidential information or commercially
sensitive information , such as the name of customers or
suppliers . No buyer makes a final decision on the basis of a
sales memorandum , so you can provide this information
later to serious buyers only . 
Be tailored to meet the needs of different potential buyers . 
For example , competitors know a lot about the industry and
your products , so you don ’ t need to explain that to them . 
Finding Advisers
The information in this chapter should give you an idea of what you
need to know in order to exit from your business successfully . But
although you should know the questions , you need advice with
finding the answers . These organisations can help you find
professional advisers and advice from those experienced in selling
businesses : 
HW is a national business advisory and accountancy firm
with a network of over 60 offices strategically placed
throughout England , Wales and Scotland , offering advice on a
range of financial matters including specific help with selling
your business ( www . hwca . com / business-services / buyingand-selling-businesses /  )  . 
Business Link ( www . businesslink . gov . uk , then select Buy or
Sell a Business and then Getting Ready to Sell ) has a
comprehensive range of advice covering everything from
preparing your business for the sale to handling potential
redundancies , including links to sources of professional help . 
BDO Stoy Hayward , an accountancy firm , has a publication , 
Guide to Selling Your Business ( available from
www . bdo . co . uk )  , which sets out its service offer to
entrepreneurs planning to sell up . 
Getting the best corporate finance advice , as the whole
subject of selling and buying a business is known , isn ’ t cheap . 
Expect to pay out between 3 and 7 per cent of the value of your
business , and to have to lay out a largish five-figure sum on the
table to kick things off . But good advice can double the amount
of money you actually end up with when you take tax , pensions
and warranties into consideration . 
Doing Due Diligence
When you buy a house , you and your surveyor crawl over
everywhere with a tape measure to check out sizes , and employ
various instruments to see whether any damp , dry rot or other
unpleasant infestation exists that could affect its value . Your lawyer
makes sure that the sellers actually own the property , no mortgage
is outstanding and no imminent plans exist to build a motorway
through the garden . A very similar process happens when
businesses are bought and sold , in a process known as due
diligence . The accounts have to be correct , tax paid up to date and
mortgages declared , and any lawsuits rumbling in the background
for unfair dismissal of employees , disputes with suppliers or
defective products supplied need to be flushed out into the open . 
At the end of the due diligence process , lots of people end up with
liabilities . The corporate finance firm and the lawyers are
responsible for the quality of their advice and if they get it wrong
they can be sued . The accountants are responsible on your side for
delivering proper accounts and on the buyer ’ s side for interpreting
them correctly . The seller too has to give guarantees that she ’ s told
the truth , the whole truth and nothing but the truth . If that proves
not to be the case , she may miss out on a slug of the sale price . 
Sellers are usually required to give warranties and indemnities
to the buyer to the effect that every important thing she says
about the business and its accounts is true , and that she ’ s have
left nothing material unsaid . By way of guarantee , a portion of
the selling price isn ’ t paid up for a period of a year or so , giving
time for the buyer to uncover skeletons . 
AllBusiness . com , a website with resources for entrepreneurs
including how-to articles , business forms , contracts and
agreements , expert advice and blogs , has a free 40-point due
diligence checklist ( go to www . allbusiness . com , then select
Shop Legal Forms , then Mergers and Acquisitions , then Due
Diligence Checklist )  . You can buy the full Monty for $25 . 
Earning Out Your Profits
One trick that buyers and their canny advisers use to make sure that
your business is really worth all the bundles of dough they ’ re paying
out is to make you do some of the hard work for them . The thinking
behind this is that because you ’ ve been running the firm for years , 
no one ’ s better qualified than you to make sure that you keep sweet
customers and suppliers with whom you presumably have a good
working relationship . 
Typically , if an earn-out is proposed it ’ s for between 10 and 30 per
cent of the sale price and covers a period between one and three
years . The rule here is that sellers should resist such proposals and
buyers should insist ! 
Most of the costs involved in selling your business are based
on a percentage of the selling price . That figure includes the
earn-out amount , whether or not the figure is actually achieved . 
Some unique tax implications exist that you or your adviser
should check out with HM Revenue and Customs 
( www . hmrc . gov . uk / manuals / ersmmanual / ERSM110000 . htm )  . 
Starting Up Again
Having worked out how to start a business , build it up and sell it on , 
you may be justified in thinking that you have a winning formula for
making money : just keep turning the handle . One business founder
who came on a programme at Cranfield School of Management
bought out a chain of three pubs , built it up to a dozen and then
sold out to a national brewery chain for a healthy profit . He
repeated the process three times more and for all I know is still
following his simple but effective business model . The value he
discovered was that big brewers didn ’ t want to buy a pub or two at
a time . That ’ s too much like hard work . In any event , it takes as
much management time to buy one pub as it does to acquire a
chain . 
A buyer doesn ’ t want to pay you for a business only to find
out that you start up a new business and become a competitor . 
A buyer expects you to sign a non-compete clause as part of the
sale contract . This requires you not to compete for a certain
number of years within a designated geographical area . The
good news – for sellers , that is – is that such agreements are
difficult to enforce and aren ’ t always looked on favourably by
the courts , because they restrict an individual ’ s employment
options . 
Becoming a Business Angel
If you don ’ t want to run a business but do want to stay involved , 
then you can consider becoming a business angel , backing other
people ’ s businesses with your money and expertise . I cover this
subject in the section on business angels in Chapter 8 . 
Robert Wright started up his business , a one-plane regional
airline , straight from business school ; he ’ d already qualified as
a pilot . Robert built the company , trading as City Flyer Express , 
up to a substantial venture and sold it to British Airways for a
sizeable eight-figure sum . Over the years following the sale he
took stakes in a handful of small businesses and some not so
small ones , such as Wizzair . com , using only a modest fraction of
the gain made from the sale of his own company . 
Winding Up
If for any reason a business appears to have no value , perhaps
because it ’ s making losses and has no assets worthy of the name , it
may still be possible to salvage something from the wreckage . In the
worst case your creditors can apply to wind your business up if
they ’ re owed more than £750 . They can serve a statutory demand 
( Form 4 . 1 ) for the money due and if it ’ s not paid or secured , or a
settlement isn ’ t agreed , within 21 days , they can appoint a
liquidator . The liquidator ’ s job is to pay off the creditors , starting
with herself . No realistic likelihood exists of anything being left for
the owner ( s ) going this route . 
Before you reach this stage you should take professional advice
urgently , not least because you may be liable for more expenses
than you think . In theory , if you ’ re trading as a limited company
then your liabilities are capped at your stated share capital . 
However , trading on after the business has become insolvent leaves
the directors open to a charge of wrongful trading . In such cases the
directors can be personally liable for the company ’ s debts . 
Talk with your accountant , check out your position by reading up
on the government ’ s Insolvency Service website 
( www . insolvency . gov . uk ) or contact a member of the Insolvency
Practitioners ’ Association ( www . insolvency-practitioners . org . uk )  . A
directory of members is on the website . 
To access the cheat sheet specifically for this book , go to
www . dummies . com / cheatsheet / startingabusinessuk . 
Find out " HOW " at Dummies . com

Business Plans For Dummies® 
, 3rd
Edition
Visit www . dummies . com / cheatsheet / businessplansuk to view
this book ' s cheat sheet . 
Table of Contents
Introduction
Why You Need This Book
How to Use This Book
How This Book Is Organised
Part I : Determining Where You Want to Go
Part II : Sizing Up Your Marketplace
Part III : Weighing Up Your Company ’ s Prospects
Part IV : Looking to the Future
Part V : A Planner ’ s Toolkit
Part VI : The Part of Tens
Icons Used in This Book
Where to Go from Here
Part I : Determining Where You Want to Go
Chapter 1 : Starting Your Business Plan
Getting the Most Out of Your Plan
Looking to the future
Accounting for your history
Anticipating your different audiences
Putting Your Plan on Paper
Executive summary
Company overview
Business environment
Company description
Business strategy
Financial review
Action plan
Chapter 2 : Charting the Proper Course
Developing Your Company ’ s Vision Statement
Thinking big
Using the power of passion
Building a brand
Creating Your Company ’ s Mission Statement
Getting started
Defining your business ( in 50 words or less ) 
Introducing Goals and Objectives
Using goals to manage the plan
Looking at goals versus objectives
Setting Your Own Goals and Objectives
Guidelines for setting goals
Guidelines for setting objectives
Getting it right
Avoiding the pitfalls
Stretching for targets
Timing is everything
Chapter 3 : Setting Off in the Right Direction
Wondering Why Values Matter
Looking at tough choices
Avoiding being lost and unprepared
Valuing having values
Identifying Your Organisation ’ s Values
Thinking about investors
Considering the rest of the crew
Existing beliefs and principles
Putting Together the Values Statement
Developing a values statement
Preparing a values statement – the full Monty
Part II : Sizing Up Your Marketplace
Chapter 4 : Checking Out the Business Environment
Defining the Business That You ’ re In
Analysing Your Industry
Structure
Markets
Relationships
Finance
Researching Your Market
Establishing your knowledge gaps
Carrying out desk research
Getting into the field
Using the Internet – wisely
Recognising Critical Success Factors
Technology
Manufacturing
Operations
Human resources
Organisation
Services
Location
Marketing
Distribution
Government regulation
Outsourcing
Preparing for Opportunities and Threats
It ’ s a beautiful morning
Dark clouds on the horizon
Chapter 5 : Taking a Closer Look at Customers
Checking Out Who Your Customers Are
The good customer
The bad customer
The other guy ’ s customer
Discovering Why Your Customers Buy
Understanding needs
Determining motives
Monitoring complaints
Finding Out How Your Customers Make Choices
Realising that perceptions are reality
Finding the five steps to adoption
Remembering the Big Picture
Dealing with Business Customers
Sizing up secondhand demand
Thinking of decision making as a formal affair
Judging the forces to be reckoned with
Chapter 6 : Dividing Customers into Groups
Defining Market Segments
Ways to Make Market Segments
Looking at who is buying
Looking at what they buy
Wondering why they buy
Finding Useful Market Segments
Is the segment the right size ? 
Can customers be identified ? 
Can the market be reached ? 
Chapter 7 : Scoping Out Your Competition
Understanding the Value of Competitors
Identifying Your Real Competitors
Competition based on customer choice
Competition based on product use
Competition based on strategy
Competition in the future
Predicting Your Competitors ’ Moves
Figuring out their goals
Uncovering their assumptions
Competing to Win
Organising facts and figures
Choosing your battles
Part III : Weighing Up Your Company ’ s Prospects
Chapter 8 : Establishing Your Starting Position
Sizing Up Situation Analysis
Identifying Strengths and Weaknesses
Finding your frames of reference
Counting up your capabilities and resources
Coming up with critical success factors
Analysing Your Situation in 3-D
Taking a glance at competitors
Completing your SWOT analysis
Measuring Market Share
Chapter 9 : Focusing On What You Do Best
Describing What You Do
Constructing a typical value chain
Comparing different value chains
Forging your own value chain
Staying in Business
Searching for competitive advantage
Focusing on core competence
Sustaining an advantage over time
Earmarking Resources
Chapter 10 : Figuring Out Financials
Understanding a Profit and Loss Account
Revenue
Costs
Profit
Margins matter
Building the Balance Sheet
Settling on layout
Assets
Liabilities and owners ’ equity
Examining the Cash-Flow Statement
Cash in and cash out
What ’ s left over
Evaluating Financial Ratios
Short-term obligations
Long-term responsibilities
Relative profitability
Understanding Break-Even
Chapter 11 : Forecasting and Budgeting
Constructing a Financial Forecast
Pondering the pro-forma profit and loss account
Looking at the estimated balance sheet
Projecting cash flow
Exploring Alternatives
Using the DuPont formula
Exploring the what-if analysis
Making a Budget
Wondering what ’ s in the budget
Discovering how budgets are made
Using ratios to improve your budget
Analysing variances
Flexing your budget
Budgeting for capital expenditure
Deducing payback
Discounting cash flow
Calculating the internal rate of return
Part IV : Looking to the Future
Chapter 12 : Preparing for Change
Defining the Dimensions of Change
Looking at economic trends
Taking heed of technological trends
Poring over political trends
Considering cultural trends
Anticipating Change
Trying out trend forecasting
Seeking out scenario planning
Looking at demographic time bombs
Doing a PEST analysis
Assessing the Effects of Change
Rolling the dice
Winning or losing
Chapter 13 : Thinking Strategically
Making Strategy Make a Difference
Thinking what strategy means
Wondering when strategy works
Applying Off-the-Shelf Strategies
Learning low-cost leadership
Standing out in a crowd
Focusing on focus
Checking Out Strategic Alternatives
Going up , down , or sideways
Leading and following
Looking at the Marketing Mix
Coming Up with Your Own Strategy
Chapter 14 : Managing More than One Product
Facing the Product / Service Life Cycle
Starting out
Growing up
Coping with middle age
Facing the senior stretch
Judging where you are now
Milking cash cows
Finding Ways to Grow
Same product / service , same market
New market or new product
New product and new market
Understanding the adoption cycle
Protecting intellectual property
Managing Your Product Portfolio
Looking at strategic business units
Aiming for the stars
Looking strong and attractive
Hastening slowly
Extending Your E-Penetration
Buying Out Competitors
Knowing why you want to buy
Investigating and approaching
Valuing the business
Limiting the risks
Part V : A Planner ’ s Toolkit
Chapter 15 : Planning in Turbulent Economic Times
Cycles and the Multiplier Effect
Downturns galore
Cycles are different
Anticipating trouble
Preparing for the Worst
Deleveraging balance sheets
Containing working capital
Pricing under pressure
Maintaining market share
Conserving cash
Keeping key employees
Selling off assets
Preparing for the Upturn
Acquiring competitors
Planning short term for the long term
Chapter 16 : Making Your Business Plan Work
Shaping Your Company
Living the plan
Putting together an organisation
Developing procedures
Preparing Your People
Encouraging leadership
Developing skills
Creating a culture
Building a team
Rewarding results
Assembling your finances
Planning for the exit
Chapter 17 : Learning from Others : A Sample Business Plan
Safari Europe : Business Plan
Part VI : The Part of Tens
Chapter 18 : Ten Questions to Ask About Your Plan
Are Your Goals Tied to Your Mission ? 
Can You Point to Major Opportunities ? 
Have You Prepared for Threats ? 
Have You Defined Your Customers ? 
Can You Track Your Competitors ? 
Where Are You Strong ( and Weak )  ? 
Does Your Strategy Make Sense ? 
Can You Stand Behind the Numbers ? 
Are You Really Ready for Change ? 
Is Your Plan Clear , Concise and Current ? 
Chapter 19 : Top Ten Business-Planning Never-Evers
Failing to Plan in the First Place
Missing Out on Assumptions
External assumptions
Internal assumptions
Second-Guessing the Customer
Underestimating Your Competition
Ignoring Your Own Strengths
Mistaking a Budget for a Plan
Shying Away from Reasonable Risk
Allowing One Person to Dominate the Plan
Being Afraid to Change
Forgetting to Motivate and Reward
Cheat Sheet
Introduction
So you pulled this book off the shelf and decided to give us a try . 
Good move . You ’ ve come to the right place . Believe it or not , we
don ’ t need to read tea leaves to know a bit about your background . 
In fact , we ’ d go so far as to suggest that you probably find yourself
in one of the following situations : 
You ’ ve a great idea for a brand-new gadget and can ’ t wait to
get your own company up and running . 
Your boss just turned over a new leaf and wants a business
plan from you in three weeks . 
You ’ ve always run the business without a business plan , and
you ’ re the one who turned over the new leaf . 
You thought you had a business plan for the company , but it
doesn ’ t seem to be doing the job that it should . 
The business and economic climate looks a whole lot more
hostile than the last time you thought about writing a
business plan and you want to be doubly sure of getting it
right . 
Are we close ? Whatever your situation , you ’ re not going to need
those tea leaves to make a business plan , just read this book
instead . We can ’ t tell you the future of your business . But the
business plan that we help you put together prepares you for the
future . And we ’ re with you every step of the way . 
Why You Need This Book
You may not know how to make a business plan just yet , but you ’ re
smart enough to know that a plan is important . We know , from years
of working with companies large and small , that a business plan is
of working with companies large and small , that a business plan is
crucial – your plan is the only way that you can get where you want
to go . 
This book helps you create your business plan step by step . Along
the way , you may discover things about your business that you
never realised – things that just may help you beat the competition . 
We even throw in a few laughs as well . 
Sure , for some of you , a business plan is something that you ’ re
required to put together to raise money for a startup company . At
best , it ’ s a formality ; at worst , a real pain in the neck . But a business
plan isn ’ t just there to raise money ; it can also be a powerful tool –
one that ’ s bound to make your company a better place to work and
your business a more successful operation . 
Is a business plan magic ? No – no sorcery here . A business plan
works because it forces you to stop and think about what you ’ re
doing . It prompts you to figure out what you want your company to
be in the future and how you intend to make the future happen . 
Then your plan acts as a template , guiding you through the steps
required to meet your goals . For example : 
A business plan requires you to look carefully at your
industry , your customers and the competition to determine
what your real opportunities are and what threats you face . 
A business plan takes a good hard look at your company as
well , so that you can honestly and objectively recognise its
capabilities and resources , its strengths and weaknesses and
its true advantages . 
A business plan coaxes a financial report , a forecast and a
budget out of you , so that you know where you stand today
and what the future holds . 
A business plan prepares you for an uncertain future by
encouraging you to come up with business strategies and
alternatives to increase your chances of success down the
road . 
How to Use This Book
Business Plans For Dummies , 3rd Edition will help your business
succeed no matter who you are or what your job description is , 
whether you ’ re part of a large corporation or a one-person show . 
Depending on your situation , you may find yourself dipping into and
out of the book in different ways : 
If business plans are new to you , you may want to start at the
beginning and let us be your guides . We take you from your
company mission all the way through to making your
business plan work , and we keep your head above water the
whole way . 
If you ’ re a little more experienced , you may want to head
straight for one of the more interesting watering holes : how
to recognise the critical success factors in your business , for
example , or where to look for your company ’ s strengths and
weaknesses . After dipping in anywhere along the way , you ’ ll
most likely discover yet another section where you want to
spend some time . 
Just remember – no matter where you find yourself , you ’ re never
too late to start a business plan , and never too late to make the one
that you have even better . In each case , you can find what you ’ re
looking for between these bright-yellow covers . 
How This Book Is Organised
Business Plans For Dummies is divided into six parts , based on the
major elements of your business plan . You don ’ t have to read all the
parts , however , and you certainly don ’ t have to read them in order . 
Each chapter is devoted to a particular business-planning topic , and
you may need some chapters more than you do others . Feel free to
skip around ; pick and choose what you ’ re really interested in . 
Part I : Determining Where You Want to Go
When putting together a business plan , you have to decide where
you want to end up in the future . This part helps you get on track
right away by establishing a mission for your company , along with
business goals and objectives . Then we help you examine your
company ’ s values and your vision for the future . 
Part II : Sizing Up Your Marketplace
To make a useful plan for your business , you have to know
something about the market you ’ re going after . In this part , we help
you examine your industry and figure out what it takes to be
successful by identifying where your opportunities and threats
come from . We also help you analyse your customers , so that you
can understand who they are , what they need and how you can
group them to better serve them . Finally , we help you scope out
your competition , trying to determine exactly what you need to win . 
Part III : Weighing Up Your Company ’ s
Prospects
In this part , we turn our full attention to your company . We help you
look as objectively as you can at your capabilities and resources , 
identifying the strengths that you can count on and the weaknesses
that you need to deal with . We also help you zero in on what you do
best , enabling you to figure out the real value that you provide for
your customers and the true advantage that you have over your
competitors . Finally , we guide you through your finances and help
you put together a financial forecast and a budget . 
Part IV : Looking to the Future
The main reason why you make a business plan in the first place is
to get ready for what lies ahead for your business . Part IV helps you
look into your future and prepares you for change . We introduce
several standard alternatives and show you how you can use them
to come up with strategies of your own . And we consider the
different directions that you can take as your company grows
bigger . 
Part V : A Planner ’ s Toolkit
Your business plan is no good if you can ’ t put it to work . In this part , 
we help you shape your company to be as efficient and effective as
it can be . We also help you prepare the people in your company so
that they ’ ve the skills they need to accomplish the goals set out in
your plan . Finally , we show you a sample of a real business plan , so
that you know – start to finish – what you ’ re aiming for . 
Part VI : The Part of Tens
The Part of Tens is a collection of reminders , hints , observations
and warnings about what to do – and not to do – as you work
through your business plan . These chapters focus on the big
picture , so look at them whenever you need a little perspective on
where you stand and where you ’ re headed , especially if the road
ahead starts to look a little bumpy . 
Icons Used in This Book
To guide you through your business plan preparation , we include
icons in the left margins of the book . Here ’ s what they mean : 
This icon indicates tips to put you way ahead of the
competition . 
Wherever you see this icon , you find definitions of businessguru terms . 
This icon calls your attention to illuminating examples from
the business world . 
This icon flags situations that apply mostly to large
companies , but that may help small companies as well . 
Ouch !  , you may get burned unless you heed these warnings . 
This icon serves as a friendly reminder that the topic at hand
is important enough for you to note down for the future . 
This icon lets you know about websites from which you can
download free financial spreadsheets , tables and other useful
goodies . These can help take the grunt and groan out of
number-crunching cashflow forecasts ,  ‘ what if ’ projections and
other tedious but vital repetitive calculations , as well as keep
you up-to-date on important rules and regulations . 
Where to Go from Here
Take a minute to thumb through this book and get comfortable with
what ’ s inside . Then pick out one or two chapters that tickle your
fancy . Better yet , turn to a chapter that you already know something
about . Or , if you ’ re really daring , turn the page and start at the
beginning . 
Don ’ t forget to use the table of contents for a chapter-by-chapter
breakdown . The index is also an excellent place to turn to find a
specific topic right away . 
Want to make your business plan look great , or need some hands on
support ? Go to www . dummies . com / go / businessplansfordummies to find
tips and advice on shaping up your business plan . You can also
download a glossary from here to get your head around the
business jargon . 
Part I
Determining Where You Want to Go
In this part .  .  . 
No matter what you ’ d like to finish , from
wallpapering the bedroom to hooking up the
new router , it ’ s awfully easy to pass over all the
preliminary stuff and jump right into the thick of
the project . Let ’ s face it , the preliminaries are a
bit boring . But for the really important things in
life – and in business – preparation is everything . 
So preparing to do your business plan ranks
right up there in importance with each of the
other major steps as you create a plan . 
In this part , we help you prepare to plan by
looking at what a business plan is all about . 
First , we look at how to establish a mission for
your company and develop business goals and
objectives with all your stakeholders in mind . 
We also point out why values are so important
to your company , and show you how you can
use your company ’ s values . Finally , we look at
how a vision for your company gives you
something to aim for and a direction to take . 
Chapter 3
Setting Off in the Right Direction
In This Chapter
Understanding why a set of values is so important
Figuring out who your stakeholders are
Identifying your company ’ s current beliefs and principles
Putting together your company values statement
You may ask yourself why on earth you ’ re reading a chapter on
values in a book on business planning . We can hear what you ’ re
thinking : Hey , it ’ s the twenty-first century . Today ’ s business ethics
revolve around survival in the marketplace : cater to your
customers , beat the competition ( hey , demolish them !  )  , make 
 ‘ loadsamoney ’ and run . 
Yet even in a business world dominated by market economies , 
global competition and the laws of the jungle , values still matter . In
fact , we ’ re convinced that successful business plans must start with
a statement of company values . 
Now , don ’ t get us wrong here – we have no quarrel with profits . We
absolutely love them , and we expect to earn lots for ourselves over
time . But short-term profits don ’ t go far over the long haul . Values
and a vision keep everybody in your company – even if you ’ re only
two people – on course and heading in the same direction . What if
you ’ re a company of one ? Taking time to establish your values and
vision will still keep you on track as your business grows . 
In this chapter , we point out why values are so important in the first
place . We help you identify your company ’ s values by noting who
place . We help you identify your company ’ s values by noting who
has a stake in your business and discovering the beliefs and
business principles that you already hold . Then we show you how
to put together a values statement for your company . 
Wondering Why Values Matter
Your company faces all sorts of options , alternatives and decisions
every day that you ’ re in business . If you take the time to define your
company ’ s values , these principles and beliefs can guide your
managers , employees , or just you ( if you ’ re in business for yourself ) 
as you face complicated issues that don ’ t have easy answers . When
the unexpected happens , you can react quickly and decisively , 
based on a clear sense of what ’ s important . 
Looking at tough choices
Consider a scenario . Frank Little is an independent
consultant working for a large UK-based petrochemical firm that
we ’ ll call Bigg Oil . He ’ s conducting market analysis for one of
the company ’ s largest divisions and is involved in an important
project concerning the development of new overseas business . 
Frank ’ s good at what he does , and he sketches out several options
for the production , distribution and pricing of petrochemicals in
three countries . In one of his most promising scenarios , the
numbers for a country that we ’ ll call Friedonia yield substantially
higher short-term profits than the other two – primarily because
that nation doesn ’ t yet have expensive pollution-control procedures
in place . The other two nations have environmental laws similar to
those in the UK . 
Here ’ s Frank ’ s dilemma : by introducing its product line into
Friedonia , Frank ’ s client can make huge profits . Sure , the resulting
pollution may cause ecological damage that may possibly be traced
pollution may cause ecological damage that may possibly be traced
back to Bigg Oil . But this situation is not illegal , according to
Friedonia ’ s current laws , and Frank stands to get a lot more
business from Bigg Oil if the project goes ahead . 
He agonises over the situation and his report . What should Frank
recommend to senior management : 
Go for the short-term bucks ? 
Voluntarily enact procedures to control pollution , even
though the company is not legally required to do so ? 
Forget Friedonia until the country has stronger
environmental laws ? 
Maybe you can relate to our friend Frank ’ s quandary , having faced
similar kinds of ethical questions and trade-offs in your own
business . 
If Frank had a set of values written down , those values can help him
out of his quandary . Values provide a framework to guide people
who are confronted with difficult choices . 
Having no fundamental guidelines to follow – or , worse yet , 
being told to play it safe or ‘ don ’ t rock the boat ’ –
businesspeople in Frank ’ s position are forced to choose the
safest path , and that path is often determined by profits , 
promotion prospects or job security . But the easiest path is not
always the best . 
Avoiding being lost and unprepared
What happens when disaster strikes ? We all remember headlinegrabbing stories in which unexpected troubles tarnished the images
of all sorts of companies , such as the following : 
Exxon ( oil manufacturer and exporter )  : The
infamous oil tanker Valdez spilled millions of gallons of crude
oil into a pristine Alaskan bay , causing incalculable
environmental damage . The TotalFinaElf tanker Erika did
much the same off the Brittany coast in 1999 . 
Perrier ( natural carbonated water bottler )  : In 1989 , Frenchbased Perrier was the market leader in bottled mineral water , 
its name synonymous with purity and quality . Perrier water
was on the tables of virtually every high-class restaurant
around the world . Sales peaked at 1 . 2 billion bottles a year . 
The plant at Vergèze , near Nimes , was tooled up for 1 . 5
billion , with capital investment and personnel to match . The
Perrier water benzene contamination incident in 1990 wiped
out a lifetime investment in promoting the images of purity
and quality . Coca-Cola had a similar experience when its
brand of ‘ pure ’ bottled water , Dasani , had to be withdrawn in
2004 . Far from being produced using a ‘ highly sophisticated
purification process ’  , based on NASA spacecraft technology , 
it turned out to be contaminated with bromate , a potentially
cancer-causing chemical . 
Intel ( computer chip manufacturer )  : A flaw in its Pentium
chip ( which was or wasn ’ t really significant , depending on
who you talked to ) led to corporate apologies and product
replacement . 
These companies all stumbled over so-called externalities ( to
use economics doublespeak )  . Externalities refer to those
circumstances that extend beyond a firm ’ s immediate control to
issues that are deeper than simply making a mint . Over time , 
the failure to see the power of these outside forces – and to
account for social and ethical values when you make decisions
– can result in serious or even disastrous consequences for
your company . As the examples illustrate , we ’ re not talking
about one unhappy customer , folks ; we ’ re talking about big-time
trouble . 
Our list of examples could include episodes involving companies of
every size in all industries . Faced with unexpected events , 
unprepared companies often react as though they ’ re in total
disarray . When a company lacks a set of stated values that
everybody subscribes to , the interpretation of important issues is
left up to anyone and everyone in the company . Then the company
is likely to find itself speaking with many voices and going in several
directions , resulting in confused employees , unhappy customers , an
angry public and maybe , disappointed investors . 
Valuing having values
A values statement is a set of beliefs and principles that
guides the activities and operations of a company , no matter
what its size . The people at the top of your company must
exemplify your stated values , and your company ’ s incentive
and reward systems should lead all employees to act in ways
that support your company ’ s values . 
Here ’ s an example of just how important a values statement
can be . In the summer of 1985 , the United States experienced
what was described by many people as a terrorist attack . 
Someone in the Chicago area tampered with bottles of Tylenol , 
the best-selling pain reliever from McNeil Laboratories , a
subsidiary of the health care giant Johnson & Johnson . An
unknown number of Tylenol capsules were laced with cyanide , 
and eight people died . The tragedy created a business crisis for
Johnson & Johnson . 
Johnson & Johnson reacted quickly and decisively to the threat
Johnson & Johnson reacted quickly and decisively to the threat
against its customers . The company pulled every bottle of Tylenol
from retail shelves throughout America – a massive undertaking that
ultimately cost the company more than $100 million – and it did so
immediately upon learning of the problem . 
When the crisis was finally over , Johnson & Johnson became a
corporate role model . The company ’ s lightning-fast response to the
Tylenol incident earned it a reputation as one of the most
responsible companies in the world , one that takes its civic duties
seriously and is willing to put the public good ahead of its own
profits . Johnson & Johnson ’ s many businesses benefited
accordingly . 
Why did Johnson & Johnson behave so well when so many other
companies find themselves paralysed in similar situations ? The
reasons are summed up in the company ’ s statement of values , an
extraordinary document called the Johnson & Johnson Credo ( see
the ‘ The Johnson & Johnson Credo ’ sidebar )  . 
The Johnson & Johnson Credo 
 ‘ We believe our first responsibility is to the doctors , nurses and patients , to
mothers and all others who use our products and services . In meeting their
needs , everything we do must be of high quality . We must constantly strive to
reduce our costs in order to maintain reasonable prices . Customers ’ orders
must be serviced promptly and accurately . Our suppliers and distributors must
have an opportunity to make a fair profit . 
We are responsible to our employees , the men and women who work with us
throughout the world . Everyone must be considered as an individual . We must
respect their dignity and recognize their merit . They must have a sense of
security in their jobs . Compensation must be fair and adequate , and working
conditions clean , orderly and safe . Employees must feel free to make
suggestions and complaints . There must be equal opportunity for employment , 
development and advancement for those qualified . We must provide
competent management , and their actions must be just and ethical . 
competent management , and their actions must be just and ethical . 
We are responsible to the communities in which we live and work and to the
world community as well . We must be good citizens – support good works and
charities and bear our fair share of taxes . We must encourage civic
improvements and better health and education . We must maintain in good
order the property we are privileged to use , protecting the environment and
natural resources . 
Our final responsibility is to our stockholders . Business must make a sound
profit . We must experiment with new ideas . Research must be carried on , 
innovative programs developed and mistakes paid for . New equipment must be
purchased , new facilities provided and new products launched . Reserves must
be created to provide for adverse times . When we operate according to these
principles , the stockholders should realize a fair return .  ’ 
For more than half a century , the credo has successfully guided
behaviour and actions across the sprawling Johnson & Johnson
empire , currently a £17 billion worldwide corporation employing
more than 109 , 500 people . 
The Johnson & Johnson Credo works so well because each
employee takes it seriously . With the active encouragement and
involvement of top management , from the chairperson on
down , the credo is invoked , praised and communicated
throughout the company . Old-timers and new employees alike
are continually reminded of the importance of the message . 
Promotions depend , in part , on how well managers live up to
and disseminate the values of the credo within their areas of
responsibility . The credo is a significant factor in Johnson & 
Johnson ’ s continued performance near the top of its industry –
and an indication of why the company is so well regarded by so
many people . 
Remember the following points about values : 
A values statement is a set of beliefs and principles to guide
your company ’ s activities . 
Clearly stated values can help your company react quickly
and decisively when the unexpected strikes . 
Everybody in your company must embrace the company ’ s
values . 
Identifying Your Organisation ’ s
Values
Values statements often address several audiences . The Johnson & 
Johnson Credo ( refer to the preceding section )  , for example , speaks
to doctors , patients , customers , suppliers , distributors , employees , 
stockholders and the community at large . As you begin to work on
your own company ’ s values , you need to think about different
groups , each of which has some relationship with your company . 
Stakeholders are groups of people who have a claim or
interest in how you operate your business . The stakes involved
can be tangible and legally binding , or they may be informal
arrangements or expectations that have developed over time . 
Although all these interested parties have a stake in what you
do , stakeholders may have different ideas and rather strong
feelings about what values your company should embrace . 
You ’ re going to put together a values statement primarily for the
benefit of employees , of course ( or just for yourself , if you operate a
business alone )  . But your company ’ s values are going to have an
obvious impact on all your stakeholders , including owners , 
obvious impact on all your stakeholders , including owners , 
shareholders , customers , suppliers , regulators – and even your
mother , if she loaned you £10 , 000 to start your business . As you
start to identify the values that are most important to your
company , you ’ re going to have to consider different viewpoints , 
including the following : 
The demands of your shareholders ( if you have any ) 
The interests and expectations of all your stakeholders
The beliefs and principles that you and your company
already hold
In the following sections , we take a closer look at each of these
factors . When you come up with a preliminary list of company
values that you feel are most important , you are in a good position
to go on and create a values statement . 
A short values statement that works
McKinsey provide a marvellous example of a set of values that have been
strongly and clearly articulated for over 60 years in such a way that any
member of the professional staff who is or ever has been employed with
McKinsey , anywhere in the world , can instantly , seriously and passionately tell
you what the company stands for . This situation is brought about through a set
of ‘ guiding principles ’  : 
Serving clients : 
Adhere to professional standards . 
Follow the top management approach . 
Assist the client in implementation and capability building . 
Perform consulting in cost-effective manner . 
Building the firm : 
Operate as one firm . 
Maintain a meritocracy . 
Show a genuine concern for our people . 
Foster an open and non-hierarchical working atmosphere . 
Manage the firm ’ s resources responsibly . 
Being a member of the professional staff : 
Demonstrate commitment to client service . 
Strive continuously for superior quality . 
Advance the state of the art of management . 
Contribute to a spirit of partnership through teamwork and collaboration . 
Profit from the freedom and assume the responsibility associated with
self-governance . 
Uphold the obligation to dissent . 
Thinking about investors
Economists argue that when it comes to company values , you really
have to worry about only one significant group : the shareholders . 
On paper , at least , the shareholders are the true owners of the firm , 
and they deserve your undivided attention . In this view of the world , 
managers are simply paid agents of those who own the company , no
matter how far removed those owners may be , and you don ’ t need
to know much more about values except to carry out your
to know much more about values except to carry out your
shareholders ’ wishes . 
Now , we can ’ t really argue with this picture , as far as it goes , but it
doesn ’ t square with the intentions of many shareholders out there
today . For starters , your company may not have any investors , 
unless you count yourself and the bank account that you wiped out
to start your company . In addition , pension and mutual funds now
control the majority of publicly held stocks , and the investors who
buy these funds are mainly interested in making their own personal
nest eggs grow . These shareholders are absentee owners . They
seldom demand a serious say in management decision making . 
When something goes wrong with the company or with their fund , 
they simply sell the shares and get on with their next investment . 
So what ’ s our point ? Although shareholders obviously are an
important bunch , deserving the attention of companies that have
shareholders , their demands shouldn ’ t necessarily crowd out all
other voices . Remember – your shareholders have the luxury of
selling off shares and moving on to other choices when things go
wrong . As a manager or owner , you don ’ t have that option . 
Your company will be much better off in the long run if you
take a broader view , acknowledging not just the shareholders , 
but also all the stakeholders , giving each group the attention
that it deserves . 
Considering the rest of the crew
If you think about it , you may be surprised at how many types of
people are involved in what your company does – everyone from
suppliers to distributors and from bankers to customers . Each
group has its own set of interests and looks to your company to
fulfil a series of promises . The explicit promises that you make may
take the form of legal agreements , licences , freelance agreements , or
purchase orders . Your implicit promises represent the unwritten
purchase orders . Your implicit promises represent the unwritten
expectations of the various groups that have dealings with your
company . 
For each group of stakeholders that you identify , ask two basic
questions : 
What are these people most interested in ? 
What do these people expect from my company ? 
In other words , what is their stake in the activities and behaviour of
your company ? At first glance , it may seem that your interests
conflict with your stakeholders ’ interests . You may want to
maximise profits over time as one of your company ’ s key values , for
example . You may decide that serving customers is important as
well . But what do your customers want ? They certainly have a stake
in your business , and you ’ re probably safe to say that they ’ re
looking for quality products and services at reasonable prices . 
Do these two values conflict with each other ? Not necessarily . 
Wouldn ’ t most customers rather buy from companies that they
trust , companies that they feel comfortable with , companies that
have served them well in the past ? In addition , customers don ’ t
really like the uncertainty and time wasted in trying new products or
services , and they won ’ t make a change unless they ’ re really pushed
to do so . In other words , most of your customers don ’ t want to deny
you profits , because they realise that your business – and their
favourite goods and services – won ’ t be around for long if you can ’ t
make any money .  ( For the lowdown on figuring out your customers , 
check out Chapters 5 and 6 .  ) 
At the same time , customers aren ’ t stupid and certainly don ’ t
want to be taken advantage of . We ’ ve all heard stories about
food and hardware stores that try to make a quick buck after
floods , hurricanes or earthquakes . Although competition
usually keeps prices in check , scarcity creates opportunity and
the temptation to overcharge customers . But again , customers
are stakeholders in the business , with interests and
expectations . After a disaster is over and the clean-up is behind
them , those same customers often take their cash elsewhere , 
rewarding stores that may have behaved more responsibly in
the crisis . 
Now you need to bring together all your information on the
people who have a stake in your company and to create a
stakeholder profile . Follow these steps : 
1 . List all interest groups that have a relationship with your
company . 
Don ’ t forget to include the less-obvious candidates . Your list may
include customers , owners , shareholders , banks , creditors , 
suppliers , distributors , business partners , industry associates , 
regulatory agencies , advocacy groups and so on .  ( See Figure 3-1
for further detail .  ) 
2 . Rank the stakeholders by importance to the business . 
How does each group affect your business goals ? 
3 . Record what you think are the interests of each group . 
4 . Record what you think are the expectations of each group . 
Do your company ’ s actions fit with what you ’ ve identified as being
your key stakeholders ’ expectations ? Always be aware of how your
business decisions are perceived by the general public . How do
those decisions look from the other side ? Do you see satisfied
customers , contented employees , helpful creditors , responsive
suppliers and eager distributors ? If not , how is your company going
to respond to those stakeholders who feel that you ’ re letting them
down ? 
Ideally , of course , you want to plan ahead when it comes to your
dealings with all stakeholders . The secret to responding before
molehills become mountains lies in having a clear understanding of
each group ’ s expectations and a set of values that acknowledges
Figure 3-1 : 
Stakeholder
mapping . 
each group ’ s expectations and a set of values that acknowledges
each group ’ s interests . 
Existing beliefs and principles
Drawing up a list of abstract beliefs and principles is one thing , 
putting those beliefs to the test is another . Tough choices come
along , forcing you to examine your beliefs closely . If you run a oneperson company , you already know something about what you
stand for . If you ’ re part of a bigger company , chances are that
certain beliefs and values are inherent in the way in which your
company does business . The best way to get to the heart of those
beliefs and principles is to imagine how you ’ d respond to tough
dilemmas . 
Think about the situations described in the Beliefs and Principles
Questionnaire ( see Figure 3-2 )  . Ask other people in your company , 
or trusted colleagues from outside your business , how they ’ d react
to these situations . Chances are you wish that the questionnaire
included a box marked Other or Don ’ t know . But the whole point of
situations that put your values to the test is that they ’ re not always
easy . 
Figure 3-2 : 
Beliefs and
Principles
Questionnaire . 
Answers to the questionnaire point to the beliefs and principles that
your company ’ s managers and employees already hold . 
Keep in mind that this questionnaire has no right or wrong answers ; 
no one ’ s going to send a note home or give anyone a bad mark . 
You ’ re simply trying to identify the basic values that your company
already feels comfortable with . Completed questionnaires give
insights into the general beliefs and principles that your company
considers to be important . 
When thinking about your company ’ s beliefs and principles bear in
mind that : 
Many people , ranging from employees to customers , have a
stake in what your company does . 
Different stakeholders may have different viewpoints when it
comes to your company ’ s values . 
Your company needs to acknowledge as many stakeholder
perspectives as possible . 
Company values should be tied to the beliefs and principles
that you already hold . 

Putting Together the Values
Statement
When you ’ ve a good idea of just who your company ’ s stakeholders
are , and when you ’ ve got to grips with the general beliefs and
principles that your company already holds , you have to bring these
two worlds together . But how do you create a written statement of
values based on those general beliefs and principles that also guide
your company toward doing the right thing in the eyes of all your
stakeholders ? 
First , keep in mind that your company ’ s values statement represents
First , keep in mind that your company ’ s values statement represents
more than a quick to-do list . Your values reach beyond quarterly
goals or even yearly targets . They ’ re meant to guide you through
those tough decisions as you build a sustainable business that lasts
and grows over years and decades . 
Maybe your company already has some sort of values credo in
place . If so , you ’ re a step ahead of the game .  ( You lose points , 
however , if you have to glance at the dusty plaque on the office wall
to read it .  ) If you can ’ t dig up a ready-made values statement to start
with , begin putting together your own . You ’ ve two options . 
Developing a values statement
You may not have the luxury of spending weeks or months to
develop a values statement , so we show you a quick way to create
one to set your company on the right track . If your company is
small , you can follow the steps yourself or with one or two of your
colleagues – no need for long meetings and careful review : 
1 . Meet with your company ’ s chief decision-makers to talk about
the general company values that should guide employee
behaviour . 
2 . Prepare a first-draft list of all the values discussed in the
meeting and circulate copies for review . 
3 . Schedule one or two follow-up meetings with senior managers
to clarify and confirm a final set of values . 
4 . Create a values statement that captures the agreed-upon
values clearly and concisely , and get it approved . 
5 . Meet with managers at all levels to make sure that they
understand the importance of , and reasoning behind , the
company values statement . 
6 . See that every employee gets a copy of the statement . 
The values statement that you come up with here may serve you
well for a long time . At the very least , it should meet your needs
while you work on a more complete and permanent version . 
while you work on a more complete and permanent version . 
If you ’ re part of a larger company , however , you ’ re going to have to
go through a bit more rigmarole to get a consensus . Sorry . 
Make sure that every employee receives a copy of your
company ’ s values statement , along with an explanation of its
purpose . If you ’ re in business for yourself , place a framed copy
of the values statement near your desk or ( if you work from
home ) stick it on the fridge . Don ’ t let it gather dust . For a bigger
company , print the values statement on wallet-sized cards , and
don ’ t forget to include it in the annual report . Your company ’ s
values must be referred to , relied on and understood to be a
guiding force in the actions and activities of every person who
represents your company . 
Preparing a values statement – the full
Monty
Why is the quick way to create a values statement not always
good enough ? If you ’ re part of a large firm , the quick way relies
heavily on the ideas and suggestions of people at the top of the
organisation . Yet the best insights on company values often
come from employees themselves – people from different
backgrounds and various levels in the company who can draw
on a range of business experiences . 
The long way to create a values statement takes a little more effort , 
but getting these employees involved usually is worth it . Follow
these steps : 
1 . Select three or four representative groups of employees , 
including a mix of people from all levels and functions in your
company . 
2 . Have the groups meet on a rather formal basis over a two-to
three-month period to come up with values that should guide the
behaviour of every employee in the firm . 
You have to point the groups in the right direction at the
beginning . Start by asking everyone to fill out the questionnaire
shown in Figure 3–2 earlier in this chapter . 
3 . Ask group members to create a short list of the values that
they think are most important . 
Encourage them to back up this list with their reasons , 
reminding them that values are often the tiebreakers when it
comes to tough management decisions and difficult choices . 
4 . Bring the lists together and create a priority ranking of all the
values suggested . 
5 . Compose a statement , motto , or credo that includes the most
significant and widely held values , along with compelling
reasons for those values . 
6 . Have the groups review and ratify your values statement . 
When the time comes to conduct those annual employee
performance reviews ( you know , the ones that everyone loves
to hate )  , use them as an opportunity to promote your
company ’ s values . Bring out a copy of the values statement and
ask each employee how well his or her individual activities
reflect the company ’ s values . At the same time , ask yourself
whether the incentive and reward systems in your company
work toward supporting those values . 
Keep the following in mind when putting together a values
statement : 
Even though you think that you know your values , getting
them down on paper is worth the effort . 
The best insights on company values come from employees
themselves . 
Make the values statement available to everybody in your
company . 
Chapter 5
Taking a Closer Look at Customers
In This Chapter
Checking out who your customers are
Discovering why your customers buy .  .  .  
.  .  . And why they may not buy again ! 
Finding out how your customers make choices
Remembering the big picture
Dealing with business customers
The most crucial part of business planning involves taking a long , 
hard look at customers – those you enjoy having , those you would
love to land and those you would just as soon give away to some
unsuspecting competitor . The stakes are high . How well you know
your customers ultimately determines how successful you are . But
figuring out what makes customers tick can be downright
frustrating . If you ’ ve tried it before , you may be tempted to throw up
your hands and leave the entire mess to the so-called experts –
marketing gurus , consultants or perhaps astrologers . Don ’ t . This
chapter shows you how to better acquaint yourself with your
customers so that you can offer them more value and serve them
more profitably than anyone else out there . 
In this chapter , we take a closer look at why customers buy your
products and services in the first place by exploring their needs and
motives . And we investigate how they make choices in the
marketplace by examining customer perceptions and their decisionmaking process . Finally , we take a quick look at your customers that
are actually other businesses . 
are actually other businesses . 
Checking Out Who Your Customers
Are
A fresh look at customers starts with the ones you enjoy seeing –
those who regularly purchase goods or services from you . But
sometimes , knowing what something is not can be just as important
as knowing what it is . You can find out as much about your own
business and best customers by observing the other kinds of
customers out there – the customers who are difficult , the
customers who are gone and the customers whom you never had . 
The good customer
Good customers are the ones who bring a smile to your face , the
ones you like serving , the ones who appreciate you , the ones who
keep you in business . They ’ re the customers you want to keep
coming back time and again . To keep all those good customers
happy , however , you may need to know more than the fact that Tom
likes Chinese food , Mary has a weakness for chocolates and Harry
loves red ties . 
Why ? Isn ’ t simply knowing individual customers on some personal
basis enough ? Well , not quite . What happens if you ’ ve hundreds or
even thousands of small customers , such as if you run a shop , or if
your staff turnover is high as in most parts of the catering industry ? 
In such cases , you ’ ve no substitute for a good database sytem for
tracking your relationship with clients and then making appropriate
product or sevice offers . For example , supermarkets now analyse
customer purchases and make targeted special offers based on their
understanding of the customer profile . This all helps to make
customers feel special and loved . Your business can measure and
describe its customers in several ways : 
describe its customers in several ways : 
Track where your customers are , breaking them down by
country , region , city or postcode . 
Figure out who your customers are , including their age , 
gender , occupation , income , education and ethnic origin . 
Discover more about how they live – their hobbies , favourite
sports teams , restaurant choices and holiday destinations , 
for example . 
You ’ re probably a step ahead of us here and have already
noticed that many of these criteria result in groups of
customers that look alike . When marketing gurus divide
customers into specific groups , they call them market segments . 
If you ’ d like to get a better handle on how to separate your own
customers into market segments , check out Chapter 6 . 
When it comes to understanding customers , one good
strategy is to find out what other businesses try to find out
about their customers . Keep track of the questions that other
companies ask you . Richer Sounds stores ( a chain of hi-fi and
home cinema retailers )  , for example , routinely ask for your
postcode when you step up to the till . And you often find a list
of personal questions on product registration forms , warranty
cards and customer service mailings . Some companies even
offer a small reward if you tell them something – anything –
about yourself . But go easy here . Radio Shack , an American
electronics retailer , began to lose a lot of goodwill when
customers grew suspicious about – or just annoyed by – all the
questions that their shop assistants were asking . 
The bad customer 
 ‘ A bad customer ? Isn ’ t that a contradiction in terms ?  ’ you ask .  ‘ How
can there be such a thing as a bad customer , especially for a
customer-orientated company ?  ’ Keep in mind that your initial
reaction doesn ’ t always tell the whole story . Remember that you
don ’ t really define the business that you ’ re in , your customers do . 
They place a series of demands on your company and then evaluate
how well it performs against those demands . 
Good customers do the following : 
Ask you to do things that you do well . 
Place value on the things that you do and are willing to pay
for them . 
Challenge you to improve your skills , expand your
knowledge and focus your resources . 
Take you in new directions that are consistent with your
strategy and planning . 
Bad customers represent the flip side . They do the following : 
Ask you to do things that you aren ’ t equipped to do well . 
Distract you , causing you to veer away from your strategy
and your business plan . 
Purchase in such small quantities that the cost of doing
business with them far outweighs any revenue that they
generate . 
Require so much service and attention that you can ’ t focus
your efforts on more valuable ( and profitable ) customers . 
Remain dissatisfied with what you do , despite all your best
efforts . 
Fail to pay on time – or to pay at all ! 
The pundits have come up with a principle that we can apply
here : the 80 / 20 principle . In this case , the rule says that if you
survey all your customers , 20 per cent of them account for
about 80 per cent of your business . These 20 per cent are your
good customers . You obviously want to keep them – and keep
them happy ! But look at the other 80 per cent of your
customers , and you ’ ll probably discover a few whom you ’ d
rather hand over to the competition . 
When you analyse what you do for that 80 per cent of customers
and what they do for you , these customers are often more trouble
than they ’ re worth . Their shoe styles are never in stock , and their
special orders are always returned . Maybe their finances are a mess , 
which makes them late in paying . Still , the lure of additional revenue
and more customers – or the belief that you should never say no to
any customer – often keeps you involved with this group . You would
be better off without these customers , though , and leaving your
competitors to handle such bad business impairs their ability to
compete with you for good business . 
To handle bad customers , follow these steps : 
1 . Figure out who they are , by establishing whether you can
make a profit out of doing business with them . 
2 . Convert them into good customers , by exploring ways of
turning loss-making customers into profitable ones . For example , 
by putting up prices , introducing minimum order sizes or
minimum drop quantities or by encouraging them to order online . 
3 . Alternatively , hand them over to someone else . If they don ’ t
accept the changes to your service that you introduce to ensure
that they make you money , they will soon move on to other
suppliers . 
A note of caution : some of this year ’ s bad customers may become
next year ’ s good customers . Ensure that you only divest yourself of
permanently bad customers . 
The other guy ’ s customer
You may think that focusing on customers whom you ’ ve never had
points to another sort of failure on your part , but actually , these
people present an opportunity . The fact that you haven ’ t been able
to serve this group gives you a challenge : to find out what your
market really thinks is important . Your competitors ’ customers are
telling you what you ’ re not . This information is extremely useful , 
especially when you ’ re working on the big picture in the early stages
of business planning , defining who you are and who you want to
serve . 
Unfortunately , getting information out of your competitors ’ 
customers is often an expensive proposition . You don ’ t know them , 
and you don ’ t have an ongoing relationship with them . Market
research firms , of course , are always eager to work with you . These
companies are willing to bring together focus groups and talk to
consumers about all sorts of things that relate to your products in
comparison to the competition . The catch , of course , is that their
services don ’ t come cheap . 
Fortunately , you don ’ t have to be quite this formal about the
information-gathering process , at least in the initial stages . As long
as you can get selected people to provide sincere answers , you
probably can approximate the results of a focus-group study on
your own . 
Bank accounts and the 80 / 20 principle
A large retail bank recently undertook a comprehensive study of those
customers using cheque books . The results presented a classic 80 / 20 situation : 
about 19 per cent of the bank ’ s customers were generating 90 per cent of the
total profits , back in the days when banks actually made profits that is . What
was the chief characteristic of the other 81 per cent ? Most of those customers
had accounts with average balances of less than £250 , yet they wrote lots of
cheques . As a consequence , the bank was losing serious money on this
cheques . As a consequence , the bank was losing serious money on this
customer group ; internal processing costs were simply greater than the
revenue generated from the use of their deposited funds . 
The bank conducted further research . Obviously , not all of these accountholders were bad customers . Some of them were senior citizens , for example , 
and a percentage of them were new and would go on to become profitable
customers over time . The bank wanted to nourish developing relationships , so
it set up incentives to encourage new customers to accumulate savings in
related savings accounts . But the bank also knew that many of its customers
would never change and would simply remain a drain on profits . So it created
hurdles to ‘ de-market ’ its less profitable customers , using a new fee structure
that penalised accounts when monthly average balances fell below certain
levels , unless customers maintained certain balances in savings accounts . 
An acquaintance of ours used to go into supermarkets and
hang around the aisles in which her company ’ s goods were
displayed . When a customer came along and picked out a
competing product , she offered to buy that product from the
startled shopper for more than the listed price ! She would offer
a minimal amount ( a penny , say ) and then work her way up , 
trying to determine the shopper ’ s degree of loyalty to the
competing brand . Finally , she would ask questions to find out
why . As a reward , she paid the shopper for the price of the
product when the conversation was over . 
Getting to know your competitors ’ customers is often
difficult , but not impossible . Check out these ideas : 
Spend time where customers gather . Use trade shows , user
groups and industry conferences to make informal contacts
and begin a dialogue with your non-customers . 
Ask pointed questions of people who choose competing
products . Did they take the time to see what was available on
the market ? Have they even heard of your product or
service ? If they have , did they actually take the time to look
at it ? If not , why not ? If so , what were their impressions ? 
Really listen to what they have to say , no matter how painful . 
Don ’ t get defensive when people say negative things about
your company or your products . 
Information about your customers is valuable , if not priceless . A
consultant charges you thousands of pounds for the same
information . 
A few points to remember when checking out who your
customers are : 
To plan effectively , find out as much about your customers
as you can . 
Of all your customers , 20 per cent are likely to account for 80
per cent of your business . 
Some of your customers may actually cost you money . 
Your competitors ’ customers can tip you off to new
opportunities . 
Discovering Why Your Customers
Buy
Perhaps the most difficult – and useful – question that you can
answer about your customers is why they buy what they buy . What
actually compels them to seek out your products or services in the
marketplace ? What ’ s important to them ? What are they really
looking for ? 
Figure 5-1 : A
basic
overview of
people ’ s
needs . 
looking for ? 
Understanding needs
Why do people buy things in the first place ? Psychologist
types tell us that needs fulfilment is really at the heart of all
consumer behaviour ( see Figure 5-1 , based on the social
psychologist Abraham Maslow ’ s famous ‘ Hierarchy of Needs ’ 
model )  . Everybody has needs and wants . When a need is
discovered , it creates the motivation that drives human activity . 
Here ’ s an overview of people ’ s needs : 
Survival , at the most basic level , results in the universal need
for grocery shops , carpenters and tailors . 
The urge for safety , security and stability generates the need
for bank accounts , disability health insurance and home
alarm systems . 
The desire for belonging and acceptance creates the need for
designer-label polo shirts , members-only clubs and
participation in expensive diet programmes . 
The urge to be recognised and held in esteem establishes the
need for company banquets , fast cars and award plaques . 
The desire for self-achievement and fulfilment results in the
need for adventure holidays , quiz shows and
correspondence courses . 
DHL , for example , is really in the reliability business . Many of
its customers are businesses that want the assurance –
absolutely , positively – that their precious shipments are
delivered early the next day or even the same day . These
customers are so motivated by this need that they ’ re willing to
pay a substantial premium over other alternatives , simply for
absolute reliability and their own peace of mind . 
Determining motives
Motives are needs that have been awakened and activated , so to
speak . Motives send people scurrying into the marketplace , 
searching for products or services that can fulfil a particular need . 
Motives aren ’ t always what they seem to be . Here are a few
examples : 
Greeting card companies don ’ t just sell cute little jingles
printed on glossy paper at exorbitant prices . The prices are
justified because the companies are actually selling small
insurance policies against their customers ’ fear of feeling
guilty . Perhaps fear of guilt ( over a missed birthday or a
forgotten anniversary ) is really what propels the buyer into
the greeting card market . 
Recent MBA graduates have been asked to rank the things
that are most important to them when they decide among
various job offers . When asked point-blank , a substantial
majority rank quality of life , community and schools at the
top of the list and place starting salary somewhere in the
middle . A more careful survey and analysis of the MBA
selection criteria , however , usually settles upon
compensation as being the single most important variable in
accepting a new position fresh out of university . 
Most of us have a need to be accepted and liked by other
people . This powerful motivation creates great market
opportunities for the likes of beauty salons , gyms and breathmint companies . 
Although motives obviously apply to individual consumers , they
work equally well in the context of business or corporate behaviour . 
When a particular manufacturing company contracts with a private
health and medical insurance company , such as Bupa , for example , 
is the company motivated to improve the health of its employees ? 
Or is it motivated to reduce the cost of its health insurance
premiums so that it can better compete with foreign companies 
( fulfilling its own need to survive )  ? If you run Bupa , how you answer
this question has a major impact on your internal management of
costs versus the overall quality of the health care that you provide . 
Your job , of course , is to dig beneath the obvious customer
responses and consumption patterns to determine what the
buyers ’ real motives are in purchasing goods and services in
your own market . When you understand what ’ s actually driving
customer behaviour , you ’ re in a much better position to talk
about your own product in terms that customers respond to . 
Be sure to keep these points in mind : 
Be sure to keep these points in mind : 
The most important question to ask about your customers is
why they buy what they buy . 
Customer needs range from basic survival and security to
the urge for self-improvement . 
Motives such as vanity , status-seeking and guilt are the hot
buttons that can really get customers to buy . 
Monitoring complaints
Discovering why your customers won ’ t buy again is as valuable as
knowing why they buy in the first place . One terrifying statistic is
that 98 per cent of complaints never happen . People just don ’ t get
round to making the complaint , or worse still , they can find no one
to complain to . You would have to be a hermit never to have
experienced something to complain about , but just try finding
someone to complain to at 8 p . m . on a Sunday at Paddington Station
and you get a fair impression of how the Gobi Desert feels . 
You can never be confident that just because you ’ re not hearing
complaints your customers and clients aren ’ t dissatisfied and about
to defect . Nor does silence mean that they won ’ t run around bad
mouthing you and your business to other people . You do well to
remember that on average people share their complaint with a
score of others , who in turn are equally eager to share the tidings
with others . The viral effect of email has the potential to make any
particularly juicy story run around the world in days if not hours . 
Set up a system to ensure that your customers have ample
opportunity to let you know what they think about your
product or service . This can involve a short questionnaire , a
follow up phone call or an area on your website devoted to
customer feedback . As a bonus , you will probably get great
ideas on how to improve your business . 
One entrepreneur who is more than aware of the problems 
( and incidentally opportunities ) presented by complaints is
Julian Richer , founder of the retail hi-fi chain , Richer Sounds . 
His maxim is that his staff should maximise customers ’ 
opportunities to complain . The operative word in that sentence
is opportunities , which should not be confused with reasons . In
order to put this policy into effect , Richer has a range of
techniques in place . The whole customer satisfaction
monitoring process starts from the moment customers enter
one of his retail outlets . A bell near the door invites those in the
shop to ring it if they ’ ve had particularly good service or help
while in the shop . That help may be simply getting great advice , 
or may be finding a product they want to buy at a very
competitive price . Customers find , when they get their hi-fi
equipment home , a short questionnaire on a postcard asking
them for their immediate post-purchase feelings . Does the
product work as specified , is it damaged in any way , were they
delighted with the service they ’ ve had ? The postcard is
addressed to ‘ Julian Richer , Founder ’ and not , as is the case
with so many other big businesses , to ‘ Customer Services , 
Department 126754 , PO Box , blah blah blah ’  . Richer does
surveys on customer satisfaction and encourages his staff to
come up with their own ideas for monitoring customer
reactions . In fact , he insists that they hit minimum targets for
getting customer feedback . Silence on the customer satisfaction
front is not an option for management in his business . Richer is
clearly aware of the other great statistic when it comes to
complaining customers . 
Ninety-eight per cent of customers who have a complaint buy
from you again if you handle their complaint effectively and
promptly . Not only do they buy from you again , but also they
spread the gospel about how clever they were in getting you to
respond to their complaint . Nothing makes people happier than
having something to complain about that ends up costing them
next to nothing . 
Finding Out How Your Customers
Make Choices
How do customers make choices in the marketplace ? The most
important thing to remember is that customers decide to buy things
based on their own view of the world – their own perceptions of
reality . Few customers buy without thinking . Instead , they bring
their perceptions of the world into a decision-making process that 
( ideally ) leads them to purchase your product or service instead of
other options . 
Realising that perceptions are reality
Customer perceptions represent the market ’ s world view and
include not only what your customers think of your products and
services , but also how they see your company and view your
competitors . 
As customers turn to the marketplace , they confront a mindboggling array of competing products . Many variables influence
your customers as they evaluate their choices : advertising , 
endorsements , reviews and salesmanship , not to mention their own
gut reactions . You need to know how customers respond to all these
stimuli if you ultimately want to earn and keep their business . 
Have you ever wondered , for example , why so few yellow jumpers
are available in the men ’ s departments of clothing shops ? Market
research consistently shows that a majority of men believe that the
colour yellow suggests weakness . Subconsciously , men feel that
they may be perceived as being wimps if they have anything to do
they may be perceived as being wimps if they have anything to do
with the colour . So the yellow-jumper option isn ’ t too popular . 
Or have you noticed that Madonna doesn ’ t do many endorsements ? 
Okay , she doesn ’ t need the extra income . But companies may feel
that her image is just too controversial , resulting in negative
perceptions and the risk that potential buyers are driven away . 
Never lose sight of the marketer ’ s motto : 
Customer perceptions are the market reality . 
People buy goods and services based on what they perceive to be
true , not necessarily on what you know to be the facts . To be
successful in the marketplace , you have to develop a clear insight
into customers ’ perceptions , understanding how buyers react to
products and services in your market before you complete your
own business plans . 
Finding the five steps to adoption
Marketing gurus often refer to the customer ’ s decisionmaking process as the DMP ( the acronym makes the term sound
more official )  . In many markets , the DMP involves a series of
well-defined steps that are dubbed the consumer adoption
process .  ( Okay , we ’ ll call it the CAP .  ) In this case , of course , 
adoption refers to a newly formed relationship with a product , 
not a child . 
By understanding the steps that consumers often go through , you ’ re
better able to take advantage of customers ’ behaviour and build
strategies that help them complete the adoption process . The
process involves five major steps , which are described in Table 5-1 . 
Suppose that you ’ re in a startup firm with a top-notch
consumer-software title . You ’ re afraid , however , that customers
are reluctant to give the program a try , for fear that the
software may be difficult to fathom or incompatible with their
computers .  ( Keep in mind that people act on their perceptions
of reality rather than on the reality itself !  ) To move potential
customers past the evaluation and into the trial step of the
adoption process , you may want to consider setting up a free
new-user hotline and offering a money-back , no-questions-asked
guarantee . 
Table 5-1 The Consumer ’ s Five-Step Adoption Process
Primary
steps
Description of consumer Your task
Awareness
Aware of a product or service but lacking
detailed knowledge
Develop a strategy that educates and excites potential
customers
Interest
Curious because of publicity and seeking more
information
Provide more detailed product information and continue to
build momentum
Evaluation Deciding whether to test the product or service
Make the product-evaluation process as easy and
rewarding as possible
Trial Using the product or service on a test basis Make the trial as simple and risk-free as you can
Adoption Deciding to become a regular user Develop strategies to retain good customers
Sounds like we need a summary of all this : 
Customers make choices based on their perceptions , not
necessarily on the facts . 
Before they buy , customers go through a distinct decisionmaking process . 
The five steps in making a purchase are awareness , interest , 
evaluation , trial and adoption . 
If you understand how customers make choices , you ’ ve a
better shot at getting their business . 
Remembering the Big Picture
Remember that old saying about not seeing the forest for the trees ? 
Well , when you first start to think about your customers , you don ’ t
want to fall into a similar trap . Seeing only the small number of
individual customers whom you know , and focusing on their
personal habits , likes and dislikes , is tempting sometimes . Even
when you begin to look at more general customer trends , including
why your customers buy and how they make choices , getting buried
in the details still is awfully easy . 
Don ’ t take the bait ! Don ’ t view your customers and your own
business activities too narrowly . Look instead at the larger
forest – those general customer behaviours and basic needs
that define your market . 
If you think about your business only in terms of your existing
products , for example , you risk losing sight of customer needs that
you ’ ve overlooked – needs that a competitor is no doubt going to
satisfy at some point . You also create a short-sighted view of your
own strategic choices that can result in missed market
opportunities and woefully inadequate business plans . 
Unfortunately , companies ( and even entire industries ) still
lose sight of the big picture all the time . Markets are viewed too
narrowly , and customer needs are neglected – a classic
management blunder . Check out these examples : 
Companies that make home-improvement tools often view
their business in terms of product components – the making
and selling of 6mm drill bits , for example . But when you think
about it , nobody really wants or needs 6mm drill bits ( not
even your dentist )  . What customers are really looking for are
6mm holes . That basic need creates the potential
opportunity for any number of possible solutions . 
Glasses manufacturers – the companies that make the frames
and lenses – continue to see themselves as being in the
glasses-fashion business . But the customers , frustrated by
not being able to read a menu closer than three feet away
when they ’ ve forgotten their glasses , simply want to see
better . The manufacturers are now discovering a hard lesson
with the advent of laser technologies that promise to
improve vision by reshaping the cornea – no vision
problems , no need for glasses , no more business . 
Politics and the marketplace
Bill Clinton had a little sign tacked up on the back wall of his 1992 US
presidential campaign headquarters that read : 
It ’ s the economy , Stupid ! 
Campaign manager James Carville posted the sign because he wanted
everyone to focus not so much on the product – Mr Clinton – as on the
marketplace and customer needs . 
In this case , of course , the marketplace was the election itself , and the
customers were the voting public . At the time , workers in the United States
were suffering through a steep recession , worried about foreign competition
and petrified about the ‘ new world economy ’  . As a shrewd campaign
strategist , Carville knew that the road to success lay in getting beyond the
candidates themselves and appealing to the voters ’ innermost needs – those
universal , underlying issues that would ultimately sway decision making in the
polling booth . 
As a business planner , you have to do the same thing : focus on being marketdriven when you approach your customers . 
Charles Revson revolutionised the cosmetics industry when he
quipped ,  ‘ In the factory , we make cosmetics ; in the store , we sell
hope .  ’ As the founder of Revlon , he understood that he was offering
his customers something far more important than simple chemistry : 
the prospect of youth , beauty , and sex appeal . 
The key point here is simple : If you don ’ t know what your
customers really want , you can ’ t possibly fulfil their needs in an
effective way . 
Put yourself in your customer ’ s shoes : 
Take a hard look at one of your own products or services , 
and honestly ask yourself ,  ‘ Why would I need this thing ?  ’ 
Ask the same question of several people who also use your
product or service . 
Try to imagine a world without your product or service . 
What would you substitute for it ? 
Answering questions such as these goes a long way toward fostering
creativity , generating new strategies and providing expanded
market opportunities . 
Dealing with Business Customers
Although we ’ ve mentioned companies that sell principally to other
companies ( as opposed to those that sell primarily to individual
consumers )  , some of you in this so-called business-to-business market
may think that we ’ re ignoring you . We aren ’ t – honest ! In this
section , you find details on how companies , institutions and
government agencies act when they themselves are the customers . 
What makes the business buyer different ? Many things . 
Sizing up secondhand demand
Demand for goods and services in business-to-business
markets is almost always derived demand . In other words , 
businesses purchase only those goods and services that they
can use to better serve their own customers . 
Steel , for example , is a product that no end-user buys . When was the
last time you had the urge to go out and get your hands on some
flat-rolled sheeting ? Steel purchasers tend to be car manufacturers , 
construction firms , appliance companies and the like . After these
businesses use the steel to make their own products ( cars , office
blocks and refrigerators )  , we come into the picture as potential
customers . 
What are the implications for the steel sellers ? If a steelmaker cuts
its prices across the board , for example , should it expect a huge
increase in orders ? Not necessarily . The steel buyers will increase
their purchases only if they think that they can sell more of the
things that they make , and their own sales may be affected by many
factors beyond the underlying price of steel . How many of us dashed
out to buy a new car the last time steel prices were reduced by 10
per cent ? 
Inelastic demand is a term that number crunchers use when
they talk about demand for a particular product that doesn ’ t
stretch or change automatically when the price of the product
changes . 
If you offer products or services in the business-to-business
market , make sure that you take the time to think through what
your planning decisions mean to your business buyers . And
that means thinking about your customers ’ customers as well . 
You can do this by asking yourself : 
Does a price reduction on your part result in increased sales
for your customers – and your company ? 
Do your customers ( and their customers ) benefit if you offer
them additional bells and whistles while raising their costs ? 
Are your customers looking for continuity and price
stability ? 
Thinking of decision making as a formal
affair
Purchase decisions in the business-to-business marketplace
tend to be more formal , rational and professional than in most
consumer markets . Many people from different parts of the
target company are often involved in the decision-making
process ( DMP )  . One division in the company may recommend
your product or service , another may acquire it , yet another
may pay for it , and all of them do the work for a separate
customer centre that actually uses that product . Taken
together , these divisions form the decision-making unit ( or
DMU ) – another marketing term foisted off on us nice folks by
marketing gurus . 
Table 5-2 describes three ways in which a business DMU may
behave when thinking about buying a product or service . 
Table 5-2 How Businesses Behave When They Buy
Table 5-2 How Businesses Behave When They Buy
Buying
behaviour
Description of the customer ’ s DMP
Business
as usual
Continues to order more of the product or service , perhaps even automating the process so that inventories
don ’ t fall below certain levels
Yes , but .  .  . 
Asks for changes in the existing sales arrangement , modifying one or more purchase terms ( such as pricing , 
financing , quantities and options ) and including various people who are part of the DMU
Opportunity
knocks
Purchases a product or service for the first time , perhaps after putting out a request for proposal ( RFP ) to
several possible suppliers and making a deliberate , complete decision involving all parties in the DMU
Judging the forces to be reckoned with
In working with business customers , you most likely have to deal
with several powerful customer forces that you rarely encounter in
consumer markets . If your business-to-business strategies are going
to succeed over time , you must factor these forces into your
business plans . Consider the following questions : 
What ’ s the state of the customer ’ s business ? 
• Is the customer ’ s business booming , mature , or dying ? 
• Is it facing increased competition or enjoying record
profits ? 
• Is it outsourcing business , creating new opportunities ? 
• Does it threaten to become a competitor ? 
How does the customer ’ s company operate ? 
• Does the customer purchase centrally , or does it have
buyers scattered around the company ? 
• Does it require several levels of approval before a
decision is made ? 
• Do senior executives ( who may or may not know a lot
about the product ) make the ultimate purchase
decisions ? 
Who ’ s important to whom ? 
• Do the customer ’ s key decision makers tend to be
engineers or marketing people ? 
• Does the customer use both small and large suppliers ? 
• Does it have a policy of requiring more than one
supplier in critical areas ? 
As you begin to develop strategies for your business
customers , take the time to investigate the forces that are
unique in business-to-business markets : 
Get out into the field and talk to potential business buyers . 
Read about customers ’ organisations and their industries . 
Attend the conferences and conventions that your customers
attend , and find out about the critical events and forces that
shape their thinking . 
All these activities take time and resources , of course , but your
investment will be rewarded many times over when you incorporate
what you discover into your business-to-business planning . 
Remember the following when dealing with business
customers : 
Some of your customers may be other businesses , and the
way in which they buy is different from the way that
individuals buy . 
Several people may be involved in making the decision to
buy from you . 
Sometimes your business customers aren ’ t the end users , so
you need to understand your customers ’ customers as well . 
Part III
Weighing Up Your Company 
 ’ 
s
Prospects
In this part .  .  . 
Whenever you tackle something new , whether it ’ s going back to
school , buying a house , changing jobs , starting a business , or
planning for change – nagging questions come up . Is the new
strategy really the right decision ? Are you up to the challenge ? Will
things work out in the end ? They ’ re good questions , because they
force you to be honest about the capabilities and qualities that you
bring to the table . 
In this part , we help you look in the mirror and make an honest
assessment about what you see . We set out to discover all the
capabilities and resources that you have . We try to determine which
of them are strengths and which are weaknesses by looking at what
you need to succeed in your sector and industry – and what
opportunities and threats you face . We help you focus on what your
organisation does best by looking at the areas where you provide
the most value to customers , and then we help you figure out how
you can maintain and extend the competitive advantages you
already have in the market . Finally , we turn to your finances and
help you create an objective portrait of your business based on your
income , profits , assets , and cash position , and then we help you use
them to create a forecast and a budget . 
Chapter 9
Focusing On What You Do Best
In This Chapter
Describing what your company does
Constructing a value chain
Searching for your competitive advantage
Focusing on your company ’ s core competence
Sustaining a competitive advantage over time
Using the value chain to allocate resources
Every time you leave the house to go shopping , you gear up to make
a complex set of choices that together determine what you finally
come home with at the end of the day . As you look down the
shopping list over morning coffee , the decisions begin : 
Town centre shops or the out-of-town shopping precincts ? 
Speciality shops or a department store ? 
Designer brands or store labels ? 
£25 , £50 or £100 limit ? 
If you happen to be in the business of producing and selling
products in shops , these are make-or-break decisions . How do
shoppers make their choices ? Why do they go into one shop and not
the next ? What determines where they stop to browse and what
they take a second look at ? How are customers different from one
another ? In what ways are they the same ? No matter what industry
you ’ re in , the same kinds of questions are just as crucial . 
As they go about making decisions on what to buy and where to
shop , customers continually weigh various combinations of product
or service benefits against price . When customers make their
choices based on their own calculation of the best value they can
find in the marketplace , they ’ re using a value equation .  ( Check out
Chapter 7 if you want to know more about that equation .  ) But what
does it actually mean to have the best value out there ? If you ’ re one
of the competitors , you need to know exactly where and how your
products add value in the eyes of your customers . 
In this chapter , we take another look at how you create
customer value around your own products and services . The
approach is called a value-chain analysis by people who try to
make something simple sound difficult , and we use it to identify
which parts of your business are responsible for adding the
greatest value for customers . We show you how to use your
value chain to help explain why you may have a competitive
advantage in the marketplace . We also use the value chain to
point out your company ’ s core competence . We talk about how
you can work to maintain your competitive advantage over the
long term . Finally , we show you how to use an understanding of
your value chain and core competence to make the most of
your company ’ s human and financial resources as you create
your business plan . 
Describing What You Do
You ’ d think that it would be easy to describe what your company
does , summarising your key business activities in a few well-chosen
sentences or in a clear diagram or two . It ’ s not . From the inside of
your business looking out , it ’ s much harder than you may think to
push away the everyday details to get at the core of what actually
keeps you in business from one day to the next . 
That ’ s why consultants hang around a lot . Many of them would like
nothing better than to help you describe what you do . Their little
secret , of course , is that they ’ re not really any smarter than you are . 
Consultants seem to have a clearer view of your business simply
because they ’ re on the outside looking in . 
But chances are that you ’ ve a built-in understanding of your own
business and what really makes your company successful – you just
need to unlock what you already know . 
Tom Farmer , the son of a Leith shipping clerk who earned £5
a week , launched Kwik-Fit , a company that grew into a £418
million public company with almost 1 , 000 outlets , before he
sold out to Ford for £1 billion . In his own words , the enduring
philosophy behind his business to which he ascribes its
success is ‘ 100 per cent customer satisfaction . Just giving
service – phoning back in half an hour if you say you will , 
standing by promises – puts you miles ahead of anyone else in
the field .  ’ Knowing that service is as important as the exhausts
themselves is what has provided Kwik-Fit with a lasting
competitive advantage . 
This canny businessman had a real feeling for why he was
successful at what he did . Given a little guidance , you can take the
same gut-level understanding of your own business and develop a
chain of activities that captures what your company really does to
stay in business . In particular , we focus on creating customer value , 
and divide your business into the specific areas and activities that
build value into the products and services that you offer . 
Kwik-Fit has been rather less successful under new ownership . 
French private equity firm PAI Partners bought Kwik-Fit in 2005 for
£800 million , selling it on in March 2011 to Itochu , a Japanese
conglomerate for just £637 million . 
Constructing a typical value chain
Figure 9-1 : A
company ’ s
value chain
has two types
of links : 
primary
activities and
support
activities . 
Constructing a typical value chain
Your company constructs its value chain from the sequence
of activities that it engages in to increase the value of your
products and services in the eyes of your customers .  ( See
Figure 9-1 .  ) The chain connects you to the marketplace , making
sure that you don ’ t stray too far from the customers you serve . 
The links in a value chain help you to understand your company ’ s
activities . 
Primary links in the value chain are the business functions
that are at the heart of what your company does . Primary links
are usually sequential . They ’ re the essential stages that your
company goes through in developing , producing and getting
products to market and they often involve the following : 
Research and development
Operations
Marketing and sales
Distribution and delivery
Service
Supporting links in the value chain contribute to the overall success
of the business by strengthening your company ’ s primary links . 
Supporting links are often spread throughout your organisation . 
They assist and tie together all the primary business functions , as
well as support one another . The activities often involve the
following : 
Management
Organisation
Strategy and planning
Financial control
Try to concentrate on organising your basic business
functions around customer value and the bright idea that
everything you do in your company should somehow
contribute to that effort . A value-chain analysis allows you to
take your company apart and put it back together , making sure
that each link in the chain contributes to the value that
customers see when they buy your product or service . 
Comparing different value chains
You can find out a great deal about a company by checking out its
value chain : where and how the company creates customer value . In
fact , the value chain is a relatively good way to compare and
contrast competitors in your own industry . You may even want to
use this information to revisit your strategic groups of competitors .  
( See Chapter 7 to find out what the phrase a strategic group of
competitors means .  ) 
To see how to compare value chains , take a closer look at the airline
industry . The experience of flying from London , Heathrow to Belfast , 
for example , is usually measured somewhere in the range of
tolerable to terrible . Air travel always seems to generate metaphors
that involve cattle trucks , the underground at rush hour and
Guinness records that have to do with people crammed into
telephone booths or Volkswagens . But within these constraints , so
to speak , airlines do in fact compete for your sky business in
different ways . 
Ryanair and easyJet , for example , are major players in the socalled ‘ budget ’ segment . Compared with other airlines , these
companies can make several additional flights a day in each
airplane , based on their capability to turn the plane around –
unload , reload and take off – in about 20 minutes . Most of the
costs in the airline industry are tied up in things such as aircraft
and buildings , so extra flights a day mean extra profits for an
airline – or lower prices for customers . These companies cater
primarilly to people who have to pay for travel out of their own
pockets and are looking for the best deal . How do budget
airlines make their businesses work ? A quick glance at easyJet ’ s
value chain highlights several important value-adding activities . 
Key links include : 
Operations : Budget airlines have efficient personnel , ace
ground crews and state-of-the-art equipment that allow them
to get planes in and out of airports as fast as humanly
possible , meet tight flight schedules and reduce overall
costs . 
Distribution : These airlines have built up regional route
systems that tend to bypass the most crowded airports and
overly competitive destinations . Periodic reviews of
passenger traffic and competition suggest expansion
opportunities that are in line with the carrier ’ s low-cost
strategy . 
Management : They have put together teams of managers
and professionals who have the skills , aptitude and
temperament to deal with considerable job stress and who
work well together . 
By contrast , British Airways is a global , full-service carrier at
the opposite end of the airline spectrum from the budget crew . 
The company serves hundreds of destinations daily and offers
frequently scheduled flights to most major commercial airports
in the world . 
Its extensive national network feeds into international routes that
span the globe . BA has a freephone reservations number , close
relationships with travel agents , a frequent-flyer programme offering
worldwide awards and credit cards tied to its mileage programme . 
Customers count on BA to provide in-flight meals on longer flights , 
films , to transfer their bags and to cater to them if anything goes
wrong along the way . Who are these customers ? Many of them are
business passengers and other well-heeled travellers who are willing
to pay the price to cover the costs of all these added services . 
Although getting each plane turned around quickly on the ground
certainly is important to British Airways , the company doesn ’ t
depend on it the same way that easyJet does . In fact , the services
that BA ’ s passengers demand make it almost impossible for its
airline crews to keep up with easyJet on the ground . BA ’ s value
chain points out the areas in which the airline adds customer value . 
Key links include the following : 
Research and development : Whether developing more
comfortable business-class seats , better in-flight
entertainment , or Internet connections at 35 , 000 feet , British
Airways works to please its most demanding customers . At
the same time , its reservation system and yield-management
software allow the airline to maximise revenue and match
fares with other airlines in certain competitive markets . 
Marketing and sales : The company spends significant time
and resources in promoting its image and worldwide brand . 
BA advertises in a wide range of global media , sponsors all
sorts of special events and maintains strong ties with travel
agencies across the country and the world . 
Service : Customer service is a major link in BA ’ s value chain . 
The company makes every effort to create a lasting
relationship with its most loyal customers through its
frequent-flyer programme . And it makes sure that these
valued customers are pampered with special airport lounges , 
hassle-free checkin and checked baggage that always arrives
first in the baggage claim . 
Financial control : British Airways maintains the financial
resources and flexibility to fund continued investments in
the extensive ground facilities and huge fleet of aircraft that
allow it to serve a global network of routes and destinations . 
Both easyJet and British Airways are in the business of transporting
passengers from one location to another by using aircraft on
regularly scheduled flights , yet their value chains and the important
links in creating customer value are quite different . 
Value chains don ’ t stand still . In April 2011 , Ryanair
introduced seat reservation on some flights , aimed at
smoothing the travel experience for business flyers . Earlier in
the year they opened a Business Lounge at Stansted offering wi-
Figure 9-2 : 
The valuechain
framework . 
fi , printing , scanning and fax facilities as well as bar and bistro . 
In September 2011 , easyJet enhanced its Flexi Fare ticket , 
introduced to give business travellers benefits such as speedy
boarding , unlimited ticket changes and one piece of hold
luggage , to include an offer to those whose arrivals are delayed
by more than 15 minutes of a free leisure ticket to anywhere on
easyJet ’ s network . 
Forging your own value chain
To develop your company ’ s own value chain – the sequence of
activities that you go through in the process of adding customer
value to your products and services – you need a list of your
company ’ s capabilities and resources . Take a look at Chapter 8 if
you need help . 
You can construct a framework for your value chain by creating a
grid that divides your business into value-creating areas ( see Figure
9-2 )  . Then you place activities in the grid based on whether they ’ re
part of your primary business functions or are associated with
supporting areas . 
Follow these steps to create the grid that shapes your value chain : 
1 . List all the key business areas that are directly involved in
putting together your own company ’ s products and services and
getting them out to customers . 
Include such things as R & D , operations , marketing , sales , 
distribution , delivery and service . 
2 . Arrange the list of key business areas in order , from the first
good idea out of R & D to the finished product or service . 
3 . List the general business areas in your company that support
the primary business functions . 
Include such things as management , organisation and human
resources , strategy and planning , and financial control . 
4 . Construct a grid similar to the one in Figure 9-2 , using your
own lists of primary and supporting business areas . 
Your value chain may not look exactly like all those
organisation charts that are floating around your company . The
primary and supporting business functions that end up adding
customer value may be framed differently , depending on whom
you ask , so make sure that you talk to customers as well as to
co-workers . Ask your customers to describe your business as
they see it . Your customers just may have a better vantage
point . 
A blueprint for change
An architectural and engineering firm in the northeast , that we ’ ll call NAE , 
used to pride itself on being a full-service building consultant . Its professional
staff ranged from structural engineers to interior designers and everyone in
between . The company maintained a complete project-budgeting department
and a full in-house blueprinting operation ; in fact , the firm routinely turned
down requests by small outside contractors to take over and supply
down requests by small outside contractors to take over and supply
blueprinting services . Business was booming , the company was growing and
its clients couldn ’ t have been happier . 
All that changed in 2008 . A major and sustained downturn in the property
market hit NAE quite hard , and the company was forced to think about ways to
cut costs as its very survival was at stake . As part of the restructuring effort , 
NAE took a hard look at its internal blueprinting operations , and it discovered
that it should have taken the bids from outside suppliers more seriously . 
Independent contractors could provide the quality and reliability that NAE
demanded and substantially lower the firm ’ s blueprinting costs at the same
time . 
When NAE asked its most important customers what they thought about the
proposed changes , the answers were surprising . No one chose the company
because of the quality of its blueprints ; clients saw real value in the breadth
and expertise of the company ’ s professional staff . By reviewing the value
chain , NAE had an opportunity to refocus its resources and energy on the
activities and links in the chain that provided the most value to its customers . 
Doing so also helped it to stay afloat while less observant competitors sank
without trace . 
To fill in the value-chain grid , you have to fill in all the specific valueadding activities – the capabilities and resources that your company
uses to increase the value of your products and services in the eyes
of your customers . Follow these steps : 
1 . Go through the lists of capabilities and resources , and have a
first go at placing them in the value-chain grid . 
2 . In the boxes on the left side of the value-chain grid , place
value-adding activities that directly contribute to your primary
business functions . 
These activities make up the primary links in your value chain . 
3 . Place value-adding activities that are associated with
supporting functions in grid boxes across from the primary
functions that they support . 
These activities are the supporting links in the value chain . 
4 . On the grid , include a description of the customer value that ’ s
added at each link , as well as how that value is added . 
The value chain offers you a unique look at your company
through your customers ’ eyes . Every link in the value chain is
something that you do as a company . Every link is an activity
that you spend money on . The value chain allows you to see
exactly what value customers are getting out of each link . A
value-chain analysis gives you a relatively clear picture of why
you stay in business , as well as where you can be doing a better
job . 
A few things to remember about the value chain : 
The value chain describes all the things that you do to add
value to the products and services that you offer customers . 
Value is in the eyes of the customer . 
By comparing the value chains of other companies in your
industry , you find out about the competitive landscape and
how you fit in . 
A value chain shows exactly what value your customers are
getting from each of your basic business functions . 
Staying in Business
Companies don ’ t just stay in business year after year by accident . 
Oh , maybe a manager somewhere gets lucky every once in a while , 
making a brilliant move without having a clue as to why the move is
so brilliant . But that kind of luck never lasts long , especially when
the competition is intense . Companies succeed over the long haul
because they understand what their customers place the most value
because they understand what their customers place the most value
on , and they translate that knowledge into products and services
that consistently meet or exceed customers ’ expectations , often at
the expense of unsuspecting competitors . 
Using a value chain for your own company enables you to pinpoint
the business areas and activities in which most of your customer
value is created . Those key areas and activities tell you about your
company ’ s advantage in the marketplace and how it achieved that
advantage . The value chain may highlight the importance of your
cost advantage in the market , for example , and point out that your
company achieved that advantage through careful , continuous
improvements in manufacturing efficiency . Or maybe your value
chain flags the calibre of your professional staff as being a key
advantage in the marketplace , achieved through a commitment to
recruit , develop and support the most capable people out there . 
Take a close look at what it means to have an advantage over the
competition in your marketplace , where the advantage comes from , 
and how you can work to maintain it over the long haul . 
Searching for competitive advantage
We all know people who like to take car trips – maybe up to the Lake
District for a walking weekend or off in the family caravan whenever
the weather ’ s nice . If you ask them where they stop along the way , 
they always have a special burger van , a favourite pub or café , or a
certain ice-cream place that they would never dream of missing . 
Why do these travellers develop such affection for specific stops on
their route when hundreds of other places are available along the
way ? What makes particular establishments so unique ? 
If you push them , these travellers come up with all sorts of reasons . 
They may tell you that they ’ ve been stopping at the same places for
years , that they love the food , that they like the atmosphere , that
they know the owners , that they can count on the service .  .  . 
whatever . No doubt all these things are true . But take a careful look
at the value chain for many of these businesses , and one important
at the value chain for many of these businesses , and one important
link that jumps right out at you is likely to be location . Distances and
driving times most likely are the major reason why many of their
customers find these businesses in the first place ; the shopfronts
literally happen to be in the right place at the right time . Location
provides a significant competitive advantage in this on-the-move
marketplace . 
Competitive advantage means exactly what it says : a
company has some sort of advantage over the competition . 
Where does it come from ? Usually , out of the distinct and
special value that the company can offer its customers – and
from the premium that customers place on that value . Ask
yourself this basic question : 
Why do customers choose my company and its products when other
competitors in the industry have more-or-less similar offerings ? 
You can find the answer in the strongest links of your value chain . 
The links that produce the bulk of your customer value – whether
this value is location , service , image or product features – are the
links that create your competitive advantage in the marketplace . 
In the beginning , Microsoft was a partnership of two : Bill
Gates and Paul Allen . They started out competing against a host
of bright young entrepreneurs like themselves and eventually
had to go head-to-head with IBM itself . Today , Microsoft has
over 20 , 000 employees and £5 . 18 billion in revenue and offers a
wide array of software products , ranging from word processing
programs and spreadsheet applications to language tools and
operating systems . Its Windows program alone has sold more
than 100 million units . Microsoft ’ s competitive advantages : 
Standards : Microsoft ’ s programs pretty much set the
standards in the PC world . Microsoft offers the standard
operating system and the standard suite of office
applications . Although other companies sell better products
here and there , Microsoft is seen as being the safe and
sensible choice across the board . 
Compatibility : Microsoft programs promise to work with one
another and with the operating system . You don ’ t have to
worry that your favourite application will become an outcast
or somehow misbehave inside your computer . 
Product range : You name it , and Microsoft probably has a
product that can do it . The company continues to
aggressively develop new software to meet the needs of
rapidly changing markets . Most recently , the company
targeted Internet users with a host of new products . 
Service and support : With Microsoft , you know what you ’ re
getting . If something doesn ’ t work , the company tries hard to
fix it . In the meantime , it ’ s comforting to know that you can
always find other people who have the same problem . 
Hertz is by far the largest car-rental agency in the world . The
company has rental locations in more than 150 countries and
boasts a fleet of more than 500 , 000 vehicles . But Hertz faces
competition at all levels , from the family-run rental companies
at popular holiday spots to regional agencies such as easyCar , 
an offshoot of easyJet and other global companies , including
Avis and National . Hertz Corporation ’ s competitive advantages : 
One-stop reservations : When you call the Hertz free number , 
you gain immediate access to the company ’ s worldwide fleet . 
You can quickly and conveniently book the kind of car that
you want , when and where you want it . Changing your mind
is just as easy . 
International presence : No matter where or why you need
the car – for a safari in Africa , a tour of Italy , or a business
trip to Birmingham – you can safely bet that Hertz can rent
you what you need . 
Peace of mind : With Hertz , you don ’ t have to worry that the
car won ’ t be there , that the rate going to double , or that
you ’ ll end up paying for a rent-a-dent that ’ s obviously a year
old . Also , to help you find your way around , the company
offers personalised maps and is introducing a new onboard
navigation system . 
Rewards for loyalty : As a loyal Hertz customer , you ’ re
rewarded with membership in a club that provides extra
service , attention and the chance to apply the pounds that
you spend toward free rental days . 
Biggest is useful , but best is better According to a survey in
October 2010 by Condé Nast Traveler , Hertz , Enterprise , and
Avis top the list of best car hire firms . The results take into
account rates , reliability and locations . But to stay at the
forefront of new developments in the industry , Hertz recently
intoduced one-way rentals allowing customers to drop off a car
at an airport instead of an original pick-up spot , a valuable
benefit for business users . Enterprise and Avis , on the other
hand , are pioneering electric car rentals , appealing to the green
and cost conscious markets . 
Focusing on core competence
Your competitive advantage is created in the marketplace . That
advantage has everything to do with your customers , with the
relative value that they place on your products and services , and
with the purchase decisions that they finally make . But what is it
about your company that allows you to achieve this competitive
advantage ? What internal capabilities and resources do you have , 
and what business activities do you engage in that lead directly to
your competitive advantage ? 
your competitive advantage ? 
You probably already have the answer . Go back to your
company ’ s value chain , and focus on those links that are most
responsible for your own competitive advantage . When you do , 
you come face to face with something that the gurus call your
core competence . Simply defined , core competence is your
company ’ s special capability to create a competitive advantage
for itself in the marketplace . In almost all cases , this gift is
specific to your company . Think of core competence as being
corporate DNA . Unlike your personal genetic code , however , 
your company ’ s core competence is there for you to build on –
or to lose , depending on how attentive you are to your markets
and your business . 
The section ‘ Searching for competitive advantage ’ earlier in this
chapter examined two well-known companies , each of which is a
household name . Can you identify the core competence behind that
competitive advantage for both Microsoft and Hertz ? 
Microsoft ’ s core competence is built on : 
Visionary executives : The executive team has a broad vision
of the future , enabling the company to forge today ’ s software
standards and shape tomorrow ’ s . 
Top-notch development team : The company is committed to
supporting a dream-team corps of developers and
programmers who are charged with creating and maintaining
a state-of-the-art product line . 
Management of complexity : Microsoft manages a complex
related set of software products that all have to behave and
work together . 
Capability to change direction : The company has the
capacity to redirect resources and energies when the fast-
moving marketplace shifts course and the rules of the game
suddenly change . 
Hertz Corporation ’ s core competence consists of : 
Information systems : A sophisticated computer database
allows the company to keep track of customer profiles and
match them against an ever-changing supply of rental cars
around the world . 
Global logistics : The company has the capability to track , 
distribute , arrange and rearrange a huge fleet of vehicles in
all shapes and sizes on a worldwide basis . 
Scale of operations : The company uses its sheer size and
business volume to negotiate favourable terms when it
comes to new-car purchases and even insurance premiums . 
Relationships and tie-ins : Hertz has the resources to work
closely with travel agencies and the travel industry to create
new business by expanding car-rental options and
opportunities . 
Sometimes , a company ’ s core competence can point the way
toward new market opportunities . Honda , for example , used a
core competence in designing engines to expand its markets . 
The company created product lines in lawn mowers , snow
throwers , snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles , to name just a
few of its motor-based businesses . Honda benefits from a
related competitive advantage in each of these distinct markets . 
Take another look at your own company ’ s core competence to
see whether you can come up with any new business directions , 
based on those things that you already do well . 
Sustaining an advantage over time
Every company that manages to stay in business from one month to
Every company that manages to stay in business from one month to
the next has some sort of competitive advantage and core
competence to draw upon ; otherwise , it simply wouldn ’ t be there . 
But the million-dollar question has to do with how to renew and
sustain that competitive advantage over years and even decades . 
Customers and their needs shift over time , competition gets more
intense and industries evolve , so your competitive advantage and
the core competence that supports it aren ’ t guaranteed to stay
around . You rent them ; you don ’ t own them . You want to make sure
that you keep a long-term lease on both . 
Sustained competitive advantage – the business world ’ s Holy
Grail – is a company ’ s capability to renew a competitive
advantage over and over again in the face of a constantly
changing business environment and marketplace . But if you
want to sustain a competitive advantage over time , you need to
have a long-term strategy in place . Chapter 7 introduces three
common alternatives called generic strategies and gives you a
handle on what your competitors may be up to . Chapter 13
takes a much closer look at your own strategic options . 
Spend time thinking about things that your company can do
on an ongoing basis to see that your core competence is
preserved or evolves to meet changed market needs . How can
you sustain the competitive advantage that your company
already has ? Get a blank sheet of paper and jot down answers
to these key questions : 
Where will changes in your business most likely come from ? 
How are those changes likely to affect your company ’ s
competitive advantage ? 
What can your company do to maintain core competence in
the face of change ? 
Focus on each of the major forces that fuel change in your own
industry : 
Your customers and their changing needs and requirements . 
Your competitors and their changing capabilities , strategies
and goals . 
Your company , its value chain and its shifting strengths and
weaknesses . 
As you create your business plan , make sure that you continue to
track these forces so that they don ’ t threaten the core competence
you ’ ve worked so hard to achieve or so that your core competence
evolves . 
Sounds like a summary is in order : 
Your core competence – what sets you apart – is based on
the strongest links in your value chain . 
Competitive advantage in the marketplace is a direct result
of your company ’ s distinct core competence . 
Staying ahead of the competition means sustaining your
competitive advantage , which requires a long-term strategy . 
Whatever happened to Daddy 
 ’ 
s Daimler ? 
Daimler used to be a synonym for making it in the UK . When a Daimler was
parked in front of someone ’ s house , it meant that they had finally arrived . In
fact , you ’ d have been hard pressed to think of another product that could
bestow quite as much status on its owner . The car was built for ultimate
comfort , and it conveyed an image of wealth and luxury . Daimler owners were
an intensely loyal bunch , typically ordering new models every few years , just
to burnish that image . 
Dailmer owners are still loyal today , but not to that brand . In the 1980s , a new
generation of car buyers began to look for new status symbols . The young and
generation of car buyers began to look for new status symbols . The young and
wealthy began to chase foreign cars with names such as BMW , Mercedes
and Volvo ( or Lexus , Infiniti and Acura )  . Whatever happened to Daimler ’ s
enviable position in the luxury-car market ? Competition , of course , and a
failure on Daimler ’ s part to respond quickly to changing tastes . The image of
luxury and intense brand loyalty that the car used to enjoy simply weren ’ t
passed along to the next generation of buyers , and a once-powerful
competitive advantage quietly slipped away . 
Earmarking Resources
The value chain paints a portrait of your company as your
customers see it . Links in the chain reflect the value that customers
place on aspects of your products and services . The strongest links
capture your competitive advantage in the market and define your
core competence as a business . Because the value chain is so good
at weighing the importance of the things that your company does , it
also comes in handy when you plan how your resources are going to
be used . 
Have you ever been to a horse race ? If you have , you know
that you ’ re bound to see a group of regulars hanging around the
stands or clustered at the fence . These people are serious about
horse racing . They spend time poring over form sheets and
newspapers , circling this , checking that . They pace back and
forth , occasionally disappearing for a while to do something or
other . What are they up to ? 
Well , they ’ re placing bets , of course . But they ’ re certainly not
relying on Lady Luck alone to keep them flush . Instead , they ’ re using
all the information available – the condition of the track , the horse ’ s
health , the jockey ’ s record and the betting odds – to place their
cash only on those wagers that are most likely to result in the best
payoffs and the biggest winnings . 
payoffs and the biggest winnings . 
Betting on the horses is a serious business for these committed
professionals . Maybe those punters can tell you something about
how to divvy up working assets . Is it sensible to spread your
company ’ s limited resources equally among all the areas that make
up your business ? Probably not . Each time you set aside time and
money for a particular business activity , you ’ re placing a bet . What
you ’ re betting is that the resources you commit are going to
contribute to your business , add value to what you do , and
eventually come back around to generate revenue and profits . 
Chapters 10 and 11 help you pore over the numbers ( financial
statements , ratios and budgets ) that keep track of where you spend
money and then tell you whether you ’ re winning . In short , your
financial statements tell you a great deal about how you manage
your cash , what bets you place and how well you do at the track . 
But your financial statements alone don ’ t tell you what to do . So how
do you know where to place your bets in the first place ? 
You guessed it : you go back to your company ’ s value chain . 
Consider this simple way to check your resource allocation
based on your own value chain : 
1 . Look at where your company currently spends money . 
Make a quick-and-dirty estimate of how yearly expenses are
divvied up among business activities – from R & D to delivery and
service – and jot the numbers down on your value-chain grid . To
keep things simple , use percentages . Make sure that the numbers
add up to 100 per cent . 
2 . Look at where customers think that you ’ re providing them
value . 
Take the total value that customers think you provide , and divvy
it up among your business activities . If customers pay £100 to
buy your widget , for example , how much of that are they willing
to pay for features , how much for service and how much for
convenience ? Again , use percentages , and jot the numbers on
convenience ? Again , use percentages , and jot the numbers on
the same value-chain grid . Make sure that the numbers add up to
100 per cent . 
3 . As a reminder , highlight the boxes on the value-chain grid
that represent your core competence and account for your
competitive advantage in the marketplace . 
4 . Analyse the completed grid . 
If the percentages line up and are concentrated in the
highlighted boxes , you ’ re in fairly good shape . But if you find a
glaring mismatch in terms of where you ’ re spending money , what
your core competence is , and where your customers think that
your products get their value , take time to reassess where your
company ’ s resources are directed . 
The value chain is invaluable when it comes time for you to earmark
resources for your business activities . A clear understanding of your
core competence and competitive advantage helps you make
informed decisions when you have to allocate scarce resources . 
Check out these points about the value chain : 
Value chains come in handy when it comes to planning the
best way to allocate your company ’ s resources . 
A value chain highlights mismatches between current
spending and the areas that provide the most value to
customers . 
Part V
A Planner 
 ’ 
s Toolkit
In this part .  .  . 
Whatever the task you ’ re involved in , no matter how big or small , 
there comes a time when you have to roll up your sleeves and get
down to the real business at hand . Once you know where you ’ re
headed and what you ’ re going to do , you must go out and do the
task itself . The best plans in the world aren ’ t worth anything if you
can ’ t carry them out . 
In this part , we help you put your business plan to work . First , we
look at ways to organise your company , and develop the procedures
and systems that allow you to carry out your plan as efficiently and
effectively as possible . Second , we talk about ways to encourage
leadership , develop business skills , and create a company culture so
that you can achieve your plan . Third , we look at financing your
plan and planning to bow out gracefully . Finally , we show you a
sample business plan , so that you have a better idea of exactly what
lies ahead for your company . 
Chapter 17
Learning from Others : A Sample
Business Plan In This Chapter
Viewing a sample business plan Following a business-plan
template Learning about the tourism industry Sometimes , you
have to see something up close and personal before you really
understand what it ’ s all about . Viewing a real live business plan
should get you much closer to putting your own plan down on
paper . 
Your written business plan says something about all the
important parts of your company . After all , you want to
convince people – and yourself – that your company knows
what it ’ s doing . If you want to persuade people of anything , 
however , they have to actually sit down and read what ’ s in front
of them . So you want to be clear , concise and to the point , and
it doesn ’ t hurt to spend some time with your prose , either . 
In this chapter , we show you a sample business plan .  ( We changed
the names and some of the numbers to protect the innocent .  ) By
reviewing the plan in some detail , you can discover a bit about how
to construct a business plan of your own , and as a bonus , you can
pick up some tips on the tourism industry . But please don ’ t rely on
any of the data ; we provide it simply to illustrate the business plan
and not to help you kick start your way into the tourism business . 
There is no such thing as a universal business plan but you can use
the table of contents below as a rough guide as to what to put into
into your own business plan , as a sort of template . But every
business is different as is the situation the business is planning for . 
Safari Europe : Business Plan
Prepared in July 2009
By Karen Kehoe
Contact Details : Mob : 009912244 : Email : kk @ safari . com : Website : 
www . safarieurope . org















Chapter 18
Ten Questions to Ask About Your Plan
In This Chapter
Looking over what you ’ ve done
Making the necessary changes
It never hurts to step back every once in a while and take stock of
where you stand . With that in mind , we ’ ve filled this chapter with all
sorts of questions to mull over before you share your business plan
with the world . 
Are Your Goals Tied to Your
Mission ? 
Look at the goals that you set for your business . These goals are the
results that you absolutely , positively intend to achieve , and to a
large extent , these goals determine how you set priorities and how
you run your business . Your goals have to be consistent with one
another so that you ’ re not running in different directions at the
same time . In addition , you have to tie your goals to your company ’ s
mission so that you ’ re heading in the direction in which you really
want to go . 
Can You Point to Major
Opportunities ? 
Opportunities ? 
If you want your business to grow and prosper in the long haul , you
have to take advantage of opportunities as they come along . Don ’ t
get too fixated on short-term economic problems , however severe ; 
try to look over the horizon using your business plan to highlight
the major opportunities that you see heading your way ( in
technology , markets and distribution , for example ) and outline the
actions that your company intends to take now so as to be in a
position to take advantage of those opportunities down the road . 
Have You Prepared for Threats ? 
You can easily paint a rosy picture of what the future holds for your
company , but having a rosy picture doesn ’ t necessarily mean that
it ’ s going to come true . Your company is in much better shape if you
paint an objective picture – including the bad news along with the
good . That way , you ’ re prepared for the dangers that are bound to
be there . 
Your business plan should point out the biggest threats that loom
on the horizon ( a market slowdown , new regulations , or increasing
competition , for example ) and offer ways to prepare for them . If you
recognise threats before anybody else does , you can often turn a
threat into a real business opportunity . Use Chapter 15 to help spot
economic turning points . 
Have You Defined Your Customers ? 
The more you know about your customers – who they are , how they
act , what they want – the more you know about your company . 
Customers tell you how to succeed in the marketplace . 
Describing your customers is much easier if you think about
dividing them into separate groups . Each group , or market segment , 
has its own unique profile and places its own set of demands on
has its own unique profile and places its own set of demands on
your company . 
Your customers are so important to your company that you can ’ t
afford to leave them out of your business plan . You should answer
three questions : 
Who is buying ? 
What do they buy ? 
Why do they buy ? 
Your plan should explain how your company intends to serve those
customers better than anyone else out there . 
Can You Track Your Competitors ? 
Your competitors are around to make life interesting . They ’ re the
companies that always try to woo your customers away , promising
products or services that have better value ( more benefits , lower
prices )  , and you can ’ t ignore them . You have to be able to identify
who your competitors are , what they ’ re doing and where they plan
to go in the future . 
Competition represents a big piece of your business environment . 
Your business plan should cover what you know about your
competitors and – more important – how you intend to keep track of
them on an ongoing basis . Your plan should also address how you
intend to use what you find out to choose competitive battles that
you can win . 
Where Are You Strong ( and Weak )  ? 
You may find it hard to be objective in making an honest
assessment of what your company does well and what it could do
assessment of what your company does well and what it could do
better . But your company ’ s strengths and weaknesses determine its
odds of success as you look ahead . Strengths and weaknesses refer
to your company ’ s capabilities and resources and how well they
match up with the capabilities and resources that your company
really needs to have in place to be successful . Check out Chapter 8
for more tips on carrying out a SWOT ( Strenths , Weaknesses , 
Opportunities and Threats ) analysis . 
Your business plan should list your company ’ s capabilities and
resources – from management skills or research expertise to
operations and distribution strength or loyal customers . But the
plan must go on to describe how each of these capabilities or
resources is a strength or a potential weakness , given your business
situation and the industry in which you compete . 
Does Your Strategy Make Sense ? 
Strategy has to do with how you intend to make your business plan
happen . For starters , you have to pull together your company ’ s
strengths and weaknesses , the opportunities and threats that your
company faces and the business goals that you set . Then , given all
these pieces of the puzzle , you have to figure out a way to get where
you want to be , in spite of all the things that stand in your way . 
It should be clear , from beginning to end , that your business plan is
based on an overall strategy that makes sense . Your company
should have a strategy that ’ s grounded in reality and that makes
reasonable assumptions about what ’ s happening and what ’ s about
to happen – a strategy that ’ s logical and rational about what can be
accomplished and how long it ’ s going to take . 
Can You Stand Behind the Numbers ? 
Think about all your financial statements as your company ’ s report
Think about all your financial statements as your company ’ s report
card – one that answers some big questions . Do your customers
love you ? Do your competitors respect you ? Are you making the
right business choices ? A profit and loss account presents the
bottom line , the balance sheet shows your business ’ s financial
health and the cash-flow statement keeps track of the money . 
Your current financial statements tell everybody how well you ’ re
doing . But many people are more interested in your financial
forecasts , which say what you expect to happen in the future . Just
because these forecasts include official-looking numbers , however , 
doesn ’ t mean that the predictions will necessarily come true . If you
want to paint an honest picture of your company , your business
plan should include a realistic financial portrait , based on
assumptions that you believe in and numbers that you trust . 
Are You Really Ready for Change ? 
If one thing remains constant in the business world , it ’ s change . 
Although some industries change faster than others , everything
around you – from technology to competition to your market – is
going to be a little different tomorrow than it is today , no matter
what business you ’ re in . If you want to keep up , you have to think
two or three steps ahead . You must look carefully and continually at
what may happen in the world and how it may affect your company . 
Although your business plan paints an honest picture of how you
see your company and what you see happening down the road , the
plan should also acknowledge the fact that you don ’ t have a crystal
ball . So present some options . Include one or two alternative
business scenarios , asking – and answering – the question ‘ What if .  .  
.  ?  ’ 
Is Your Plan Clear , Concise and
Current ? 
Current ? 
Your plan should certainly capture all the things that you think are
essential to know about your company and its situation – everything
important that you discover in the process of planning your
company . But none of the information that you present is going to
be of any use to anyone else if your business plan is too long , 
impossible to read , or out of date . 
Read over your own plan . Is it easy to understand ? Is it easy to
navigate ? How long did it take you to read ? Did you know where to
find all the details ? Did the details get in the way ? 
To access the cheat sheet specifically for this book , go to
www . dummies . com / cheatsheet / businessplansuk . 
Find out " HOW " at Dummies . com

Understanding Business Accounting
For Dummies® 
, 3rd Edition
by John A Tracy and Colin Barrow
Understanding Business Accounting For Dummies® 
, 3rd Edition
Published by
John Wiley & Sons , Ltd
The Atrium
Southern Gate
Chichester
West Sussex
PO19 8SQ
England
E-mail ( for orders and customer service enquires )  : csbooks @ wiley . co . uk
Visit our Home Page on www . wiley . com
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd , Chichester , West Sussex , 
England
Published by John Wiley & Sons , Ltd , Chichester , West Sussex
All Rights Reserved . No part of this publication may be reproduced , 
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any
means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying , recording , scanning
or otherwise , except under the terms of the Copyright , Designs and
Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the
Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd , Saffron House , 6-10 Kirby Street , 
London EC1N 8TS , UK , without the permission in writing of the
Publisher . Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd , 
The Atrium , Southern Gate , Chichester , West Sussex , PO19 8SQ , 
England , or emailed to permreq @ wiley . co . uk , or faxed to ( 44 ) 1243
770620 . 
Trademarks : Wiley , the Wiley Publishing logo , For Dummies , the
Dummies Man logo , A Reference for the Rest of Us !  , The Dummies
Way , Dummies Daily , The Fun and Easy Way , Dummies . com and
related trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John
Wiley & Sons , Inc . and / or its affiliates in the United States and other
countries , and may not be used without written permission . All
other trademarks are the property of their respective owners . Wiley
Publishing , Inc .  , is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book . 
Limit of Liability / Disclaimer of Warranty : The contents of this work
are intended to further general scientific research , understanding , 
and discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied
upon as recommending or promoting a specific method , diagnosis , 
or treatment by physicians for any particular patient . The publishe , 
the author , AND ANYONE ELSE INVOLVED IN PREPARING THIS
WORK make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and
specifically disclaim all warranties , including without limitation any
implied warranties of fitness for a particular purpose . In view of
ongoing research , equipment modifications , changes in
governmental regulations , and the constant flow of information
relating to the use of medicines , equipment , and devices , the
reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in
the package insert or instructions for each medicine , equipment , or
device for , among other things , any changes in the instructions or
indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions . 
Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate . The
fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a
citation and / or a potential source of further information does not
mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the
organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may
make . Further , readers should be aware that Internet Websites
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between
when this work was written and when it is read . No warranty may
be created or extended by any promotional statements for this
work . Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any
damages arising herefrom . 
For general information on our other products and services , please
contact our Customer Care Department within the U . S . at 877-762-
contact our Customer Care Department within the U . S . at 877-762-
2974 , outside the U . S . at 317-572-3993 , or fax 317-572-4002 . 
For technical support , please visit www . wiley . com / techsupport . 
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats . 
Some content that appears in print may not be available in
electronic books . 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data : A catalogue record
for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-11995128-5 ( pbk )  ; ISBN 978-1-119-95384-5 ( ebk )  ; ISBN 978-
1-119-95385-2 ( ebk )  ; ISBN 978-1-119-95386-9 ( ebk ) 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International Ltd
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
About the Authors
John A Tracy is Professor of Accounting , Emeritus , in the College of
Business and Administration at the University of Colorado in
Boulder . Before his 35-year tenure at Boulder he was on the
business faculty for four years at the University of California in
Berkeley . He has served as staff accountant at Ernst & Young and is
the author of several books on accounting , including The Fast
Forward MBA in Finance and How To Read a Financial Report . Dr
Tracy received his MBA and PhD degrees from the University of
Wisconsin and is a CPA in Colorado . 
Colin Barrow was until recently Head of the Enterprise Group at
Cranfield School of Management , where he taught entrepreneurship
on the MBA and other programmes and where he is still a visiting
fellow . He is also a visiting professor at business schools in the US , 
Asia , France and Austria . His books on entrepreneurship and
business have been translated into over twenty languages including
Russian and Chinese . He worked with Microsoft to incorporate the
business planning model used in his teaching programmes into the
software program , Microsoft Business Planner , bundled with Office . 
He is a regular contributor to newspapers , periodicals and academic
journals such as The Financial Times , The Guardian , Management
Today and the International Small Business Journal . 
Thousands of students have passed through Colin ’ s start-up and
business growth programmes , raising millions in new capital and
going on to run successful and thriving enterprises . Some have
made it to The Sunday Times Rich List . He has been a non-executive
director of two venture capital funds , on the board of several small
businesses , and serves on a number of Government Task Forces . 
Currently he is a non-executive director in several private firms and
works with family businesses in the Middle East on succession
planning . 
Dedication
Dedication
For all my grandchildren . 
John A Tracy
Authors ’ Acknowledgments
From John : I ’ m deeply grateful to everyone at Wiley who helped
produce this book . Their professionalism and their unfailing sense
of humour and courtesy were much appreciated . I owe a debt of
gratitude to a faculty colleague at Boulder , an accomplished author
in his own right , Professor Ed Gac . He offered very sage advice . Ed
was always ready with a word of encouragement when I needed one , 
and I ’ m very appreciative . 
I often think about why I like to write books . I believe it goes back to
an accounting class in my undergraduate days at Creighton
University in Omaha . In a course taught by the Dean of the Business
School , Dr Floyd Walsh , I turned in a term paper and he said that it
was very well written . I have never forgotten that compliment . I
think he would be proud of this book . 
From Colin : I would like to thank everyone at Wiley for the
opportunity to write this book , as well as their help , encouragement , 
feedback and tireless work to make this all happen . 
Publisher ’ s Acknowledgements
We ’ re proud of this book ; please send us your comments through
our Dummies online registration form located at
www . dummies . com / register /  . 
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include
the following : 
Acquisitions , Editorial , and Vertical Websites
Project Editor : Rachael Chilvers ( Previous Edition : Steve Edwards ) 
Commissioning Editor : Claire Ruston
Assistant Editor : Ben Kemble
Technical Editor : Anna Rawlinson
Proofreader : James Harrison
Production Manager : Daniel Mersey
Publisher : David Palmer
Cover Photos : iStock / Jonathan Maddock
Cartoons : Ed McLachlan
Composition Services
Project Coordinator : Kristie Rees
Layout and Graphics : Joyce Haughey , Lavonne Roberts
Proofreader : Lauren Mandelbaum
Indexer : Christine Karpeles
Understanding Business Accounting
For Dummies®
Visit
www . dummies . com / cheatsheet / understandingbusinessaccountinguk
to view this book ' s cheat sheet . 
Table of Contents
Introduction
About This Book
Conventions Used in Financial Reports
Foolish Assumptions
How This Book Is Organised
Part I : Accounting Basics
Part II : Getting a Grip on Financial Statements
Part III : Accounting in Managing a Business
Part IV : Financial Reports in the Outside World
Part V : The Part of Tens
Part VI : Appendixes
Icons Used in This Book
Where to Go from Here
Part I : Accounting Basics
Chapter 1 : Introducing Accounting to Non-Accountants
Accounting Everywhere You Look
The Basic Elements of Accounting
Accounting and Financial Reporting Standards
The emergence of international financial reporting
standards ( IFRS ) 
Why accounting rules are important
Income tax and accounting rules
Flexibility in accounting standards
Enforcing Accounting Rules
Protecting investors : Sarbanes-Oxley and beyond
The Accounting Department : What Goes On in the Back
Office
Focusing on Business Transactions and Other Financial
Events
Taking a Closer Look at Financial Statements
The balance sheet
The profit and loss account
The cash flow statement
Accounting as a Career
Chartered accountant ( CA ) 
The financial controller : The chief accountant in an
organisation
Accounting branches : Treasury , tax and audit
Chapter 2 : Bookkeeping 101 : From Shoe Boxes to Computers
Bookkeeping versus Accounting
Pedalling through the Bookkeeping Cycle
Managing the Bookkeeping and Accounting System
Categorise your financial information : The chart of
accounts
Standardise source document forms and procedures
Don ’ t be penny-wise and pound-foolish : The need for
competent , trained personnel
Protect the family jewels : Internal controls
Keep the scales in balance with double-entry
accounting
Check your figures : End-of-period procedures checklist
Keep good records : Happy audit trails to you ! 
Look out for unusual events and developments
Design truly useful accounting reports for managers
Double-Entry Accounting for Non-Accountants
The two-sided nature of a business entity and its
activities
Recording transactions using debits and credits
Making Sure the Books Don ’ t Get Cooked
Chapter 3 : Taxes , Taxes and More Taxes
Taxing Wages and Property
Putting the government on the payroll : Employer taxes
Taxing everything you can put your hands on : Property
taxes
Working from home
Getting to Grips with Value Added Tax
Taxing Your Bottom Line : Company Taxes
Different tax rates on different levels of business
taxable income
Profit accounting and taxable income accounting
Deductible expenses
Non-deductible expenses
Equity capital disguised as debt
Chapter 4 : Accounting and Your Personal Finances
The Accounting Vice You Can ’ t Escape
The Ins and Outs of Figuring Interest and Return on
Investment ( ROI ) 
Individuals as borrowers
Individuals as savers
Individuals as investors
An Accounting Template for Retirement Planning
Part II : Getting a Grip on Financial Statements
Chapter 5 : Profit Mechanics
Swooping Profit into One Basic Equation
Measuring the Financial Effects of Profit-Making Activities
Preparing the balance sheet equation
Exploring the Profit-Making Process One Step at a Time
Making sales on credit
Depreciation expense
Unpaid expenses
Prepaid expenses
Stock ( or Inventory ) and cost of goods sold expense
So Where ’ s Your Hard-Earned Profit ? 
Reporting Profit to Managers and Investors : The Profit and
Loss Account
Reporting normal , ongoing profit-making operations
Reporting unusual gains and losses
Putting the profit and loss account in perspective
Chapter 6 : The Balance Sheet from the Profit and Loss Account
Viewpoint
Coupling the Profit and Loss Account with the Balance
Sheet
Sizing Up Assets and Liabilities
Sales revenue and debtors
Cost of goods sold expense and stock
SA and G expenses and the four balance sheet accounts
that are connected with the expenses
Fixed assets and depreciation expense
Debt and interest expense
Income tax expense
The bottom line : net profit ( net income ) and cash
dividends ( if any ) 
Financing a Business : Owners ’ Equity and Debt
Reporting Financial Condition : The Classified Balance
Sheet
Current ( short-term ) assets
Current ( short-term ) liabilities
Costs and Other Balance Sheet Values
Growing Up
Chapter 7 : Cash Flows and the Cash Flow Statement
The Three Types of Cash Flow
Setting the Stage : Changes in Balance Sheet Accounts
Getting at the Cash Increase from Profit
Getting specific about changes in assets and liabilities
Presenting the Cash Flow Statement
A better alternative for reporting cash flow from profit ? 
Sailing through the Rest of the Cash Flow Statement
Investing activities
Financing activities
Free Cash Flow : What on Earth Does That Mean ? 
Scrutinising the Cash Flow Statement
Chapter 8 : Getting a Financial Report Ready for Prime Time
Reviewing Vital Connections
Statement of Changes in Owners ’ Equity and
Comprehensive Income
Making Sure that Disclosure Is Adequate
Types of disclosures in financial reports
Footnotes : Nettlesome but needed
Other disclosures in financial reports
Keeping It Private versus Going Public
Nudging the Numbers
Fluffing up the cash balance by ‘ window dressing ’ 
Smoothing the rough edges off profit
Sticking to the accounting conventions
Browsing versus Reading Financial Reports
Part III : Accounting in Managing a Business
Chapter 9 : Managing Profit Performance
Redesigning the External Profit and Loss Account
Basic Model for Management Profit and Loss Account
Variable versus fixed operating expenses
From operating profit ( EBIT ) to the bottom line
Travelling Two Trails to Profit
First path to profit : Contribution margin minus fixed
expenses
Second path to profit : Excess over break-even volume
× contribution margin per unit
Calculating the margin of safety
Doing What-If Analysis
Lower profit from lower sales – but that much lower ? 
Violent profit swings due to operating leverage
Cutting sales price , even a little , can gut profit
Improving profit
Cutting prices to increase sales volume : A very tricky
game to play ! 
Cash flow from improving profit margin versus
improving sales volume
A Final Word or Two
Chapter 10 : Business Budgeting
The Reasons for Budgeting
The modelling reasons for budgeting
Planning reasons for budgeting
Management control reasons for budgeting
Other benefits of budgeting
Budgeting and Management Accounting
Budgeting in Action
Developing your profit strategy and budgeted profit
and loss account
Budgeting cash flow from profit for the coming year
Capital Budgeting
Deducing payback
Discounting cash flow
Calculating the internal rate of return
Arriving at the cost of capital
Reporting On Variances
Flexing your budget
Staying Flexible with Budgets
Chapter 11 : Choosing the Right Ownership Structure
From the Top Line to the Bottom Line
What Owners Expect for Their Money
Companies
Partnerships and limited partnerships
Sole proprietorships
Limited companies ( Ltd ) and public limited companies 
( plc ) 
Choosing the Right Legal Structure for Tax Purposes
Companies
Partnerships , limited liability partnerships and sole
proprietorships
Deciding which legal structure is best
Chapter 12 : Cost Conundrums
Previewing What ’ s Coming Down the Road
What Makes Cost So Important ? 
Sharpening Your Sensitivity to Costs
Direct versus indirect costs
Fixed versus variable costs
Breaking even
Relevant versus irrelevant ( sunk ) costs
Separating between actual , budgeted and standard costs
Product versus period costs
Putting Together the Pieces of Product Cost for
Manufacturers
Minding manufacturing costs
Allocating costs properly : Not easy ! 
Calculating product cost
Fixed manufacturing costs and production capacity
Excessive production output for puffing up profit
A View from the Top Regarding Costs
Chapter 13 : Choosing Accounting Methods
Decision-Making Behind the Scenes in Profit and Loss
Accounts
Calculating Cost of Goods Sold and Cost of Stock
The FIFO method
The LIFO method
The average cost method
Identifying Stock Losses : Net Realisable Value ( NRV ) 
Managing Your Stock Position
Appreciating Depreciation Methods
Collecting or Writing Off Bad Debts
Reconciling Corporation Tax
Dealing With Foreign Exchange
Transaction exposure
Translation exposure
Comparing performance
Two Final Issues to Consider
Part IV : Financial Reports in the Outside World
Chapter 14 : How Investors Read a Financial Report
Financial Reporting by Private versus Public Businesses
Analysing Financial Reports with Ratios
Gross margin ratio
Profit ratio
Earnings per share , basic and diluted
Price / earnings ( P / E ) ratio
Dividend yield
Book value per share
Return on equity ( ROE ) ratio
Gearing or leverage
Current ratio
Acid-test ratio
Keeping track of stock and debtor levels
Return on assets ( ROA ) ratio
Using combined ratios
Appreciating the limits of ratios
Frolicking through the Footnotes
Checking for Ominous Skies on the Audit Report
Finding Financial Facts
Public company accounts
Private company accounts
Scoring credit
Using FAME ( Financial Analysis Made Easy ) 
Chapter 15 : Professional Auditors and Advisers
Why Audits ? 
Who ’ s Who in the World of Audits
What an Auditor Does before Giving an Opinion
What ’ s in an Auditor ’ s Report
True and fair , a clean opinion
Other kinds of audit opinions
Do Audits Always Catch Fraud ? 
Looking for errors and fraud
What happens when auditors spot fraud
Auditors and the Rules
From Audits to Advising
Part V : The Part of Tens
Chapter 16 : Ten Ways Savvy Business Managers Use
Accounting
Make Better Profit Decisions
Understand That a Small Sales Volume Change Has a Big
Effect on Profit
Fathom Profit and Cash Flow from Profit
Profit accounting methods are like hemlines
The real stuff of profit
Govern Cash Flow Better
Call the Shots on Your Management Accounting Methods
Build Better Budgets
Optimise Capital Structure and Financial Leverage
Develop Better Financial Controls
Minimise Tax
Explain Your Financial Statements to Others
Chapter 17 : Ten Places a Business Gets Money From
Stock Markets
Private Equity
Business Angels
Corporate Venture Funds
Banks
Bonds , Debentures and Mortgages
Leasing and Hire-Purchase
Factoring and Invoice Discounting
Grants , Incentives and Competitions
Using the Pension Fund
Chapter 18 : Ten ( Plus One ) Questions Investors Should Ask
When Reading a Financial Report
Did Sales Grow ? 
Did the Profit Ratios Hold ? 
Were There Any Unusual or Extraordinary Gains or Losses ? 
Did Earnings Per Share Keep Up with Profit ? 
Did the Profit Increase Generate a Cash Flow Increase ? 
Are Increases in Assets and Liabilities Consistent with the
Business ’ s Growth ? 
Can the Business Pay Its Liabilities ? 
Are There Any Unusual Assets and Liabilities ? 
How Well Are Assets Being Utilised ? 
What Is the Return on Capital Investment ? 
What Does the Auditor Say ? 
Chapter 19 : Ten Ways to Get a Better Handle on the Financial
Future
Sales Forecasts versus Sales Objectives
Dealing with Demand Curves
Maths Matters
Averaging Out Averages
Looking for Causes
Straddling Cycles
Surveying Future Trends
Talking To The Troops
Setting Out Assumptions
Making Regular Revisions
Part VI : Appendixes
Appendix A : Glossary : Slashing through the Accounting Jargon
Jungle
Appendix B : Accounting Software and Other Ways to Get the
Books in Good Order
Sourcing accounting and bookkeeping software
Cheat Sheet
Introduction
Welcome to Understanding Business Accounting For Dummies , 3rd
Edition . We ’ ve written this book for people who need to understand
accounting information and financial reports , quickly . 
Unsurprisingly the business climate at the end of the first decade of
the 21st Century has made this a hot topic – not quite in the Stieg
Larsson league but every bit as scary in its own way . While it ’ s not
for accountants and bookkeepers , they should find this book very
interesting and a good refresher course . This book is for people who
need to use and understand accounting information – business
managers and entrepreneurs , for example , who need to raise money , 
make profit , turn profit into cash flow and control the assets and
liabilities of their venture . If you ’ re running a business or you ’ re a
business unit manager , we ’ re probably preaching to the converted
when we say that you need a basic familiarity with accounting and
financial statements in order to make good business decisions . 
Business investors , lawyers , business consultants – pretty much
anyone who reads ( or aspires to read ) The Financial Times – can
also benefit from a solid understanding of how to read financial
reports and how accounting works . 
About This Book
Understanding Business Accounting For Dummies , 3rd Edition lifts the
veil of obscure terminology and lays bare the methods of
accounting . This book takes you behind the scenes and explains the
language and methods of accounting in a down-to-earth and lighthearted manner – and in plain English . 
Each chapter in this book is designed to stand on its own . Each
chapter is self-contained , and you can jump from chapter to chapter
as you please ( although we encourage you to take a quick tour
through the chapters in the order that we present them )  . We bet
through the chapters in the order that we present them )  . We bet
you ’ ll discover some points that you may not have expected to find
in a book about accounting . 
Conventions Used in Financial
Reports
Much of this book focuses on profit and how a business makes
profit . Because profit and other financial aspects of a business are
reported in financial statements , understanding some basic
notations and conventions used in these financial reports is
important . 
We use the following condensed profit and loss account to illustrate
some conventions that you can expect to see when reading financial
reports .  ( The actual format of a profit and loss account includes
more information about expenses and profit .  ) These conventions
are the common ways of showing figures in financial reports just as
saying hello and shaking hands are common conventions that you
can expect when you greet someone . 
You read a financial statement from the top down . In this
sample profit and loss account , for example , sales revenue is
listed first followed by cost of goods sold expense because
this particular expense is the first expense deducted from
sales revenue . The other two expenses are listed below the
first profit line , which is called gross margin . 
The sample profit and loss account includes two columns of
numbers . Note that the 6 , 000 , 000 total of the two expenses in
the left column is entered in the right column . Some financial
statements display all figures in a single column . 
An amount that is deducted from another amount – like cost
of goods sold expense in this sample profit and loss account
– may have parentheses around the amount to indicate that
it is being subtracted from the amount just above it . Or , 
financial statements may make the assumption that you
know that expenses are deducted from sales revenue – so no
parentheses are put around the number . You see expenses
presented both ways in financial reports . But you hardly ever
see a minus or negative sign in front of expenses – it ’ s just
not done . 
Notice the use of pound signs in the sample profit and loss
account . Not all numbers have a pound sign in front of the
number . Financial reporting practices vary on this matter . 
We prefer to use pound signs only for the first number in a
column and for a calculated number . In some financial
reports , pound signs are put in front of all numbers , but
usually they aren ’ t . 
To indicate that a calculation is being done , a single
underline is drawn under the bottom number , as you see
below the 15 , 000 , 000 cost of goods sold expense number in
the sample profit and loss account . 
The final number in a column is usually double underlined , 
as you can see for the £4 , 000 , 000 profit number in the sample
profit and loss account . This is about as carried away as
accountants get in their work – a double underline . Again , 
actual financial reporting practices are not completely
uniform on this point – instead of a double underline on a
bottom-line number , the number may appear in bold . 
Sometimes statements note that the amounts shown are in
thousands ( this prevents clogging up neat little columns with
loads of noughts )  . So if a statement noting ‘ amounts in
thousands ’ shows £300 , it actually means £300 , 000 . And that
can make quite a difference ! 
When we present an accounting formula that shows how financial
numbers are computed , we show the formula indented , like this : 
Assets = Liabilities + Owners ’ Equity
Terminology in financial reporting is reasonably uniform , thank
goodness , although you may see a fair amount of jargon . When we
introduce a new term in this book , we show the term in italics and
flag it with an icon ( see the section ‘ Icons Used in This Book ’ later in
this Introduction )  . You can also turn to Appendix A to look up a
term that you ’ re unfamiliar with . 
Foolish Assumptions
While this book is designed for all of you who have that nagging
feeling that you really should know more about accounting , we have
made a few assumptions about you . 
You don ’ t want to be an accountant , nor do you have any
aspirations of ever sitting for the FCA ( Fellow of the Institute of
Chartered Accountants ) exam . But you worry that ignorance of
accounting may hamper your decision-making , and you know deep
down that learning more about accounting would help . 
We assume that you have a basic familiarity with the business
world , but we take nothing for granted in this book regarding how
much accounting you know . Even if you have some experience with
accounting and financial statements , we think you ’ ll find this book
useful – especially for improving your communication with
accountants . 
We assume that you need to use accounting information . Many
different types of people ( business managers , investors and
solicitors , to name but three ) need to understand accounting basics
– not all the technical stuff , just the fundamentals . 
We assume that you want to know something about accounting
because it ’ s an excellent gateway for understanding how business
works , and it gives you an indispensable vocabulary for moving up
in the business and investment worlds . Finding out more about
accounting helps you understand earnings reports , mergers and
takeovers , frauds and pyramid schemes , and business
restructurings . 
Let us point out one other very practical assumption
that we have regarding why you should know some accounting . 
We call it the defensive reason . A lot of people out there in the
cold , cruel financial world may take advantage of you , not
necessarily by illegal means , but by withholding key
information and by diverting your attention away from
unfavourable aspects of certain financial decisions . These
unscrupulous characters treat you as a lamb waiting to be
fleeced . The best defence against such tactics is to learn some
accounting basics , which can help you ask the right questions
and understand the financial points that tricksters don ’ t want
you to know . 
How This Book Is Organised
This book is divided into parts , and each part is further divided into
chapters . The following sections describe what you can find in each
part . 
Part I : Accounting Basics
Part I of Understanding Business Accounting For Dummies , 3rd Edition
introduces accounting to non-accountants and discusses the basic
features of bookkeeping and accounting record-keeping systems . 
This part also talks about taxes of all kinds that are involved in
running a business , as well as accounting in the everyday lives of
individuals . 
Part II : Getting a Grip on Financial
Statements
Part II moves on to the end product of the business accounting
process – financial statements . Three main financial statements are
prepared every period – one for each financial imperative of
business : making profit , keeping financial condition in good shape
and controlling cash flow . The nature of profit and the financial
effects of profit are explained in Chapter 5 . The assets , liabilities and
owners ’ capital invested in a business are reported in the balance
sheet , which is discussed in Chapter 6 . Cash flow from profit and the
cash flow statement are explained carefully in Chapter 7 . The last
chapter in this part , Chapter 8 , explains what managers have to do
to get financial statements ready for the annual financial report of
the business to its owners . 
Part III : Accounting in Managing a
Business
Business managers should know their financial statements like the
backs of their hands . However , just understanding these reports is
not the end of accounting for managers . Chapter 9 kicks off this part
with an extraordinarily important topic – building a basic profit
model – that clearly focuses on the key variables that drive profit . 
model – that clearly focuses on the key variables that drive profit . 
This model is absolutely critical for decision-making analysis . 
Chapter 10 discusses accounting-based planning and control
techniques , especially budgeting . Business managers and owners
have to decide on the best business ownership structure , which we
discuss in Chapter 11 . Managers in manufacturing businesses
should be wary of how product costs are determined – as Chapter
12 explains . This chapter also explains other economic and
accounting costs that business managers use in making decisions . 
Chapter 13 identifies and explains the alternative accounting
methods for expenses and how the choice of method has a major
impact on profit for the period , and on the cost of stock and fixed
assets reported in the balance sheet . 
Part IV : Financial Reports in the Outside
World
Part IV explains financial statement reporting for investors . Chapter
14 presents a speed-reading approach that concentrates on the key
financial ratios to look for in a financial report . The scope of the
annual audit and what to look for in the auditor ’ s report are
explained in Chapter 15 , which also explains the role of auditors as
enforcers of financial accounting and disclosure standards . 
Part V : The Part of Tens
This part of the book presents four chapters . Chapter 16 presents
some practical ideas for managers to help them put their accounting
knowledge to use while Chapter 17 lists various sources of finance
available to the business . Chapter 18 gives business investors some
handy tips on things to look for in a financial report – tips that can
make the difference between making a good investment and a notso-good one . Chapter 19 provides our take on reading the stars . 
Sure , no one knows everything about the financial future , but here
we outline some ways you can spot a cloud before it becomes a
thunder storm . 
Part VI : Appendixes
At the back of the book , you can find two helpful appendixes that
can assist you on your accounting safari . Appendix A provides you
with a handy , succinct glossary of accounting terms . Appendix B
fills you in on the accounting software programs available for your
business . 
Icons Used in This Book
For Dummies books always include little icons in the margins to
draw your attention to paragraphs of particular significance : 
This icon calls your attention to particularly important
points and offers useful advice on practical financial topics . 
This icon saves you the cost of buying a yellow highlighter pen . 
This icon serves as a friendly reminder that the topic at
hand is important enough for you to put a note about it in the
front of your wallet . This icon marks material that your lecturer
might put on the board before the class starts , noting the
important points that you should remember at the end of the
class . 
Accounting is the language of business , and , like all
languages , the vocabulary of accounting contains many
specialised terms . This icon identifies key accounting terms and
their definitions . You can also check the glossary ( Appendix A ) 
to find definitions of unfamiliar terms . 
This icon is a caution sign that warns you about speed
bumps and potholes on the accounting highway . Taking special
note of this material can steer you around a financial road
hazard and keep you from blowing a fiscal tyre . In short – watch
out ! 
We use this icon sparingly ; it refers to very specialised
accounting stuff that is heavy going , which only an FCA could
get really excited about . However , you may find these topics
important enough to return to when you have the time . Feel free
to skip over these points the first time through and stay with
the main discussion . 
This icon alerts you that we ’ re using a practical example
to illustrate and clarify an important accounting point . You can
apply the example to your business or to a business in which
you invest . 
This icon points out especially important ideas and
accounting concepts that are particularly deserving of your
attention . The material marked by this icon describes concepts
that are the building blocks of accounting – concepts that you
should be very clear about , and that clarify your understanding
of accounting principles in general . 
Where to Go from Here
If you ’ re new to the accounting game , by all means , start with Part I . 
However , if you already have a good background in business and
know something about bookkeeping and financial statements , you
may want to jump right into Part II of this book , starting with
Chapter 5 . Part III is on accounting tools and techniques for
managers and assumes that you have a handle on the financial
statements material in Part II . Part IV stands on its own ; if your main
interest in accounting is to make sense of and interpret financial
statements , you can read through Part II on financial statements and
then jump to Part IV on reading financial reports . If you have
questions about specific accounting terms , you can go directly to
the glossary in Appendix A . 
We ’ ve had a lot of fun writing this book . We sincerely hope that it
helps you become a better business manager and investor , and that
it aids you in your personal financial affairs . We also hope that you
enjoy the book . We ’ ve tried to make accounting as fun as possible , 
even though it ’ s a fairly serious subject . Just remember that
accountants never die ; they just lose their balance .  ( Hey , 
accountants have a sense of humour , too .  ) 
Chapter 2
Bookkeeping 101 : From Shoe Boxes to
Computers
In This Chapter
Understanding the difference between bookkeeping and
accounting
Following the steps in the bookkeeping cycle
Managing the bookkeeping and accounting system
Getting down the basics of double-entry accounting
Deterring and detecting errors , irregularities and outright fraud
Most people are pretty terrible bookkeepers just because they really
don ’ t do much bookkeeping . Admit it . Maybe you balance your
chequebook against your bank statement every month and
somehow manage to pull together all the records you need for your
annual income tax return . But you probably stuff your bills in a
drawer and just drag them out once a month when you ’ re ready to
pay them .  ( Hey , that ’ s what we do .  ) And you almost certainly don ’ t
prepare a detailed listing of all your assets and liabilities ( even
though a listing of assets is a good idea for insurance purposes )  . We
don ’ t prepare a summary statement of our earnings and income for
the year or a breakdown of what we spent our money on and how
much we saved . Why not ? Because we don ’ t need to ! Individuals can
get along quite well without much bookkeeping – but the exact
opposite is true for a business . 
One key difference between individuals and businesses is that a
business must prepare periodic financial statements , the accuracy of
which is critical to the business ’ s survival . The business uses the
accounts and records generated by its bookkeeping process to
prepare these statements ; if the accounting records are incomplete
or inaccurate , the financial statements will be incomplete or
inaccurate . And inaccuracy simply won ’ t do . 
Obviously , then , business managers have to be sure that the
company ’ s bookkeeping and accounting system is adequate and
reliable . This chapter shows managers what bookkeepers and
accountants do – mainly so that you can make sure that the
information coming out of your accounting system is complete , 
timely and accurate . 
Bookkeeping versus Accounting
Bookkeeping is essentially the process ( some would say
the drudgery ) of recording all the information regarding the
transactions and financial activities of a business – the recordkeeping aspects of accounting . Bookkeeping is an indispensable
subset of accounting . The term accounting goes much further , 
into the realm of designing the bookkeeping system in the first
place , establishing controls to make sure that the system is
working well , and analysing and verifying the recorded
information . Bookkeepers follow orders ; accountants give
orders . 
Accounting can be thought of as what goes on before and after
bookkeeping . Accountants prepare reports based on the
information accumulated by the bookkeeping process – financial
statements , tax returns and various confidential reports to
managers . Measuring profit is a very important task that
accountants perform , a task that depends on the accuracy of the
information recorded by the bookkeeper . The accountant decides
Figure 2-1 : 
The basic
steps and
sequence of
the
bookkeeping
cycle , 
including the
accounting
inputs and
outputs . 
information recorded by the bookkeeper . The accountant decides
how to measure sales revenue and expenses to determine the profit
or loss for the period . The tough questions about profit – where it is
and what it consists of – can ’ t be answered through bookkeeping
alone . 
The rest of this book doesn ’ t discuss bookkeeping in any detail – no
talk of debits and credits and all that stuff . All you really need to
know about bookkeeping , as a business manager , is contained in
this chapter alone . 
Pedalling through the Bookkeeping
Cycle
Figure 2-1 presents an overview of the bookkeeping cycle side-byside with elements of the accounting system . You can follow the
basic bookkeeping steps down the left-hand side . The accounting
elements are shown in the right-hand column . The basic steps in the
bookkeeping sequence , explained briefly , are as follows .  ( See also 
 ‘ Managing the Bookkeeping and Accounting System ,  ’ later in this
chapter , for more details on some of these steps .  ) 
1 . Record transactions – the economic exchanges between a
business and the other people and businesses that it deals with . 
Transactions have financial effects that must be recorded – the
business is better off , worse off or at least ‘ different off ’ as the
result of its transactions . Examples of typical business
transactions include paying employees , making sales to
customers , borrowing money from the bank and buying products
that will be sold to customers . The bookkeeping process begins
by identifying all transactions and capturing the relevant
information about each transaction . 
2 . Prepare and collect source documents – transaction
documentation that the bookkeeper uses to record the
transactions . 
When buying products , a business gets a purchase invoice from
the supplier . When borrowing money from the bank , a business
signs for an overdraft , a copy of which the business keeps . When
a customer uses a credit card to buy the business ’ s product , the
business gets the credit card slip as evidence of the transaction . 
When preparing payroll cheques , a business depends on salary
schedules and time cards . All of these key business forms serve as
sources of information into the bookkeeping system – in other
words , information the bookkeeper uses in recording the
financial effects of the transaction . 
3 . Record original entries ( the financial effects of the
transactions ) into journals and accounts . 
Using the source document ( s ) for every transaction , 
the bookkeeper makes the first , or original , entry into a journal
and then into the business ’ s accounts . Only an official , 
established book of accounts should be used in recording
transactions . A journal is a chronological record of transactions
in the order in which they occur – like a very detailed personal
diary . In contrast , an account is a separate record for each asset , 
each liability and so on . One transaction affects two or more
accounts . The journal entry records the whole transaction in one
place ; then each piece is recorded in the two or more accounts
changed by the transaction . 
Here ’ s a simple example that illustrates recording of a
transaction in a journal and then posting the changes caused by
the transaction in the accounts . Expecting a big demand from its
customers , a retail bookshop purchases , on credit , 50 copies of
Understanding Business Accounting For Dummies from the
publisher , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . The books are received and
placed on the shelves .  ( 50 copies are a lot to put on the shelves , 
but our relatives promised to rush down and buy several copies
each .  ) The bookshop now owns the books and also owes John
Wiley £600 . 00 , which is the cost of the 50 copies . You look only at
recording the purchase of the books , not recording subsequent
sales of the books and paying the bill to John Wiley . 
The bookshop has established a specific stock or account called 
 ‘ Stock-Trade Paperbacks ’ for books like this . And the purchase
liability to the publisher should be entered in the account 
 ‘ Creditor-Publishers ’  . So the journal entry for this purchase is
recorded as follows : 
Stock-Trade Paperbacks + £600 . 00 Creditor-Publishers + £600 . 00
This pair of changes is first recorded in one journal entry . Then , 
sometime later , each change is posted , or recorded , in the
separate accounts – one an asset and the other a liability . 
Not so long ago , bookkeepers had to record these entries by
hand , and even today there ’ s nothing wrong with a good handentry ( manual ) bookkeeping system . But bookkeepers can now
use computer programs that take over many of the tedious
chores of bookkeeping . Computers have come to the rescue – of
course , typing has replaced hand cramps with repetitive strain
injury , but at least the work gets done more quickly and with
fewer errors !  ( See Appendix B for more about popular
accounting software packages for personal computers .  ) 
We can ’ t exaggerate the importance of entering
transaction data correctly and in a timely manner . For example , 
an important reason that most retailers these days use cash
registers that read bar-coded information on products is to more
accurately capture the necessary information and to speed up
the entry of this information . 
4 . Perform end-of-period procedures – preliminary steps for
preparing the accounting reports and financial statements at the
end of every period . 
A period can be any stretch of time – from one day to one month
to one quarter ( three months ) to one year and is determined by
the needs of the business . A year is usually the longest period of
time that a business would wait to prepare its financial
statements . As a matter of fact , most businesses need accounting
reports and financial statements at the end of each quarter , and
many need monthly financial statements . 
Before the accounting reports can be prepared at the
end of the period ( see Figure 2-1 )  , the bookkeeper needs to bring
the accounts of the business up-to-date and complete the
bookkeeping process . One step , for example , is recording the
depreciation expense for the period ( see Chapter 6 for more on
depreciation )  . Another step is getting an actual count of the
business ’ s stock so that the stock records can be adjusted to
account for shoplifting , employee theft and so on . 
The accountant needs to take the final step and check for errors
in the business ’ s accounts . Data entry clerks and bookkeepers
may not fully understand the unusual nature of some business
transactions and may have entered transactions incorrectly . One
reason for establishing internal controls ( discussed in ‘ Protect
the family jewels : Internal controls ’  , later in this chapter ) is to
keep errors to an absolute minimum . Ideally , accounts should
contain very few errors at the end of the period , but the
accountant can ’ t make any assumptions and should make a final
check for any errors that fell through the cracks . 
5 . Prepare the adjusted trial balance for the accountants . 
After all the end-of-period procedures have been completed , the
bookkeeper prepares a complete listing of all accounts , which is
called the adjusted trial balance . Modest-sized businesses
maintain hundreds of accounts for their various assets , 
liabilities , owners ’ equity , revenue and expenses . Larger
businesses keep thousands of accounts , and very large
businesses may keep more than 10 , 000 accounts . In contrast , 
external financial statements , tax returns and internal accounting
reports to managers contain a relatively small number of
accounts . For example , a typical external balance sheet reports
only 20 to 25 accounts , and a typical income tax return contains
less than 100 accounts . 
The accountant takes the adjusted trial balance and telescopes
similar accounts into one summary amount that is reported in a
financial report or tax return . For example , a business may keep
hundreds of separate stock accounts , every one of which is
listed in the adjusted trial balance . The accountant collapses all
these accounts into one summary stock account that is
presented in the external balance sheet of the business . 
In short , the large number of specific accounts listed in the
adjusted trial balance is condensed into a comparatively small
number of accounts that are reported in financial statements and
tax returns . In grouping the accounts , the accountant should
comply with established financial reporting standards and
income tax requirements . 
6 . Close the books – bring the bookkeeping for the fiscal year
just ended to a close and get things ready to begin the
bookkeeping process for the coming fiscal year . 
Books is the common term for accounts . A business ’ s
transactions are a constant stream of activities that don ’ t end
tidily on the last day of the year , which can make preparing
financial statements and tax returns challenging . The business
has to draw a clear line of demarcation between activities for the
year ( the 12-month accounting period ) ended and the year yet to
come by closing the books for one year and starting with fresh
books for the next year . 
The business may have an accounting manual that spells out in great
detail the specific accounts and procedures for recording
transactions . But all businesses change over time , and they
occasionally need to review their accounting system and make
revisions . Companies do not take this task lightly ; discontinuities in
the accounting system can be major shocks and have to be carefully
thought out . Nevertheless , bookkeeping and accounting systems
can ’ t remain static for very long . If these systems were never
changed , bookkeepers would still be sitting on high stools making
entries with quill pens and ink in leather-bound ledgers . 
Managing the Bookkeeping and
Accounting System
In our experience , far too many business managers either ignore
their bookkeeping and accounting systems or take them for granted
– unless something obvious goes wrong . The managers assume that
if the books are in balance , then everything is okay . The section 
 ‘ Recording transactions using debits and credits ’  , later in this
chapter , covers just exactly what ‘ the books being in balance ’ means
– it does not necessarily mean that everything is okay . 
To determine whether your bookkeeping system is up to scratch , 
check out the following sections , which , taken as a whole , provide a
checklist of the most important elements of a good system . 
Categorise your financial information : The
chart of accounts
Suppose that you ’ re the accountant for a company and you ’ re faced
with the daunting task of preparing the annual income tax return for
the business . This demands that you report the following kinds of
expenses ( and this list contains just the minimum !  )  : 
Advertising
Bad debts
Charitable contributions
Compensation of directors
Cost of goods sold
Depreciation
Employee benefits
Interest
Pensions and profit-sharing plans
Rents
Repairs and maintenance
Salaries and wages
Taxes and licenses
You must provide additional information for some of these
expenses . For example , the cost of goods sold expense is
determined in a schedule that also requires stock cost at the
beginning of the year , purchases during the year , cost of labour
during the year ( for manufacturers )  , other costs and stock cost at
year-end . 
Where do you start ? Well , if it ’ s March 1 and the tax return deadline
is March 15 , you start by panicking – unless you were smart enough
to think ahead about the kinds of information your business would
need to report . In fact , when your accountant first designs your
business ’ s accounting system , he or she should dissect every report
to managers , the external financial statements and the tax returns , 
breaking down all the information into categories such as those we
just listed . 
For each category , you need an account , a record of the
activities in that category . An account is basically a focused
history of a particular dimension of a business . In bookkeeping
this means a basic category of information in which the
financial effects of transactions are recorded and which serves
as the source of information for preparing financial statements , 
tax returns and reports to managers . 
The term general ledger refers to the complete set of
accounts established and maintained by a business . The chart of
accounts is a term used to describe a formal index of these
accounts – the complete listing and classification of the
accounts used by the business to record its transactions . 
General ledger usually refers to the actual accounts and often to
the balances in these accounts at some particular time . 
The chart of accounts , even for a relatively small business , normally
contains 100 or more accounts . Larger business organisations need
thousands of accounts . The larger the number , the more likely that
the accounts are given number codes according to some scheme –
all assets may be in the 100–300 range , all liabilities in the 400–500
range and so on . 
As a business manager , you should make sure that the
person in charge of accounting ( or perhaps an outside
chartered accountant ) reviews the chart of accounts
periodically to determine whether the accounts are up-to-date
and adequate for the business ’ s needs . Over time , income tax
rules change , the company may go into new lines of business , 
the company could decide to offer additional employee benefits
and so on . Most businesses are in constant flux , and the chart
of accounts has to keep up with these changes . 
Standardise source document forms and
Standardise source document forms and
procedures
Businesses move on paperwork . Whether placing an order to buy
products , selling a product to a customer or determining the
earnings of an employee for the month – virtually every business
transaction needs paperwork , known as source documents . Source
documents serve as evidence of the terms and conditions agreed
upon by the business and the other person or organisation that it ’ s
dealing with . Both parties receive some kind of source document . 
For example , for a sale at a cash register , the customer gets a sales
receipt , and the business keeps a running record of all transactions
in the register . 
Clearly , an accounting system needs to standardise the forms and
procedures for processing and recording all normal , repetitive
transactions and should control the generation and handling of
these source documents . 
From the bookkeeping point of view , these business forms and
documents are very important because they provide the input
information needed for recording transactions in the business ’ s
accounts . Sloppy paperwork leads to sloppy accounting records , 
and sloppy accounting records just won ’ t do when the time comes
to prepare tax returns and financial statements . 
Check out a business office-supply store to see the kinds
of forms that you can buy right off the shelf . You can find many
– maybe all – of the basic forms and documents that you need
for recording business transactions , although most firms have
to design at least some of their own forms . Also , personal
computer accounting software packages ( see Appendix B for
more detail ) provide templates for common business forms . 
Don ’ t be penny-wise and pound-foolish : 
Don ’ t be penny-wise and pound-foolish : 
The need for competent , trained personnel
What good is meticulously collecting source documents
if the information on those documents isn ’ t entered into your
system correctly ? You shouldn ’ t try to save a few pounds by
hiring the lowest-paid people you can find . Bookkeepers and
accountants , like all other employees in a business , should have
the skills and knowledge needed to perform their functions . Nobrainer , right ? Well , determining what that level is can be
difficult . Here are some guidelines for choosing the right people
to enter and manipulate your business ’ s data and for making
sure that those people remain the right people : 
University degree : Many accountants in business
organisations have a degree in accounting . However , as you
move down the accounting department you find that more
and more employees do not have a degree and perhaps even
haven ’ t taken any courses in accounting . 
ACA , ACCA or CIMA : The main professional accounting
credentials are : ACA sponsored by the Institute of Chartered
Accountants ; ACCA sponsored by the Association of
Chartered Certified Accountants ; and CIMA sponsored by the
Chartered Institute of Management Accountants . All of these
qualifications are evidence that the person has passed tough
exams and has a good understanding of business accounting
and income tax . The Association of Chartered Certified
Accountants ( www . accaglobal . com , click on ‘ Public Interest ’ 
and then on ‘ Find an Accountant ’  ) and the Institute of
Chartered Accountants ( www . icaewfirms . co . uk ) have online
directories of qualified accountants . You can search these
directories by name ( useful if you have a personal
recommendation from a colleague you respect )  , location 
( handy if you just want someone nearby )  , the business
sector you ’ re in ( helpful for tapping into specialist skills ) or
any specific accountancy skills or knowledge you ’ re looking
for . 
Accounting technicians : These people assist chartered
accountants in their work , or can join a chartered institute
themselves after further study . The Association of
Accounting Technicians ’ website ( www . aat . org . uk , then click
on ‘ Employers ’ and ‘ Recruitment ’  ) provides guidance on pay
structures and tips on how to find an accountant . 
Bookkeepers : These are the lowest-cost players in this game . 
They perform the basic entry work covering anything from
simply recording the transactions in your books through to
producing accounts , preparing the VAT return or doing the
Payroll . The International Association of Bookkeepers 
( www . iab . org . uk ) and the Institute of Certified Bookkeepers 
( www . bookkeepers . org ) offer free matching services to help
small businesses find a bookkeeper to suit their particular
needs . 
Continuing education : Many short-term courses , e-learning
and home-study programmes are available at very
reasonable costs for keeping up on the latest accounting
developments . Accountancy bodies that give practising
certificates , which allow accountants to work with
businesses in public practice , will expect them to take
continuing education in approved courses in order to keep
their practising certificates . 
Integrity : What ’ s possibly the most important quality to look
for is also the hardest to judge . Bookkeepers and
accountants need to be honest people because of the amount
of control they have over your business ’ s financial records . 
Protect the family jewels : Internal controls
Protect the family jewels : Internal controls
Every accounting system should establish and vigorously enforce
internal controls – basically , additional forms and procedures over
and above what ’ s strictly needed to move operations along . These
additional controls serve to deter and detect errors ( honest
mistakes ) and all forms of dishonesty by employees , customers , 
suppliers and even managers themselves . Internal controls are like a
public weighbridge that makes sure that a heavy goods vehicle ’ s
load doesn ’ t exceed the limits and that the vehicle has a valid
licence . You ’ re just checking that your staff are playing by the rules . 
For example , to prevent or minimise shoplifting , most retailers now
have video surveillance , tags that set off the alarms if the customer
leaves the store with the tag still on the product , and so on . 
Likewise , a business has to implement certain procedures and forms
to prevent , as much as possible , any theft , embezzlement , scams
and fraud ( and simple mistakes ) by its own employees and
managers . 
In our experience , smaller businesses tend to think that
they ’ re immune to embezzlement and fraud by their loyal and
trusted employees . Yet a recent study found that small
businesses are hit the hardest by fraud and usually can least
afford the consequences . Your business , too , should put checks
and balances into place to discourage dishonest practices and
to uncover any fraud and theft as soon as possible . For
example , virtually every retailer that deals with the general
public installs protection against shoplifting . Likewise , every
business should guard against ‘ internal shoplifting ’ or fraud by
its employees and managers . 
Keep the scales in balance with doubleentry accounting
entry accounting
A business needs to be sure that both sides of the economic
exchange are recorded for all its transactions . Economic exchanges
involve a give and take , or something given for something received . 
Businesses ( and other entities as well ) use the double-entry
accounting method to make sure that both sides of their transactions
are recorded and to keep their books in balance . This method , 
which has been used for hundreds of years , involves recording
certain changes as debits and the counterbalancing changes as
credits . See ‘ Double-Entry Accounting for Non-Accountants ,  ’ later in
this chapter , for more details . 
Check your figures : End-of-period
procedures checklist
Like a pilot before take-off , an accountant should have a
clear checklist to follow at the end of each period and especially
at the end of the accounting year . Two main things have to be
done at the end of the period : 
Normal , routine adjusting entries for certain expenses : For
example , depreciation isn ’ t a transaction as such and
therefore hasn ’ t been recorded as an expense in the flow of
transactions recorded in the day-to-day bookkeeping
process .  ( Chapter 6 explains depreciation expense .  ) 
Similarly , certain other expenses and some revenues may not
have been associated with a specific transaction and will not
have been recorded . These kinds of adjustments are
necessary for providing complete and accurate reports . 
Careful sweep of all matters to check for other
developments that may affect the accuracy of the accounts : 
For example , the company may have discontinued a product
line . The remaining stock of these products may have to be
removed from the asset account , with a loss recorded in the
period . Or the company may have settled a long-standing
lawsuit , and the amount of damages needs to be recorded . 
Layoffs and severance packages are another example of what
the chief accountant needs to look for before preparing
reports . 
Lest you still think of accounting as dry and dull , let us
tell you that end-of-period accounting procedures can stir up
controversy of the heated-debate variety . These procedures
require that the accountant make decisions and judgments that
upper management may not agree with . For example , the
accountant may suggest recording major losses that would put
a big dent in the profit for the year or cause the business to
report a loss . The outside auditor ( assuming that the business
has an audit of its financial statements ) often gets in the middle
of the argument . These kinds of debates are precisely why you
business managers need to know some accounting : to hold up
your end of the argument and participate in the great sport of
yelling and name-calling – strictly on a professional basis , of
course . 
Keep good records : Happy audit trails to
you ! 
The happy trails that accountants like to walk are called
audit trails . Good bookkeeping systems leave good audit trails . 
An audit trail is a clear-cut path of the sequence of events
leading up to an entry in the accounts ; an accountant starts
with the source documents and follows through the
bookkeeping steps in recording transactions to reconstruct this
path . Even if a business doesn ’ t have an outside accountant do
an annual audit , the firm ’ s management accountant has
frequent occasion to go back to the source documents and
either verify certain information in the accounts or reconstruct
the information in a different manner . For example , suppose
that a salesperson is claiming some suspicious-looking travel
expenses ; the accountant would probably want to go through
all this person ’ s travel and entertainment reimbursements for
the past year . 
If HM Revenue and Customs comes in for a field audit of
your business , you ’ d better have good audit trails to
substantiate all your expense deductions and sales revenue for
the year . Rules exist about saving source documents for a
reasonable period of time ( usually at least five years ) and
having a well-defined process for making bookkeeping entries
and keeping accounts . Think twice before throwing away source
documents . Also , ask your accountant to demonstrate , and lay
out for your inspection , the audit trails for key transactions –
such as cash collections , sales , cash disbursements , stock
purchases and so on . Even in computer-based accounting
systems , the importance of audit trails is recognised . Welldesigned computer programs provide the ability to backtrack
through the sequence of steps in the recording of specific
transactions . The HM Revenue and Customs website ( go to
www . hmrc . gov . uk and click on ‘ Businesses and corporations ’  ) 
gives you the lowdown on which books to keep and for how
long . You can search for info about any unlisted topics by using
the search panel at the top of the homepage . 
Look out for unusual events and
developments
Business managers should encourage their accountants to be alert
to anything out of the ordinary that may require attention . Suppose
that the debtor balance for a particular customer is rapidly
increasing – that is , the customer is buying more and more from
your company on credit but isn ’ t paying for these purchases
quickly . Maybe the customer has switched more of his or her
company ’ s purchases to your business and is buying more from you
only because he or she is buying less from other businesses . But
maybe the customer is planning to stuff your business and take off
without paying his or her debts . Or maybe the customer is secretly
planning to go into bankruptcy soon and is stockpiling products
before the company ’ s credit rating heads south . To some extent , 
accountants have to act as the eyes and ears of the business . Of
course , that ’ s one of your main functions as business manager , but
your accounting staff can play an important role as well . 
Design truly useful accounting reports for
managers
We have to be careful in this section ; we have strong opinions on
this matter . We have seen too many hit-and-miss accounting reports
to managers – difficult to decipher and not very useful or relevant to
the manager ’ s decision-making needs and control functions . 
Part of the problem lies with the managers themselves . As a
business manager , have you told your accounting staff what you
need to know , when you need it , and how to present it in the most
efficient manner ? Probably not . When you stepped into your
position you probably didn ’ t hesitate to rearrange your office and
maybe even insisted on hiring your own support staff . Yet you most
likely lay down like a lapdog regarding your accounting reports . 
Maybe you ’ ve assumed that the reports have to be done a certain
way and that arguing for change is no use . 
way and that arguing for change is no use . 
On the other hand , accountants bear a good share of the blame for
the poor reports . Accountants should proactively study the
manager ’ s decision-making responsibilities and provide the
information that is most useful , presented in the most easily
digestible manner . 
In designing the chart of accounts , the accountant should also keep
in mind the type of information needed for management reports . To
exercise control , managers need much more detail than what ’ s
reported on tax returns and external financial statements . And , as
Chapter 9 explains , expenses should be regrouped into different
categories for management decision-making analysis . A good chart
of accounts looks to both the external and the internal 
( management ) needs for information . 
So what ’ s the answer for a manager who receives poorly
formatted reports ? Demand a report format that suits your
needs ! See Chapter 9 for a useful profit analysis model ( and
make sure that your accountant reads that chapter as well )  . 
Double-Entry Accounting for NonAccountants
A business is a two-sided entity . It accumulates assets on one side –
by borrowing money , persuading investors to put money in the
business as owners , purchasing assets on credit and making profit . 
Profit ( net income ) is essentially an increase in assets , not from
increasing liabilities and not from additional capital infusion from
owners , but rather as the net result of sales revenue less expenses . 
Assets don ’ t fall on a business like manna from heaven . Assets have
sources , and these sources are claims of one sort or another on the
assets of a business . A business needs to keep track of the sources
of assets , according to the type of claim each source has against the
assets . This is precisely the reason for and nature of double-entry
accounting . 
The two-sided nature of a business entity
and its activities
In a nutshell , double-entry accounting means two-sided accounting . 
Both the assets of a business and the sources of and claims on its
assets are accounted for . Suppose that a business reports £10
million in total assets . That means the total sources of and claims on
its assets are also reported at a total of £10 million . Each asset
source has a different type of claim . Some liabilities charge interest
and some don ’ t ; some have to be paid soon , and other loans to the
business may not come due for five or ten years . Owners ’ equity
may be mainly from capital invested by the owners and very little
from retained earnings ( profit not distributed to the owners )  . Or the
mix of owners ’ equity sources may be just the reverse . 
The sources of and claims on the assets of a business fall into two
broad categories : liabilities and owners ’ equity . With a few technical
exceptions that we won ’ t go into , the amount of liabilities that the
business reports are the amounts that will be paid to the creditors
at the maturity dates of the liabilities . In other words , the amounts
of liabilities are definite amounts to be paid at certain future dates . 
In contrast , the amounts reported for owners ’ equity are historical
amounts , based on how much capital the owners invested in the
business in the past and how much profit the business has
recorded . Owners ’ equity , unlike the liabilities of a business , has no
maturity date at which time the money has to be returned to the
owners . When looking at the amount of owners ’ equity reported in a
balance sheet , don ’ t think that this amount could be taken out of the
business . Owners ’ equity is tied up in the business indefinitely . 
So one reason for double-entry accounting is the two-sided nature of
a business entity – assets are on one side and the sources of and
claims on assets are on the other side . The second reason for
double-entry accounting is the economic exchange nature of
business activities , referring to the give-and-receive nature of the
transactions that a business engages in to pursue its financial
objectives . Consider a few typical transactions : 
A business borrows £10 million . It receives money , so the
company ’ s cash increases . In exchange , the business
promises to return the £10 million to the lender at some
future date so the company ’ s debt increases . Interest on the
loan is paid in exchange for the use of the money over time . 
The business buys products that it will later resell to its
customers : It gives money for the products ( the company ’ s
cash decreases ) and receives the products ( the company ’ s
stock increases )  . 
The business sells products : It receives cash or promises of
cash to come later ( the company ’ s debtors increase )  , and it
gives the products to the customer ( the company ’ s stock
decreases )  . Of course , the business should sell the products
for more than cost . The excess of the amount received over
product cost is called gross profit , from which many other
expenses have to be deducted .  ( Chapter 5 explains the profitmaking transactions leading to bottom-line profit or loss .  ) 
Recording transactions using debits and
credits
Using debits and credits is a marvellous technique for
making sure that both sides of exchanges are recorded and for
keeping both sides of the accounting equation in balance . The
recording of every transaction requires the same value for the
debits on one side and the credits on the other side . Just think
back to maths class in your schooldays : What you have on one
side of the equal sign ( in this case , in the accounting equation ) 
must equal what you have on the other side of the equal sign . 
See the table for how debits and credits work in the balance sheet
accounts of a business . The rules of debits and credits : 
Note : Sales revenue and expense accounts , which aren ’ t listed , also
follow debit and credit rules . A revenue item increases owners ’ 
equity ( thus is a credit )  , and an expense item decreases owners ’ 
equity ( thus is a debit )  . 
As a business manager , you don ’ t need to know all the
mechanics and technical aspects of using debits and credits . 
Here ’ s what you do need to know : 
The basic premise of the accounting equation : Assets equal
the sources of the assets and the claims on the assets . That
is , the total of assets on the one side should equal the sum of
total liabilities and total owners ’ equity on the other side . 
The important difference between liabilities and owners ’ 
equity accounts : Liabilities need to be paid off at definite due
dates in the future . Owners ’ equity has no such claims for
definite payments at definite dates . As such , these two
accounts must be kept separate . 
Balanced books don ’ t necessarily mean correct
balances : If debits equal credits , the entry for the transaction
is correct as far as recording equal amounts on both sides of
the transaction . However , even if the debits equal the
credits , other errors are possible . The bookkeeper may have
recorded the debits and credits in a wrong account , or may
have entered wrong amounts , or may have missed recording
an entry altogether . Having balanced books simply means
that the total of accounts with debit balances equals the total
of accounts with credit balances . The important thing is
whether the books ( the accounts ) have correct balances , 
which depends on whether all transactions and other
developments have been recorded and accounted for
correctly . 
Making Sure the Books Don ’ t Get
Cooked
Cooked is a catch-all term ; we ’ re using the term in its broadest sense
to include any type of dishonest , unethical , immoral or illegal
practice . Our concern here is with the effects of distortion on a
business ’ s accounting records , not with the broader social and
criminal aspects of fraudulent accounting – which are very serious , 
of course , but which are outside the scope of this book . 
A business should capture and record faithfully all
transactions in its accounting records . Having said this , we
have to admit that some business activities are deliberately not
accounted for or are accounted for in a way that disguises their
true nature . For example , money laundering involves taking
money from illegal sources ( such as drug dealing ) and passing
it through a business to make it look legitimate – to give the
money a false identity . This money can hardly be recorded as 
 ‘ revenue from drug sales ’ in the accounts of the business . 
Fraud occurs in large corporations and in one-owner / managercontrolled small businesses – and every size business in between . 
Some types of fraud are more common in small businesses , 
including sales skimming ( not recording all sales revenue , to deflate
the taxable income of the business and its owner ) and the recording
of personal expenses through the business ( to make these expenses
deductible for income tax )  . Some kinds of fraud are committed
mainly by large businesses , including paying bribes to public
officials and entering into illegal conspiracies to fix prices or divide
the market . The purchasing managers in any size business can be
tempted to accept kickbacks and under-the-table payoffs from
vendors and suppliers . 
We should mention another problem that puts
accountants in the hot seat : In many situations , two or more
businesses are controlled by the same person or the same
group of investors . Revenue and expenses can be arbitrarily
shifted among the different business entities under common
control . For one person to have a controlling ownership interest
in two or more businesses is perfectly legal , and such an
arrangement often makes good business sense . For example , a
retail business rents a building from a property business , and
the same person is the majority owner of both businesses . The
problem arises when that person arbitrarily sets the monthly
rent to shift profit between the two businesses ; a high rent
generates more profit for the property business and lower
profit for the retail business . This kind of manoeuvre may even
be perfectly legal , but it raises a fundamental accounting issue . 
Readers of financial statements are entitled to assume
that all activities between the business and the other parties it
deals with are based on what ’ s called arm ’ s-length bargaining , 
meaning that the business and the other parties have a purely
business relationship . When that ’ s not the case , the financial
report should – but usually doesn ’ t – use the term related
parties to describe persons and organisations who are not at
arm ’ s length with the business . According to financial reporting
standards , your accountant should advise you , the business
manager , to disclose any substantial related-party transactions
in your external financial statements . 
In short , fraud occurs in the business world . Most of these schemes
require cooking the books – which means altering entries in the
accounts to cover the fraud or simply not recording certain entries
that should be recorded . If you saw an expense account called
bribes , you would tend to be a little suspicious , but unethical
bookkeepers and accountants are usually a tad cleverer than that . 
You can find several tips on uncovering and preventing fraud in 
 ‘ Managing the Bookkeeping and Accounting System ’ earlier in this
chapter . 
When the books have been cooked , the financial
statements prepared from the accounts are distorted , incorrect
and probably misleading . Lenders , other creditors and the
owners who have capital invested in the business rely on the
company ’ s financial statements . Also , a business ’ s managers
and board of directors ( the group of people who oversee a
business enterprise ) may be misled – assuming that they ’ re not
a party to the fraud , of course – and may also have liability to
third-party creditors and investors for their failure to catch the
fraud . Creditors and investors who end up suffering losses have
legal grounds to sue the managers and directors ( and perhaps
the auditors who did not catch the fraud ) for damages suffered . 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act , a new set of rules and regulations designed
to ensure truthful accounting in companies listed on the American
stock market , came into force in 2002 . Chapter 1 gives you
information about Sarbanes-Oxley . 
Chapter 3
Taxes , Taxes and More Taxes
In This Chapter
Paying taxes as an employer and a property owner
Putting on your tax collector hat and collecting Value Added
Tax ( VAT ) 
Determining how much of business profit goes to the
government
Allowing company tax methods to override good accounting
methods
Looking at the different ways company tax works for different
business structures
As an employer , a business pays taxes . As a property owner or
occupier , a business pays taxes . As a seller of goods and services , a
business collects Value Added Tax paid by customers and remits
the amounts to the government ’ s Customs and Excise Department . 
And , of course , a business , or its owners , must pay corporate
income tax . Yikes ! Is there no escaping the tax millstone ? 
Nope , afraid not ( short of resorting to illegal activity or a sly move
to another country – you ’ ll have to find another book to tell you
about those options )  . But you can take advantage of the many
options in tax laws that can minimise how much you pay and delay
your payment ( a perfectly legal strategy known as tax avoidance )  . 
This chapter starts you on your way by explaining the various types
of taxation that a business faces . 
We say that this chapter ‘ starts you on your way ’ because we can ’ t
possibly provide you with exhaustive detail in one chapter . And
besides , no one can give you good tax advice without first looking at
your specific situation – consult a professional tax expert for that . 
Taxing Wages and Property
Even if you don ’ t earn a profit in your business , you still have to pay
certain taxes . Unlike corporation tax , which is a contingent or
conditional tax that depends on whether a business earns taxable
income for the year , the two major types of non-income taxes –
employer payroll taxes and business rates – always have to be paid .  
( See ‘ Taxing Your Bottom Line : Company Taxes ,  ’ later in this
chapter , for more about income tax .  ) 
Putting the government on the payroll : 
Employer taxes
In addition to deducting income tax from employees ’ wages and
remitting those amounts to the proper government agencies , 
businesses need to pay National Insurance for all employees , 
yourself included .  ( Actually , National Insurance isn ’ t really a tax , but
we won ’ t get technical .  ) 
National Insurance
Most people don ’ t realise that they usually pay less than half of their
National Insurance bill – the employer picks up the rest of the tab . 
The idea is that the burden should be shared almost evenly , but
with the employer generally picking up a little more of the tab . 
We don ’ t want to get into a debate about the National
Insurance system and the financial problems it ’ s facing ; we ’ ll
just say that the amount you ’ ll pay in National Insurance almost
certainly won ’ t diminish in the future . Here ’ s an idea of what a
business pays in National Insurance : In 20011 / 12 , the first £5 , 315
of annual wages were exempt from any National Insurance
charges . Then , up to a ceiling of £42 , 475 , the employer pays 13 . 8
per cent . 
Employment tax
Employing people requires you to manage a PAYE ( Pay As You
Earn ) system . If your business is a limited company , the owner 
( you ) is also liable for PAYE . You will also have to deduct National
Insurance . Both these tasks will involve some additional record
keeping , as , once again , owner-managers are being asked to act as
unpaid tax collectors . There are serious penalties for getting it
wrong . 
PAYE
Income tax is collected from employees through the
PAYE system , or Pay As You Earn . The employee ’ s liability to
income tax is collected as it is earned instead of by tax
assessment at some later date . If the business is run as a limited
company , then the directors of the company are employees . 
PAYE must be operated on all salaries and bonuses paid to
them , yourself included . 
The way to an employee 
 ’ 
s heart is through the
payroll department
Remember the first time you received a real pay cheque ? Your jaw dropped
when you compared the gross wages ( the amount before deductions ) and the
net , or take-home pay ( the amount you actually received )  , right ? A business ’ s
accountants need to track how much of the following , by law , to deduct from
employees ’ pay cheques : 
National Insurance . 
Pay As You Earn ( PAYE ) taxes on income , which go to the Government . 
Other , non-tax-related withholdings that the employee agrees to ( such as
union dues , pension plan contributions , and health insurance costs paid by the
employee )  . 
Other non-tax-related withholdings required by a court order ( for
example , a business may be ordered to withhold part or all of an employee ’ s
wages and remit the amount to a legal agency or a creditor to which the
employee owes money )  . 
For all these deductions , a business serves as a collection agent and remits
the appropriate amount of wages to the appropriate party . As you can imagine , 
this task requires lots of additional accounting and record-keeping . 
HM Revenue and Customs now issues booklets in reasonably plain
English explaining how PAYE works . The main documents you need
to operate PAYE are : 
Form P11 , a deduction working sheet for each employee . 
The PAYE Tables . There are two books of tax tables in
general use , which are updated in line with the prevailing tax
rates . 
• Pay Adjustment Tables show the amount that an
employee can earn in any particular week or month
before the payment of tax . 
• Taxable Pay Tables show the tax due on an employee ’ s
taxable pay . 
Form P45 , which is given to an employee when transferring
from one employment to another . 
Form P46 , which is used when a new employee does not
have a P45 from a previous employment ( for example , a
school-leaver starting work for the first time )  . 
Form P60 , which is used so that the employer can certify an
employee ’ s pay at the end of the income tax year in April . 
Form P35 , the year-end declaration and certificate . This is
used to summarise all the tax and National Insurance
deductions from employees for the tax year . 
Form P6 , the tax codes advice notice issued by the Inspector
of Taxes telling you which tax code number to use for each
employee . 
You can find tables giving details of PAYE and NIC rates and limits
for the current tax year , for every conceivable category , at the HM
Revenue and Customs website ( www . hmrc . gov . uk / employers /  )  . 
Taxing everything you can put your hands
on : Property taxes
Businesses and other occupiers of non-domestic properties pay
Non-Domestic Rates ( also known as Business Rates ) to directly
contribute towards the costs of local authority services . Non-
contribute towards the costs of local authority services . Nondomestic properties are business properties such as shops , offices , 
warehouses and factories , and any other property that is not
classed as domestic property . In some cases , properties may be
used for both domestic and non-domestic purposes ( for example , a
shop with a flat above it )  , in which case both council tax , the tax
charged on personal properties , and Business Rates will be charged . 
Apart from the few lucky properties such as churches , agricultural
land , sewers , public parks , certain property used for disabled
people , and swinging moorings for boats , which are all exempt from
Business Rates , each non-domestic property has a rateable value . 
The valuation officers of the Valuation Office Agency ( VOA ) set the
rateable values . The VOA is a part of HM Revenue and Customs . It
draws up and maintains a full list of all rateable values . 
The Valuation Office Agency carries out a revaluation every five
years so that the values in the rating lists can be kept up-to-date . 
The total amount of Business Rates collected does not change
except to reflect inflation , but revaluations make sure that this is
spread fairly between ratepayers . The most recent revaluation took
place in April 2005 . 
The rateable value broadly represents the yearly rent the property
could have been let for on the open market on a particular date . 
Your local council works out your Business Rates bill by multiplying
your rateable value by the multiplier or ‘ poundage ’ which the
Government sets from 1 April each year for the whole of England . 
For example , if the multiplier ( which is often called the uniform
business rate or UBR ) was set at 43 . 3p ( 43 . 7 in Central London ) and
your rateable value was £10 , 000 , the local authority would multiply
this by 43 . 3p and your ‘ property tax ’ bill for the year would be
£4 , 330 . 
Your property may qualify for exemption under various
national and local regulations or may be eligible for special
reductions . 
You may be able to get relief if one of the following applies to you : 
Your business is small . A UBR of 42 . 6p applies to certain
businesses with rateable values below £6 , 000 . The rules are
complex and operate on a sliding scale . 
Your property is empty and unused . For the first three
months that a business property is empty , councils don ’ t
charge Business Rates for the property . For industrial and
warehouse property the rate-free period is six months . After
this , a 100 per cent business rate charge usually applies . 
Your business is in a rural village with a population below
3 , 000 . The types of business that qualify for this relief are : 
• The only village general store or post office as long as it
has a rateable value of up to £8 , 500 . 
• A food shop with a rateable value of up to £8 , 500 . 
• The only village pub and the only petrol station as long
as it has a rateable value of up to £12 , 500 . 
These premises are entitled to a 50 per cent reduction in the
Business Rates bill , or more if the council believes you need
it . 
If you are a business in a qualifying rural village with a
rateable value of up to £16 , 500 , your local council may decide
to give you up to 100 per cent relief , as long as your business
is of benefit to the community . 
You are suffering severe hardship and cannot pay your
Business Rates bill . Your local council may decide to give
you up to 100 per cent relief – the decision is up to them . 
They normally only do this in extreme cases of hardship and
for businesses that are particularly important to the local
community . This takes account of the fact that local council
tax payers will cover part of the cost of the relief . 
If you think you may qualify for any of these types of relief , you
should contact the Business Rates section of your local council for
more information and advice on how to apply . 
Working from home
If you work from home , your local council may charge
Business Rates for the part of the property used for work , and
you will have to pay council tax for the rest of the property 
( although your property ’ s valuation band may change )  . It will
depend on the circumstances of each case and you should ask
your local office of the Valuation Office Agency for advice . 
Property taxes can take a big chunk out of a business ’ s
profit . In large organisations , an in-house accountant who deals
with property taxes and knows the tax law language and
methods is responsible for developing strategies to minimise
property taxes . Small-business owners may want to consult a
rating adviser . Members of the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors ( RICS ) and the Institute of Revenues Rating and
Valuation ( IRRV ) are qualified and are regulated by rules of
professional conduct designed to protect the public from
misconduct . 
You can find details of these organisations and their members on
their websites : 
RICS – www . rics . org
IRRV – www . irrv . org . uk
You can find the latest information on business rates on the official
Government website at www . businesslink . gov . uk . 
Before you employ a rating adviser , you should check that they have
the necessary knowledge and expertise , as well as appropriate
indemnity insurance . You should also be wary of false or misleading
claims . 
Getting to Grips with Value Added
Tax
Most governments , and the UK Government is no exception , levy
sales taxes on certain products and services sold within their
jurisdictions . In the UK this tax is known as the Value Added Tax 
( VAT )  . The final consumer of the product or service pays the VAT –
in other words the tax is tacked onto the product ’ s price tag at the
very end of the economic chain . The business that is selling the
product or service collects the VAT and remits it to the appropriate
tax agency ( HM Revenue and Customs in the UK )  . Businesses that
operate earlier in the economic chain ( that is , those that sell
products to other businesses that in turn resell the products ) 
generally do not end up paying VAT but simply collect it and pass it
on . 
For example , when you run to your local chemist for some headache
pills after all this tax business , you pay the chemist the cost of the
pills plus VAT . But the chemist can reclaim the VAT it paid to the
wholesaler ( and so on , back along the retail chain )  . Only you , the
final consumer , pays the VAT .  ( Lucky you !  ) 
VAT is a complicated tax . Currently , you must register if
your taxable turnover , that is , sales ( not profit )  , exceeds
£73 , 000 in any 12-month period , or looks as though it might
reasonably be expected to do so . This rate is reviewed each
year in the budget and is frequently changed .  ( The UK is
significantly out of line with many other countries in Europe , 
where VAT entry rates are much lower .  ) The general rule is that
all supplies of goods and services are taxable at the standard
rate ( 20 per cent ) unless they are specifically stated by the law
to be zero-rated or exempt . In deciding whether your turnover
exceeds the limit you have to include the zero-rated sales 
( things like most foods , books and children ’ s clothing )  , as they
are technically taxable ; it ’ s just that the rate of tax is 0 per cent . 
You leave out exempt items . As a designated tax collector , the
business does not pay VAT on goods and services it buys from
other VAT registered businesses that are destined to be sold to
its customers . 
If you are a small business owner / manager , be aware that if you
overlook this role imposed on the business by the government , 
you ’ re still responsible for paying the tax over to the government . 
Suppose you make a sale for £100 but don ’ t add the £20 . 00 VAT , 
which is the rate currently applying in the UK . Big Brother says you
did collect the VAT , whether you think you did or not . So you still
have to pay the government the VAT element in the £100 ( £16 . 67 )  , 
which leaves you with only £83 . 33 in sales revenue . 
There are three free booklets issued by HM Revenue and Customs : a
simple introductory booklet called Should you be registered for VAT ? 
and two more detailed booklets called General Guide and Scope and
Coverage . If in doubt ( and the language is not easy to understand ) 
ask your accountant or the local branch of HM Revenue and
Customs ; after all , they would rather help you to get it right in the
first place than have to sort it out later when you have made a mess
of it . 
Each quarter , you have to complete a return , which shows your
purchases and the VAT you paid on them , and your sales and the
VAT you collected on them . The VAT paid and collected are offset
against each other and the balance sent to HM Revenue and
Customs . If you have paid more VAT in any quarter than you have
collected , you will get a refund . For this reason it sometimes pays to
register if you don ’ t have to – if you ’ re selling mostly zero-rated
items for example ; also , being registered for VAT may make your
business look more professional and less amateurish to your
potential customers . 
Tracking and recording Value Added Tax is a big
responsibility for many businesses , especially if the business
operates across several European countries . Having welltrained accounting staff manage this side of the business is well
worth the cost . You can check the HM Revenue and Customs
website for the latest rules ( go to www . hmrc . gov . uk and click on 
 ‘ VAT ’  )  . 
You can find a useful VAT calculator on the small business portal
www . bytestart . co . uk . Click on ‘ Tax and Accounting ’ and then on 
 ‘ VAT Calculator ’  . 
Taxing Your Bottom Line : Company
Taxes
This chapter focuses on the tax dimensions of business entities . 
Chapter 4 presents a basic income tax model for individuals ( see the
section ‘ The Accounting Vice You Can ’ t Escape ’  )  . 
Every business must determine its annual taxable
income , which is the amount of profit subject to corporate tax
or income tax if the business is not a limited company . To
determine annual taxable income , you deduct certain allowed
expenses from gross income . Corporation tax law rests very
roughly on the premise that all income is taxable unless
expressly exempted , and nothing can be deducted unless
expressly allowed . 
When you read a profit-and-loss account that
summarises a business ’ s sales revenue and expenses for a
period and ends with bottom-line profit , keep in mind that the
accrual basis of accounting has been used to record sales
revenue and expenses . The accrual basis gives a more
trustworthy and meaningful profit number . But accrual-based
sales revenue and expense numbers are not cash inflows and
outflows during the period . So the bottom-line profit does not
tell you the impact on cash from the profit-making activities of
the business . You have to convert the revenue and expense
amounts reported in the profit-and-loss account to a cash basis
in order to determine the net cash increase or decrease . Well , 
actually , you don ’ t have to do this – the cash flow statement
does this for you , as Chapter 7 explains . 
Although you determine your business ’ s taxable income as an
annual amount , you don ’ t wait until you file your tax return to make
that calculation and payment . Instead , corporation tax law requires
you to estimate your corporation income tax for the year and , based
on your estimate , to make two half-yearly instalment payments on
your corporation tax during the year , one at the end of January and
one at the end of July . Rather than calculating the tax due yourself , 
one at the end of July . Rather than calculating the tax due yourself , 
you can rely on HM Revenue and Customs to do the sums for you if
you send in a completed tax return before the 30 September for the
year in question . When you file the final tax return – with the official , 
rather than the estimated , taxable income amount – after the close
of the year , you pay any remaining amount of tax you owe or claim a
refund if you have overpaid your corporation tax during the year . If
you grossly underestimate your taxable income for the year and
thus end up having to pay a large amount of tax after the end of the
year , you probably will owe a late payment penalty . After your first
year in business , the tax you have to pay will be based on your
profits for the previous tax year . A tax year runs from 6 April to 5
April . 
A word on cash basis accounting for Value
Added Tax
Cash basis accounting ( also known as chequebook accounting ) isn ’ t generally
acceptable in the world of business , but is permitted by Value Added Tax law
for some businesses . To use cash basis VAT accounting , a business must keep
these factors in mind : 
Cash accounting is open to you if you are a registered trader with an
expected turnover not exceeding £1 , 350 , 000 in the next 12 months . There is a
25 per cent tolerance built into the scheme . This means that once you are
using cash accounting , you can normally continue to use it until the annual
value of your taxable supplies reaches £1 , 600 , 000 . 
The main accounting record you must keep will be a cash book
summarising all payments made and received , with a separate column for the
relevant VAT . You will also need to keep the corresponding tax invoices and
ensure that there is a satisfactory system of cross-referencing . 
These VAT records must be kept for six years , unless you have agreed
upon a shorter period with your local VAT office . 
The longer the time lag between your issuing sales invoices and
receiving payment from your customers , the more benefit cash accounting is
likely to be to you . If you are usually paid as soon as you make a sale ( e . g . if
you use a retail scheme ) you will normally be worse off under cash
accounting . The same applies to the situation where you regularly receive repayments of VAT ( e . g . because you make zero-rated supplies )  . 
One major advantage of the scheme is that it simplifies your bookkeeping
requirements , and many businesses can be controlled simply by using an
appropriately analysed cash book . 
For the great majority of businesses , cash basis accounting is not acceptable , 
either for reporting to HM Revenue and Customs or for preparing financial
statements . So this last advantage of cash-based VAT accounting is illusory . 
This method falls short of the information needed for even a relatively small
business . Accrual basis accounting , described in Chapters 5 and 6 , is the only
real option for most businesses . Even small businesses that don ’ t sell products
should carefully consider whether cash basis is adequate for : 
Preparing external financial statements for borrowing money and
reporting to owners . 
Dividing profit among owners . 
For all practical purposes , only sole proprietorships ( one-owner businesses ) 
that sell just services and no products can use cash basis VAT accounting . 
Other businesses must use the accrual basis – which provides a much better
income statement for management control and decision-making , and a much
more complete picture of the business ’ s financial condition . 
You must keep adequate accounting records to
determine your business ’ s annual taxable income . If you report
the wrong taxable income amount , you can ’ t plead that the
bookkeeper was incompetent or that your accounting records
were inadequate or poorly organised – in fact , the good old tax
man may decide that your poor accounting was intentional and
is evidence of income tax evasion . If you under-report your
taxable income by too much , you may have to pay interest and
penalties in addition to the tax that you owe . 
When we talk about adequate accounting records , we ’ re not talking
about the accounting methods that you select to determine annual
taxable income – Chapter 13 discusses choosing among alternative
accounting methods for certain expenses . After you ’ ve selected
which accounting methods you ’ ll use for these expenses , your
bookkeeping procedures must follow these methods faithfully . 
Choose the accounting methods that minimise your current year ’ s
taxable income – but make sure that your bookkeeping is done
accurately and on time and that your accounting records are
complete . If your business ’ s income tax return is audited , HM
Revenue and Customs agents first look at your accounting records
and bookkeeping system . 
Furthermore , you must stand ready to present evidence for expense
deductions . Be sure to hold on to receipts and other relevant
documents . In an HM Revenue and Customs audit , the burden of
proof is on you . HM Revenue and Customs don ’ t have to disprove a
deduction ; you have to prove that you were entitled to the
deduction . No evidence , no deduction is the rule to keep in mind . 
The following sections paint a rough sketch of the main topics of
business income taxation .  ( We don ’ t go into the many technical
details of determining taxable income , however .  ) 
Different tax rates on different levels of
business taxable income
Personal taxes , which apply to sole traders and partnerships , come
on a sliding scale up to a maximum of 40 per cent . When trading as a
company a business ’ s annual taxable income isn ’ t taxed at a flat rate
either . In writing the income tax law , the government gave the little
either . In writing the income tax law , the government gave the little
guy a break . As of 2011 , the corporate income tax rate starts at 20
per cent on the first £300 , 000 of taxable income , then quickly moves
up to a 26 per cent rate on taxable income in the range of £300 , 001
to £1 , 500 , 000 , after which it drops back to 20 per cent . Simple it
ain ’ t ! The income tax on the taxable income for the year is
calculated using these tax rates . 
In years past , corporate income tax rates were
considerably higher , and the rates could go up in the future –
although most experts don ’ t predict any increase . The
Chancellor of the Exchequer looks at the income tax law every
year and makes some changes virtually every year . Many
changes have to do with the accounting methods allowed to
determine annual taxable income . For instance , the methods for
computing annual writing down expense , which recognises the
wear and tear on a business ’ s long-lived operating assets , have
been changed back and forth by chancellors over the years . 
You can check with HM Revenue and Customs for the latest
rules at www . hmrc . gov . uk by simply clicking on ‘ Corporation
Tax ’  . 
Businesses pay tax on income at different rates
depending on their size . But any capital gains ( made , for
example , when part of a business is sold or when owners cash
in ) used to be taxed at 10 per cent ( if the asset concerned had
been owned for two years or more ) and then on a sliding scale
up to 40 per cent for some assets and some time periods . 
However , some fiendishly complicated ‘ taper reliefs ’ existed
that made understanding the true tax position very difficult . So , 
from 2008 , all capital gains are now taxed at a single rate of 18
per cent . The simplification does mean that some taxpayers ( in
particular , any entrepreneurs selling up ) face a tax hike of 80
per cent ( from 10 per cent up to 18 per cent )  . 
Profit accounting and taxable income
accounting
You ’ re probably thinking that this section of the chapter is about
how a business ’ s bottom-line profit – its net income – drives its
taxable income amount . Actually , we want to show you the exact
opposite : how income tax law drives a business ’ s profit accounting . 
That ’ s right : Tax law plays a large role in how a business determines
its profit figure , or more precisely the accounting methods used to
record revenue and expenses . 
Before you explore that paradox , you need to understand something
about the accounting methods for recording profit . For measuring
and recording many expenses ( and some types of revenue )  , no
single accounting method emerges as the one and only dominant
method . Accountants have a certain amount of legitimate leeway in
measuring and reporting the revenue and expenses that drive the
profit figure .  ( See Chapter 13 for further discussion of alternative
accounting methods .  ) Therefore , two different accountants , 
recording the same profit-making activities for the same period , 
would most likely come up with two different profit figures – the
numbers would be off by at least a little , and perhaps by a lot . 
And that inconsistency is fine – as long as the differences are due to
legitimate reasons . We ’ d like to be able to report to you that in
measuring profit , accountants always aim right at the bull ’ s-eye , the
dead centre of the profit target . One commandment in the
accountants ’ bible is that annual profit should be as close to the
truth as can be measured ; accounting methods should be objective
and fair . But in the real world , profit accounting doesn ’ t quite live up
to this ideal . 
Be aware that a business may be tempted to deliberately
overstate or understate its profit . When a business overstates its
profit in its profit and loss account , some amount of its sales
revenue has been recorded too soon and / or some amount of its
expenses has not yet been recorded ( but will be later )  . 
Overstating profit is a dangerous game to play because it
deceives investors and other interested parties into thinking
that the business is doing better than it really is . Audits of
financial reports by chartered accountants ( as discussed in
Chapter 15 ) keep such financial reporting fraud to a minimum
but don ’ t necessarily catch every case . 
More to the point of this chapter is the fact that most businesses are
under some pressure to understate the profit reported in their
annual income statements . Businesses generally record sales
revenue correctly ( with some notable exceptions )  , but they may
record some expenses sooner than these costs should be deducted
from sales revenue . Why ? Businesses are preoccupied with
minimising income tax , which means minimising taxable income . To
minimise taxable income , a business chooses accounting methods
that record expenses as soon as possible . Keeping two sets of books 
( accounting records ) – one for tax returns and one for internal profit
accounting reports to managers – is not very practical , so the
business uses the accounting methods kept for tax purposes for
other purposes as well . And that ’ s why tax concerns can drive down
a business ’ s profit figure . 
In short , the income tax law permits fairly conservative expense
accounting methods – expense amounts can be front-loaded , or
deducted sooner rather than later . The reason is to give a business
the option to minimise its current taxable income ( even though this
course has a reverse effect in later years )  . Many businesses select
these conservative expense methods – both for their income tax
returns and for their financial statements reported to managers and
to outside investors and lenders . Thus financial statements of many
businesses tilt to the conservative , or understated , side . 
Of course , a business should report an accurate figure as
its net profit , with no deliberate fudging . If you can ’ t trust that
figure , who knows for sure exactly how the company is doing ? 
Not the owners , the value of whose investment in the business
depends mostly on profit performance , and not even the
business ’ s managers , whose business decisions depend on
recorded profit performance . Every business needs a reliable
profit compass to navigate its way through the competitive
environment of the business world – that ’ s just common sense
and doesn ’ t even begin to address ethical issues . 
Other reasons for understating profit
Minimising taxable income is a strong motive for understating profit , but
businesses have other reasons as well . Imagine for the moment that business
profit isn ’ t subject to income tax ( you wish !  )  . Even in this hypothetical , no-tax
world , many businesses probably would select accounting methods that
measure their profit on the low side rather than the high side . Two possible
reasons are behind this decision : 
Don ’ t count your chickens before they hatch philosophy : Many business
managers and owners tend to be financially conservative ; they prefer to err on
the low side of profit measurement rather than on the high side . 
Save for a rainy day philosophy : A business may want to keep some
profit in reserve so that during a future downturn , it has a profit cushion to
soften the blow . 
The people who think this way tend to view overstating profit as a form of
defrauding investors but view understating profit as simply being prudent . 
Frankly , we think that putting your thumb on either side of the profit scale 
( revenue being one side and expenses the other ) is not a good idea . Let the
chips fall where they may is our philosophy . Adopt the accounting methods
that you think best reflect how you operate the business . The income tax law
has put too much downward pressure on profit measurement , in our opinion . 
We should say that many businesses do report their annual profit
correctly – sales revenue and expenses are recorded properly and
without any attempt to manipulate either side of the profit equation . 
Refer to Chapter 13 for more about how choosing one expense
accounting method over another method impacts profit .  ( Note : The
following sections , which discuss expenses and income that are not
deductible or are only partially deductible , have nothing to do with
choosing accounting methods .  ) 
Deductible expenses
What expenses can you claim when you are self-employed ? 
Expenditure can be split into two main categories ,  ‘ Capital ’ and 
 ‘ Revenue ’  . 
Capital Expenditure : Capital expenditure is expenditure on
such items as the purchase or alteration of business
premises , purchase of plant , machinery and vehicles , or the
initial cost of tools . You cannot deduct ‘ capital expenditure ’ 
in working out your taxable profits , but some relief may be
due on this type of expenditure in the form of capital
allowances . Your Tax Office can give further advice on these
allowances . 
Revenue Expenditure : Listing all the expenses that can be
deducted is impossible but , generally speaking , allowable
expenditure relates to day-to-day running costs of your
business . It includes such items as wages , rent , lighting and
heating of business premises , running costs of vehicles used
in the business , purchase of goods for resale and the cost of
replacing tools used in the business . 
Non-deductible expenses
To be deductible , business expenses must be ordinary and necessary
– that is , regular , routine stuff that you need to do to run your
business . You ’ re probably thinking that you can make an argument
that any of your expenses meet the ordinary and necessary test . 
And you ’ re mostly right – almost all business expenses meet this
twofold test . 
However , HM Revenue and Customs consider certain
business expenses to be anything but ordinary and necessary ; 
you can argue about them until you ’ re blue in the face , and it
won ’ t make any difference . Examples of non-allowable
expenditure are your own wages , premiums on personal
insurance policies , and income tax and National Insurance
contributions . Where expenditure relates to both business and
private use , only the part that relates to the business will be
allowed ; examples are lighting , heating and telephone
expenditure . If a vehicle is used for both business and private
purposes , then the capital allowances and the total running
expenses will be split in proportion to the business and private
mileage . You will need to keep records of your total mileage and
the number of miles travelled on business to calculate the
correct split . 
Here ’ s a list of expenses that are not deductible or are only partially
deductible when determining annual taxable income : 
Customer entertainment expenses : Definitely a no go area . 
For a while entertaining overseas customers was an
allowable tax expense until the Revenue became suspicious
of the amazing number of people being entertained by
businesses with no export activity whatsoever . 
Bribes , kickbacks , fines and penalties : Oh , come on , did you
really think that you could get rewarded for doing stuff that ’ s
illegal or , at best , undesirable ? If you were allowed to deduct
these costs , that would be tantamount to the Revenue
encouraging such behaviour – a policy that wouldn ’ t sit too
well with the general public . 
Lobbying costs : You can ’ t deduct payments made to
influence legislation . Sorry , but you can ’ t deduct the
expenses you ran up to persuade Minister Hardnose to give
your bicycle business special tax credits because riding
bicycles is good exercise for people . 
Start-up costs : You can ’ t just deduct the cost of everything
needed to start a business in year one . Some assets , such as
cars and equipment or machinery , have to be written down
over a number of future years . This area of the tax law can
get a little hairy . If you have just started a new business , you
may be wise to consult a tax professional on this question , 
especially if your start-up costs are rather large . 
Working from home : If you use part of your home for work , 
you need to keep sufficient records to back up the
proportion of heating and lighting costs that relate to your
business and your private use . Sometimes you may not get
evidence , such as a receipt , for cash expenses , especially
where the amounts are small . If this happens , make a brief
note as soon as you can of the amount you spent , when you
spent it , and what it was for . HM Revenue and Customs don ’ t
expect you to keep photocopies of bills , although you may
find them useful . 
Life insurance premiums : A business may buy life insurance
coverage on key officers and executives , but if the business
is the beneficiary , the premiums are not deductible . The
proceeds from a life insurance policy are not taxable income
to the business if the insured person dies , because the cost
of the premiums was not deductible . In short , premiums are
not deductible , and proceeds upon death are excluded from
taxable income . 
Travel and convention attendance expenses : Some
businesses pay for rather lavish conventions for their
managers and spend rather freely for special meetings at
attractive locations that their customers attend for free . The
Revenue takes a dim view of such extravagant expenditures
and may not allow a full deduction for these types of
expenses . HM Revenue and Customs holds that such
conventions and meetings could have been just as effective
for a much more reasonable cost . In short , a business may
not get a 100 per cent deduction for its travel and convention
expenses if the Revenue audits these expenditures . 
Transactions with related parties : Income tax law takes a
special interest in transactions where the two parties are
related in some way . For example , a business may rent space
in a building owned by the same people who have money
invested in the business ; the rent may be artificially high or
low in an attempt to shift income and expenses between the
two tax entities or individuals . In other words , these
transactions may not be based on what ’ s known as arm ’ slength bargaining . A business that deals with a related party
must be ready to show that the price paid or received is
consistent with what the price would be for an unrelated
party . 
You can find a useful guide to business expenses on the
www . bytestart . co . uk small business portal . Just click on ‘ Tax
and Accounting ’ and ‘ Business Expenses Guide ’  . 
Equity capital disguised as debt
Equity capital disguised as debt
The general term debt refers to money borrowed from
lenders who require that the money be paid back by a certain
date , and who require that interest be paid on the debt until it
is repaid . Equity is money invested by owners ( such as
shareholders ) in a business in return for hoped-for , but not
guaranteed , profit returns . Interest is deductible , but cash
dividends paid to shareholders are not – which gives debt
capital a big edge over equity capital at tax time . 
Not surprisingly , some businesses try to pass off equity capital as
debt on their tax returns so that they can deduct the payments to
the equity sources as interest expense to determine taxable income . 
Don ’ t think that HM Revenue and Customs are ignorant of these
tactics : Everything that you declare as interest on debt may be
examined carefully , and if the Revenue determines that what you ’ re
calling debt is really equity capital , it disallows the interest
deduction . The business can make payments to its sources of
capital that it calls and treats as interest – but this does not mean
that HM Revenue and Customs will automatically believe that the
payments are in fact interest . The Revenue follows the general
principle of substance over form . If the so-called debt has too many
characteristics of equity capital , HM Revenue and Customs treat the
payments not as interest but rather as dividend distributions from
profit to the equity sources of capital . 
In summary , debt must really be debt and must have few or none of
the characteristics of equity . Drawing a clear-cut line between debt
and equity has been a vexing problem for HM Revenue and
Customs , and the rules are complex . You ’ ll probably have to consult
a tax professional if you have a question about this issue . Be warned
that if you attempt to disguise equity capital as debt , your charade
may not work – and the Revenue may disallow any ‘ interest ’ 
payments you have made . 
payments you have made . 
Part II
Getting a Grip on Financial
Statements
In this part .  .  . 
Financial statements are like the tip of an iceberg – they only show
the visible part , underneath which are a lot of record-keeping , 
accounting methods , and reporting decisions . The managers of a
business , the investors in a business , and the lenders to a business
need a firm grasp on these accounting communications . They need
to know which handles to grab hold of and how to find both the
good and bad signals in financial statements – and , ugh , this
includes the small-print footnotes that go with financial statements . 
Accountants prepare three primary financial statements . The profit
and loss account reports the profit-making activities of the business
and how much profit or loss the business made .  ( Sounds odd , 
doesn ’ t it , to say a business made a loss ? But to make profit , a
business has to take the risk that it may suffer a loss .  ) The balance
sheet reports the financial situation and position of the business at a
point in time – usually the last day of the profit period . The cash
flow statement reports how much cash was actually realised from
profit and other sources of cash , and what the business did with
this money . In short , the financial life of a business and its prospects
for success or potential danger of failing is all revealed in its
financial statements , as this part of the book exposes . 
But , as with much in accounting , not everything is quite as it
appears . Changing a single letter ( FIFO to LIFO ) in the footnotes to
the accounts can add ( or subtract ) a small fortune from the
reported profit , as you ’ ll see in Chapter 8 . 
Chapter 6
The Balance Sheet from the Profit and
Loss Account Viewpoint
In This Chapter
Coupling the profit and loss account with the balance sheet
Seeing how sales revenue and expenses drive assets and
liabilities
Sizing up assets and liabilities
Drawing the line between debt and owners ’ equity
Grouping short-term assets and liabilities to determine
solvency
Understanding costs and other balance sheet values
This chapter explores one of the three primary financial statements
reported by businesses – the balance sheet , or , to be more formal , 
the statement of financial condition . This key financial statement may
seem to stand alone – like an island to itself – because it ’ s presented
on a separate page in a financial report . In fact , the assets and
liabilities reported in a balance sheet are driven mainly by the
transactions the business engages in to make profit . These sale and
expense transactions of a business are summarised for a period in
its profit and loss account , which is explained in Chapter 5 . 
You ’ ve probably heard the expression that it takes money to make
money . For a business it takes assets to make profit . This chapter
identifies the particular assets needed to make profit . Also , the
chapter points out the particular liabilities involved in the pursuit of
profit . 
In brief , a business needs a lot of assets to open its
doors and to carry on its profit-making activities – making sales
and operating the business from day to day . For example , 
companies that sell products need to carry a stock of products
that are available for delivery to customers when sales are
made . A business can purchase products for its stock on credit , 
and delay payment for the purchase ( assuming it has a good
credit rating )  . In most cases , however , the business has to pay
for these purchases before all the products have been sold –
the stock-holding period is considerably longer than the credit
period . The business needs cash to pay for its stock purchases . 
Where does the cash come from ? 
In fact a business needs many more assets than just stock . Where
does the money for these assets come from ? Assets are the first act
of a two-act play . The second act looks at where the money comes
from , or the sources of capital for businesses . As Chapter 1 explains , 
the balance sheet of a business is the financial statement that
reports its assets on one side and the sources of capital on the other
side . 
Of course , as we repeat throughout this book , you need to use all
three primary financial statements to paint a business ’ s complete
financial picture . The profit and loss account details sales revenue
and expenses , which directly determine the amounts of assets ( and
two or three of the liabilities ) that are summarised in the balance
sheet . The cash flow statement answers the important question of
how much of the profit has been converted to cash , and the
company ’ s other sources and uses of cash during the period . 
This chapter connects sales revenue and expenses , which are
reported in the profit and loss account , with their corresponding
assets and liabilities in the balance sheet . The chapter also explains
the sources of capital that provide the money a business uses to
invest in its assets . 
Coupling the Profit and Loss Account
with the Balance Sheet
Sales revenue generates the inflow of assets and expenses cause the
outflow of assets . These increases and decreases in assets have to
be recorded . Also , some expenses spawn short-term liabilities that
have to be recorded . In short , accounting for profit involves much
more than keeping track of cash inflows and outflows . Which
specific assets and liabilities are directly involved in recording the
sales revenue and expenses of a business ? And how are these assets
and liabilities reported in a business ’ s balance sheet at the end of
the profit period ? These are the two main questions that this
chapter answers . 
This chapter explains how the profit-making transactions reported
in the profit and loss account connect with the assets ( and some
operating liabilities ) reported in the balance sheet . We stress the
dovetail fit between these two primary financial statements ( the
profit and loss account and the balance sheet )  . And don ’ t forget that
business accounting also keeps track of where the money for the
assets comes from – to invest in its assets , a business needs to raise
money by borrowing and persuading owners to put money in the
business . You shouldn ’ t look at assets without also looking at where
the money ( the capital ) for the assets comes from . 
The balance sheet , or statement of financial condition , summarises a
business ’ s assets , liabilities and owners ’ equity at a point in time
and , as shown in Chapter 5 , can be summarised in the following
equation : 
Figure 6-1 shows a balance sheet for a fictitious company – not from
left to right as shown in the accounting equation just above , but
rather from top to bottom , which is a vertical expression of the
accounting equation . This balance sheet is stripped down to the
bare-bone essentials – please note that it would need a little tidying
up before you ’ d want to show it off to the world in an external
financial report ( see Chapter 8 )  . 
Figure 6-1 : A
balance sheet
example
showing a
business ’ s
various
assets , 
liabilities and
owners ’ 
equity . 
A balance sheet doesn ’ t have a punch line like the profit and loss
account does – the profit and loss account ’ s punch line being the
net income line ( which is rarely humorous to the business itself , but
can cause some sniggers among analysts )  . You can ’ t look at just one
item on the balance sheet , murmur an appreciative ‘ ah-hah ,  ’ and
rush home to watch the footy game . You have to read the whole
thing ( sigh ) and make comparisons among the items . See Chapters 8
and 14 for more information on interpreting financial statements . 
At the most basic level , the best way to understand a
balance sheet ( most of it , anyway ) is to focus on the assets that
are generated by the company ’ s profit-making activities – in
other words , the cause-and-effect relationship between an item
that ’ s reported in the profit and loss account and an item that ’ s
reported in the balance sheet . 
Figure 6-2 : 
Connections
between the
assets and
operating
liabilities of a
business and
its sales
revenue and
expenses . 
Figure 6-2 lays out the vital links between sales revenue and
expenses and the assets and liabilities that are driven by these
profit-seeking activities . You can refer back to each connection as
sales revenue and expenses are discussed below . The format of the
profit and loss account is virtually the same as the format
introduced in Chapter 5 , except that depreciation expense is
reported on a separate line ( in Chapter 5 , depreciation is buried in
the sales , administrative and general expenses account )  . 
The amounts reported in the profit and loss account are
the cumulative totals for the whole year ( or other time period )  . 
In contrast , the amounts reported in the balance sheet are the
balances at the end of the year – the net amount , starting with
the balance at the start of the year , adjusted for increases and
decreases that occur during the year . For example , the total
cash inflows and outflows over the course of the entire year
were much more than the £2 million ending balance for cash . 
The purpose of Figure 6-2 is to highlight the connections between
the particular assets and operating liabilities that are tightly
interwoven with sales revenue and expenses . Business managers
need a good grip on these connections to control assets and
need a good grip on these connections to control assets and
liabilities . And outside investors need to understand these
connections to interpret the financial statements of a business ( see
Chapter 14 )  . 
Most people intuitively understand that sooner or later sales
revenue increases cash and expenses decrease cash .  ( The exception
is depreciation expense , as explained in Chapters 5 and 7 .  ) It ’ s the 
 ‘ sooner or later ’ that gives rise to the assets and liabilities involved
in making profit . 
The assets and liabilities driven by sales revenue and expenses are
as follows : 
Sales revenue derives from selling products and services to
customers . 
The cost of goods sold expense is what the business paid for
the products that it sells to its customers . You can ’ t charge
the cost of products to this expense account until you
actually sell the goods , so that cost goes into the stock asset
account until the goods are sold . 
The sales , administrative and general expenses ( SA & G ) 
category covers many different operating expenses ( such as
advertising , travel and telephone costs )  . SA & G expenses
drive the following items on the balance sheet : 
• The prepaid expenses asset account holds the total
amount of cash payments for future expenses ( for
example , you pay insurance premiums before the
policy goes into effect , so you charge those premiums
to the months covered by the policy )  . 
• The creditor liability account is the total amount of
expenses that haven ’ t been paid yet but that affect the
current period . For example , you receive a bill for
electricity that you used the month before , so you
charge that bill to the month benefited by the
electricity – thanks to the accrual basis of accounting . 
• The accrued expenses payable account is the opposite
of the prepaid expenses asset account : this liability
account holds costs that are paid after the cost is
recorded as an expense . An example is the accumulated
holiday pay that the company ’ s employees have earned
by the end of the year ; when the employees take their
holidays next year the company pays this liability . 
The purpose of depreciation is to spread out the original
cost of a fixed asset over the course of the asset ’ s life . If you
buy a vehicle that ’ s going to serve you for five years , you
charge one-fifth of the cost to depreciation expense each of
the five years .  ( Instead of charging this straight line , or level
amount to each year , a business can choose an accelerated
depreciation method , as explained in Chapter 13 .  ) Rather
than decreasing the fixed assets account directly ( which
would make some sense )  , accountants put depreciation
expense in an offset account called accumulated depreciation , 
the balance of which is deducted from the original cost of
fixed assets . Thus , both the original cost and the amount by
which the original cost has been depreciated to date are
available in separate accounts – both items of information
are reported in the balance sheet . 
Interest expense depends on the amount of money that the
business borrows and the interest rate that the lender
charges . Debt is the generic term for borrowed money ; and
debt bears interest . Loans and overdrafts are the most
common terms you see for most debt because the borrower 
( the business ) signs a legal instrument called a note . 
Normally , the total interest expense for a period hasn ’ t been
paid by the end of the period so the unpaid part is recorded
in accrued expenses payable ( or in a more specific account of
this type called accrued interest payable )  . 
A small part of the total income tax owed on the company ’ s
taxable income for the year probably will not be paid by the
end of the year , and the unpaid part is recorded in the
income tax payable account . 
A final note : The bottom-line profit ( net income ) for the year
increases the reserves or , as it is also known , the retained
earnings account , which is one of the two owners ’ equity
accounts . 
Sizing Up Assets and Liabilities
Although the business example shown in Figure 6–2 is
hypothetical , we didn ’ t make up the numbers at random – not
at all . We use a medium-sized business that has £25 million in
annual sales revenue as the example .  ( Your business may be a
lot smaller or larger than one with £25 million annual sales
revenue , of course .  ) All the other numbers in both the profit
and loss account and the balance sheet of the business are
realistic relative to each other . We assume the business earns
40 per cent gross margin ( £10 million gross margin ÷ £25 million
sales revenue = 40 per cent )  , which means its cost of goods sold
expense is 60 per cent of sales revenue . The sizes of particular
assets and liabilities compared with their relevant profit and
loss account numbers vary from industry to industry , and even
from business to business in the same industry . 
Based on its history and policies , the managers of a business can
estimate what the size of each asset and liability should be – and
these estimates provide very useful control benchmarks , or
yardsticks , against which the actual balances of the assets and
liabilities are compared to spot any serious deviations . In other
words , assets ( and liabilities , too ) can be too high or too low in
relation to the sales revenue and expenses that drive them , and
these deviations can cause problems that managers should try to
correct as soon as possible . 
Turning over assets
Assets should be turned over , or put to use by making sales . The higher the
turnover ( the more times the assets are used and then replaced )  , the better . 
The more sales , the better – because every sale is a profit-making opportunity . 
The asset turnover ratio compares annual sales revenue with total assets : 
Annual sales revenue ÷ total assets = asset turnover ratio
The asset turnover ratio is interesting as far as it goes , but it unfortunately
doesn ’ t go very far . This ratio looks only at total assets as an aggregate total . 
And the ratio looks only at sales revenue . The expenses of the business for the
year are not considered – even though expenses are responsible for most of
the assets of a business . 
Note : The asset turnover ratio is a quick-and-dirty test of how well a business
is using its assets to generate sales . The ratio does not evaluate profitability ; 
profit is not in the calculation . Basically , the ratio indicates how well assets
are being used to generate sales – nothing more . 
For example , based on the credit terms extended to customers and
the company ’ s actual policies regarding how aggressive the
business is in collecting past-due receivables , a manager can
determine the range for how much a proper , or within-theboundaries , balance of accounts receivable should be . This figure
would be the control benchmark . If the actual balance is reasonably
close to this control benchmark , the debtors ’ level is under control . 
If not , the manager should investigate why the debtors ’ level is
higher or lower than it should be . 
The following sections discuss the relative sizes of the assets and
liabilities in the balance sheet that result from sales and expenses . 
The sales and expenses are the drivers , or causes , of the assets and
liabilities . If a business earned profit simply by investing in stocks
and bonds , for example , it would not need all the various assets and
liabilities explained in this chapter . Such a business – a mutual fund , 
for example – would have just one income-producing asset : 
investments in securities . But this chapter focuses on businesses
that sell products to make profit . 
Sales revenue and debtors
In Figure 6-2 the annual sales revenue is £25 million . Debtors
represent one-tenth of this , or £2 . 5 million . In rough terms , the
average customer ’ s credit period is about 36 days – 365 days in the
year multiplied by the 10 per cent ratio of ending debtors balance to
annual sales revenue . Of course , some customers ’ balances owed to
the business may be past 36 days and some quite new . It ’ s the
overall average that you should focus on . The key question is
whether or not a customer-credit period averaging 36 days is
reasonable or not . 
Cost of goods sold expense and stock
In Figure 6-2 the annual cost of goods sold expense is £15 million . 
The stock is £3 , 575 , 000 , or about 24 per cent . In rough terms , the
average product ’ s stock-holding period is 87 days – 365 days in the
year multiplied by the 24 per cent ratio of ending stock to annual
cost of goods sold . Of course , some products may remain in stock
longer than the 87-day average and some products may sell in a
much shorter period than 87 days . It ’ s the overall average that you
should focus on . Is an 87-day average stock-holding period
reasonable ? 
The ‘ correct ’ average stock-holding period varies from
industry to industry . In some industries , the stock-holding
period is very long , three months or longer , especially for
manufacturers of heavy equipment and high-tech products . The
opposite is true for high-volume retailers such as retail
supermarkets who depend on getting products off the shelves
as quickly as possible . The 87-day average holding period in the
example is reasonable for many businesses , but would be far
too high for many other businesses . 
SA & G expenses and the four balance sheet
accounts that are connected with the
expenses
Note that in Figure 6-2 sales , administrative and general ( SA & G ) 
expenses connect with four balance sheet accounts – cash , prepaid
expenses , creditors and accrued expenses payable . The broad SA & G
expense category includes many different types of expenses that are
involved in making sales and operating the business .  ( Separate
expense accounts are maintained for specific expenses ; depending
on the size of the business and the needs of its various managers , 
hundreds or thousands of specific expense accounts are
established .  ) 
Cash is paid when recording payroll , mailing and some other
expenses . In contrast , insurance and office supplies costs are
prepaid , and then released to expense gradually over time . So , cash
is paid before the recording of the expense . Some of these expenses
are not paid until weeks after being recorded ; to recognise the
delayed payment the amounts owed are recorded in an accounts
payable or an accrued expenses payable liability account . 
One point we would like to repeat is that the company ’ s
managers should adopt benchmarks for each of these accounts
that are connected with the operating expenses of the business . 
For example , the £1 . 2 million ending balance of accrued
expenses payable is 20 per cent of the £6 million SA & G for the
year . Is this ratio within control limits ? Is it too high ? Managers
should ask and answer questions like these for every asset and
liability connected with the expenses of the business . 
Fixed assets and depreciation expense
As explained in Chapter 5 , depreciation is a truly unique expense . 
Depreciation is like other expenses in that , like all other expenses , it
is deducted from sales revenue to determine profit . Other than this , 
however , depreciation is very different . None of the depreciation
expense recorded to the period requires cash outlay during the
period . Rather , depreciation expense for the period is that portion
of the total cost of a business ’ s fixed assets that is allocated to the
period to record an amount of expense for using the assets during
the period . Depreciation is an imputed cost , based on what fraction
of the total cost of fixed assets is assigned to the period . 
The higher the total cost of its fixed assets , the higher a business ’ s
depreciation expense . However , there is no standard ratio of
depreciation expense to the total cost of fixed assets . The amount of
depreciation expense depends on the useful lives of the company ’ s
fixed assets and which depreciation method the business selects .  
( How to choose depreciation methods is explained in Chapter 13 .  ) 
The annual depreciation expense of a business is seldom more than
10–15 per cent of the total cost of its fixed assets . The depreciation
expense for the year is either reported as a separate expense in the
profit and loss account ( as in Figure 6–2 ) or the amount is disclosed
in a footnote . 
Because depreciation is based on the cost of fixed assets , the
balance sheet reports not one but two numbers – the original cost of
the fixed assets and the accumulated depreciation amount ( the
amount of depreciation that has been charged as an expense from
the time of acquiring the fixed asset to the current balance sheet
date )  . 
The point isn ’ t to confuse you by giving you even more
numbers to deal with . Seeing both numbers gives you an idea of
how old the fixed assets are and also tells you how much these
fixed assets originally cost . 
What about cash ? 
A business ’ s cash account consists of the money it has in its bank accounts
plus the money that it keeps on hand to provide change for its customers . Cash
is the essential lubricant of business activity . Sooner or later , virtually
everything passes through the cash account . 
How much of a cash balance should a business maintain ? This question has no
right answer . A business needs to determine how large a cash safety reserve
it ’ s comfortable with to meet unexpected demands on cash while keeping the
following wisdom in mind : 
Excess cash balances are non-productive and don ’ t earn any profit for
the business . 
Insufficient cash balances can cause the business to miss taking
advantage of opportunities that require quick action and large amounts of cash
– such as snatching up a prized piece of property that just came on the market
and that the business has had its eye on for some time , or buying out a
competitor when the business comes up for sale . 
The cash balance of the business whose balance sheet is presented in Figure
6–2 is £2 , 000 , 000 – which would be too large for some other businesses and too
small for others . 
In the example , the business has , over several years , 
invested £11 , 305 , 000 in its fixed assets ( that it still owns and
uses )  , and it has already charged off depreciation of £4 , 580 , 000
in previous years . In this year , the business records £1 , 200 , 000
depreciation expense ( you can ’ t tell from the balance sheet how
much depreciation was charged this year ; you have to look at
the profit and loss account in Figure 6–2 )  . The remaining nondepreciated cost of this business ’ s fixed assets at the end of the
year is £5 , 525 , 000 . So the fixed assets part of this year ’ s balance
sheet looks like this : 
You can tell that the collection of fixed assets includes both old and
new assets because the company has recorded £5 , 780 , 000 total
depreciation since the assets were bought , which is a fairly sizable
percentage of original cost ( more than half )  . But many businesses
use accelerated depreciation methods , which pile up a lot of the
depreciation expense in the early years and less in the back years 
( see Chapter 13 for more details ) so it ’ s hard to estimate the
average age of the assets . 
Debt and interest expense
The business example whose balance sheet and profit
and loss accounts are presented in Figure 6–2 has borrowed £5
million on loans , which , at an 8 per cent annual interest rate , is
£400 , 000 in interest expense for the year .  ( The business may
have had more or less borrowed at certain times during the
year , of course , and the actual interest expense depends on the
debt levels from month to month .  ) 
For most businesses , a small part of their total annual interest is
unpaid at year-end ; the unpaid part is recorded to bring the expense
up to the correct total amount for the year . In Figure 6–2 , the
accrued amount of interest is included in the more inclusive
accrued expenses payable liability account . You seldom see accrued
interest payable reported on a separate line in a balance sheet
unless it happens to be a rather large amount or if the business is
seriously behind in paying interest on its debt . 
Income tax expense
In Figure 6-2 , earnings before income tax – after deducting interest
and all other expenses from sales revenue – is £2 , 400 , 000 .  ( The
actual taxable income of the business for the year probably would
be somewhat more or less than this amount because of the many
complexities in the income tax law , which are beyond the scope of
this book .  ) In the example we use a tax rate of one-third for
convenience , so the income tax expense is £800 , 000 of the pre-tax
income of £2 , 400 , 000 . Most of the income tax for the year must be
paid over to HM Revenue and Customs before the end of the year . 
But a small part is usually still owed at the end of the year . The
unpaid part is recorded in the income tax payable liability account –
as you see in Figure 6–2 . In the example , the unpaid part is £80 , 000
of the total £800 , 000 income tax for the year – but we don ’ t mean to
suggest that this ratio is typical . Generally , the unpaid income tax at
the end of the year is fairly small , but just how small depends on
several technical factors . You may want to check with your tax
professional to make sure you have paid over enough of the annual
income tax by the end of the year to avoid a penalty for late
payment . 
The bottom line : net profit ( net income ) and
cash dividends ( if any ) 
A business may have other sources of income during the year , such
as interest income on investments . In this example , however , the
business has only sales revenue , which is gross income from the
sale of products and services . All expenses , starting with cost of
goods sold , down to and including income tax , are deducted from
sales revenue to arrive at the last , or bottom line , of the profit and
loss account . The preferred term for bottom-line profit is net
income , as you see in Figure 6–2 . 
The £1 , 600 , 000 net income for the year increases retained earnings
by the same amount , hence the line of connection from net income
and retained earnings in Figure 6-2 . The £1 , 600 , 000 profit ( here we
go again using the term profit instead of net income ) either stays in
the business , or some of it is paid out and divided among the
owners of the business . If the business paid out cash dividends from
profit during the year , these cash payments to its owners 
( shareholders ) are deducted from retained earnings . You can ’ t tell
from the profit and loss account or the balance sheet whether any
cash dividends were paid . You have to look in the cash flow
statement for this information – which is explained in Chapter 7 . 
Financing a Business : Owners ’ 
Equity and Debt
You may have noticed in Figure 6-2 that there are two
balance sheet accounts that have no lines of connection from
the profit and loss account – loans and owners ’ invested capital . 
Revenue and expenses do not affect these two key balance
sheet accounts ( nor the fixed assets account for that matter , 
which is explained in Chapter 7 )  . However , both debt and
owners ’ invested capital are extremely important for making
profit . 
To run a business you need financial backing , otherwise known as
capital . Capital is all incoming funds that are not derived from sales
revenue ( or from selling off assets )  . A business raises capital by
borrowing money , getting owners to invest money in the business , 
and making profit that is retained in the business . Borrowed money
is known as debt ; invested money and retained profits are the two
sources of owners ’ equity . Those two sources need to be kept
separate according to the rules of accounting . See Chapters 5 and 9
for more about profit . 
How much capital does the business shown in Figure 6-2 have ? Its
total assets are £14 , 080 , 000 , but this is not quite the answer . The
company ’ s profit-making activities generated three operating
liabilities – creditors , accrued expenses payable and income tax
payable – and in total these three liabilities provided £2 , 080 , 000 of
the total assets of the business . So , deducting this amount from total
assets gives the answer : The business has £12 million in capital . 
Where did this capital come from ? Debt provided £5 million and the
two sources of owners ’ equity provided the other £7 million ( see
Figure 6-1 or 6-2 to check these numbers )  . 
Creditors , accrued expenses payable and income tax
payable are short-term , non-interest-bearing liabilities that are
sometimes called current liabilities because they arise directly
from a business ’ s expense activities – they aren ’ t the result of
borrowing money but rather are the result of buying things on
credit or delaying payment of certain expenses . 
This particular business has decided to finance itself
through debt and equity in the following mix : 
Deciding how to divide your sources of capital can be tricky . In a
very real sense , the debt-versus-equity question never has a final
answer ; it ’ s always under review and reconsideration by most
answer ; it ’ s always under review and reconsideration by most
businesses . Some companies , just like some individuals , are strongly
anti-debt , but even they may find that they need to take on debt
eventually to keep up with changing times . 
Debt is both good and bad , and in extreme situations it can get very
ugly . The advantages of debt are : 
Most businesses can ’ t raise all the capital they need from
owners ’ equity and debt offers another source of capital 
( though , of course , many lenders may provide only half or
less of the capital that a business needs )  . 
Interest rates charged by lenders are lower than rates of
return expected by owners . Owners expect a higher rate of
return because they ’ re taking a greater risk with their money
– the business is not required to pay them back the same
way that it ’ s required to pay back a lender . For example , a
business may pay 8 per cent interest on its debt and have to
earn a 13 per cent rate of return on its owners ’ equity .  ( See
Chapter 14 for more on earning profit for owners .  ) 
The disadvantages of debt are : 
A business must pay the fixed rate of interest for the period
even if it suffers a loss for the period . 
A business must be ready to pay back the debt on the
specified due date , which can cause some pressure on the
business to come up with the money on time .  ( Of course , a
business may be able to roll over its debt , meaning that it
replaces its old debt with an equivalent amount of new debt , 
but the lender has the right to demand that the old debt be
paid and not rolled over .  ) 
If you default on your debt contract – you don ’ t pay the
interest on time , or you don ’ t pay back the debt on the due date
– you face some major unpleasantries . In extreme cases , a
lender can force you to shut down and liquidate your assets 
( that is , sell off everything you own for cash ) to pay off the debt
and unpaid interest . Just as you can lose your home if you don ’ t
pay your home mortgage , your business can be forced into
involuntary bankruptcy if you don ’ t pay your business debts . 
A lender may allow the business to try to work out its financial crisis
through bankruptcy procedures , but bankruptcy is a nasty business
that invariably causes many problems and can really cripple a
business . 
Reporting Financial Condition : The
Classified Balance Sheet
The assets , liabilities and owners ’ equity of a business are reported
in its balance sheet , which is prepared at the end of the profit and
loss account period . 
The balance sheet is not a flow statement but a position
statement which reports the financial condition of a company at
a precise moment in time – unlike the income and cash flow
statements which report inflows and outflows . The balance
sheet presents a company ’ s assets , liabilities and owners ’ 
equity that exist at the time the report is prepared . 
An accountant can prepare a balance sheet at any time that a
An accountant can prepare a balance sheet at any time that a
manager wants to know how things stand financially . However , 
balance sheets are usually prepared only at the end of each month , 
quarter and year . A balance sheet is always prepared at the close of
business on the last day of the profit period so that the financial
effects of sales and expenses ( reported in the profit and loss
account ) also appear in the assets , liabilities and owners ’ equity
sections of the balance sheet . 
Trading on the equity : Taking a chance on debt
The large majority of businesses borrow money to provide part of the total
capital needed for their assets . The main reason for debt , by and large , is to
close the gap between how much capital the owners can come up with and
the amount the business needs . Lenders are willing to provide the capital
because they have a senior claim on the assets of the business . Debt has to be
paid back before the owners can get their money out of the business . The
owners ’ equity provides the permanent base of capital and gives the lenders a
cushion of protection . 
The owners use their capital invested in the business as the basis to borrow . 
For example , for every two pounds the owners have in the business , lenders
may be willing to add another pound ( or even more )  . Thus , for every two
pounds of owners ’ equity the business can get three pounds total capital to
work with . Using owners ’ equity as the basis for borrowing is called trading on
the equity . It is also referred to as financial leverage , because the equity is the
lever for increasing the total capital of the business . 
These terms also refer to the potential gain a business can realise from making
more EBIT ( earnings before interest and tax ) on the amount borrowed than the
interest on the debt . For a simple example , assume that debt supplies one-third
of the total capital of a business ( and owners ’ equity two-thirds , of course )  , 
and the business ’ s EBIT for the year just ended is a nice , round £3 , 000 , 000 . Fair
is fair , so you could argue that the lenders who put up one-third of the money
should get one-third or £1 , 000 , 000 of the profit . This is not how it works . The
should get one-third or £1 , 000 , 000 of the profit . This is not how it works . The
lenders ( investors ) get only the interest amount on their loans ( their
investments )  . Suppose this total interest is £750 , 000 . The financial leverage
gain , therefore , is £250 , 000 . The owners would get their two-thirds share of
EBIT plus the £250 , 000 pre-tax financial leverage gain . 
Trading on the equity may backfire . Instead of a gain , the business may realise
a financial leverage loss – one-third of its EBIT may be less than the interest
due on its debt . That interest has to be paid no matter what amount of EBIT the
business earns . Suppose the business just breaks even , which means its EBIT
equals zero for the year . Nevertheless , it must pay the interest on its debt . So , 
the business would have a bottom-line loss for the year . 
We haven ’ t said much about the situation in which a business has a loss for
the year , instead of a profit . A loss has the effect of decreasing the assets of a
business ( whereas a profit increases its assets )  . To keep it simple , assume
cash is the only asset decreased by the loss ( although other assets could also
decrease as a result of the loss )  . Basically , cash goes down by the amount of
the loss ; and , on the other side of the balance sheet , the retained earnings
account goes down the same amount . The owners do not have to invest
additional money in the business to cover the loss . The impact on the owners
is that their total equity ( the recorded value of their ownership in the business ) 
takes a hit equal to the amount of the loss . 
The balance sheet shown in Figure 6-1 is a bare-bones statement of
financial condition . Yes , the basic assets , liabilities and owners ’ 
equity accounts are presented but for both internal management
reporting and for external reporting to investors and lenders , the
balance sheet must be dressed up rather more than the one shown
in Figure 6-1 . 
For internal reporting to managers , balance sheets
include much more detail either in the body of the financial
statement itself or , more likely , in supporting schedules . For
example , only one cash account is shown in Figure 6-1 but the
chief financial officer of a business needs to see the balances in
each of the business ’ s bank accounts . 
As another example , the balance sheet shown in Figure 6-1 includes
just one total amount for debtors but managers need details on
which customers owe money and whether any major amounts are
past their due date . Therefore , the assets and liabilities of a
business are reported to its managers in greater detail , which allows
for better control , analysis and decision-making . Management
control is very detail-oriented : Internal balance sheets and their
supporting schedules should provide all the detail that managers
need to make good business decisions . 
In contrast , balance sheets presented in external
financial reports ( which go out to investors and lenders ) do not
include much more detail than the balance sheet shown in
Figure 6-1 . However , external balance sheets must classify ( or
group together ) short-term assets and liabilities . For this
reason , external balance sheets are referred to as classified
balance sheets . This classification is not mandatory for internal
reporting to managers , although separating short-term assets
and liabilities is also useful for managers . 
Business balance sheets are not vetted by the accountant to make
sure no secrets are being disclosed that would harm national
security . The term ‘ classified ’ applied to a balance sheet does not
mean restricted or top secret ; rather , the term means that assets
and liabilities are sorted into basic classes , or groups , for external
reporting . Classifying certain assets and liabilities into current
categories is done mainly to help readers of the balance sheet more
easily compare total current assets with total current liabilities for
the purpose of judging the short-term solvency of the business . 
Solvency refers to the ability of a business to pay its
liabilities on time . Delays in paying liabilities on time can cause
very serious problems for a business . In extreme cases , a
business could be thrown into bankruptcy – even the threat of
bankruptcy can cause serious disruptions in the normal
operations of a business , and profit performance is bound to
suffer . If current liabilities become too high relative to current
assets – which are the first line of defence for paying those
current liabilities – managers should move quickly to raise
additional cash to reduce one or more of the current liabilities . 
Otherwise , a low current ratio will raise alarms in the minds of
the outside readers of the business ’ s financial report . 
Figure 6-3 presents the classified balance sheet for the same
company . What ’ s new ? Not the assets , liabilities and owners ’ equity
accounts and their balances . These numbers are the same ones
shown in Figure 6-1 . The classified balance sheet shown in Figure 6-3
includes the following new items of information : 
The first four asset accounts ( cash , debtors , stock and
prepaid expenses ) are added to give the £8 , 555 , 000 subtotal
for current assets . 
The £5 , 000 , 000 total debt of the business is divided between
£2 , 000 , 000 short-term notes payable and £3 , 000 , 000 long-term
notes payable . 
The first four liability accounts ( accounts payable , accrued
expenses payable , income tax payable and short-term notes
payable ) are added to give the £4 , 080 , 000 subtotal for current
liabilities . 
Figure 6-3 : 
Example of an
external 
( classified ) 
balance sheet
for a
business . 
Current ( short-term ) assets
Short-term , or current , assets are : 
Cash
Marketable securities that can be immediately converted into
cash
Operating assets that are converted into cash within one
operating cycle
Operating cycle refers to the process of putting cash into stock , 
selling products on credit ( which generates debtors ) and then
collecting the receivables in cash . In other words , the operating
cycle is the ‘ from cash – through stock and debtors – back to cash ’ 
sequence . The term operating refers to those assets that are directly
part of making sales and directly involved in the expenses of the
company . 
Current ( short-term ) liabilities
Short-term , or current , liabilities are those non-interest-bearing
liabilities that arise from the operating activities of the business , as
well as interest-bearing overdrafts that have a maturity date one
year or less from the balance sheet date . Current liabilities also
include any other liabilities that must be paid within the upcoming
financial period . 
Current liabilities are generally paid out of current
assets . That is , current assets are the first source of money to
pay the current liabilities when those liabilities come due . Thus , 
total current assets are compared against total current
liabilities in order to compute the current ratio . For the balance
sheet shown in the preceding section , you can compute the
current ratio as follows : 
£8 , 555 , 000 current assets ÷ £4 , 080 , 000 current liabilities = 2 . 1
current ratio
The general rule is that a company ’ s current ratio should be 1 . 5 or
higher . However , business managers know that the current ratio
depends a great deal on how the business ’ s short-term operating
assets are financed from current liabilities . Some businesses do
quite well with a current ratio less than 1 . 5 . Therefore , take the 1 . 5
current ratio rule with a grain of salt . A lower current ratio does not
necessarily mean that the business won ’ t be able to pay its shortterm ( current ) liabilities on time . Chapters 14 and 17 explain current
term ( current ) liabilities on time . Chapters 14 and 17 explain current
ratios in more detail . 
Costs and Other Balance Sheet
Values
The balance sheet summarises the financial condition
for a business at a point in time . Business managers and
investors should clearly understand the values reported in this
primary financial statement . In our experience , understanding
balance sheet values can be a source of confusion for both
business managers and investors who tend to put all pound
amounts on the same value basis . In their minds , a pound is a
pound , whether it ’ s in the debtors , stock , fixed assets , or
accounts payable . Assigning the same value to every account
value tends to gloss over some important differences and can
lead to serious misinterpretation of the balance sheet . 
A balance sheet mixes together several different types of accounting
values : 
Cash : Amounts of money on hand in coin and currency ; 
money on deposit in bank accounts
Debtors : Amounts not yet collected from credit sales to
customers
Stock : Amounts of purchase costs or production costs for
products that haven ’ t sold yet
Fixed assets ( or Property , plant , and equipment )  : Amounts
of costs invested in long-life , tangible , productive operating
assets
Creditors and accrued liabilities : Amounts for the costs of
unpaid expenses
Overdrafts and loans : Amounts borrowed on interestbearing liabilities
Capital stock : Amounts of capital invested in the business by
owners ( shareholders )  . This can be either by way of the
initial capital introduced or profits left in the business after
trading gets under way
Retained earnings ( or reserves )  : Amounts remaining in the
owners ’ equity account
In short , a balance sheet represents a diversity , or a rainbow , of
values – not just one colour . This is the nature of the generally
accepted accounting principles – the accounting methods used to
prepare financial statements . 
Book values are the amounts recorded in the accounting
process and reported in financial statements . Do not assume
that the book values reported in a balance sheet necessarily
equal the current market values . Book values are based on the
accounting methods used by a business . Generally speaking –
and we really mean generally here because we ’ re sure that you
can find exceptions to this rule – cash , debtors , and liabilities
are recorded at close to their market or settlement values . 
These receivables will be turned into cash ( at the same amount
recorded on the balance sheet ) and liabilities will be paid off at
the amounts reported in the balance sheet . It ’ s the book values
of stock and fixed assets that most likely are lower than current
market values , as well as any other non-operating assets in
which the business invested some time ago . 
A business can use alternative accounting methods to
determine the cost of stock and the cost of goods sold , and to
determine how much of a fixed asset ’ s cost is allocated to
depreciation expense each year . A business is free to use very
conservative accounting methods – with the result that its stock
cost value and the non-depreciated cost of its fixed assets may
be much lower than the current replacement cost values of
these assets . Chapter 13 explains more about choosing different
accounting methods . 
Growing Up
In the layout in Figure 6-4 we start with the fixed assets rather than
liquid assets such as cash and work our way down . After the fixed
asset sum has been determined to arrive at the residual unwritten
down ‘ value ’ of those assets , in this case £5 , 525 , 000 , we work our
way down the current assets in the reverse order of their ability to
be turned into cash . The total of the current assets comes to
£8 , 555 , 000 . 
Next we get the current liabilities , which come to a total of
£4 , 080 , 000 , and subtract that from the current asset total of
£8 , 555 , 000 to arrive at a figure of £4 , 475 , 000 . This is often referred to
as the working capital , as it represents the money circulating
through the business day to day . 
By adding the net current assets ( working capital ) of £4 , 475 , 000 to
the net book value of the fixed assets , £5 , 525 , 000 , bingo ! We can see
we have £10 , 000 , 000 tied up in net total assets . Deduct the money
we owe long term , the creditors due over one year ( a fancy way of
describing bank and other debt other than overdraft )  , and we arrive
at the net total assets . Net , by the way , is accountant-speak for
deduction of one number from another , often adding a four-figure
sum to the bill for doing so . 
The net total assets figure of £7 , 000 , 000 bears an uncanny similarity
to the total of the money put in by the owners of the business when
they started out , £2 , 000 , 000 , and the sum they have left in by way of
profits undistributed over the years , £5 , 000 , 000 . So the balance
sheet balances , but with a very different total from that of Figure 6-3 . 
Figure 6-4 : A
balance
sheet . 
You can find a blank balance sheet and profit and loss
accounts in Excel format , as well as a tutored exercise and
supporting notes , at www . bized . co . uk / learn / sheets / tasker . xls . 

Chapter 7
Cash Flows and the Cash Flow
Statement
In This Chapter
Separating the three types of cash flows
Figuring out how much actual cash increase was generated by
profit
Looking at a business ’ s other sources and uses of cash
Being careful about free cash flow
Evaluating managers ’ decisions by scrutinising the cash flow
statement
This chapter talks about cash flows – which in general refers to cash
inflows and outflows over a period of time . Suppose you tell us that
last year you had total cash inflows of £145 , 000 and total cash
outflows of £140 , 000 . We know that your cash balance increased
£5 , 000 . But we don ’ t know where your £145 , 000 cash inflows came
from . Did you earn this much in salary ? Did you receive an
inheritance from your rich uncle ? Likewise , we don ’ t know what you
used your £140 , 000 cash outflow for . Did you make large payments
on your credit cards ? Did you lose a lot of money at the races ? In
short , cash flows have to be sorted into different sources and uses
to make much sense . 
The Three Types of Cash Flow
Accountants categorise the cash flows of a business into
three types : 
Cash inflows from making sales and cash outflows for
expenses – sales and expense transactions – are called the
operating activities of a business ( although they could be
called profit activities just as well , because their purpose is
to make profit )  . 
Cash outflows for making investments in new assets 
( buildings , machinery , tools and so on ) and cash inflows
from liquidating old investments ( assets no longer needed
that are sold off )  ; these transactions are called investment
activities . 
Cash inflows from borrowing money and from the additional
investment of money in the business by its owners , and cash
outflows for paying off debt , returning capital that the
business no longer needs to owners and making cash
distributions of profit to its owners ; these transactions are
called financing activities . 
The cash flow statement ( or statement of cash flows ) summarises the
cash flows of a business for a period according to this three-way
classification . Generally accepted accounting principles require that
whenever a business reports its income statement , it must also
report its cash flow statement for the same period – a business
shouldn ’ t report one without the other . A good reason exists for this
dual financial statement requirement . 
The income statement is based on the accrual basis of
accounting that records sales when made , whether or not cash
is received at that time , and records expenses when incurred , 
whether or not the expenses are paid at that time .  ( Chapter 3
explains accrual basis accounting .  ) Because accrual basis
accounting is used to record profit , you can ’ t equate bottomline profit with an increase in cash . Suppose a business ’ s annual
income statement reports that it earned £1 . 6 million net income
for the year . This does not mean that its cash balance increased
£1 . 6 million during the period . You have to look in the cash flow
statement to find out how much its cash balance increased ( or , 
possibly , decreased !  ) from its operating activities ( sales
revenue and expenses ) during the period . 
In the chapter , we refer to the net increase ( or decrease ) 
in the business ’ s cash balance that results from collecting sales
revenue and paying expenses as cash flow from profit ( the
alternative term for cash flow from operating activities )  . Cash
flow from profit seems more user-friendly than cash flow from
operating activities , and in fact the term is used widely . In any
case , do not confuse cash flow from profit with the other two
types of cash flow – from the business ’ s investing activities and
financing activities during the period . 
Before moving on , here ’ s a short problem for you to solve . This
summary of the business ’ s net cash flows ( in thousands ) for the
year just ended , which uses the three-way classification of cash
flows explained earlier , has one amount missing : 
Note that the business ’ s cash balance from all sources and uses
decreased £15 , 000 during the year . The amounts of net cash flows
from the company ’ s investing and financing activities are given . So
you can determine that the net cash flow from profit was £1 , 100 , 000
for the year . Understanding cash flows from investing activities and
financing activities is fairly straightforward . Understanding the net
cash flow from profit , in contrast , is more challenging – but business
Figure 7-1 : 
Changes in
cash flow from profit , in contrast , is more challenging – but business
managers and investors should have a good grip on this very
important number . 
Setting the Stage : Changes in Balance
Sheet Accounts
The first step in understanding the amounts reported by a business
in its cash flow statement is to focus on the changes in the
business ’ s assets , liabilities and owners ’ equity accounts during the
period – the increases or decreases of each account from the start
of the period to the end of the period . These changes are found in
the comparative two-year balance sheet reported by a business . 
Figure 7-1 presents the increases and decreases during the year in
the assets , liabilities and owners ’ equity accounts for a business
example . Figure 7-1 is not a balance sheet but only a summary of
changes in account balances . We do not want to burden you with an
entire balance sheet , which has much more detail than is needed
here . 
Take a moment to scan Figure 7-1 . Note that the business ’ s cash
balance decreased £15 , 000 during the year .  ( An increase is not
necessarily a good thing , and a decrease is not necessarily a bad
thing ; it depends on the overall financial situation of the business .  ) 
One purpose of reporting the cash flow statement is to summarise
the main reasons for the change in cash – according to the threeway classification of cash flows explained earlier . One question on
everyone ’ s mind is this : How much cash did the profit for the year
generate for the business ? The cash flow statement begins by
answering this question . 
balance sheet
assets and
operating
liabilities that
affect cash
flow from
profit . 
Getting at the Cash Increase from
Profit
Although all amounts reported on the cash flow
statement are important , the one that usually gets the most
attention is cash flow from operating activities , or cash flow from
profit as we prefer to call it . This is the increase in cash
generated by a business ’ s profit-making operations during the
year exclusive of its other sources of cash during the year ( such
as borrowed money , sold-off fixed assets and additional owners ’ 
investments in the business )  . Cash flow from profit indicates a
business ’ s ability to turn profit into available cash – cash in the
bank that can be used for the needs of business . Cash flow from
profit gets just as much attention as net income ( the bottomline profit number in the income statement )  . 
Before presenting the cash flow statement – which is a
rather formidable , three-part accounting report – in all its glory , 
in the following sections we build on the summary of changes in
the business ’ s assets , liabilities and owners ’ equities shown in
Figure 7-1 to explain the components of the £1 , 100 , 000 increase
in cash from the business ’ s profit activities during the year .  
( The £1 , 100 , 000 amount of cash flow from profit was
determined earlier in the chapter by solving the unknown
factor .  ) 
The business in the example experienced a rather strong growth
year . Its accounts receivable and stock increased by relatively large
amounts . In fact , all the relevant accounts increased ; their ending
balances are larger than their beginning balances ( which are the
amounts carried forward from the end of the preceding year )  . At
this point , we need to provide some additional information . The £1 . 2
million increase in retained earnings is the net difference of two
quite different things . 
The £1 . 6 million net income earned by the business increased
retained earnings by this amount . As you see in Figure 7-1 , the
account increased only £1 . 2 million . Thus there must have been a
£400 , 000 decrease in retained earnings during the year . The
business paid £400 , 000 cash dividends from profit to its owners ( the
shareholders ) during the year , which is recorded as a decrease in
retained earnings . The amount of cash dividends is reported in the
financing activities section of the cash flow statement . The entire
amount of net income is reported in the operating activities section
of the cash flow statement . 
Cash flow from profit ( £3 , 020 positive increases minus £1 , 920
negative increases ) £1 , 100
Note that net income ( profit ) for the year – which is the correct
amount of profit based on the accrual basis of accounting – is listed
in the positive cash flow column . This is only the starting point . 
Think of this the following way : If the business had collected all its
sales revenue for the year in cash , and if it had made cash payments
for its expenses exactly equal to the amounts recorded for the
expenses , then the net income amount would equal the increase in
cash . These two conditions are virtually never true , and they are not
true in this example . So the net income figure is just the jumping-off
point for determining the amount of cash generated by the
business ’ s profit activities during the year . 
We ’ ll let you in on a little secret here . The analysis of
cash flow from profit asks what amount of profit would have
been recorded if the business had been on the cash basis of
accounting instead of the accrual basis . This can be confusing
and exasperating , because it seems that two different profit
measures are provided in a business ’ s financial report – the
true economic profit number , which is the bottom line in the
income statement ( usually called net income )  , and a second
profit number called cash flow from operating activities in the
cash flow statement . 
When the cash flow statement was made mandatory , many
accountants worried about this problem , but the majority opinion
was that the amount of cash increase ( or decrease ) generated from
the profit activities of a business is very important to disclose in
financial reports . For reading the income statement you have to
wear your accrual basis accounting lenses , and for the cash flow
statement you have to put on your cash basis lenses . Who says
accountants can ’ t see two sides of something ? 
The following sections explain the effects on cash flow that each
balance sheet account change causes ( refer to Figure 7-1 )  . 
Getting specific about changes in assets and
liabilities
As a business manager , you should keep a close watch
on each of your assets and liabilities and understand the cash
flow effects of increases ( or decreases ) caused by these
changes . Investors should focus on the business ’ s ability to
generate a healthy cash flow from profit , so investors should be
equally concerned about these changes . 
Debtors increase
Remember that the debtors asset shows how much money
customers who bought products on credit still owe the business ; 
this asset is a promise of cash that the business will receive . 
Basically , debtors is the amount of uncollected sales revenue at the
end of the period . Cash does not increase until the business collects
money from its customers . 
But the amount in debtors is included in the total sales revenue of
the period – after all , you did make the sales , even if you haven ’ t
been paid yet . Obviously , then , you can ’ t look at sales revenue as
being equal to the amount of cash that the business received during
the period . 
To calculate the actual cash flow from sales , you need to subtract
from sales revenue the amount of credit sales that you did not
collect in cash over the period – but you add in the amount of cash
that you collected during the period just ended for credit sales that
you made in the preceding period . Take a look at the following
equation for the business example , which is first introduced in
Chapter 6 – the income statement figures used here are given in
Figure 6–2 and the asset and liability changes are shown in Figure 7–
1 .  ( No need to look back to Figure 6–2 unless you want to review the
income statement .  ) 
£25 million sales revenue – £0 . 8 million increase in debtors = 
£24 . 2 million cash collected from customers during the year
The business started the year with £1 . 7 million in debtors and ended
the year with £2 . 5 million in debtors . The beginning balance was
collected during the year but at the end of the year the ending
balance had not been collected . Thus the net effect is a shortfall in
cash inflow of £800 , 000 , which is why it ’ s called a negative cash flow
factor . The key point is that you need to keep an eye on the increase
or decrease in debtors from the beginning of the period to the end
of the period . 
If the amount of credit sales you made during the period is
greater than the amount collected from customers during the
same period , your debtors increased over the period . 
Therefore you need to subtract from sales revenue that
difference between start-of-period debtors and end-of-period
debtors . In short , an increase in debtors hurts cash flow by
the amount of the increase . 
If the amount you collected from customers during the
period is greater than the credit sales you made during the
period , your debtors decreased over the period . In this case
you need to add to sales revenue that difference between
start-of-period debtors and end-of-period debtors . In short , a
decrease in debtors helps cash flow by the amount of the
decrease . 
In the example we ’ ve been using , debtors increased
£800 , 000 . Cash collections from sales were £800 , 000 less than
sales revenue . Ouch ! The business increased its sales
substantially over last period , so you shouldn ’ t be surprised
that its debtors increased . The higher sales revenue was good
for profit but bad for cash flow from profit . 
An occasional hiccup in cash flow is the price of growth – managers
and investors need to understand this point . Increasing sales
without increasing debtors is a happy situation for cash flow , but in
the real world you can ’ t have one increase without the other ( except
in very unusual circumstances )  . 
Stock increase
Stock is the next asset in Figure 7-1 – and usually the largest shortterm , or current , asset for businesses that sell products . If the stock
account is greater at the end of the period than at the start of the
period – because either unit costs increased or the quantity of
products increased – what the business actually paid out in cash for
stock purchases ( or manufacturing products ) is more than the
business recorded as its cost-of-goods-sold expense in the period . 
Therefore , you need to deduct the stock increase from net income
when determining cash flow from profit . 
In the example , stock increased £975 , 000 from start-ofperiod to end-of-period . In other words , this business replaced
the products that it sold during the period and increased its
stock by £975 , 000 . The easiest way to understand the effect of
this increase on cash flow is to pretend that the business paid
for all its stock purchases in cash immediately upon receiving
them . The stock on hand at the start of the period had already
been paid for last period , so that cost does not affect this
period ’ s cash flow . Those products were sold during the period
and involved no further cash payment by the business . But the
business did pay cash this period for the products that were in
stock at the end of the period . 
In other words , if the business had bought just enough new stock ( at
the same cost that it paid out last period ) to replace the stock that it
sold during the period , the actual cash outlay for its purchases
would equal the cost-of-goods-sold expense reported in its income
statement . Ending stock would equal the beginning stock ; the two
stock costs would cancel each other out and thus would have no
effect on cash flow . But this hypothetical scenario doesn ’ t fit the
example because the company increased its sales substantially over
the last period . 
the last period . 
To support the higher sales level , the business needed to increase
its stock level . So the business bought £975 , 000 more in products
than it sold during the period – and it had to come up with the cash
to pay for this stock increase . Basically , the business wrote cheques
amounting to £975 , 000 more than its cost-of-goods-sold expense for
the period . This step-up in its stock level was necessary to support
the higher sales level , which increased profit – even though cash
flow took a hit . 
It ’ s that accrual basis accounting thing again : The cost that a
business pays this period for next period ’ s stock is reflected in this
period ’ s cash flow but isn ’ t recorded until next period ’ s income
statement ( when the products are actually sold )  . So if a business
paid more this period for next period ’ s stock than it paid last period
for this period ’ s stock , you can see how the additional expense
would adversely affect cash flow but would not be reflected in the
bottom-line net income figure . This cash flow analysis stuff gets a
little complicated , we know , but hang in there . The cash flow
statement , presented later in the chapter , makes a lot more sense
after you go through this background briefing . 
Prepaid expenses increase
The next asset , after stock , is prepaid expenses ( refer to Figure 7-1 )  . 
A change in this account works the same way as a change in stock
and debtors , although changes in prepaid expenses are usually
much smaller than changes in those other two asset accounts . 
Again , the beginning balance of prepaid expenses is recorded as an
expense this period but the cash was actually paid out last period , 
not this period . This period , a business pays cash for next period ’ s
prepaid expenses – which affects this period ’ s cash flow but doesn ’ t
affect net income until next period . So the £145 , 000 increase in
prepaid expenses from start-of-period to end-of-period in this
example has a negative cash flow effect . 
As it grows , a business needs to increase its prepaid
expenses for such things as fire insurance ( premiums have to
be paid in advance of the insurance coverage ) and its stocks of
office and data processing supplies . Increases in debtors , stock
and prepaid expenses are the price a business has to pay for
growth . Rarely do you find a business that can increase its sales
revenue without increasing these assets . 
The simple but troublesome depreciation factor
Depreciation expense recorded in the period is both the simplest
cash flow effect to understand and , at the same time , one of the
most misunderstood elements in calculating cash flow from profit .  
( Refer to Chapters 5 and 6 for more about depreciation .  ) To start
with , depreciation is not a cash outlay during the period . The
amount of depreciation expense recorded in the period is simply a
fraction of the original cost of the business ’ s fixed assets that were
bought and paid for years ago .  ( Well , if you want to nit-pick here , 
bought and paid for years ago .  ( Well , if you want to nit-pick here , 
some of the fixed assets may have been bought during this period , 
and their cost is reported in the investing activities section of the
cash flow statement .  ) Because the depreciation expense is not a
cash outlay this period , the amount is added back to net income in
the calculation of cash flow from profit – so far so good . 
When measuring profit on the accrual basis of
accounting you count depreciation as an expense . The fixed
assets of a business are on an irreversible journey to the junk
heap . Fixed assets have a limited life of usefulness to a business 
( except for land )  ; depreciation is the accounting method that
allocates the total cost of fixed assets to each year of their use
in helping the business generate sales revenue . Part of the total
sales revenue of a business constitutes recovery of cost invested
in its fixed assets . In a real sense , a business ‘ sells ’ some of its
fixed assets each period to its customers – it factors the cost of
fixed assets into the sales prices that it charges its customers . 
For example , when you go to a supermarket , a very small slice
of the price you pay for that box of cereal goes toward the cost
of the building , the shelves , the refrigeration equipment and so
on .  ( No wonder they charge so much for a box of cornflakes !  ) 
Each period , a business recoups part of the cost invested in its fixed
assets . In other words , £1 . 2 million of sales revenue ( in the example ) 
went toward reimbursing the business for the use of its fixed assets
during the year . The problem regarding depreciation in cash flow
analysis is that many people simply add back depreciation for the
year to bottom-line profit and then stop , as if this is the proper
number for cash flow from profit . It ain ’ t so . The changes in other
assets as well as the changes in liabilities also affect cash flow from
profit . You should factor in all the changes that determine cash flow
from profit , as explained in the following section . 
Adding net income and depreciation to determine cash
flow from profit is mixing apples and oranges . The business did
not realise £1 , 600 , 000 cash increase from its £1 , 600 , 000 net
income . The total of the increases of its debtors , stock and
prepaid expenses is £1 , 920 , 000 ( refer to Figure 7-1 )  , which wipes
out the net income amount and leaves the business with a cash
balance hole of £320 , 000 . This cash deficit is offset by the
£220 , 000 increase in liabilities ( explained later )  , leaving a
£100 , 000 net income deficit as far as cash flow is concerned . 
Depreciation recovery increased cash flow £1 . 2 million . So the
final cash flow from profit equals £1 . 1 million . But you ’ d never
know this if you simply added depreciation expense to net
income for the period . 
The managers did not have to go outside the business
for the £1 . 1 million cash increase generated from its profit for
the year . Cash flow from profit is an internal source of money
generated by the business itself , in contrast to external money
that the business raises from lenders and owners . A business
does not have to find sources of external money if its internal
cash flow from profit is sufficient to provide for its growth . 
Net income + depreciation expense doesn 
 ’ t
equal cash flow from profit ! 
The business in our example earned £1 . 6 million in net income for the year , 
plus it received £1 . 2 million cash flow because of the depreciation expense
built into its sales revenue for the year . The sum of these figures is £2 . 8 million . 
Is £2 . 8 million the amount of cash flow from profit for the period ? The knee-jerk
answer of many investors and managers is ‘ yes ’  . But if net income + 
depreciation truly equals cash flow , then both factors in the brackets – both
net income and depreciation – must be fully realised in cash . Depreciation is , 
but the net income amount is not fully realised in cash because the company ’ s
debtors , stock and prepaid expenses increased during the year , and these
increases have negative impacts on cash flow . 
In passing , we should mention that a business could have a negative
cash flow from profit for a year – meaning that despite posting a net
income for the period , the changes in the company ’ s assets and
liabilities caused its cash balance to decrease . In reverse , a business
could report a bottom line loss in its income statement yet have a
positive cash flow from its operating activities : The positive
contribution from depreciation expense plus decreases in its
debtors and stock could amount to more than the amount of loss . 
More commonly , a loss leads to negative cash flow or very little
positive cash flow . 
Operating liabilities increases
The business in the example , like almost all businesses , has three
basic liabilities that are inextricably intertwined with its expenses : 
creditors , accrued expenses payable and income tax payable . When
the beginning balance of one of these liability accounts is the same
as the ending balance of the same account ( not too likely , of
course )  , the business breaks even on cash flow for that account . 
When the end-of-period balance is higher than the start-of-period
balance , the business did not pay out as much money as was
actually recorded as an expense on the period ’ s income statement . 
In the example we ’ ve been using , the business disbursed
£720 , 000 to pay off last period ’ s creditors balance .  ( This
£720 , 000 was reported as the creditors balance on last period ’ s
ending balance sheet .  ) Its cash flow this period decreased by
£720 , 000 because of these payments . But this period ’ s ending
balance sheet shows the amount of creditors that the business
will need to pay next period – £800 , 000 . The business actually
paid off £720 , 000 and recorded £800 , 000 of expenses to the year , 
so this time cash flow is richer than what ’ s reflected in the
business ’ s net income figure by £80 , 000 – in other words , the
increase in creditors has a positive cash flow effect . The
increases in accrued expenses payable and income tax payable
work the same way . 
Therefore , liability increases are favourable to cash flow – in a sense
the business borrowed more than it paid off . Such an increase
means that the business delayed paying cash for certain things until
next year . So you need to add the increases in the three liabilities to
net income to determine cash flow from profit , following the same
logic as adding back depreciation to net income . The business did
not have cash outlays to the extent of increases in these three
liabilities . 
liabilities . 
The analysis of the changes in assets and liabilities of the business
that affect cash flow from profit is complete for the business
example . The final result is that the company ’ s cash balance
increased £1 . 1 million from profit . You could argue that cash should
have increased £2 . 8 million – £1 . 6 million net income plus £1 . 2
million depreciation that was recovered during the year – so the
business is £1 . 7 million behind in turning its profit into cash flow 
( £2 . 8 million less the £1 . 1 million cash flow from profit )  . This £1 . 7
million lag in converting profit into cash flow is caused by the
£1 , 920 , 000 increase in assets less the £220 , 000 increase in liabilities , 
as shown in Figure 7–1 . 
Presenting the Cash Flow Statement
The cash flow statement is one of the three primary financial
statements that a business must report to the outside world , 
according to generally accepted accounting principles ( GAAP )  . To
be technical , the rule says that whenever a business reports a profit
and loss account , it should also report a cash flow statement . The
profit and loss account summarises sales revenue and expenses and
ends with the bottom-line profit for the period . The balance sheet
summarises a business ’ s financial condition by reporting its assets , 
liabilities and owners ’ equity .  ( Refer to Chapters 5 and 6 for more
about these reports .  ) 
You can probably guess what the cash flow statement does by its
name alone : This statement tells you where a business got its cash
and what the business did with its cash during the period . We prefer
the name given to this statement in the old days in the US – the
Where Got , Where Gone statement . This nickname goes straight to
the purpose of the cash flow statement : asking where the business
got its money and what it did with the money . 
To give you a rough idea of what a cash flow statement reports , we
repeat some of the questions we asked at the start of the chapter : 
How much money did you earn last year ? Did you get all your
income in cash ( or did some of your wages go straight into a
pension plan or did you collect a couple of IOUs )  ? Where did you get
other money ( did you take out a loan , win the lottery or receive a
gift from a rich uncle )  ? What did you do with your money ( did you
buy a house , support your out-of-control Internet addiction or lose it
playing bingo )  ? 
Getting a little too personal for you ? That ’ s exactly why
the cash flow statement is so important : It bares a business ’ s
financial soul to its lenders and owners . Sometimes the cash
flow statement reveals questionable judgment calls that the
business ’ s managers made . At the very least , the cash flow
statement reveals how well a business handles the cash
increase from its profit . 
As explained at the start of the chapter , the cash flow
statement is divided into three sections according to the threefold classification of cash flows for a business : operating
activities ( which we also call cash flow from profit in the
chapter )  , investing activities and financing activities . 
The cash flow statement reports a business ’ s net cash increase or
decrease based on these three groupings of the cash flow statement . 
Figure 7-2 shows what a cash flow statement typically looks like – in
this example , for a growing business ( which means that its assets , 
liabilities and owners ’ equity increase during the period )  . 
The history of the cash flow statement
The cash flow statement was not required for external financial reporting until
the late 1980s . Until then , the accounting profession had turned a deaf ear to
calls from the investment community for cash flow statements in annual
financial reports .  ( Accountants had presented a funds flow statement prior to
Figure 7-2 : 
Cash flow
statement for
the business
in the
example . 
then , but that report proved to be a disaster – the term funds included more
assets than just cash and represented a net amount after deducting short-term
liabilities from short-term , or current , assets .  ) 
In our opinion , the reluctance to require cash flow statements came from fears
that the cash flow from profit figure would usurp net income – people would
lose confidence in the net income line . 
Those fears have some justification – considering the attention given to cash
flow from profit and what is called ‘ free cash flow ’  ( discussed later in the
chapter )  . Although the profit and loss account continues to get most of the
fanfare ( because it shows the magic bottom-line number of net income )  , cash
flow gets a lot of emphasis these days . 
The trick to understanding cash flow from profit is to
link the sales revenue and expenses of the business with the
changes in the business ’ s assets and liabilities that are directly
connected with its profit-making activities . Using this approach
earlier in the chapter , we determine that the cash flow from
profit is £1 . 1 million for the year for the sample business . This is
the number you see in Figure 7-2 for cash flow from operating
activities . In our experience , many business managers , lenders
and investors don ’ t fully understand these links , but the savvy
ones know to keep a close eye on the relevant balance sheet
changes . 
What do the figures in the first section of the cash flow statement 
( See Figure 7-2 ) reveal about this business over the past period ? 
Recall that the business experienced rapid sales growth over the
last period . However , the downside of sales growth is that operating
assets and liabilities also grow – the business needs more stock at
the higher sales level and also has higher debtors . 
The business ’ s prepaid expenses and liabilities also increased , 
although not nearly as much as debtors and stock . The rapid growth
of the business yielded higher profit but also caused quite a surge in
its operating assets and liabilities – the result being that cash flow
from profit is only £1 . 1 million compared with £1 . 6 million in net
income – a £500 , 000 shortfall . Still , the business had £1 . 1 million at
its disposal after allowing for the increases in assets and liabilities . 
What did the business do with this £1 . 1 million of available cash ? 
You have to look to the remainder of the cash flow statement to
answer this key question . 
A very quick read through the rest of the cash flow statement ( refer
to Figure 7-2 ) goes something like this : The company used
£1 , 275 , 000 to buy new fixed assets , borrowed £500 , 000 and
distributed £400 , 000 of the profit to its owners . The result is that
cash decreased £15 , 000 during the year . Shouldn ’ t the business have
cash decreased £15 , 000 during the year . Shouldn ’ t the business have
increased its cash balance , given its fairly rapid growth during the
period ? That ’ s a good question ! Higher levels of sales generally
require higher levels of operating cash balances . However , you can
see in its balance sheet at the end of the year ( refer back to Figure 6-
2 ) that the company has £2 million in cash , which , compared with
its £25 million annual sales revenue , is probably enough . 
A better alternative for reporting cash flow
from profit ? 
We call your attention , again , to the first section of the
cash flow statement in Figure 7-2 . You start with net income for
the period . Next , changes in assets and liabilities are deducted
or added to net income to arrive at cash flow from operating
activities ( the cash flow from profit ) for the year . This format is
called the indirect method . The alternative format for this
section of the cash flow statement is called the direct method
and is presented like this ( using the same business example , 
with pound amounts in millions )  : 
You may remember from the earlier discussion that sales revenue
for the year is £25 million , but that the company ’ s debtors increased
£800 , 000 during the year , so cash flow from sales is £24 . 2 million . 
Likewise , the expenses for the year can be put on a cash flow basis . 
But we ‘ cheated ’ here – we have already determined that cash flow
from profit is £1 . 1 million for the year , so we plugged the figure for
cash outflow for expenses . We would take more time to explain the
cash outflow for expenses . We would take more time to explain the
direct approach , except for one major reason . 
Where to put depreciation ? 
Where the depreciation line goes within the first section ( operating activities ) 
of the cash flow statement is a matter of personal preference – no standard
location is required . Many businesses report it in the middle or toward the
bottom of the changes in assets and liabilities – perhaps to avoid giving people
the idea that cash flow from profit simply requires adding back depreciation to
net income . 
Although the Accounting Standards Board ( ASB ) expresses a
definite preference for the direct method , this august rule-making
body does permit the indirect method to be used in external
financial reports – and , in fact , the overwhelming majority of
businesses use the indirect method . Unless you ’ re an accountant , 
we don ’ t think you need to know much more about the direct
method . 
Sailing through the Rest of the Cash
Flow Statement
After you get past the first section , the rest of the cash flow
statement is a breeze . The last two sections of the statement explain
what the business did with its cash and where cash that didn ’ t come
from profit came from . 
Investing activities
The second section of the cash flow statement reports the
investment actions that a business ’ s managers took during the year . 
Investments are like tea leaves , serving as indicators regarding what
the future may hold for the company . Major new investments are
the sure signs of expanding or modernising the production and
distribution facilities and capacity of the business . Major disposals
of long-term assets and the shedding of a major part of the business
could be good news or bad news for the business , depending on
many factors . Different investors may interpret this information
differently , but all would agree that the information in this section of
the cash flow statement is very important . 
Certain long-lived operating assets are required for
doing business – for example , Federal Express wouldn ’ t be
terribly successful if it didn ’ t have aeroplanes and vans for
delivering packages and computers for tracking deliveries . 
When those assets wear out , the business needs to replace
them . Also , to remain competitive , a business may need to
upgrade its equipment to take advantage of the latest
technology or provide for growth . These investments in longlived , tangible , productive assets , which we call fixed assets in
this book , are critical to the future of the business and are
called capital expenditures to stress that capital is being
invested for the long term . 
One of the first claims on cash flow from profit is capital
expenditure . Notice in Figure 7–2 that the business spent £1 , 275 , 000
for new fixed assets , which are referred to as property , plant and
equipment in the cash flow statement ( to keep the terminology
consistent with account titles used in the balance sheet , because
the term fixed assets is rather informal )  . 
Cash flow statements generally don ’ t go into much detail
regarding exactly what specific types of fixed assets a business
purchased – how many additional square feet of space the
business acquired , how many new drill presses it bought and so
on .  ( Some businesses do leave a clearer trail of their
investments , though . For example , airlines describe how many
new aircraft of each kind were purchased to replace old
equipment or expand their fleets .  ) 
Note : Typically , every year a business disposes of some of its fixed
assets that have reached the end of their useful lives and will no
longer be used . These fixed assets are sent to the junkyard , traded
in on new fixed assets , or sold for relatively small amounts of
money . The value of a fixed asset at the end of its useful life is called
its salvage value . The disposal proceeds from selling fixed assets are
reported as a source of cash in the investments section of the cash
flow statement . Usually , these amounts are fairly small . In contrast , 
a business may sell off fixed assets because it ’ s downsizing or
abandoning a major segment of its business . These cash proceeds
can be fairly large . 
Financing activities
Note that in the annual cash flow statement ( refer to
Figure 7-2 ) of the business example we ’ ve been using , the
positive cash flow from profit is £1 , 100 , 000 and the negative
cash flow from investing activities is £1 , 275 , 000 . The result to
this point , therefore , is a net cash outflow of £175 , 000 – which
would have decreased the company ’ s cash balance this much if
the business did not go to outside sources of capital for
additional money during the year . In fact , the business
increased its short-term and long-term debt during the year , 
and its owners invested additional money in the business . The
third section of the cash flow statement summarises these
financing activities of the business over the period . 
The term financing generally refers to a business raising capital from
debt and equity sources – from borrowing money from banks and
other sources willing to loan money to the business and from its
owners putting additional money in the business . In addition , the
term includes making payments on debt and returning capital to
owners . Financing also refers to cash distributions ( if any ) from
profit by the business to its owners . 
Most businesses borrow money for a short term ( generally defined
as less than one year )  , as well as for longer terms ( generally defined
as more than one year )  . In other words , a typical business has both
short-term and long-term debt .  ( Chapter 6 explains that short-term
debt is presented in the current liabilities section of the balance
sheet .  ) The business in our example has both short-term and longterm debt . Although not a hard-and-fast rule , most cash flow
statements report just the net increase or decrease in short-term
debt , not the total amount borrowed and the total payments on
short-term debt during the period . In contrast , both the total
amount borrowed and the total amount paid on long-term debt
during the year are reported in the cash flow statement . 
For the business we ’ ve been using as an example , no long-term debt
was paid down during the year but short-term debt was paid off
during the year and replaced with new short-term notes payable . 
However , only the net increase ( £200 , 000 ) is reported in the cash
flow statement . The business also increased its long-term debt by
£300 , 000 ( refer to Figure 7-2 )  . 
The financing section of the cash flow statement also reports on the
flow of cash between the business and its owners ( who are the
stockholders of a corporation )  . Owners can be both a source of a
business ’ s cash ( capital invested by owners ) and a use of a
business ’ s cash ( profit distributed to owners )  . This section of the
cash flow statement reports capital raised from its owners , if any , as
well as any capital returned to the owners . In the cash flow
statement ( Figure 7–2 )  , note that the business did issue additional
stock shares for £60 , 000 during the year , and it paid a total of
£400 , 000 cash dividends ( distributions ) from profit to its owners . 
Free Cash Flow : What on Earth Does
That Mean ? 
A new term has emerged in the lexicon of accounting and finance –
free cash flow . This piece of language is not – we repeat , not – an
officially defined term by any authoritative accounting rule-making
body . Furthermore , the term does not appear in the cash flow
statements reported by businesses . Rather , free cash flow is street
language , or slang , even though the term appears often in The
Financial Times and The Economist . Securities brokers and
investment analysts use the term freely ( pun intended )  . Like most
new words being tossed around for the first time , this one hasn ’ t
settled down into one universal meaning although the most
common usage of the term pivots on cash flow from profit . 
The term free cash flow is used to mean any of the following : 
Net income plus depreciation ( plus any other expense
recorded during the period that does not involve the outlay
of cash but rather the allocation of the cost of a long-term
asset other than property , plant and equipment – such as the
intangible assets of a business )  . 
Cash flow from operating activities ( as reported in the cash
flow statement )  . 
Cash flow from operating activities minus some or all of the
capital expenditures made during the year ( such as
purchases or construction of new , long-lived operating
assets such as property , plant and equipment )  . 
Cash flow from operating activities plus interest , and
depreciation , and income tax expenses , or , in other words , 
cash flow before these expenses are deducted . 
In the strongest possible terms , we advise you to be very
clear on which definition of free cash flow the speaker or writer
is using . Unfortunately , you can ’ t always determine what the
term means in any given context . The reporter or investment
professional should define the term . 
One definition of free cash flow , in our view , is quite useful : cash
flow from profit minus capital expenditures for the year . The idea is
that a business needs to make capital expenditures in order to stay
in business and thrive . And to make capital expenditures , the
business needs cash . Only after paying for its capital expenditures
does a business have ‘ free ’ cash flow that it can use as it likes . In our
example , the free cash flow is , in fact , negative – £1 , 100 , 000 cash
flow from profit minus £1 , 275 , 000 capital expenditures for new fixed
assets equals a negative £175 , 000 . 
This is a key point . In many cases , cash flow from profit
falls short of the money needed for capital expenditures . So the
business has to borrow more money , persuade its owners to
invest more money in the business , or dip into its cash reserve . 
Should a business in this situation distribute some of its profit
to owners ? After all , it has a cash deficit after paying for capital
expenditures . But many companies like the business in our
example do , in fact , make cash distributions from profit to their
owners . 
Scrutinising the Cash Flow Statement
Analysing a business ’ s cash flow statement inevitably raises certain
questions : What would I have done differently if I were running this
business ? Would I have borrowed more money ? Would I have raised
more money from the owners ? Would I have distributed so much of
the profit to the owners ? Would I have let my cash balance drop by
even such a small amount ? 
One purpose of the cash flow statement is to show readers what
judgment calls and financial decisions the business ’ s managers
made during the period . Of course , management decisions are
always subject to second-guessing and criticising , and passing
judgment based on a financial statement isn ’ t totally fair because it
doesn ’ t reveal the pressures the managers faced during the period . 
Maybe they made the best possible decisions given the
circumstances . Maybe not . 
The business in our example ( refer to Figure 7-2 ) 
distributed £400 , 000 cash from profit to its owners – a 25 per
cent pay-out ratio ( which is the £400 , 000 distribution divided by
£1 . 6 million net income )  . In analysing whether the pay-out ratio
is too high , too low or just about right , you need to look at the
broader context of the business ’ s sources of , and needs for , 
cash . 
First look at cash flow from profit : £1 . 1 million , which is not enough
to cover the business ’ s £1 , 275 , 000 capital expenditures during the
year . The business increased its total debt £500 , 000 . Given these
circumstances , maybe the business should have hoarded its cash
and not paid so much in cash distributions to its owners . 
So does this business have enough cash to operate with ? 
You can ’ t answer that question just by examining the cash flow
statement – or any financial statement for that matter . Every
business needs a buffer of cash to protect against unexpected
developments and to take advantage of unexpected
opportunities , as we explain in Chapter 10 on budgeting . This
particular business has a £2 million cash balance compared
with £25 million annual sales revenue for the period just ended , 
which probably is enough . If you were the boss of this business
how much working cash balance would you want ? Not an easy
question to answer ! Don ’ t forget that you need to look at all
three primary financial statements – the profit and loss account
and the balance sheet as well as the cash flow statement – to
get the big picture of a business ’ s financial health . 
You probably didn ’ t count the number of lines of information in
Figure 7-2 , the cash flow statement for the business example . 
Anyway , the financial statement has 17 lines of information . Would
you like to hazard a guess regarding the average number of lines in
cash flow statements of publicly owned companies ? Typically , their
cash flow statements have 30 to 40 lines of information by our
reckoning . So it takes quite a while to read the cash flow statement –
more time than the average investor probably has .  ( Professional
stock analysts and investment managers are paid to take the time to
read this financial statement meticulously .  ) Quite frankly , we find
that many cash flow statements are not only rather long but also
difficult to understand – even for an accountant . We won ’ t get on a
soapbox here but we definitely think businesses could do a better
job of reporting their cash flow statements by reducing the number
of lines in their financial statements and making each line clearer . 
The website www . score . org offers a downloadable Excel
spreadsheet that enables you to tailor a cash flow statement to
your requirements . You can find the spreadsheet by going to
the SCORE homepage and clicking on ‘ Templates & Tools ’ 
where you can find an extensive selection of templates and
calculators . Microsoft also has a comprehensive range of
templates at 
followed by a search term , in this case ‘ cash flow ’  . 
Chapter 8
Getting a Financial Report Ready for
Prime Time
In This Chapter
Making sure that all the pieces fit together
Looking at the various changes in owners ’ equity
Making sure that disclosure is adequate
Touching up the numbers
Financial reporting on the Internet
Dealing with financial reports ’ information overload
The primary financial statements of a business ( as explained in
Chapters 5 , 6 and 7 ) are : 
Profit and loss account : Summarises sales revenue inflows
and expense outflows for the period and ends with the
bottom-line profit , which is the net inflow for the period ( a
loss is a net outflow )  . 
Balance sheet : Summarises financial condition at the end of
the period , consisting of amounts for assets , liabilities and
owners ’ equity at that instant in time . 
Cash flow statement : Summarises the net cash inflow ( or
outflow ) from profit for the period plus the other sources
and uses of cash during the period . 
An annual financial report of a business contains more than just
these three financial statements . In the ‘ more ’  , the business
manager plays an important role – which outside investors and
lenders should understand . The manager should do certain critical
things before the financial report is released to the outside world . 
1 . The manager should review with a critical eye the vital
connections between the items reported in all three financial
statements – all amounts have to fit together like the pieces of a
jigsaw . The net cash increase ( or decrease ) reported at the end of
the cash flow statement , for instance , has to tie in with the change
in cash reported in the balance sheet . Abnormally high or low
ratios between connected accounts should be scrutinised
carefully . 
2 . The manager should carefully review the disclosures in the
financial report ( all information in addition to the financial
statements ) to make sure that disclosure is adequate according to
financial reporting standards , and that all the disclosure elements
are truthful but not damaging to the interests of the business . 
This disclosure review can be compared with the
notion of due diligence , which is done to make certain that all
relevant information is collected , that the information is accurate
and reliable , and that all relevant requirements and regulations
are being complied with . This step is especially important for
public corporations whose securities ( shares and debt
instruments ) are traded on national securities exchanges . 
3 . The manager should consider whether the financial statement
numbers need touching up to smooth the jagged edges off the
company ’ s year-to-year profit gyrations or to improve the
business ’ s short-term solvency picture . Although this can be
described as putting your thumb on the scale , you can also argue
that sometimes the scale is a little out of balance to begin with and
the manager is adjusting the financial statements to jibe better
with the normal circumstances of the business . 
In discussing the third step later in the chapter , we walk
on thin ice . Some topics are , shall we say , rather delicate . The
manager has to strike a balance between the interests of the
business on the one hand and the interests of the owners 
( investors ) and creditors of the business on the other . The best
analogy we can think of is the advertising done by a business . 
Advertising should be truthful but , as we ’ re sure you know , 
businesses have a lot of leeway in how to advertise their
products and they have been known to engage in hyperbole . 
Managers exercise the same freedoms in putting together their
financial reports . 
Reviewing Vital Connections
Business managers and investors read financial reports
because these reports provide information regarding how the
business is doing . The top managers of a business , in reviewing
the annual financial report before releasing it outside the
business , should keep in mind that a financial report is
designed to answer certain basic financial questions : 
Is the business making a profit or suffering a loss , and how
much ? 
How do assets stack up against liabilities ? 
Where did the business get its capital and is it making good
use of the money ? 
Is profit generating cash flow ? 
Did the business reinvest all its profit or distribute some of
the profit to owners ? 
Does the business have enough capital for future growth ? 
As a hypothetical but realistic business example , Figure
8-1 highlights some of the vital connections – the lines connect
one or more balance sheet accounts with sales revenue or an
expense in the profit and loss account . The savvy manager or
investor checks these links to see whether everything is in
Figure 8-1 : 
Vital
connections
between the
profit and loss
account and
the balance
sheet . 
order or whether some danger signals point to problems .  ( We
should make clear that these lines of connection do not appear
in actual financial reports .  ) 
In the following list , we briefly explain these five connections , 
mainly from the manager ’ s point of view . Chapters 14 and 17 explain
how investors and lenders read a financial report and compute
certain ratios .  ( Investors and lenders are on the outside looking in ; 
managers are on the inside looking out .  ) 
Note : We cut right to the chase in the following brief comments and
we do not illustrate the calculations behind the comments . The
purpose here is to emphasise why managers should pay attention to
these important ratios .  ( Chapters 5 and 6 provide fuller
explanations of these and other connections of operating assets and
liabilities with sales revenue and expenses .  ) 
1 . Sales Revenue and Debtors : This business ’ s ending balance of
debtors is five weeks of its annual sales revenue . The manager
should compare this ratio to the normal credit terms offered to
the business ’ s customers . If the ending balance is too high , the
manager should identify which customers ’ accounts are past due
and take actions to collect these amounts , or perhaps shut off
future credit to these customers . An abnormally high balance of
debtors may signal that some of these customers ’ amounts owed
to the business should be written off as uncollectable bad debts . 
2 . Cost of Goods Sold Expense and Stock : This business ’ s ending
stock is 13 weeks of its annual cost of goods sold expense . The
manager should compare this ratio to the company ’ s stock
policies and objectives regarding how long stock should be held
awaiting sale . If stock is too large the manager should identify
which products have been in stock too long ; further purchases ( or
manufacturing ) should be curtailed . Also , the manager may want
to consider sales promotions or cutting sales prices to move these
products out of stock faster . 
3 . Sales , Administration and General ( SA & G ) Expenses and
Prepaid Expenses : This business ’ s ending balance of prepaid
expenses is three weeks of the total of these annual operating
expenses . The manager should know what the normal ratio of
prepaid expenses should be relative to the annual SA & G operating
expenses ( excluding depreciation expense )  . If the ending balance
is too high , the manager should investigate which costs have been
paid too far in advance and take action to bring these prepaids
back down to normal . 
4 . Sales , Administration and General ( SA & G ) Expenses and
Creditors : This business ’ s ending balance of creditors is five
weeks of its annual operating expenses . Delaying payment of these
liabilities is good from the cash flow point of view ( refer to
Chapter 7 ) but delaying too long may jeopardise the company ’ s
good credit rating with its key suppliers and vendors . If this ratio
is too high , the manager should pinpoint which specific liabilities
have not been paid and whether any of these are overdue and
should be paid immediately . Or , the high balance may indicate
that the company is in a difficult short-term solvency situation and
needs to raise more money to pay the amounts owed to suppliers
and vendors . 
5 . Sales , Administration and General ( SA & G ) Expenses and
Accrued Expenses Payable : This business ’ s ending balance of this
operating liability is eight weeks of the business ’ s annual operating
expenses . This ratio may be consistent with past experience and
the normal lag before paying these costs . On the other hand , the
ending balance may be abnormally high . The manager should
identify which of these unpaid costs are higher than they should
be . As with creditors , inflated amounts of accrued liabilities may
signal serious short-term solvency problems . 
These five key connections are very important ones , but the
manager should scan all basic connections to see whether the ratios
pass the common sense test . For example , the manager should make
a quick eyeball test of interest expense compared with interestbearing debt . In Figure 8-1 , interest expense is £750 , 000 compared
with £10 million total debt , which indicates a 7 . 5 per cent interest
rate . This seems OK . But if the interest expense were more than £1
million , the manager should investigate and determine why it ’ s so
high . 
There ’ s always the chance of errors in the accounts of a
business . Reviewing the vital connections between the profit
and loss account items and the balance sheet items is a very
valuable final check before the financial statements are
approved for inclusion in the business ’ s financial report . After
the financial report is released to the outside world , it becomes
the latest chapter in the official financial history of the business . 
If the financial statements are wrong , the business and its top
managers are responsible . 
Statement of Changes in Owners ’ 
Equity and Comprehensive Income
In many situations a business needs to prepare one
additional financial statement – the statement of changes in
owners ’ equity . Owners ’ equity consists of two fundamentally
different sources – capital invested in the business by the
owners , and profit earned by and retained in the business . The
specific accounts maintained by the business for its total
owners ’ equity depend on the legal organisation of the business
entity . One of the main types of legal organisation of business is
the company , and its owners are shareholders because the
company issues ownership shares representing portions of the
business . So , the title statement of changes in shareholders ’ 
equity is used for companies .  ( Chapter 11 explains the
corporation and other legal types of business entities .  ) 
First , consider the situation in which a business does not need to
report this statement – to make clearer why the statement is
needed . Suppose a company has only one class of share and it did
not buy any of its own shares during the year and it did not record
any gains or losses in owners ’ equity during the year due to other
comprehensive income ( explained below )  . This business does not
need a statement of changes in shareholders ’ equity . In reading the
financial report of this business you would see in its cash flow
statement ( Figure 7–2 shows an example ) whether the business
raised additional capital from its owners during the year and how
much in cash dividends ( distributions from profit ) was paid to the
owners during the year . The cash flow statement contains all the
changes in the owners ’ equity accounts during the year . 
In sharp contrast , larger businesses – especially publicly traded
corporations – generally have complex ownership structures
consisting of two or more classes of shares ; they usually buy some
of their own shares and they have one or more technical types of
gains or losses during the year . So , they prepare a statement of
changes in stockholders ’ equity to collect together in one place all
the changes affecting the owners ’ equity accounts during the year . 
This particular ‘ mini ’ statement ( that focuses narrowly on changes
in owners ’ equity accounts ) is where you find certain gains and
losses that increase or decrease owners ’ equity but which are not
reported in the profit and loss account . Basically , a business has the
option to bypass the profit and loss account and , instead , report
these gains and losses in the statement of changes in owners ’ 
equity . In this way the gains or losses do not affect the bottom-line
profit of the business reported in its profit and loss account . You
have to read this financial summary of the changes in the owners ’ 
equity accounts to find out whether the business had any of these
gains or losses and the amounts of the gains or losses . 
The special types of gains and losses that can be
reported in the statement of owners ’ equity ( instead of the
profit and loss account ) have to do with foreign currency
translations , unrealised gains and losses from certain types of
securities investments by the business and changes in liabilities
for unfunded pension fund obligations of the business . 
Comprehensive income is the term used to describe the normal
content of the profit and loss account plus the additional layer
of these special types of gains and losses . Being so technical in
nature , these gains and losses fall in a ‘ twilight zone ’ as it were , 
in financial reporting . The gains and losses can be tacked on at
the bottom of the profit and loss account or they can be put in
the statement of changes in owners ’ equity – it ’ s up to the
business to make the choice . If you encounter these gains and
losses in reading a financial report , you ’ ll have to study the
footnotes to the financial statements to learn more information
about each gain and loss . 
Keep on the lookout for the special types of gains and
losses that are reported in the statement of changes in owners ’ 
equity . A business has the option to tack such gains and losses
onto the bottom of its profit and loss account – below the net
income line . But , most businesses put these income gains and
losses in their statement of changes in shareholders ’ equity , or
in a note or notes to their accounts . So , watch out for any large
amounts of gains or losses that are reported in the statement of
changes in owners ’ equity . 
The general format of the statement of changes in shareholders ’ 
equity includes a column for each class of stock ( ordinary shares , 
preference shares and so on )  ; a column for any shares of its own
that the business has purchased and not cancelled ; a column for
retained earnings ; and one or more columns for any other separate
components of the business ’ s owners ’ equity . Each column starts
with the beginning balance and then shows the increases or
decreases in the account during the year . For example , a
comprehensive gain is shown as an increase in retained earnings
and a comprehensive loss as a decrease . The purchase of its own
shares is shown as an increase in the relevant column and if the
business reissued some of these shares ( such as for stock options
exercised by executives )  , the cost of these shares reissued is shown
as a decrease in the column . 
We have to admit that reading the statement of changes , or notes to
the accounts in shareholders ’ equity can be heavy going . The
professionals – stock analysts , money and investment managers and
so on – carefully read through and dissect this statement , or at least
they should . The average non-professional investor should focus on
whether the business had a major increase or decrease in the
number of shares during the year , whether the business changed its
ownership structure by creating or eliminating a class of stock , and
the impact of stock options awarded to managers of the business . 
Making Sure that Disclosure Is
Adequate
The primary financial statements ( including the statement of
changes in owners ’ equity , if reported ) are the backbone of a
financial report . In fact , a financial report is not deserving of the
name if the primary financial statements are not included . But , as
mentioned earlier , there ’ s much more to a financial report than the
financial statements . A financial report needs disclosures . Of course , 
the financial statements provide disclosure of the most important
financial information about the business . The term disclosures , 
however , usually refers to additional information provided in a
financial report . In a nutshell , a financial report has two basic parts :  
( 1 ) the primary financial statements and ( 2 ) disclosures . 
The chief officer of the business ( usually the CEO of a publicly
owned company , the president of a private corporation or the
managing partner of a partnership ) has the primary responsibility to
make sure that the financial statements have been prepared
according to prevailing accounting standards and that the financial
report provides adequate disclosure . He or she works with the chief
financial officer of the business to make sure that the financial
report meets the standard of adequate disclosure .  ( Many smaller
businesses hire an independent qualified accountant to advise them
on their financial statements and other disclosures in their financial
reports .  ) 
Types of disclosures in financial reports
For a quick survey of disclosures in financial reports – that is to say , 
the disclosures in addition to the financial statements – the
following distinctions are helpful : 
Footnotes that provide additional information about the
basic figures included in the financial statements ; virtually all
financial statements need footnotes to provide additional
information for the account balances in the financial
statements . 
Supplementary financial schedules and tables that provide
more details than can be included in the body of financial
statements . 
A wide variety of other information , some of which is
required if the business is a company quoted on a stock
market subject to government regulations regarding financial
reporting to its shareholders and other information that is
voluntary and not strictly required legally or according to
GAAP . 
Footnotes : Nettlesome but needed
Footnotes appear at the end of the primary financial statements . 
Within the financial statements you see references to particular
footnotes . And at the bottom of each financial statement , you find
the following sentence ( or words to this effect )  :  ‘ The footnotes are
integral to the financial statements .  ’ You should read all footnotes
for a full understanding of the financial statements . 
Footnotes come in two types : 
One or more footnotes must be included to identify the
major accounting policies and methods that the business
uses .  ( Chapter 13 explains that a business must choose
among alternative accounting methods for certain expenses , 
and for their corresponding operating assets and liabilities .  ) 
The business must reveal which accounting methods it uses
for its major expenses . In particular , the business must
identify its cost of goods sold expense ( and stock ) method
and its depreciation methods . 
Other footnotes provide additional information and details
for many assets and liabilities . Details about share option
plans for key executives are the main type of footnote to the
capital stock account in the owners ’ equity section of the
balance sheet . 
One problem that most investors face when reading
footnotes – and , for that matter , many managers who should
understand their own footnotes but find them a little dense – is
that footnotes often deal with complex issues ( such as lawsuits ) 
and rather technical accounting matters . Let us offer you one
footnote that brings out this latter point . This footnote is taken
from the recent financial report of a well-known manufacturer
that uses a very conservative accounting method for
determining its cost of goods sold expense and stock cost
value . We know that we have not yet talked about these
accounting methods ; this is deliberate on our part .  ( Chapter 13
explains accounting methods .  ) We want you to read the
following footnote from the 2011 Annual Report of this
manufacturer and try to make sense of it ( amounts are in
thousands )  . 
D . Inventories : Inventories are valued principally
by the LIFO ( last-in , first-out ) method . If the FIFO 
( first-in , first-out ) method had been in use , inventories
would have been £2 , 000 million and £1 , 978 million
higher than reported at December 31 , 2010 and 2011 , 
respectively . 
Yes , these amounts are in millions of pounds . The company ’ s stock
cost value at the end of 2010 would have been £2 billion higher if the
FIFO method had been used . Of course , you have to have some idea
of the difference between the two methods , which we explain in
Chapter 13 . 
You may wonder how different the company ’ s annual
profits would have been if the alternative method had been in
use . A manager can ask the accounting department to do this
analysis . But , as an outside investor , you would have to
compute these amounts . Businesses disclose which accounting
methods they use but they do not have to disclose how
different annual profits would have been if the alternative
method had been used – and very few do . 
Other disclosures in financial reports
The following discussion includes a fairly comprehensive list of the
various types of disclosures found in annual financial reports of
larger , publicly owned businesses – in addition to footnotes . A few
caveats are in order . First , not every public company includes every
one of the following items although the disclosures are fairly
common . Second , the level of disclosure by private businesses –
after you get beyond the financial statements and footnotes – is
much less than in public companies . Third , tracking the actual
disclosure practices of private businesses is difficult because their
annual financial reports are circulated only to their owners and
lenders . A private business may include any or all of the following
disclosures but , by and large , it is not legally required to do so . The
next section further explains the differences between private and
public businesses regarding disclosure practices in their annual
financial reports . 
Warren Buffett ’ 
s annual letter to shareholders
We have to call your attention to one notable exception to the generally selfserving and slanted writing found in the letter to shareholders by the chief
executive officer of the business in annual financial reports . The annual letter
to stockholders of Berkshire Hathaway , Inc . is written by Warren Buffett , the
Chairman and CEO . Mr Buffett has become very well known – he ’ s called the 
 ‘ Oracle of Omaha ’  . In the annual ranking of the world ’ s richest people by
Forbes magazine he is near the top of the list – right behind people like Bill
Gates , the co-founder of Microsoft . If you had invested £1 , 000 with him in 1960 , 
your investment would be worth well over £1 , 000 , 000 today . Even in the recent
financial meltdown Berkshire Hathaway stock delivered a return of nearly 80%
over the period 2000–2011 compared to a negative 12% return for the S & P 500 . 
Mr Buffett ’ s letters are the epitome of telling it like it is ; they are very frank and
quite humorous . 
You can go to the website of the company ( www . berkshirehathaway . com ) and
download his most recent letter . You ’ ll learn a lot about his investing
philosophy and the letters are a delight to read . 
Public corporations typically include most of the following
disclosures in their annual financial reports to their shareholders : 
Cover ( or transmittal ) letter )  : A letter from the chief
executive of the business to the shareholders . 
Highlights table : A short table that presents the shareholder
with a financial thumbnail sketch of the business . 
Management discussion and analysis ( MD & A )  : Deals with
the major developments and changes during the year that
affected the financial performance and situation of the
business . 
Segment information : The sales revenue and operating
profits are reported for the major divisions of the
organisation or for its different markets ( international versus
domestic , for example )  . 
Historical summaries : Financial history that extends back
beyond the years ( usually three but can be up to five or six ) 
included in the primary financial statements . 
Graphics : Bar charts , trend charts and pie charts
representing financial conditions ; photos of key people and
products . 
Promotional material : information about the company , its
products , its employees and its managers , often stressing an
over-arching theme for the year . 
Profiles : Information about members of top management and
the board of directors . 
Quarterly summaries of profit performance and share
prices and dividends : Shows financial performance for all
four quarters in the year and share price ranges for each
quarter . 
Management ’ s responsibility statement : A short statement
that management has primary responsibility for the
accounting methods used to prepare the financial statements
and for providing the other disclosures in the financial
report . 
Independent auditor ’ s report : The report from the
accounting firm that performed the audit , expressing an
opinion on the fairness of the financial statements and
accompanying disclosures .  ( Chapter 15 discusses the nature
of audits .  ) Public companies are required to have audits ; 
private businesses may or may not have their annual
financial reports audited depending on their size . 
Company contact information : Information on how to
contact the company , the website address of the company , 
how to get copies of the reports filed with the London Stock
Exchange , SEC , the stock transfer agent and registrar of the
company , and other information . 
Managers of public corporations rely on lawyers , 
auditors and their financial and accounting officers to make
sure that everything that should be disclosed in the business ’ s
annual financial reports is included and that the exact wording
of the disclosures is not misleading , inaccurate or incomplete . 
This is a tall order . The field of financial reporting disclosure
changes constantly . Laws , as well as authoritative accounting
standards , have to be observed . Inadequate disclosure in an
annual financial report is just as serious as using wrong
accounting methods for measuring profit and for determining
values for assets , liabilities and owners ’ equity . A financial
report can be misleading because of improper accounting
methods or because of inadequate or misleading disclosure . 
Both types of deficiencies can lead to nasty lawsuits against the
business and its managers . 
Companies House provides forms showing how the
Companies Act requires balance sheets and profit and loss
accounts to be laid out . To access their guidance , go to
www . companieshouse . gov . uk / forms / introduction . shtml . All their
statutory forms are available on request and free of charge . 
Keeping It Private versus Going
Public
Compared with their big brothers and sisters , privately owned
businesses provide very little additional disclosures in their annual
financial reports . The primary financial statements and footnotes
are pretty much all you get . 
The annual financial reports of publicly owned corporations include
all , or nearly all , of the disclosure items listed earlier . Somewhere in
the range of 3 , 000 companies are publicly owned , and their shares
are traded on the London Stock Exchange , NASDAQ or other stock
exchanges . Publicly owned companies must file annual financial
reports with the Stock Exchange , which is the agency that makes
and enforces the rules for trading in securities and for the financial
reporting requirements of publicly owned corporations . These
filings are available to the public on the London Stock Exchange ’ s
website ( www . londonstockexchange . com ) or for US companies on the
Securities Exchange Commission ’ s ( SEC ’ s ) EDGAR database at the
SEC ’ s website – www . sec . gov / edgar / searchedgar / cik . htm . 
Both privately held and publicly owned businesses are bound by the
same accounting rules for measuring profit , assets , liabilities and
owners ’ equity in annual financial reports to the owners of the
business and in reports that are made available to others ( such as
the lenders to the business )  . There aren ’ t two different sets of
accounting rules – one for private companies and another one for
public businesses . The accounting measurement and valuation rules
are the same for all businesses . However , disclosure requirements
and practices differ greatly between private and public companies . 
Publicly owned businesses live in a fish bowl . When a
company goes public with an IPO ( initial public offering of
shares )  , it gives up a lot of the privacy that a closely held
business enjoys . Publicly owned companies whose shares are
traded on national stock exchanges live in glass houses . In
contrast , privately owned businesses lock their doors regarding
disclosure . Whenever a privately owned business releases a
financial report to its bank in seeking a loan , or to the outside
non-management investors in the business , it should include its
three primary financial statements and footnotes . But beyond
this , they have much more leeway and do not have to include
the additional disclosure items listed in the preceding section . 
A private business may have its financial statements audited by a
professional accounting firm . If so , the audit report is included in
the business ’ s annual financial report . The very purpose of having
an audit is to reassure shareholders and potential investors in the
business that the financial statements can be trusted . But as we look
up and down the preceding list of disclosure items we don ’ t see any
other absolutely required disclosure item for a privately held
business . The large majority of closely held businesses guard their
financial information like Fort Knox . 
The less information divulged in the annual financial report , the
better – that ’ s their thinking . And we don ’ t entirely disagree . The
better – that ’ s their thinking . And we don ’ t entirely disagree . The
shareholders don ’ t have the liquidity for their shares that
shareholders of publicly held corporations enjoy . The market prices
of public companies are everything , so information is made publicly
available so that market prices are fairly determined . The shares of
privately owned businesses are rarely traded , so there is not such
an urgent need for a complete package of information . 
A private company could provide all the disclosures given in the
preceding list – there ’ s certainly no law against this . But usually
they don ’ t . Investors in private businesses can request confidential
reports from managers at the annual shareholders ’ meetings , but
doing so is not practical for a shareholder in a large public
corporation . 
Nudging the Numbers
This section discusses two accounting tricks that business
managers and investors should know about . We don ’ t endorse
either technique , but you should be aware of both of them . In some
situations , the financial statement numbers don ’ t come out exactly
the way the business wants . Accountants use certain tricks of the
trade – some would say sleight-of-hand – to move the numbers
closer to what the business prefers . One trick improves the
appearance of the short-term solvency of the business , in particular
the cash balance reported in the balance sheet at the end of the
year . The other device shifts profit from one year to the next to
make for a smoother trend of net income from year to year . 
Not all businesses use these techniques , but the extent
of their use is hard to pin down because no business would
openly admit to using these manipulation methods . The
evidence is fairly convincing , however , that many businesses
use these techniques . We ’ re sure you ’ ve heard the term
loopholes applied to income tax accounting . Well , some
loopholes exist in financial statement accounting as well . 
Fluffing up the cash balance by ‘ window
dressing ’ 
Suppose you manage a business and your accountant has just
submitted to you a preliminary , or first draft , of the year-end
balance sheet for your review .  ( Chapter 6 explains the balance
sheet , and Figure 6-1 shows a complete balance sheet for a
business .  ) Your preliminary balance sheet includes the following : 
You start reading the numbers when something strikes you : a zero
cash balance ? How can that be ? Maybe your business has been
having some cash flow problems and you ’ ve intended to increase
your short-term borrowing and speed up collection of debtors to
help the cash balance . But that plan doesn ’ t help you right now , 
with this particular financial report that you must send out to your
business ’ s investors and your banker . Folks generally don ’ t like to
see a zero cash balance – it makes them kind of nervous , to put it
mildly , no matter how you try to cushion it . So what do you do to
avoid alarming them ? 
Your accountant is probably aware of a technique known as window
dressing , a very simple method for making the cash balance look
better . Suppose your financial year-end is October 31 . Your
accountant takes the cash receipts from customers paying their bills
that are actually received on November 1 , 2 and 3 , and records them
as if these cash collections had been received on October 31 . After
all , the argument can be made that the customers ’ cheques were in
the mail – that money is yours , as far as the customers are
concerned , so your reports should reflect that cash inflow . 
What impact does window dressing have ? It reduces the amount in
debtors and increases the amount in cash by the same amount – it
has absolutely no effect on the profit figure . It just makes your cash
balance look a touch better . Window dressing can also be used to
improve other accounts ’ balances , which we don ’ t go into here . All
of these techniques involve holding the books open to record
certain events that take place after the end of the financial year ( the
certain events that take place after the end of the financial year ( the
ending balance sheet date ) to make things look better than they
actually were at the close of business on the last day of the year . 
Sounds like everybody wins , doesn ’ t it ? Your investors
don ’ t panic and your job is safe . We have to warn you , though , 
that window dressing may be the first step on a slippery slope . 
A little window dressing today and tomorrow , who knows ? –
Maybe giving the numbers a nudge will lead to serious financial
fraud . Any way you look at it , window dressing is deceptive to
your investors who have every right to expect that the end of
your fiscal year as stated on your financial reports is truly the
end of your fiscal year . Think about it this way : If you ’ ve
invested in a business that has fudged this data , how do you
know what other numbers on the report are suspect ? 
Smoothing the rough edges off profit
Managers strive to make their numbers and to hit the milestone
markers set for the business . Reporting a loss for the year , or even a
dip below the profit trend line , is a red flag that investors view with
alarm . 
Managers can do certain things to deflate or inflate
profit ( the net income ) recorded in the year , which are referred
to as profit-smoothing techniques . Profit smoothing is also called
income smoothing . Profit smoothing is not nearly as serious as
cooking the books , or juggling the books , which refers to
deliberate , fraudulent accounting practices such as recording
sales revenue that has not happened or not recording expenses
that have happened . Cooking the books is very serious ; 
managers can go to jail for fraudulent financial statements . 
Profit smoothing is more like a white lie that is told for the good
of the business , and perhaps for the good of managers as well . 
Managers know that there is always some noise in the
accounting system . Profit smoothing muffles the noise . 
Managers of publicly owned companies whose shares are actively
traded are under intense pressure to keep profits steadily rising . 
Security analysts who follow a particular company make profit
forecasts for the business , and their buy-hold-sell recommendations
are based largely on these earnings forecasts . If a business fails to
meet its own profit forecast or falls short of analysts ’ forecasts , the
market price of its shares suffers . Share option and bonus incentive
compensation plans are also strong motivations for achieving the
profit goals set for the business . 
The evidence is fairly strong that publicly owned
businesses engage in some degree of profit smoothing . Frankly , 
it ’ s much harder to know whether private businesses do so . 
Private businesses don ’ t face the public scrutiny and
expectations that public corporations do . On the other hand , 
key managers in a private business may have incentive bonus
arrangements that depend on recorded profit . In any case , 
business investors and managers should know about profit
smoothing and how it ’ s done . 
Most profit smoothing involves pushing revenue and expenses into
other years than they would normally be recorded . For example , if
the president of a business wants to report more profit for the year , 
he or she can instruct the chief accountant to accelerate the
recording of some sales revenue that normally wouldn ’ t be recorded
until next year , or to delay the recording of some expenses until
next year that normally would be recorded this year . The main
reason for smoothing profit is to keep it closer to a projected trend
reason for smoothing profit is to keep it closer to a projected trend
line and make the line less jagged . 
Chapter 13 explains that managers choose among alternative
accounting methods for several important expenses . After making
these key choices the managers should let the accountants do their
jobs and let the chips fall where they may . If bottom-line profit for
the year turns out to be a little short of the forecast or target for the
period , so be it . This hands-off approach to profit accounting is the
ideal way . However , managers often use a hands-on approach – they
intercede ( one could say interfere ) and override the normal
accounting for sales revenue or expenses . 
Both managers who do it and investors who rely on financial
statements in which profit smoothing has been done should
definitely understand one thing – these techniques have robbingPeter-to-pay-Paul effects . Accountants refer to these as
compensatory effects . The effects on next year ’ s statement simply
offset and cancel out the effects on this year . Less expense this year
is counterbalanced by more expense next year . Sales revenue
recorded this year means less sales revenue recorded next year . 
Two profit histories
Figure 8-2 shows , side by side , the annual profit histories of two
different companies over six years . Business X shows a nice steady
upward trend of profit . Business Y , in contrast , shows somewhat of
a rollercoaster ride over the six years . Both businesses earned the
same total profit for the six years – in this case , £1 , 050 , 449 . Their
total six-year profit performance is the same , down to the last
pound . Which company would you be more willing to risk your
money in ? We suspect that you ’ d prefer Business X because of the
steady upward slope of its profit history . 
Question : Does Figure 8-2 really show two different
companies – or are the two profit histories actually alternatives
for the same company ? The year-by- year profits for Business X
could be the company ’ s smoothed profit , and the annual profits
for Business Y could be the actual profit of the same business –
the profit that would have been recorded if smoothing
techniques had not been applied . 
For the first year in the series , 2006 , no profit smoothing occurred . 
Actual profit is on target . For each of the next five years , the two
profit numbers differ . The under-gap or over-gap of actual profit
compared with smoothed profit for the year is the amount of
revenue or expenses manipulation that was done in the year . For
example , in 2007 , actual profit would have been too high , so the
company moved some expenses that normally would be recorded
the following year into 2007 . In contrast , in 2008 , actual profit was
running too low , so the business took action to put off recording
some expenses until 2011 . 
If a business has a particularly bad year , all the profit-smoothing
tricks in the world won ’ t close the gap . But several smoothing
techniques are available for filling the potholes and straightening
Figure 8-2 : 
Comparison
of two annual
profit
histories . 
techniques are available for filling the potholes and straightening
the curves on the profit highway . 
Profit-smoothing techniques
One common technique for profit smoothing is deferred
maintenance . Many routine and recurring maintenance costs
required for vehicles , machines , equipment and buildings can
be put off , or deferred until later . These costs are not recorded
to expense until the actual maintenance is done , so putting off
the work means that no expense is recorded . Or a company can
cut back on its current year ’ s outlays for market research and
product development . Keep in mind that most of these costs
will be incurred next year , so the effect is to rob Peter ( make
next year absorb the cost ) to pay Paul ( let this year escape the
cost )  . 
A business can ease up on its rules regarding when slow-paying
customers are decided to be bad debts ( uncollectable debtors )  . A
business can put off recording some of its bad debts expense until
next year . A fixed asset out of active use may have very little or no
future value to a business . Instead of writing off the non-depreciated
cost of the impaired asset as a loss this year , the business may delay
the write-off until next year . 
So , managers have control over the timing of many
expenses , and they can use this discretion for profit smoothing . 
Some amount of expenses can be accelerated into this year or
deferred to next year in order to make for a smoother profit
trend . Of course , in its external financial report a business does
not divulge the extent to which it has engaged in profit
smoothing . Nor does the independent auditor comment on the
use of profit-smoothing techniques by the business – unless the
auditor thinks that the company has gone too far in massaging
the numbers and that its financial statements are misleading . 
Sticking to the accounting conventions
Over time , a generally accepted approach to the boundaries of
acceptable number nudging has been arrived at . This hinges on the
use of three conventions : conservatism , materiality and
consistency . 
Conservatism
Accountants are often viewed as merchants of gloom , always prone
to taking a pessimistic point of view . The fact that a point of view
has to be taken at all is the root of the problem . The convention of
conservatism means that , given a choice , the accountant takes the
figure that will result in a lower end profit . This might mean , for
example , taking the higher of two possible expense figures . Few
people are upset if the profit figure at the end of the day is higher
than earlier estimates . The converse is never true . 
Materiality
A strict interpretation of depreciation could lead to all sorts of
trivial paperwork . For example , pencil sharpeners , staplers and
paperclips , all theoretically items of fixed assets , should be
depreciated over their working lives . This is obviously a useless
exercise and in practice these items are written-off when they are
bought . 
Clearly , the level of materiality is not the same for all businesses . A
multinational may not keep meticulous records of every item of
machinery under £1 , 000 . For a small business this may represent all
the machinery it has . 
Consistency
Even with the help of those concepts and conventions , there ’ s a fair
degree of latitude in how you can record and interpret financial
information . You need to choose the methods that give the fairest
picture of how the firm is performing and stick with them . Keeping
track of events in a business that ’ s always changing its accounting
methods is very difficult . This doesn ’ t mean that you ’ re stuck with
one method forever . Any change , however , is an important step . 
Browsing versus Reading Financial
Reports
Very few people have the time to carefully read all the information
in an annual financial report – even if the report is relatively short . 
Annual financial reports are long and dense documents –
like lengthy legal contracts in many ways . Pick up a typical
annual financial report of a public corporation : You would need
many hours ( perhaps the whole day ) to thoroughly read
everything in the report . You would need at least an hour or
two just to read and absorb the main points in the report . How
do investors in a business deal with the information overload of
annual financial reports put out by businesses ? 
An annual financial report is like the Sunday edition of
The Times or The Telegraph . Hardly anyone reads every
sentence on every page of these Sunday papers – most people
pick and choose what they want to read . Investors read annual
financial reports like they read Sunday newspapers . The
information is there if you really want to read it , but most
readers pick and choose which information they have time to
read . 
Annual financial reports are designed for archival purposes , not for
a quick read . Instead of addressing the needs of investors and
others who want to know about the profit performance and financial
condition of the business – but have only a very limited amount of
condition of the business – but have only a very limited amount of
time to do so – accountants produce an annual financial report that
is a voluminous financial history of the business . Accountants leave
it to the users of annual reports to extract the main points from an
annual report . So , financial statement readers use relatively few
ratios and other tests to get a feel for the financial performance and
position of the business .  ( Chapters 14 and 17 explain how readers of
financial reports get a fix on the financial performance and position
of a business .  ) 
Some businesses ( and non-profit organisations in reporting to their
members and other constituencies ) don ’ t furnish an annual financial
report . They know that few people have the time or the technical
background to read through their annual financial reports . Instead , 
they provide relatively brief summaries that are boiled-down
versions of their official financial statements . Typically these
summaries do not provide footnotes or the other disclosures that
are included in annual financial reports . These condensed financial
statements , without footnotes , are provided by several non-profit
organisations – credit unions , for instance . If you really want to see
the complete financial report of the organisation you can ask its
headquarters to send you a copy . 
You should keep in mind that annual financial reports do not report
everything of interest to owners , creditors and others who have a
financial interest in the business . Annual reports , of course , come
out only once a year – usually two months or so after the end of the
company ’ s fiscal ( accounting ) year . You have to keep abreast of
developments during the year by reading financial newspapers or
through other means . Also , annual financial reports present the 
 ‘ sanitised ’ version of events ; they don ’ t divulge scandals or other
negative news about the business . 
Finally , not everything you may like to know as an
investor is included in the annual financial report . For example , 
for US companies , information about salaries and incentive
compensation arrangements with the top-level managers of the
business are disclosed in the proxy statement , not in the annual
financial report of the business . A proxy statement is the means
by which the corporation solicits the votes of shareholders on
issues that require their approval – one of which is
compensation packages of top-level managers . In the US , proxy
statements are filed with the SEC and are available on its
EDGAR database , www . sec . gov / edgar / searchedgar / cik . htm . In the
UK this information would usually appear in the body of the
main report under the heading ‘ Report of the Directors on
Remuneration ’  . 
The quality of financial reports varies from company to company . 
The Investor Relations Society ( go to www . irs . org . uk and click on ‘ IR
Best Practice ’  ) makes an award each year to the company producing
the best ( in other words ,  ‘ complete ’ and ‘ clear ’  ) set of reports and
accounts . 
Part IV
Financial Reports in the Outside
World
In this part .  .  . 
This part looks at accounting and financial reporting from the
outside investor ’ s , or non-manager ’ s point of view . Outside
investors in a business – the owners who are not on the inside
managing the business – depend on the financial reports from the
business as their main source of information about the business . 
Investors should know how to read and interpret the financial
statements and what to look for in the footnotes to the statements . 
Their main concerns are the business ’ s profit and cash flow
performance and its financial health . Lenders to the business have
similar interests in how the business is doing . Key ratios are
calculated to test the success of the business in making profit and
keeping its financial affairs in order . You can use the same ratios on
the accounts of your competitors , customers , suppliers or potential
acquisition targets to see how they ’ re performing . 
Investors should also read the independent auditor ’ s report , which
provides some , though far from conclusive , assurance that the
financial statements have been prepared properly . The auditor ’ s
report may reveal serious shortcomings in the statements ( if they
find any )  , and warns investors in the event that the business is
standing on thin financial ice and may not be able to continue as a
going concern . Investors should also look and see from a financial
perspective how comparable businesses are performing . 
Chapter 14
How Investors Read a Financial Report
In This Chapter
Looking after your investments
Keeping financial reports private versus making them public
Using ratios to understand profit performance
Using ratios to interpret financial condition and cash flow
Scanning footnotes and identifying the important ones
Paying attention to what the auditor has to say
In reading financial reports , directors , managers , business owners
and investors need to know how to navigate through the financial
statements to find the vital signs of progress and problems . The
financial statement ratios explained in this chapter point the way –
these ratios are signposts on the financial information highway . You
can also keep abreast of business affairs by reading financial
newspapers and investment magazines , and investment newsletters
are very popular . These sources of financial information refer to the
ratios discussed in this chapter on the premise that you know what
the ratios mean . Most managers or individual investors in public
companies don ’ t have the time or expertise to study a financial
report thoroughly enough to make decisions based on the report , so
they rely on stockbrokers , investment advisers and publishers of
credit ratings ( like Standard & Poor ’ s ) for interpretations of financial
reports . The fact is that the folks who prepare financial reports have
this kind of expert audience in mind ; they don ’ t include explanations
or mark passages with icons to help you understand the report . 
Sure you may have your own accountant or investment adviser on
Sure you may have your own accountant or investment adviser on
tap so why should you bother reading this chapter if you rely on
others to interpret financial reports anyway ? Well , the more you
understand the factors that go into interpreting a financial report , 
the better prepared you are to evaluate the commentary and advice
of stock analysts and other investment experts . If you can at least
nod intelligently while your stockbroker talks about a business ’ s P / E
and EPS , you ’ ll look like a savvy investor – and may get more
favourable treatment .  ( P / E and EPS , by the way , are two of the key
ratios explained later in the chapter .  ) 
This chapter gives you the basics for comparing companies ’ 
financial reports , including the points of difference between private
and public companies , the important ratios that you should know
about and the warning signs to look out for on audit reports . Part II
of this book explains the three primary financial statements that are
the core of every financial report : the profit and loss account , the
balance sheet and the cash flow statement . In this chapter , we also
suggest how to sort through the footnotes that are an integral part
of every financial report to identify those that have the most
importance to you . Believe us , the pros read the footnotes with a
keen eye . 
Financial Reporting by Private versus
Public Businesses
The main impetus behind the continued development of
generally accepted accounting principles ( GAAP ) has been the
widespread public ownership and trading in the securities 
( stocks and bonds ) issued by thousands of companies . The
1929 stock market crash and its aftermath plainly exposed the
lack of accounting standards , as well as many financial
reporting abuses and frauds . Landmark federal securities laws
were passed in the US in 1933 and 1934 , and a federal regulatory
agency with broad powers – the Securities and Exchange
Commission ( SEC ) – was created and given jurisdiction over
trading in corporate securities . In the UK , the Government has
enacted a series of Companies Acts , culminating in one
consolidated act in 2006 , that have strengthened the protection
for shareholders . Financial reports and other information must
be filed with The London Stock Exchange or the relevant
authorities elsewhere , such as the SEC in the US , and made
available to the investing public . 
Accounting standards are not limited to public
companies whose securities are traded on public exchanges , 
such as the London and New York Stock Exchanges and
NASDAQ . These financial accounting and reporting standards
apply with equal force and authority to private businesses
whose ownership shares are not traded in any open market . 
When the shareholders of a private business receive its
periodic financial reports , they are entitled to assume that the
company ’ s financial statements and footnotes are prepared in
accordance with the accounting rules in force at the time . Even
following the rules leaves a fair amount of wriggle room – look
back to Chapter 13 if you need a refresher on this subject . So it
always pays to check over the figures yourself to be sure of
what is really going on . The bare-bones content of a private
business ’ s annual financial report includes the three primary
financial statements ( balance sheet , profit and loss account , 
and cash flow statement ) plus several footnotes . We ’ ve seen
many private company financial reports that don ’ t even have a
letter from the chairman – just the three financial statements
plus a few footnotes and nothing more . In fact , we ’ ve seen
financial reports of private businesses ( mostly small
companies ) that don ’ t even include a cash flow statement ; only
the balance sheet and profit and loss account are presented . 
Omitting a cash flow statement violates the rules – but the
company ’ s shareholders and its lenders may not demand to see
the cash flow statement , so the company can get away with it . 
Publicly owned businesses must comply with an
additional layer of rules and requirements that don ’ t apply to
privately owned businesses . These rules are issued by the Stock
Exchange , the agency that regulates financial reporting and
trading in stocks and bonds of publicly owned businesses . The
Stock Exchange has no jurisdiction over private businesses ; 
those businesses need only worry about GAAP , which don ’ t
have many hard-and-fast rules about financial report formats . 
Public businesses have to file financial reports and other forms
with the Stock Exchange that are made available to the public . 
These filings are available to the public on the London Stock
Exchange ’ s website www . londonstockexchange . com / or for US
companies on the Securities Exchange Commission ’ s ( SEC ’ s ) 
EDGAR database at the SEC ’ s website –
www . sec . gov / edgar / quickedgar . htm . 
The best known of these forms is the annual 10-K , which includes
the business ’ s annual financial statements in prescribed formats
with all the supporting schedules and detailed disclosures that the
SEC requires . 
Here are some ( but not all ) of the main financial
reporting requirements that publicly owned businesses must
adhere to .  ( Private businesses may include these items as well
if they want , but they generally don ’ t .  ) 
Management discussion and analysis ( MD & A ) section : 
Presents the top managers ’ interpretation and analysis of a
business ’ s profit performance and other important financial
developments over the year . 
Earnings per share ( EPS )  : The only ratio that a public
business is required to report , although most public
businesses do report a few other ratios as well . See ‘ Earnings
per share , basic and diluted ’ later in this chapter . Note that
private businesses ’ reports generally don ’ t include any ratios 
( but you can , of course , compute the ratios yourself )  . 
Three-year comparative profit and loss account : See
Chapter 5 for more information about profit and loss
accounts . 
Note : A publicly-owned business can make the required filings with
the Stock Exchange or SEC and then prepare a different annual
financial report for its shareholders , thus preparing two sets of
financial reports . This is common practice . However , the financial
information in the two documents can ’ t differ in any material way . A
typical annual financial report to shareholders is a glossy booklet
with excellent art and graphic design including high-quality
photographs . The company ’ s products are promoted and its people
are featured in glowing terms that describe teamwork , creativity and
innovation – we ’ re sure you get the picture . In contrast , the reports
to the London Stock Exchange or SEC look like legal briefs – nothing
fancy in these filings . The core of financial statements and footnotes 
( plus certain other information ) is the same in both the Stock
Exchange filings and the annual reports to shareholders . The Stock
Exchange filings contain more information about certain expenses
and require much more disclosure about the history of the
business , its main markets and competitors , its principal officers , 
any major changes on the horizon and so on . Professional investors
and investment managers read the Stock Exchange filings . 
Most public companies solicit their shareholders ’ votes
in the annual election of persons to the board of directors 
( whom the business has nominated ) and on other matters that
must be put to a vote at the annual shareholders ’ meeting . The
method of communication for doing so is called a proxy
statement – the reason being that the shareholders give their
votes to a proxy , or designated person , who actually casts the
votes at the annual meeting . The Stock Exchange requires many
disclosures in proxy statements that are not found in annual
financial reports issued to shareholders or in the business ’ s
annual accounts filed at Companies House . For example , 
compensation paid to the top-level officers of the business must
be disclosed , as well as their shareholdings . If you own shares
in a public company , take the time to read through all the
financial statements you receive through the post and any
others you can get your hands on . 
Analysing Financial Reports with
Ratios
Financial reports have lots of numbers in them .  ( Duh !  ) The
significance of many of these numbers is not clear unless they are
compared with other numbers in the financial statements to
determine the relative size of one number to another number . One
very useful way of interpreting financial reports is to compute ratios
– that is , to divide a particular number in the financial report by
another . Financial report ratios are also useful because they enable
you to compare a business ’ s current performance with its past
performance or with another business ’ s performance , regardless of
whether sales revenue or net income was bigger or smaller for the
other years or the other business . In other words , using ratios
cancels out size differences . 
The following sections explain the ten financial statement ratios that
you ’ re most likely to run into . Here ’ s a general overview of why
these ratios are important : 
Gross margin ratio and profit ratio : You use these ratios to
measure a business ’ s profit performance with respect to its
sales revenue . Sales revenue is the starting point for making
profit ; these ratios measure the percentage of total sales
revenue that is left over as profit . 
Earnings per share ( EPS )  , price / earnings ( P / E ) ratio and
dividend yield : These three ratios revolve around the
market price of shares , and anyone who invests in publicly
owned businesses should be intimately familiar with them . 
As an investor , your main concern is the return you receive
on your invested capital . Return on capital consists of two
elements : 
• Periodic cash dividends distributed by the business . 
• Increase ( or decrease ) in the market price of the
shares . 
Dividends and market prices depend on earnings – and there
you have the relationship among these three ratios and why
they ’ re so important to you , the investor . Major newspapers
report P / E ratios and dividend yields in their stock market
activity tables ; stockbrokers ’ investment reports focus
mainly on forecasts of EPS and dividend yield . 
Book value per share and return on equity ( ROE )  : Shares
for private businesses have no ready market price , so
investors in these businesses use the ROE ratio , which is
based on the value of their ownership equity reported in the
balance sheet , to measure investment performance . Without
a market price for the shares of a private business , the P / E
ratio cannot be determined . EPS can easily be determined for
Figure 14-1 : A
sample profit
and loss
account . 
a private business but does not have to be reported in its
profit and loss account . 
Current ratio and acid-test ratio : These ratios indicate
whether a business should have enough cash to pay its
liabilities . 
Return on assets ( ROA )  : This ratio is the first step in
determining how well a business is using its capital and
whether it ’ s earning more than the interest rate on its debt , 
which causes financial leverage gain ( or loss )  . 
The profit and loss account and balance sheet of the business
example that we first use in Chapter 8 are repeated here so that you
have a financial statement for reference – see Figures 14-1 ( profit
and loss account ) and 14-2 ( balance sheet )  . Notice that a cash flow
statement is not presented here – mainly because no ratios are
calculated from data in the cash flow statement .  ( Refer to the
sidebar ‘ The temptation to compute cash flow per share : Don ’ t give
in !  ’  ) The footnotes to the company ’ s financial statements are not
presented here , but the use of footnotes is discussed in the
following sections . 
Figure 14-2 : A
sample
balance
sheet . 
Gross margin ratio
Making bottom-line profit begins with making sales and earning
enough gross margin from those sales , as explained in Chapters 5
and 9 . In other words , a business must set its sales prices high
enough over product costs to yield satisfactory gross margins on its
products , because the business has to worry about many more
expenses of making sales and running the business , plus interest
expense and income tax expense . You calculate the gross margin
ratio as follows : 
Gross margin ÷ sales revenue = gross margin ratio
So a business with a £20 . 8 million gross margin and £52
million in sales revenue ( refer to Figure 14-1 ) ends up with a 40
per cent gross margin ratio . Now , if the business had only been
able to earn a 41 per cent gross margin , that one additional
point ( one point is 1 per cent ) would have caused a jump in its
gross margin of £520 , 000 ( 1 per cent ´ £52 million sales
revenue ) – which would have trickled down to earnings before
income tax . Earnings before income tax would have been 19 per
cent higher ( a £520 , 000 bump in gross margin ÷ £2 . 8 million
income before income tax )  . Never underestimate the impact of
even a small improvement in the gross margin ratio ! 
Outside investors know only the information disclosed
in the external financial report that the business releases . They
can ’ t do much more than compare the gross margin for the twoor three-yearly profit and loss accounts included in the annual
financial report . Although publicly owned businesses are
required to include a management discussion and analysis 
( MD & A ) section that should comment on any significant change
in the gross margin ratio , corporate managers have wide
latitude in deciding what exactly to discuss and how much
detail to go into . You definitely should read the MD & A section , 
but it may not provide all the answers you ’ re looking for . You
have to search further in stockbroker releases , in articles in the
financial press , or at the next professional business meeting you
attend . 
As explained in Chapter 9 , managers focus on contribution margin
per unit and total contribution margin to control and improve profit
performance business . Contribution margin equals sales revenue
minus product cost and other variable operating expenses of the
business . Contribution margin is profit before the company ’ s total
fixed costs for the period are deducted . Changes in the contribution
margins per unit of the products sold by a business and changes in
its total fixed costs are extremely important information in
managing profit . 
However , businesses do not disclose contribution margin
information in their external financial reports – they wouldn ’ t even
think of doing so . This information is considered to be proprietary
in nature ; it should be kept confidential and out of the hands of its
competitors . In short , investors do not have access to information
about the business ’ s contribution margin . Neither accounting
standards nor the Stock Exchange requires that such information be
disclosed . The external profit and loss account discloses gross
margin and operating profit , or earnings before interest and income
tax expenses . However , the expenses between these two profit lines
in the profit and loss account are not separated between variable
and fixed ( refer to Figure 14-1 )  . 
Profit ratio
Business is motivated by profit , so the profit ratio is very important
to say the least . The profit ratio indicates how much net income was
earned on each £100 of sales revenue : 
Net income ÷ sales revenue = profit ratio
Net income ÷ sales revenue = profit ratio
For example , the business in Figure 14-1 earned £1 . 9
million net income from its £52 million sales revenue , so its
profit ratio is 3 . 65 per cent , meaning that the business earned
£3 . 65 net income for each £100 of sales revenue . 
A seemingly small change in the profit ratio can have a big impact
on the bottom line . Suppose that this business had earned a profit
ratio of 5 per cent instead of 3 . 65 per cent . That increase in the
profit ratio translates into a £700 , 000 increase in bottom-line profit 
( net income ) on the same sales revenue . 
Profit ratios vary widely from industry to industry . A 5–10 per cent
profit ratio is common in most industries , although some highvolume retailers , such as supermarkets , are satisfied with profit
ratios around 1 per cent or 2 per cent . 
You can turn any ratio upside down and come up with a
new way of looking at the same information . If you flip the profit
ratio over to be sales revenue divided by net income , the result
is the amount of sales revenue needed to make £1 profit . Using
the same example , £52 million sales revenue ÷ £1 . 9 million net
income = 27 . 37 to 1 upside-down profit ratio , which means that
this business needs £27 . 37 in sales to make £1 profit . So you can
say that net income is 3 . 65 per cent of sales revenue , or you can
say that sales revenue is 27 . 37 times net income – but the
standard profit ratio is expressed as net income divided by
sales revenue . 
Earnings per share , basic and diluted
Earnings per share , basic and diluted
Publicly owned businesses , according to generally accepted
accounting principles ( GAAP )  , must report earnings per share ( EPS ) 
below the net income line in their profit and loss accounts – giving
EPS a certain distinction among the ratios . Why is EPS considered
so important ? Because it gives investors a means of determining the
amount the business earned on their share investments : EPS tells
you how much net income the business earned for each share you
own . The essential equation for EPS is as follows : 
Net income ÷ total number of capital stock shares = EPS
For the example in Figures 14-1 and 14-2 , the company ’ s £1 . 9 million
net income is divided by the 795 , 000 shares of stock the business
has issued to compute its £2 . 39 EPS . 
Note : Private businesses do not have to report EPS if they don ’ t
want to . Considering the wide range of issues covered by GAAP , you
find surprisingly few distinctions between private and public
businesses – these authoritative accounting rules apply to all
businesses . But EPS is one area where GAAP makes an exception for
privately owned businesses . EPS is extraordinarily important to the
shareholders of businesses whose shares are publicly traded . These
shareholders focus on market price per share . They want the total
net income of the business to be communicated to them on a per
share basis so that they can easily compare it with the market price
of their shares . The shares of privately owned companies are not
actively traded , so there is no readily available market value for
their shares . The thinking behind the rule that privately owned
businesses should not have to report EPS is that their shareholders
do not focus on per share values and are more interested in the
business ’ s total net income performance . 
The business in the example is too small to be publicly
owned . So we turn here to a larger public company example . 
This publicly owned company reports that it earned £1 . 32
billion net income for the year just ended . At the end of the
year , this company has 400 million shares outstanding , which
refers to the number of shares that have been issued and are
owned by its shareholders . Thus , its EPS is £3 . 30 ( £1 . 32 billion
net income ÷ 400 million stock shares )  . But here ’ s a
complication : The business is committed to issuing additional
capital shares in the future for share options that the company
has granted to its managers , and it has borrowed money on the
basis of debt instruments that give the lenders the right to
convert the debt into its capital stock . Under terms of its
management share options and its convertible debt , the
business could have to issue 40 million additional capital shares
in the future . Dividing net income by the number of shares
outstanding plus the number of shares that could be issued in
the future gives the following computation of EPS : 
£1 . 32 billion net income ÷ 440 million capital stock shares = £3 . 00
EPS
This second computation , based on the higher number
of shares , is called the diluted earnings per share .  ( Diluted
means thinned out or spread over a larger number of shares .  ) 
The first computation , based on the number of shares actually
outstanding , is called basic earnings per share . Publicly owned
businesses have to report two EPS figures – unless they have a
simple capital structure that does not require the business to
issue additional shares in the future . Generally , publicly owned
companies have complex capital structures and have to report
two EPS figures . Both are reported at the bottom of the profit
and loss account . So the company in this example reports £3 . 30
basic EPS and £3 . 00 diluted EPS . Sometimes it ’ s not clear which
of the two EPS figures is being used in press releases and in
articles giving investment advice . Fortunately , The Financial
Times and most other major financial publications leave a clear
trail of both EPS figures . 
Calculating basic and diluted EPS isn ’ t always as simple
as our examples may suggest . An accountant would have to
adjust the EPS equation for the following complicating things
that a business may do : 
Issue additional shares during the year and buy back some of
its shares ( shares of its stock owned by the business itself
that are not formally cancelled are called treasury stock )  . 
Issue more than one class of share , causing net income to be
divided into two or more pools – one pool for each class of
share . 
Go through a merger ( business combination ) in which a large
number of shares are issued to acquire the other business . 
The shareholders should draw comfort from the fact that the top
management of many businesses in which they invest are probably
just as anxiously reviewing EPS performance as they are . This
extract from Tesco ’ s annual accounts reveals much : 
Annual bonuses based on achieving stretching EPS growth targets
and specific corporate objectives . 
Annual bonuses are paid in shares . On award , the Executive
can elect to defer receipt of the shares for a further two
years , which is encouraged , with additional matching share
awards . 
Longer-term bonus based on a combination of relative total
shareholder return , and the achievement of stretching EPS
growth targets and specific corporate objectives . Longerterm bonuses are paid in shares , which must be held for a
further four years . Executive Directors are encouraged to
hold shares for longer than four years with additional
matching share awards . Further details are provided below . 
Share options are granted to Executive Directors at market
value and can only be exercised if EPS growth exceeds Retail
Price Index ( RPI ) plus 9 per cent over any three years from
grant . 
Executive Directors are required to build and hold a
shareholding with a value at least equal to their basic salary ; 
full participation in the Executive Incentive scheme is
conditional upon meeting this target . 
Price / earnings ( P / E ) ratio
The price / earnings ( P / E ) ratio is another ratio that ’ s of particular
interest to investors in public businesses . The P / E ratio gives you an
idea of how much you ’ re paying in the current price for the shares
for each pound of earnings , or net income , being earned by the
business . Remember that earnings prop up the market value of
shares , not the book value of the shares that ’ s reported in the
balance sheet .  ( Read on for the book value per share discussion .  ) 
The P / E ratio is , in one sense , a reality check on just how high the
current market price is in relation to the underlying profit that the
business is earning . Extraordinarily high P / E ratios are justified only
when investors think that the company ’ s EPS has a lot of upside
potential in the future . 
The P / E ratio is calculated as follows : 
Current market price of stock ÷ most recent trailing 12 months
diluted EPS = P / E ratio
If the business has a simple capital structure and does not report a
diluted EPS , its basic EPS is used for calculating its P / E ratio .  ( See
the earlier section ‘ Earnings per share , basic and diluted ’  .  ) 
Assume that the stock shares of a public business with a £3 . 65
diluted EPS are selling at £54 . 75 in the stock market . Note : From
here forward , we will use the briefer term EPS in reference to P / E
ratios ; we assume you understand that it refers to diluted EPS for
businesses with complex capital structures and to basic EPS for
businesses with simple capital structures . 
The actual share price bounces around day to day and is subject to
change on short notice . To illustrate the P / E ratio , we use this price , 
which is the closing price on the latest trading day in the stock
market . This market price means that investors trading in the stock
think that the shares are worth 15 times diluted EPS ( £54 . 75 market
price ÷ £3 . 65 diluted EPS = 15 )  . This value may be below the broad
market average that values shares at , say , 20 times EPS . The outlook
for future growth in its EPS is probably not too good . 
Dividend yield
The dividend yield tells investors how much cash flow income
they ’ re receiving on their investment .  ( The dividend is the cash flow
income part of investment return ; the other part is the gain or loss
in the market value of the investment over the year .  ) 
Market cap – not a cap on market value
One investment number you see a lot in the financial press is the market cap . 
No , this does not refer to a cap , or limit , on the market value of a company ’ s
capital shares . The term is shorthand for market capitalisation , which refers to
the total market value of the business that is determined by multiplying the
stock ’ s current market price by the total number of shares issued by the
company . Suppose a company ’ s stock is selling at £50 per share in the stock
market and it has 200 million shares outstanding . Its market cap is £10 billion . 
Another business may be willing to pay higher than £50 per share for the
company . Indeed , many acquisitions and mergers involve the acquiring
company paying a hefty premium over the going market price of the shares of
the company being acquired . 
Suppose that a stock of a public company that is selling for £60 paid
£1 . 20 cash dividends per share over the last year . You calculate
dividend yield as follows : 
£1 . 20 annual cash dividend per share ÷ £60 current market price
of stock = 2% dividend yield
You use dividend yield to compare how your stock investment is
doing to how it would be doing if you ’ d put that money in corporate
or Treasury bonds , gilt edged stock ( UK government borrowings ) or
other debt securities that pay interest . The average interest rate of
high-grade debt securities has recently been three to four times the
dividend yields on most public companies ; in theory , market price
appreciation of the shares over time makes up for that gap . Of
course , shareholders take the risk that the market value will not
increase enough to make their total return on investment rate
higher than a benchmark interest rate .  ( At the time of writing , this
yield gap has shrunk to nothing and is causing an agonizing
reappraisal of the value of equities , in relation to debt , as an
investment medium .  ) 
Assume that long-term government gilt edged stock are
currently paying 6 per cent annual interest , which is 4 per cent
higher than the business ’ s 2 per cent dividend yield in the
example just discussed . If this business ’ s shares don ’ t increase
in value by at least 4 per cent over the year , its investors would
have been better off investing in the debt securities instead .  ( Of
course , they wouldn ’ t have had all the perks of a share
investment , like those heartfelt letters from the chairman and
those glossy financial reports .  ) The market price of publicly
traded debt securities can fall or rise , so things get a little tricky
in this sort of investment analysis . 
Book value per share
Book value per share is one measure , but it ’ s certainly not the only
amount , used for determining the value of a privately owned
business ’ s shares . As discussed in Chapter 6 , book value is not the
same thing as market value . The asset values that a business
records in its books ( also known as its accounts ) are not the
amounts that a business could get if it put its assets up for sale . 
Book values of some assets are generally lower than what the cost
would be for replacing the assets if a disaster ( such as a flood or a
fire ) wiped out the business ’ s stock or equipment . Recording
current market values in the books is really not a practical option . 
Until a seller and a buyer meet and haggle over price , trying to
determine the market price for a privately owned business ’ s shares
is awfully hard . 
You can calculate book value per share for publicly owned
businesses too . However , market value is readily available , so
shareholders ( and investment advisers and managers ) do not put
much weight on book value per share . EPS is the main factor that
affects the market prices of stock shares of public companies – not
the book value per share . We should add that some investing
strategies , known as value investing , search out companies that have
a high book value per share compared to their going market prices . 
But by and large , book value per share plays a secondary role in the
market values of stock shares issued by public companies . 
Although book value per share is generally not a good indicator of
the market value of a private business ’ s shares , you do run into this
ratio , at least as a starting point for haggling over a selling price . 
Here ’ s how to calculate book value per share : 
Total owners ’ equity ÷ total number of stock shares = book value
per share
The business shown in Figure 14-2 has issued 795 , 000
shares : Its £15 . 9 million total owners ’ equity divided by its
795 , 000 shares gives a book value per share of £20 . If the
business sold off its assets exactly for their book values and
paid all its liabilities , it would end up with £15 . 9 million left for
the shareholders , and it could therefore distribute £20 per
share . But the company will not go out of business and liquidate
its assets and pay off its liabilities . So book value per share is a
theoretical value . It ’ s not totally irrelevant , but it ’ s not all that
definitive , either . 
Return on equity ( ROE ) ratio
The return on equity ( ROE ) ratio tells you how much profit a
business earned in comparison to the book value of shareholders ’ 
equity . This ratio is useful for privately owned businesses , which
have no way of determining the current value of owners ’ equity ( at
least not until the business is actually sold )  . ROE is also calculated
for public companies , but , just like book value per share , it plays a
secondary role and is not the dominant factor driving market prices .  
( Earnings are .  ) Here ’ s how you calculate this key ratio : 
Net income ÷ owners ’ equity = ROE
The owners ’ equity figure is at book value , which is
reported in the company ’ s balance sheet . Chapter 6 explains
owners ’ equity and the difference between share capital and
retained earnings , which are the two components of owners ’ 
equity . 
The business whose profit and loss account and balance
sheet are shown in Figures 14-1 and 14-2 earned £1 . 9 million net
income for the year just ended and has £15 . 9 million owners ’ 
equity . Therefore , its ROE is 11 . 95 per cent ( £1 . 9 million net
income ÷ £15 . 9 million owners ’ equity = 11 . 95 per cent )  . ROE is
net income expressed as a percentage of the amount of total
owners ’ equity of the business , which is one of the two sources
of capital to the business , the other being borrowed money , or
interest-bearing debt .  ( A business also has non-interest-bearing
operating liabilities , such as creditors .  ) The cost of debt capital 
( interest ) is deducted as an expense to determine net income . 
So net income ‘ belongs ’ to the owners ; it increases their equity
in the business , so it makes sense to express net income as the
percentage of improvement in the owners ’ equity . 
Gearing or leverage
Your company ’ s liquidity keeps you solvent from day to day and
month to month and we come to that next when we look at the
current ratio and acid test . But what about your ability to pay back
long-term debt year after year ? Two financial ratios indicate what
kind of shape you ’ re in over the long term . 
If you ’ ve read this chapter from the beginning , you may be getting
really bored with financial ratios by now , but your lenders – bankers
and bondholders , if you have them – find these long-term ratios to
be incredibly fascinating , for obvious reasons . 
The first ratio gauges how easy it is for your company to continue
making interest payments on the debt : 
Times interest earned = earnings before interest and taxes ÷
interest expense
Don ’ t get confused – earnings before any interest
expense and taxes are paid ( EBIT ) is really just the profit that
you have available to make those interest payments in the first
place . Figure 14-1 , for example , shows an EBIT of £3 , 550 
( thousand ) and an interest expense of £750 ( thousand ) this
year for a times-interest-earned ratio of 4 . 73 . In other words , 
this business can meet its interest expense 4 . 73 times over . 
You may also hear the same number called an interest
coverage . Lenders get mighty nervous if this ratio ever gets
anywhere close to 1 . 0 , because at that point , every last penny of
profits goes for interest payments on the long-term debt . 
The second ratio tries to determine whether the principal amount of
your debt is in any danger : 
Debt-to-equity ratio = long-term liabilities ÷ owners ’ equity
The debt-to-equity ratio says a great deal about the general financial
structure of your company . After all , you can raise money to
support your company in only two ways : borrow it and promise to
pay it back with interest , or sell pieces of the company and promise
to share all the rewards of ownership . The first method is debt ; the
second , equity . 
Figure 14-2 , for example , shows a debt-to-equity ratio of £6 , 000 ÷
£15 , 900 , or . 38 . This ratio means that the company has around three
times more equity financing than it does long-term debt . 
Lenders love to see lots of equity supporting a company ’ s debt
because then they know that the money they loan out is safer . If
something goes wrong with the company , they can go after the
something goes wrong with the company , they can go after the
owners ’ money . Equity investors , on the other hand , actually want
to take on some risk . They like to see relatively high debt-to-equity
ratios because that situation increases their leverage and ( as the
following section points out ) can substantially boost their profits . So
the debt-to-equity ratio that ’ s just right for your company depends
not only on your industry and how stable it is , but also on who you
ask . 
Current ratio
The current ratio is a test of a business ’ s short-term solvency – its
capability to pay off its liabilities that come due in the near future 
( up to one year )  . The ratio is a rough indicator of whether cash-onhand plus the cash flow from collecting debtors and selling stock
will be enough to pay off the liabilities that will come due in the next
period . 
As you can imagine , lenders are particularly keen on punching in the
numbers to calculate the current ratio . Here ’ s how they do it : 
Current assets ÷ current liabilities = current ratio
Note : Unlike with most of the other ratios , you don ’ t multiply the
result of this equation by 100 and represent it as a percentage . 
Businesses are expected by their creditors to maintain a
minimum current ratio ( 2 . 0 , meaning a 2-to-1 ratio , is the
general rule ) and may be legally required to stay above a
minimum current ratio as stipulated in their contracts with
lenders . The business in Figure 14-2 has £17 . 2 million in current
assets and £7 , 975 , 000 in current liabilities , so its current ratio is
2 . 16 and it shouldn ’ t have to worry about lenders coming by in
the middle of the night to break its legs . Chapter 6 discusses
current assets and current liabilities and how they are reported
in the balance sheet . 
How much working capital , ready or nearly ready money do you
need to ensure survival ? Having the liquid assets available when you
absolutely need them to meet short-term obligations is called
liquidity . You don ’ t have to have cash in the till to be liquid . Debtors 
( that is , people who owe you money and can be reasonably
expected to cough up soon ) and stock ready to be sold are both
part of your liquid assets . You can use several financial ratios to test
a business ’ s liquidity , including the current ratio and the acid test . 
You can monitor these ratios year by year and measure them
against your competitors ’ ratios and the industry averages . 
Acid-test ratio
Most serious investors and lenders don ’ t stop with the
current ratio for an indication of the business ’ s short-term
solvency – its capability to pay the liabilities that will come due
in the short term . Investors also calculate the acid-test ratio 
( also known as the quick ratio or the pounce ratio )  , which is a
more severe test of a business ’ s solvency than the current ratio . 
The acid-test ratio excludes stock and prepaid expenses , which
the current ratio includes , and limits assets to cash and items
that the business can quickly convert to cash . This limited
category of assets is known as quick or liquid assets . 
You calculate the acid-test ratio as follows : 
Liquid assets ÷ total current liabilities = acid-test ratio
Note : Unlike most other financial ratios , you don ’ t multiply the
result of this equation by 100 and represent it as a percentage . 
For the business example shown in Figure 14-2 , the acidtest ratio is as follows : 
A 1 . 07 acid-test ratio means that the business would be able to pay
off its short-term liabilities and still have a little bit of liquid assets
left over . The general rule is that the acid-test ratio should be at
least 1 . 0 , which means that liquid assets equal current liabilities . Of
course , falling below 1 . 0 doesn ’ t mean that the business is on the
verge of bankruptcy , but if the ratio falls as low as 0 . 5 , that may be
cause for alarm . 
This ratio is also known as the pounce ratio to
emphasise that you ’ re calculating for a worst-case scenario , 
where a pack of wolves ( more politely known as creditors ) has
pounced on the business and is demanding quick payment of
the business ’ s liabilities . But don ’ t panic . Short-term creditors
do not have the right to demand immediate payment , except
under unusual circumstances . This is a very conservative way
to look at a business ’ s capability to pay its short-term liabilities
– too conservative in most cases . 
Keeping track of stock and debtor levels
Two other areas that effect liquidity need to be monitored carefully : 
how fast your stock is selling out ( if your business requires holding
goods for sale )  , and how fast your customers are paying up . 
Here ’ s the ratio for stock levels : 
Stock turnover = cost of goods sold ÷ stock
Stock turnover tells you something about how liquid your stocks
really are . This ratio divides the cost of goods sold , as shown in
your yearly profit and loss account , by the average value of your
stock . If you don ’ t know the average , you can estimate it by using
the stock figure listed in the balance sheet at the end of the year . 
For the business represented in Figures 14-1 and 14-2 , the stock
turnover is £31 , 200 ÷ £7 , 800 , or 4 . 0 . This ratio means that this
business turns over its stocks four times each year . Expressed in
days , the business carries a 91 . 25-day ( 365 ÷ 4 . 0 ) supply of stock . 
Is a 90-day plus inventory good or bad ? It depends on
the industry and even on the time of year . A car dealer who has
a 90-day supply of cars at the height of the season may be in a
strong stock position , but the same stock position at the end of
the season could be a real weakness . As Just In Time ( JIT ) 
supply chains and improved information systems make
business operations more efficient across all industries , stock
turnover is on the rise , and the average number of days that
stock of any kind hangs around continues to shrink . 
What about debtor levels ? 
Debtor turnover = sales on credit ÷ debtors
Debtor turnover tells you something about liquidity by dividing the
sales that you make on credit by the average debtors . If an average
isn ’ t available , you can use the debtors from a balance sheet . 
If the business represented in Figures 14-1 and 14-2 makes 80 per
cent of its sales on credit , its debtor turnover is ( £52 , 000 ´ 0 . 8 ) ÷
£5 , 000 , or 8 . 3 . In other words , the company turns over its debtors
8 . 3 times per year , or once every 44 days , on average . That ’ s not too
bad : payment terms are 30 days . But remember , unlike fine wine , 
debtors don ’ t improve with age . 
Return on assets ( ROA ) ratio
As discussed in Chapter 6 ( refer to the sidebar ‘ Trading on the
equity : Taking a chance on debt ’  )  , one factor affecting the bottomline profit of a business is whether it used debt to its advantage . For
the year , a business may have realised a financial leverage gain – it
earned more profit on the money it borrowed than the interest paid
for the use of that borrowed money . So a good part of its net income
for the year may be due to financial leverage . The first step in
determining financial leverage gain is to calculate a business ’ s return
on assets ( ROA ) ratio , which is the ratio of EBIT ( earnings before
interest and tax ) to the total capital invested in operating assets . 
Here ’ s how to calculate ROA : 
EBIT ÷ net operating assets = ROA
Note : This equation calls for net operating assets , which equals total
assets less the non-interest-bearing operating liabilities of the
business . Actually , many stock analysts and investors use the total
assets figure because deducting all the non-interest-bearing
operating liabilities from total assets to determine net operating
assets is , quite frankly , a nuisance . But we strongly recommend
using net operating assets because that ’ s the total amount of capital
raised from debt and equity . 
Compare ROA with the interest rate : If a business ’ s ROA is 14 per
Compare ROA with the interest rate : If a business ’ s ROA is 14 per
cent and the interest rate on its debt is 8 per cent , for example , the
business ’ s net gain on its debt capital is 6 per cent more than what
it ’ s paying in interest . There ’ s a favourable spread of 6 points ( one
point = 1 per cent )  , which can be multiplied by the total debt of the
business to determine how much its total earnings before income
tax is traceable to financial leverage gain . 
In Figure 14-2 , notice that the company has £10 million
total interest-bearing debt ( £4 million short-term plus £6 million
long-term )  . Its total owners ’ equity is £15 . 9 million . So its net
operating assets total is £25 . 9 million ( which excludes the three
short-term non-interest-bearing operating liabilities )  . The
company ’ s ROA , therefore , is
£3 . 55 million earnings before interest and tax ÷ £25 . 9 million net
operating assets = 13 . 71% ROA
The business earned £1 , 371 , 000 ( rounded ) on its total debt – 13 . 71
per cent ROA times £10 million total debt . The business paid only
£750 , 000 interest on its debt . So the business had £621 , 000 financial
leverage gain before income tax ( £1 , 371 , 000 less £750 , 000 )  . Put
another way , the business paid 7 . 5 per cent interest on its debt but
earned 13 . 71 per cent on this money for a favourable spread of 6 . 21
points – which , when multiplied by the £10 million debt , yields the
£621 , 000 pre-tax financial gain for the year . 
ROA is a useful earnings ratio , aside from determining financial
leverage gain ( or loss ) for the period . ROA is a capital utilisation test
– how much profit before interest and tax was earned on the total
capital employed by the business . The basic idea is that it takes
money ( assets ) to make money ( profit )  ; the final test is how much
profit was made on the assets . If , for example , a business earns £1
million EBIT on £20 million assets , its ROA is only 5 per cent . Such a
low ROA signals that the business is making poor use of its assets
and will have to improve its ROA or face serious problems in the
future . 
Using combined ratios
You wouldn ’ t use a single ratio to decide whether one vehicle was a
better or worse buy than another . MPG , MPH , annual depreciation
percentage and residual value proportion are just a handful of the
ratios that you ’ d want to review . So it is with a business . You can
use a combination of ratios to form an opinion on the financial state
of affairs at any one time . 
The best known of these combination ratios is the
Altman Z-Score ( www . creditguru . com / CalcAltZ . shtml ) that uses a
combined set of five financial ratios derived from eight
variables from a company ’ s financial statements linked to some
statistical techniques to predict a company ’ s probability of
failure . Entering the figures into the onscreen template at this
website produces a score and an explanatory narrative giving a
view on the businesses financial strengths and weaknesses . 
Appreciating the limits of ratios
A danger with ratios is to believe that because you have a precise
number , you have a right figure to aim for . For example , a natural
feeling with financial ratios is to think that high figures are good
ones , and an upward trend represents the right direction . This
theory is , to some extent , encouraged by the personal feeling of
wealth that having a lot of cash engenders . 
Unfortunately , no general rule exists on which way is
right for financial ratios . In some cases a high figure is good ; in
others , a low figure is best . Indeed , in some circumstances , 
ratios of the same value aren ’ t as good as each other . Look at
the two working capital statements in Table 14-1 . 
The amount of working capital in examples 1 and 2 is the same , 
£16 , 410 , as are the current assets and current liabilities , at £23 , 100
and £6 , 690 respectively . It follows that any ratio using these factors
would also be the same . For example , the current ratios in these two
examples are both identical , 3 . 4 : 1 , but in the first case there ’ s a
reasonable chance that some cash will come in from debtors , 
certainly enough to meet the modest creditor position . In the
second example there ’ s no possibility of useful amounts of cash
coming in from trading , with debtors at only £100 , while creditors at
the relatively substantial figure of £6 , 600 will pose a real threat to
financial stability . 
So in this case the current ratios are identical , but the
situations being compared are not . In fact , as a general rule , a
higher working capital ratio is regarded as a move in the wrong
direction . The more money a business has tied up in working
capital , the more difficult it is to make a satisfactory return on
capital employed , simply because the larger the denominator , 
the lower the return on capital employed . 
In some cases the right direction is more obvious . A high return on
capital employed is usually better than a low one , but even this
situation can be a danger signal , warning that higher risks are being
taken . And not all high profit ratios are good : sometimes a higher
profit margin can lead to reduced sales volume and so lead to a
lower Return on Capital Employed ( ROCE )  . 
In general , business performance as measured by ratios is best
thought of as lying within a range ; liquidity ( current ratio )  , for
example , staying between 1 . 2 : 1 and 1 . 8 : 1 . A change in either
direction may represent a cause for concern . 
The temptation to compute cash flow per
share : Don 
 ’ t give in ! 
Businesses are prohibited from reporting a cash flow per share number on
their financial reports . The accounting rule book specifically prohibits very few
things , and cash flow per share is on this small list of contraband . Why ? 
Because – and this is somewhat speculative on our part – the powers that be
were worried that the cash flow number would usurp net income as the main
measure for profit performance . Indeed , many writers in the financial press
were talking up the importance of cash flow from profit , so we see the concern
on this matter . Knowing how important EPS is for market value of stocks , the
authorities declared a similar per share amount for cash flow out of bounds
and prohibited it from being included in a financial report . Of course , you could
compute it quite easily – the rule doesn ’ t apply to how financial statements are
interpreted , only to how they are reported . 
Should we dare give you an example of cash flow per share ? Here goes : A
business with £42 million cash flow from profit and 4 . 2 million total capital
stock shares would end up with £10 cash flow per share . Shhh . 
The Biz / ed ( www . bized . co . uk / compfact / ratios / index . htm ) 
and Harvard Business School 
( 
websites contain free tools that calculate financial ratios from
company accounts . They also provide useful introductions to
ratio analysis and definitions of each ratio and the formula used
to calculate it . To download their spreadsheet , you first need to
register with the Harvard website . 
By registering ( for free ) with the Proshare website ( go to
www . proshareclubs . co . uk and click on ‘ Research Centre ’ and 
 ‘ Performance Tables ’  )  , you have access to a number of tools
that crunch public company ratios for you . Select the
companies you want to look at , and then the ratios you ’ re most
interested in ( EPS , P / E , ROI , Dividend Yield and so on )  . All is
revealed within a couple of seconds . You can then rank the
companies by performance in more or less any way you want . 
You can find more comprehensive tools on the Internet , on the
websites of share traders for example , but Proshare is a great
site to cut your teeth on – and the price is right ! 
Frolicking through the Footnotes
Frolicking through the Footnotes
Reading the footnotes in annual financial reports is no picnic . The
investment pros have to read them because in providing
consultation to their clients , they are required to comply with due
diligence standards or because of their legal duties and
responsibilities of managing other peoples ’ money . 
We suggest you do a quick read-through of the footnotes and
identify the ones that seem to have the most significance . Generally , 
the most important footnotes are those dealing with the following
matters : 
Share options awarded by the business to its executives : 
The additional shares issued under share options dilute ( thin
out ) the earnings per share of the business , which in turn
puts downside pressure on the market value of its shares , 
everything else being the same . 
Pending legal actions , litigation and investigations by
government agencies : These intrusions into the normal
affairs of the business can have enormous consequences . 
Segment information for the business : Most public
businesses have to report information for the major
segments of the organisation – sales and operating profit by
territories or product lines . This gives a better glimpse of the
different parts making up the whole business .  ( However , 
segment information may be reported elsewhere in an annual
financial report than in the footnotes .  ) 
These are just three of the many important pieces of information
you should look for in footnotes . But you have to stay alert for other
critical matters that a business may disclose in its footnotes – scan
each and every footnote for potentially important information . 
Finding a footnote that discusses a major lawsuit against the
business , for example , may make the shares too risky for your
portfolio . 
Checking for Ominous Skies on the
Audit Report
The value of analysing a financial report depends directly and
entirely on the accuracy of the report ’ s numbers . Top management
wants to present the best possible picture of the business in its
financial report ( which is understandable , of course )  . The managers
have a vested interest in the profit performance and financial
condition of the business . 
Independent auditors are like umpires in the financial reporting
process . The auditor comes in , does an audit of the business ’ s
accounting system and procedures , and gives a report that is
attached to the company ’ s financial statements . You should check
the audit report included with the financial report . Publicly owned
businesses are required to have their annual financial reports
audited by an independent accountancy firm , and many privately
owned businesses have audits done , too , because they know that an
audit report adds credibility to the financial report . 
What if a private business ’ s financial report doesn ’ t include an audit
report ? Well , you have to trust that the business prepared accurate
financial statements that follow generally accepted accounting
principles and that the footnotes to the financial statements provide
adequate disclosure . 
Unfortunately , the audit report gets short shrift in financial
statement analysis , maybe because it ’ s so full of technical
terminology and accountant doublespeak . But even though audit
reports are a tough read , anyone who reads and analyses financial
reports should definitely read the audit report . Chapter 15 provides
a lot more information on audits and the auditor ’ s report . 
The auditor judges whether the business used
accounting methods and procedures in accordance with
accepted accounting principles . In most cases , the auditor ’ s
report confirms that everything is hunky-dory , and you can rely
on the financial report . However , sometimes an auditor waves a
yellow flag – and in extreme cases , a red flag . Here are the two
most important warnings to watch out for in an audit report : 
The business ’ s capability to continue normal operations is in
doubt because of what are known as financial exigencies , 
which may mean a low cash balance , unpaid overdue
liabilities or major lawsuits that the business doesn ’ t have
the cash to cover . 
One or more of the methods used in the report is not in line
with the prevailing accounting body rules , leading the
auditor to conclude that the numbers reported are
misleading or that disclosure is inadequate . 
Although auditor warnings don ’ t necessarily mean that a business is
going down the tubes , they should turn on that light bulb in your
head and make you more cautious and sceptical about the financial
report . The auditor is questioning the very information on which the
business ’ s value is based , and you can ’ t take that kind of thing
lightly . 
In very small businesses it is likely that the accounts will not be
independently audited and their accounts come with a rather
alarming caveat , running something like this : These accounts have
been prepared on the basis of information provided by the owners and
have not been independently verified . A full audit is an expensive
process and few businesses that don ’ t have to will go to the expense
and trouble just to be told what they probably already know
anyway . 
Just because a business has a clean audit report doesn ’ t
mean that the financial report is completely accurate and above
board . As discussed in Chapter 15 , auditors don ’ t necessarily
catch everything . Keep in mind that the accounting rules are
pretty flexible , leaving a company ’ s accountants with room for
interpretation and creativity that ’ s just short of cooking the
books ( deliberately defrauding and misleading readers of the
financial report )  . Window dressing and profit smoothing – two
common examples of massaging the numbers – are explained in
Chapter 8 . 
Finding Financial Facts
Understanding how to calculate financial ratios and how to interpret
that data is all fine and dandy , but before you can do anything useful
you need to get a copy of the accounts in the first place . Seeing the
accounts for your own business shouldn ’ t be too much of a
problem . If you ’ re the boss , the accounts should be on your desk
right now ; if you ’ re not the boss , try snuggling up to the accounts
department . If they ’ re too coy to let you have today ’ s figures , the
latest audited accounts are in the public domain anyway filed away
at Companies House ( www . companieshouse . gov . uk )  , as required by
law . 
Public company accounts
Most companies make their glossy annual financial reports available
to download from their websites , which you can find by typing the
company name into an Internet search engine . You need to have
Adobe Acrobat Reader on your computer to open the files . No
problem , though : Adobe Acrobat Reader is free and you can easily
download the program from Adobe ’ s website ( http :  /  / adobereader . download-start . net / download )  . The software enables you to
search for key words in the annual report – a handy feature indeed
for tracking down the sections of the report that you ’ re most
interested in . 
Yahoo has direct online links to several thousand public
company reports and accounts and performance ratios at 
 ( enter the name of the company
you ’ re looking for in the box on the left of the screen under
Investing . It appears after you ’ ve entered about three letters , 
click and follow the threads )  . Paying this site a visit saves you
the time and trouble of hunting down company websites . 
Private company accounts
Finding financial information on private companies is often a timeconsuming and frustrating job . Not for nothing do these companies
call themselves ‘ private ’  . Businesses , and particularly smaller
businesses , can be very secretive about their finances and have
plenty of tricks to hide information from prying eyes . Many smaller
businesses can elect to file abbreviated accounts with Companies
House that provide only the barest details . You can find out just
what these shortened accounts must contain at the Business Link
website ( go to www . businesslink . gov . uk and click on ‘ Taxes , returns ,  
& payroll ’  ,  ‘ Introduction to business taxes ’ and ‘ Accounting and
audit exceptions for small companies ’  )  . The accounts of very small
companies don ’ t need to be audited , so the objective reliability of
the scant data given may be questionable . Having said that , tens of
thousands of private companies file full and generally reliable
accounts . 
Two fruitful sources of private company accounts exist : 
Companies House ( www . companieshouse . gov . uk ) is the official
repository of all company information in the UK . Their
WebCHeck service offers a free Company Names and
Address Index that covers 2 million companies , searchable
either by company name or by company registration
numbers . You can use WebCHeck to purchase ( at a cost of £1
per company ) a company ’ s latest accounts that give details
of sales , profits , margins , directors , shareholders and bank
borrowings . 
Keynote ( www . keynote . co . uk ) offers business ratios and
trends for 140 industry sectors and provides information to
assess accurately the financial health of each industry
sector . This service enables you to find out how profitable a
business sector is and how successful the main companies
operating in each sector are . Executive summaries are free , 
but expect to pay between £250 and £500 for most reports . 
Scoring credit
If all you want is a quick handle on whether a company is likely to be
around long enough to pay its bills , including a dividend to
shareholders , then a whole heap of information exists about credit
status for both individual sole traders and companies of varying
complexity . Expect to pay anywhere from £5 for basic information
up to £200 for a very comprehensive picture of a company ’ s credit
status . So you can avoid trading unknowingly with individuals or
businesses that pose a credit risk . 
Experian ( www . ukexperian . com )  , Dun & Bradstreet 
( www . dnb . com )  , Creditgate . com ( www . creditgate . com ) and Credit
Reporting ( www . creditreporting . co . uk / b2b ) are the major
agencies compiling and selling credit histories and smallbusiness information . Between them they offer a
comprehensive range of credit reports instantly available online
that include advice about credit limits . 
Using FAME ( Financial Analysis Made
Easy ) 
FAME ( Financial Analysis Made Easy ) is a powerful database that
contains information on 7 million companies in the UK and Ireland . 
Typically , the following information is included : contact information
including phone , email and web addresses plus main and other
trading addresses ; activity details ; 29 profit and loss account and 63
balance sheet items ; cash flow and ratios ; credit score and rating ; 
security and price information ( listed companies only )  ; names of
bankers , auditors , previous auditors and advisors ; details of
holdings and subsidiaries ( including foreign holdings and
subsidiaries )  ; names of current and previous directors with home
addresses and shareholder indicator ; heads of department ; and
shareholders . You can compare each company with detailed
financials with its peer group based on its activity codes and the
software lets you search for companies that comply with your own
criteria , combining as many conditions as you like . FAME is
available in business libraries and on CD from the publishers , who
also offer a free trial ( www . bvdinfo . com / Products / CompanyInformation / National / FAME . aspx )  . 
Looking beyond financial statements
Investors can ’ t rely solely on the financial report when making investment
Investors can ’ t rely solely on the financial report when making investment
decisions . Analysing a business ’ s financial statements is just one part of the
process . You may need to consider these additional factors , depending on the
business you ’ re thinking about investing in : 
Industry trends and problems . 
National economic and political developments . 
Possible mergers , friendly acquisitions and hostile takeovers . 
Turnover of key executives . 
International markets and currency exchange ratios . 
Supply shortages . 
Product surpluses . 
Whew ! This kind of stuff goes way beyond accounting , obviously , and is just as
significant as financial statement analysis when you ’ re picking stocks and
managing investment portfolios . A good book for new investors to read is
Investing For Dummies by Tony Levene . 
Chapter 16
Ten Ways Savvy Business Managers
Use Accounting
In This Chapter
Making better profit decisions
Leveraging – both the operating kind and the financial kind
Putting your finger on the pulse of cash flow
Better budgeting for planning and control
Developing financial controls
Taking charge of the accounting function
Explaining your financial statements to others
So how can accounting help make you a better business manager ? 
This is the bottom-line question . Speaking of the bottom line , that ’ s
exactly the place to start . Accounting provides the financial
information and analysis tools you need for making insightful profit
decisions – and stops you from plunging ahead with gut decisions
that may feel right but that don ’ t hold water after diligent analysis . 
Make Better Profit Decisions
Making profit starts with earning margin on each unit sold and then
selling enough units to overcome your total fixed expenses for the
period ( the basic concept that we explain more fully in Chapter 9 )  . 
We condense the accounting model of profit into the following
equation : 
equation :  
( Margin per unit ´ sales volume ) – fixed expenses = profit
Note : Profit here is before corporation tax . Regular
corporations pay tax based on the amount of their taxable
income ; different rates apply to different brackets of taxable
income . The bottom-line net income in the profit and loss
account of a business is after-tax income . A business may
distribute all , part or none of its profit for the year to its
owners . 
Insist that your accountant determines the margin per
unit for all products you sell . The margin is also called the
contribution margin to emphasise that it contributes toward the
business ’ s fixed expenses . Here ’ s an example for determining
the margin per unit for a product : 
We ’ d bet that your accountant provides the gross margin ( also
called gross profit ) on your products . So far , so good . But don ’ t stop
at the gross margin line . Push your accountant to determine the two
variable expenses for each product . In this example , you don ’ t make
£40 per unit sold ; you make only £27 from selling the product . Two
products may have the same £40 gross profit , but one could provide
a £27 margin and the other a £32 margin because the second one ’ s
variable expenses are lower . 
Have your accountant differentiate between revenuedriven and volume-driven variable expenses for each product . 
Suppose you raise the sales price to £110 . 00 , a 10 per cent
increase . The sales revenue-driven expense increases by 10 per
cent as well , to £8 . 80 , because these expenses ( such as sales
commission ) are a certain percentage of the sales price . Your
margin increases not £10 . 00 , but only £9 . 20 ( the £10 . 00 sales
price increase minus the £0 . 80 expense increase )  . In contrast , 
the higher sales price by itself does not increase the sales
volume-driven expenses ( such as shipping costs )  ; these
expenses remain at £5 . 00 per unit unless other factors cause
them to increase . 
You earn profit ( or to be precise , profit before tax ) by selling
enough products that your total margin is higher than your total
fixed expenses for the period . The excess of total margin over fixed
expenses is profit before tax . Setting sales prices to generate an
adequate total contribution margin is one of the most important
functions of managers . 
When thinking about changing sales price , focus on what happens to
the margin per unit . Suppose , for example , that you ’ re considering
dropping the sales price 10 per cent from £100 . 00 to £90 . 00 . You
predict that your product cost and variable expenses will remain
unchanged . Here ’ s what would happen to your margin : 
Your margin would plunge £9 . 20 per unit – more than one-third ! 
Suppose you sold 100 , 000 units of this product during the year just
ended . These sales generated £2 . 7 million total margin . If you drop
the sales price , you give up £920 , 000 total margin . Where will the
replacement come from for this £920 , 000 contribution margin ? 
Higher sales volume ? Sales volume would have to increase more
than 50 per cent to offset the drastic drop in the contribution
margin per unit . You ’ d better have a good answer . The profit model
directs attention to this critical question and gives you the amount
of margin sacrificed by dropping the sales price . 
Understand That a Small Sales
Volume Change Has a Big Effect on
Profit
Is that big push before year-end for just 5 per cent more
sales volume really that important ? You understand that more
sales mean more profit , of course . But what ’ s the big deal ? A 5
per cent increase in sales volume means just 5 per cent more
profit , doesn ’ t it ? Oh no . If you think so , you need to read
Chapter 9 . Because fixed expenses are just that – fixed and
unchanging over the short run . Seemingly small changes in
sales volume cause large swings in profit . This effect is called
operating leverage . 
The following example illustrates operating leverage . 
Suppose your £12 . 5 million annual fixed expenses provide the
personnel and physical resources to sell 625 , 000 units over the
year . However , you didn ’ t hit capacity ; your company ’ s actual
sales volume was 500 , 000 units for the year , or 80 per cent of
sales capacity – which isn ’ t bad . Your average margin across all
products is £30 per unit . Using the basic profit equation , you
determine profit before income tax as follows : 
Now , what if you had sold 25 , 000 more units , which is just 5 per cent
more sales volume ? Your fixed expenses would have been the same
because sales volume would still be well below the sales capacity
provided by your fixed expenses . Therefore , the profit increase
would have been the £30 margin per unit times the 25 , 000 additional
units sold , or £750 , 000 . This is a 5 per cent gain in contribution
margin . But compared to the £2 , 500 , 000 pre-tax profit , the additional
£750 , 000 is a 30 per cent gain – from only a 5 per cent sales volume
gain , which is a 6-to-1 payoff ! 
Operating leverage refers to the wider swing in profit
rather than the smaller swing in sales volume . In this example , a
5 per cent increase in sales volume would cause a 30 per cent
increase in profit . Unfortunately , operating leverage cuts both
ways . If your sales volume had been 5 per cent less , your profit
would have been £750 , 000 less , which would have resulted in 30
per cent less profit . 
Here ’ s a quick explanation of operating leverage . In this example , 
total contribution margin is 6 times profit : £15 million contribution
margin ÷ £2 . 5 million profit = 6 . So a 5 per cent swing in contribution
margin has a 6-times effect , or a 30 per cent impact on profit . 
Suppose a business had no fixed expenses ( highly unlikely )  . In this
odd situation , there is no operating leverage . The percentage gain or
loss in profit would equal the percentage gain or loss in sales
volume . 
The fundamental lesson of operating leverage is to make
the best use you can of your fixed expenses – that is , take
advantage of the capacity provided by the resources purchased
with your fixed expenses . If your sales volume is less than your
sales capacity , the unsold quantity would have provided a lot
more profit . Most businesses are satisfied if their actual sales
volume is 80–90 per cent of their sales capacity . But keep in
mind one thing : That last 10 or 20 per cent of sales volume
would make a dramatic difference in profit ! 
Fathom Profit and Cash Flow from
Profit
Profit equals sales revenue minus expenses – you don ’ t need to
know much about accounting to understand this definition . 
However , business managers should dig a little deeper . First , you
should be aware of the accounting problems in measuring sales
revenue and expenses . Because of these problems , profit is not a
revenue and expenses . Because of these problems , profit is not a
clear-cut and precise number . Second , you should know the real
stuff of profit and know where to find profit in your financial
statements . 
Profit is not a politically correct term . Instead , business financial
reports call profit net income or net earnings . So don ’ t look for the
term profit in external financial statements . Remember , net income 
( or net earnings )  = bottom-line profit after tax . 
Profit accounting methods are like hemlines
Profit is not a hard-and-fast number but is rather soft and flexible on
the edges . For example , profit depends on which accounting method
is selected to measure the cost-of-goods-sold expense , which is
usually the largest expense for businesses that sell products . The
rules of the game , called generally accepted accounting principles ( or
GAAP for short )  , permit two or three alternative methods for
measuring cost of goods sold and for other expenses as well .  
( Chapter 13 discusses accounting methods .  ) 
When evaluating the profit performance of your own
business or when sizing up the net income record of a business
you ’ re considering buying , look carefully at whether profit
measurement is based on stingy ( conservative ) or generous 
( liberal ) accounting methods . You can assume that profit is in
the GAAP ballpark , but you have to determine whether profit is
in the right field or the left field ( or perhaps in centre field )  . 
Businesses are not required to disclose how different the profit
number would have been for the period if different accounting
methods had been used , but they do have to reveal their major
accounting methods in the footnotes to their annual financial
statements . 
The real stuff of profit
Most people know that , in the general sense of the word , 
profit is a gain , or an increase in wealth , or how much better off
you are . But managers and investors hit the wall when asked to
identify the real stuff of profit earned by a business . To make
our point , suppose that your business ’ s latest annual profit and
loss account reports £10 million sales revenue and £9 . 4 million
expenses , which yields £600 , 000 bottom-line net income . Your
profit ratio is 6 per cent of sales revenue , which is about typical
for many businesses . But we digress . 
Our question is this : Where is that £600 , 000 of profit ? Can you find
and locate the profit earned by your business ? Is it in cash ? If not , 
where is it ? If you can ’ t answer this question , aren ’ t you a little
embarrassed ? Quick – go and read Chapter 5 ! 
Profit accounting is more complicated than simple cash-in , cash-out
bookkeeping . Sales for cash increase cash , of course , but sales on
credit initially increase an asset called debtors . So two assets are
used in recording sales revenue . Usually , a minimum of four assets
and two liabilities are used in recording a business ’ s expenses . To
locate profit , you have to look at all the assets and liabilities that are
changed by revenue and expenses . The measure of profit is found in
the profit and loss account . But the substance of profit is found in
assets and liabilities , which are reported in the balance sheet . 
Your accountant will have determined that your £600 , 000 net
income consists of the following three components : 
£600 , 000 profit = £420 , 000 cash + £290 , 000 net increase in other
assets – £110 , 000 increase in liabilities
This is a typical scenario for the makeup of profit – we don ’ t mean
the pound amounts but rather the three components of profit . The
the pound amounts but rather the three components of profit . The
pound amounts of the increases or decreases in assets and
liabilities vary from business to business , of course , and from year
to year . But rarely would the profit equation be
£600 , 000 profit = £600 , 000 cash
Cash is only one piece of the profit pie . Business managers need
accounting to sort out how profit is divided among the three
components – in particular , you need to know the cash flow
generated from profit . 
Govern Cash Flow Better
A business wants to make profit , of course , but equally important , a
business must convert its profit into usable cash flow . Profit that is
never turned into cash or is not turned into cash for a long time is
not very helpful . A business needs cash flow from profit to provide
money for three critical uses : 
To distribute some of its profit to its equity ( owner ) sources
of capital – to provide a cash income to them as
compensation for their capital investment in the business . 
To grow the business – to invest in new fixed ( long-term ) 
operating assets and to increase its stock and other shortterm operating assets . 
To meet its debt payment obligations and to maintain the
general liquidity and solvency of the business . 
One expense , depreciation , is not a cash outlay in the
period it ’ s recorded as an expense . Rather , depreciation
expense for a period is an allocated amount of the original cost
of the business ’ s fixed assets that were bought and paid for in
previous years . More importantly , the sales revenue collected
by the business includes money for its depreciation expense . 
Thus the business converts back into cash some of the money
that it put in its fixed assets years ago . Understanding how
depreciation works in cash flow analysis is very important . 
In one sense , you can say that depreciation generates cash flow . But
please be careful here . This does not mean that if you had recorded
more depreciation expense , you would have had more cash flow . 
What it means is that through making sales at prices that include
recovery of some of the cost of fixed assets , your sales revenue ( to
the extent that it is collected by year-end ) includes cash flow to
offset the depreciation expense . 
To illustrate this critical point , suppose a business did not make a
profit for the year but did manage to break even . In this zero-profit
situation , there is cash flow from profit because of depreciation . The
company would realise cash flow equal to its depreciation for the
year – assuming that it collected its sales revenue . Depreciation is a
process of recycling fixed assets back into cash during the year , 
whether or not the business makes a profit . 
In the example in the preceding section , the business earned
£600 , 000 net income ( profit )  . But its cash increased only £420 , 000 . 
Why ? The cash flow statement provides the details . In addition to
reporting the depreciation for the year , the first section of the cash
flow statement reports the short-term operating asset and liability
changes caused by the business ’ s sales and expenses . These
changes either help or hurt cash flow from profit ( from operating
activities , to use the correct technical accounting term )  . 
An increase in debtors hurts cash flow from profit because the
business did not collect all its sales on credit for the year . An
increase in stock hurts cash flow from profit because the business
replaces the products sold and spends more money to increase its
stock of products . On the other hand , an increase in creditors or
accrued expenses payable helps cash flow from profit . These two
accrued expenses payable helps cash flow from profit . These two
liabilities are , basically , unpaid expenses . When these liabilities
increase , the business did not pay all its expenses for the year – and
its cash outflows for expenses were less than its expenses . 
Generally speaking , growth hurts cash flow from profit . 
To grow its sales and profit , a business usually has to increase
its debtors and stock . Some of this total increase is offset by
increases in the business ’ s short-term operating liabilities . 
Usually , the increase in assets is more than the increase in
liabilities , particularly when growth is faster than usual , and
therefore cash flow from profit suffers . When a business suffers
a decline in sales revenue , its bottom-line profit usually goes
down – but its cash flow from profit may not drop as much as
net profit , or perhaps not at all . A business should decrease its
debtors and stock at the lower sales level ; these decreases help
cash flow from profit . Even if a business reported a loss for the
year , its cash flow from profit could be positive because of the
depreciation factor and because the business may have
reduced its debtors and stock . 
Call the Shots on Your Management
Accounting Methods
Business managers too often defer to their accountants in choosing
accounting methods for measuring sales revenue and expenses . You
should get involved in making these decisions . The best accounting
method is the one that best fits the operating methods and
strategies of your business . As a business manager , you know these
operating methods and strategies better than your accountant . 
Chapter 13 gives you the details on various accounting methods . 
For example , consider sales prices . How do you set your sales
prices ? Many factors affect your sales prices , of course . What we ’ re
asking here concerns your general sales pricing policy relative to
product cost changes . For example , if your product cost goes up , do
you allow your ‘ old ’ stock of these products to sell out before you
raise the sales price ? In other words , do you generally wait until you
start selling the more recently acquired , higher-cost products before
you raise your sales price ? If so , you ’ re using the first-in , first-out 
( FIFO ) method . You might prefer to keep your cost-of-goods-sold
expense method consistent with your sales pricing method . But the
accountant may choose the last-in , first-out ( LIFO ) expense method , 
which would mismatch the higher-cost products with the lowersales-price products . 
The point is this : Business managers formulate a basic
strategy regarding expense recovery . Sales revenue has to
recoup your expenses to make a profit . How do you pass along
your expenses to your customers in the sales prices you charge
them ? Do you attempt to recover the cost of your fixed assets
as quickly as possible and set your sales prices on this basis ? 
Then you should use a fast , or accelerated , depreciation
method . On the other hand , if you take longer to recover the
cost of your fixed assets through sales revenue , then you
should probably use the longer-life straight-line depreciation
method . 
In short , we encourage you to take charge and choose the
accounting methods that best fit your strategic profit plan . You
need to speak some of the accounting language and know which
accounting methods are available . In short , business managers
should take charge of the accounting function just like they take
charge of marketing and other key functions of the business . 
This applies only to management accounting . Your
accountants and auditors will call the shots when preparing
accounts for the outside world . 
Build Better Budgets
Budgeting ( explained in Chapter 10 ) provides important advantages
– first , for understanding the profit dynamics and financial structure
of your business , and second , for planning for changes in the
coming period . Budgeting forces you to focus on the factors that
have to improve in order to increase profit and helps you prepare
for the future . The basic profit model provides the framework for
the profit budget . A good profit model is the essential starting point
for budgeting . To develop your profit plan for the coming year , 
focus on the following : 
Margins
Sales volume
Fixed expenses
The profit budget , in turn , lays the foundation for changes in your
operating assets and liabilities that are driven by sales revenue and
expenses . Suppose you project a 10 per cent rise in sales revenue . 
How much will your debtors asset increase ? Suppose your sales
volume target for next year is 15 per cent higher than this year . How
much will your stock increase ? The budgeted changes in sales
revenue and expenses for next year lead directly to the budgeted
changes in operating assets and operating liabilities . These changes , 
in turn , direct attention to two other key issues . 
First , if things go according to plan , how much cash flow from profit
will be generated ? Second , will you need more capital , and where
will be generated ? Second , will you need more capital , and where
will you get this money ? You need the budgeted cash flow from
profit ( operating activities ) for the coming year for three basic
financial planning decisions : 
Cash distributions from profit to owners ( cash dividends to
shareholders of companies and cash distributions to
partners )  . 
Capital expenditures ( purchases of new fixed assets to
replace and upgrade old fixed assets and to expand the
business ’ s capacity )  . 
Raising capital from borrowing on debt and , possibly , raising
new equity capital from owners . 
The higher your budgeted cash flow from profit , the
more flexibility you have in having money available for cash
distributions from profit and for capital expenditures and the
less pressure to go out and raise new capital from debt and
equity sources of capital . 
To sum up , your profit budget is dovetailed with the assets and
liabilities budget and the cash flow budget . Your accountant takes
your profit budget ( your strategic plan for improving profit ) and
builds the budgeted balance sheet and the budgeted cash flow
statement . This information is essential for good planning – focusing
in particular on how much cash flow from profit will be realised and
how much capital expenditures will be required , which in turn lead
to how much additional capital you have to raise and how much
cash distribution from profit you will be able to make . 
Optimise Capital Structure and
Financial Leverage
Our friend Ron , a florist , made this point one night :  ‘ To make profit , 
you must make sales .  ’ We quickly added that you also must invest in
operating assets , which means that you must raise capital . Where
do you get this money ? Debt and equity are the two basic sources . 
Equity refers to the money that owners invest in a business with the
hopes that the business will turn a profit . Profit builds the value of
owners ’ equity ; profit fundamentally is an increase in assets that
accrues to the benefit of the owners . Chapter 11 discusses
ownership structures ; Chapter 6 covers debt and equity . 
The return on the owners ’ equity interest in the business consists of
two quite distinct parts : 
Cash distributions from profit to the owners . 
Increases in the value of their ownership interest in the
business . 
In contrast , lenders are paid a fixed rate of interest on the amount
borrowed . This fixed nature of interest expense causes a financial
leverage or gearing effect that either benefits or hurts the amount of
profit remaining for the equity investors in the business . 
Financial leverage refers in general to using debt in addition to
equity capital . A financial leverage gain ( or loss ) refers to the
difference between the earnings before interest and tax ( EBIT ) that a
business can make on its debt capital versus the interest paid on the
debt . The following example illustrates a case of financial leverage
gain . 
Your business earned £2 . 1 million EBIT for the year just
ended . Your net operating assets are £12 million – recall that
net operating assets equal total assets less non-interest-bearing
operating liabilities ( mainly creditors and accrued expenses
payable )  . Thus your total capital sources equal £12 million . 
Suppose you have £4 million debt . The other £8 million is
owners ’ equity . You paid 8 per cent annual interest on your
debt , or £320 , 000 total interest . Debt furnishes one-third of your
capital , so one-third of EBIT is attributed to this capital source . 
One-third of EBIT is £700 , 000 . But you paid only £320 , 000
interest for this capital . You earned £380 , 000 more than the
interest . This is the amount of your pre-tax financial leverage
gain . 
Three factors determine financial leverage gain ( or loss )  : 
Proportion of total capital provided from debt . 
Interest rate . 
Return on assets ( ROA )  , or the rate of EBIT the business can
earn on its total capital invested in its net operating assets . 
In the example , your business earned 17 . 5 per cent on its net
operating assets ( £2 . 1 million EBIT ÷ £12 million total net operating
assets )  . You used £4 million debt capital for the investment in your
net operating assets , and you paid 8 per cent annual interest on the
debt , which gives a favourable 9 . 5 per cent spread ( 17 . 5 per cent – 8
per cent )  . The 9 . 5 per cent favourable spread times £4 million debt
equals the £380 , 000 leverage gain for the year ( before tax )  . 
Business managers should watch how much financial leverage gain
contributes to the earnings for owners each year . In this example , 
the after-interest earnings for owners is £1 , 780 , 000 ( equal to EBIT
less interest expense )  . The £380 , 000 financial leverage gain provided
a good part of this amount . Next year , one or more of the three
factors driving the financial leverage gain may change . Savvy
business managers sort out each year how much financial leverage
impacts the earnings available for owners . Check out Chapter 14 for
more on leverage , or gearing as it is also known . 
A financial leverage gain enhances the earnings on
owners ’ equity capital . The conventional wisdom is that a
business should take advantage of debt that charges a lower
interest rate than it can earn on the debt capital . Looking at the
bigger picture , however , the long-run success of a business
depends mainly on maintaining and improving the factors that
determine its profit from operations ( EBIT ) – rather than going
overboard and depending too much on financial leverage . 
Develop Better Financial Controls
Experienced business managers can tell you that they spend a good
deal of time dealing with problems . Things don ’ t always go
according to plan . Murphy ’ s Law ( if something can go wrong , it will , 
and usually at the worst possible time ) is all too true . To solve a
problem , you first have to know that you have one . You can ’ t solve a
problem if you don ’ t know about it . Managers are problem solvers ; 
they need to get on top of problems as soon as possible . In short , 
business managers need to develop good financial controls . 
Financial controls act like trip wires that sound alarms and wave red
flags for a manager ’ s attention . Many financial controls are
accounting-based . For example , actual costs are compared with
budgeted costs or against last period ’ s costs ; serious variances are
highlighted for immediate management attention . Actual sales
revenue for product lines and territories are compared with
budgeted goals or last period ’ s numbers . Cash flow from profit
period by period is compared with the budgeted amount of cash
flow for the period from this source . These many different financial
controls don ’ t just happen . You should identify the handful of
critical factors that you need to keep a close eye on and insist that
your internal accounting reports highlight these operating ratios
and numbers . 
and numbers . 
You must closely watch the margins on your products . Any
deviation from the norm – even a relatively small deviation – needs
your attention immediately . Remember that the margin per unit is
multiplied by sales volume . If you sell 100 , 000 units of a product , a
slippage of just 50 pence causes your total margin to fall £50 , 000 . Of
course , sales volume must be closely watched , too ; that goes
without saying . Fixed expenses should be watched in the early
months of the year to see whether these costs are developing
according to plan – and through the entire year . 
Debtors ’ collections should be monitored closely . Average days
before collection is a good control ratio to keep your eye on , and
you should definitely get a listing of past-due customers ’ accounts . 
Stock is always a problem area . Watch closely the average days in
stock before products are sold , and get a listing of slow-moving
products . Experience is the best teacher . Over time you learn which
financial controls are the most important to highlight in your
internal accounting reports . The trick is to make sure that your
accountants provide this information . 
Minimise Tax
The first decision regarding tax concerns which type of legal
ownership structure to use for carrying on the activities of the
business , which is discussed in Chapter 11 . When two or more
owners provide capital for the business , you have two basic
choices : 
A partnership – a specific contractual agreement among the
owners regarding division of management authority , 
responsibilities and profit . 
A limited liability company , which has many characteristics of
a partnership but is a separate legal entity , like a
corporation . 
Partnerships are pass-through tax entities . A pass-through business
entity pays no tax on its taxable income but passes the obligation to
its owners , who pick up their shares of the total taxable income in
their individual income tax returns . In contrast , the individual
shareholders of companies pay tax only on the amount of actual
cash dividends from profit distributed by the company . Keep in
mind here that the company pays corporation tax based on its
taxable income . Factors other than tax affect the choice of
ownership structure . You need the advice of tax professionals and
financial consultants . 
Regardless of the ownership structure , you should understand how
accounting methods determine taxable income . Basically , the choice
of accounting methods enables you to shift the timing of expenses –
such as depreciation and cost of goods sold – between early years
and later years . Do you want more expense deductions this year ? 
Then choose the last-in , first-out ( LIFO ) method for cost-of-goodssold expense and an accelerated method for depreciation . But keep
in mind that what you gain today , you lose tomorrow . Higher
expense deductions in early years cause lower deductions in later
years . Also , these income-tax-driven accounting choices make the
stock and fixed assets in your balance sheet look anaemic . 
Remember that expenses are asset decreases . You want more
expense ? Then lower asset values as reported in your balance sheet . 
Think twice before jumping on the tax minimisation
bandwagon . Knowing about accounting methods and their
effects in both the profit and loss account and the balance sheet
helps you make these important decisions . 
Explain Your Financial Statements to
Explain Your Financial Statements to
Others
On many occasions , as a business manager you have to explain your
financial statements to others : 
When applying for a loan . 
When talking with people or other businesses who may be
interested in buying your business . 
When dealing with the press . 
When dealing with unions or other employee groups in
setting new wages and benefit packages . 
When explaining the profit-sharing plan to your employees . 
When reporting financial statement data to national trade
associations that collect this information from their
members . 
When presenting the annual financial report before the
annual meeting of owners . 
Knowledge of financial statement reporting and accounting methods
is also extremely useful when you sit on a bank ’ s board of directors , 
or a hospital board , or any of several other types of oversight
boards . In the preceding list , you ’ re the explainer , the one who has
to do the explaining . As a board member , you ’ re the explainee , the
person who has to make sense of the financial statements and
accounting methods being presented . A good accounting foundation
is invaluable . 
Part II of this book shows you how to understand financial reports . 
In brief , you need a good grip on the purpose , nature and limitations
of each of the three primary financial statements reported by a
business : 
The profit and loss account : Many people think that bottomline profit is cash in the bank , but you know better . 
The cash flow statement : Many people just add back
depreciation to net income to determine cash flow from
profit , but you know better . 
The balance sheet : Many people think that this financial
statement reports the current values for assets , but you
know better . 
We ’ ll tell you one disadvantage of knowing some accounting : The
other members of the board will be very impressed with your
accounting knowledge and may want to elect you chairperson . 
A short word on massaging the numbers : 
Don 
 ’ t ! 
I ( John ) taught accounting to future business managers and accountants . I
didn ’ t encourage profit smoothing , window dressing and other techniques for
manipulating accounting numbers to make a company ’ s financial statements
look better – no more than my marketing professor colleagues encouraged
their students to engage in deceptive advertising tactics . Yet these things go
on , and I felt obligated to expose my students to these practices as a warning
that accountants face difficult moral decisions . In a similar vein , I caution you , 
a business manager , that you will surely face pressures from time to time to
massage the accounting numbers – to make profit look smoother from year to
year , or to make the short-term solvency of the business look better ( by
window dressing )  . Don ’ t ! 
Chapter 17
Ten Places a Business Gets Money
From
In This Chapter
Checking out stock markets
Getting private investors on board
Banking on the banks
Financing short-and long-term assets
Looking for government loot
Winning free dosh
Redeploying pensions
All business ventures need some cash to get going and need more
money as they become more successful . They have to invest in staff , 
equipment and websites , and need to remain competitive and
visible by keeping products and services up to date . 
Many sources of funds are available to businesses , both big and
small . However , not all of them are equally appropriate to all
businesses at all times . Different sources of finance carry very
different obligations , responsibilities and opportunities for
profitable business . Having some appreciation of these differences
enables business people to make informed choices . 
Stock Markets
A stock market is quite simply a marketplace for trading company
stock . A company listing on the London Stock Exchange , The New
York Stock Exchange or FWB Frankfurt Stock Exchange is the way
serious players raise money . The new breed of ‘ super exchanges ’ 
such as NYSE Euronext are also becoming popular . If you want a few
hundred million , or a billion or so , stock markets are the places to
come to . 
All the stock markets have different rules and different outcomes . 
For example , the value placed on new companies on US stock
markets is between 1 . 5 and 3 times that of UK and European
markets . 
To get listed on a major stock exchange , a company needs a track
record of making substantial profits , with decent seven-figure sums
being made in the year you plan to float , as this process is known . A
large proportion ( usually at least 25 per cent ) of the company ’ s
shares must be put up for sale at the outset . Also , companies are
expected to have 100 shareholders now and to demonstrate that 100
more will come on board as a result of the listing . 
You can check out all the world stock markets from
Amsterdam to Zagreb on the Stock Exchanges Worldwide Links
website at
www . tdd . lt / slnews / Stock_Exchanges / Stock . Exchanges . htm and at
www . worldwide-tax . com / stockexchanges / worldstockexchanges . asp . 
Almost all stock exchange websites have pages in English . Look
out for a term such as ‘ Listing Center ’  ,  ‘ Listing ’ or ‘ Rules ’ and
you ’ ll find the latest criteria for floating a company on that
exchange . 
Junior stock markets such as London ’ s Alternative Investment
Market ( AIM ) were formed in the mid to late 1990 ’ s specifically to
provide risk capital for new rather than established ventures . These
markets have an altogether more relaxed atmosphere than the
markets have an altogether more relaxed atmosphere than the
major exchanges . 
These junior markets are an attractive proposition for
entrepreneurs seeking equity capital . AIM is particularly attractive
to any dynamic company of any size , age or business sector that has
rapid growth in mind . The smallest firm on AIM entered to raise less
than £1 million and the largest raised over £500 million . 
As with the major stock markets , these junior versions expect
something in return . The formalities for floating are minimal but the
costs of entry are high , and you must have a nominated adviser
such as a major accountancy firm , stockbroker or banker . The cost
of floating on the junior market is around 6 . 5 per cent of all funds
raised , and companies valued at less than £2 million can expect to
shell out a quarter of funds raised in costs alone . The market is
regulated by the London Stock Exchange . You can find out more by
going to their website ( www . londonstockexchange . com ) and clicking on 
 ‘ AIM ’  . 
One rung down from AIM is PLUS-Quoted Market whose roots lie in
the market formerly known as Ofex . It began life in November 2004
and was granted Recognised Investment Exchange ( RIE ) status by
the Financial Services Authority ( FSA ) in 2007 . Aimed at smaller
companies wanting to raise up to £10 million , it draws on a pool of
capital primarily from private investors . The market is regulated , 
but requirements aren ’ t as stringent as those of AIM or the main
market and the costs of flotation and ongoing costs are lower . 
Keycom used this market to raise £4 . 4 million in September 2008 to
buy out a competitor to give them a combined contract to provide
broadband access to 40 , 000 student rooms in UK universities . There
are 174 companies quoted on PLUS with a combined market
capitalisation of £2 . 3 billion . Even in 2009 , a particularly bad year for
stock market activity , 30 companies applied for entry to PLUS and
18 were admitted . You can find out more about PLUS at
www . plusmarketsgroup . com . 
Private Equity
Private Equity
Organisations known as venture capitalists provide private equity by
investing other people ’ s money , often from pension funds . They are
likely to be interested in investing large sums of money , often more
than can be raised on AIM . Some 7 , 000 or so companies worldwide
get private equity backing each year , around half of which are in the
US where the average deal is $7 . 8 million . 
Venture capitalists generally expect their investment to pay off
within seven years , but they are hardened realists . Two in every ten
investments they make are total write-offs , and six perform
averagely well at best . So , the one star in every ten investments they
make has to cover a lot of duds . Venture capitalists have a target
rate of return of over 30 per cent , to cover this poor hit rate . 
Raising venture capital is an expensive option and deals
are slow to arrange . Six months is not unusual , and over a year
has been known . Every venture capitalist has a deal done in six
weeks in its portfolio , but that truly is the exception rather than
the rule . 
PricewaterhouseCoopers produce the Money Tree Report 
( www . pwcmoneytree . com )  , which is a quarterly study of venture capital
investment activity in the United States , and individual country
associations do something similar for their own markets . The PSEPS
Venture Capital and Private Equity Directory 
( www . pseps . com / associations . php ) lists the venture capital
associations of various countries . 
The British Venture Capital Association ( www . bvca . co . uk )  , 
the European Venture Capital Association ( www . evca . com ) and
the National Venture Capital Association ( www . nvca . org ) in the
US have online directories giving details of hundreds of venture
capital providers both inside and outside of their respective
countries and continents . 
You can see how those negotiating with or receiving
venture capital rate the firm in question at the Funded website 
( www . thefunded . com ) in terms of the deal offered , the firm ’ s
apparent competence and how good they are at managing the
relationship . 
Business Angels
One possible first source of equity or risk capital is a private
individual with his or her own funds and perhaps some knowledge
of your type of business . In return for a share in the business , such
investors will invest money at their own risk . About 40 per cent of
these individuals suffer a partial or complete loss of their
investment , which suggests that many are prepared to take big
risks . They ’ ve been christened ‘ business angels ’  , a term first coined
to describe private wealthy individuals who backed a play on
Broadway or in London ’ s West End . 
Most business angels have worked in a small firm or
have owned their own businesses before , so know the business
world well . They are more likely to invest in early-stage
investments where relatively small amounts of money are
needed . 10 per cent of business angel investment is for less than
£10 , 000 and 45 per cent is for over £50 , 000 . They are up to five
times more likely to invest in start-ups and early-stage
investments than venture capital providers in general . Most
business angels invest close to home , and syndicated deals
make up more than a quarter of all deals , proving that angels
flock together ! 
In return for their investment , most angels want some involvement
beyond merely signing a cheque and may hope to play a part in your
business in some way . They are looking for big rewards . One angel
who backed the fledgling software company Sage ( who supply
accounting , payroll and business management software for small
and medium sized companies ) with £10 , 000 in its first round of
£250 , 000 financing saw his stake rise to £40 million . Various industry
estimates suggest that upwards of £6 . 5 billion of angels ’ money is
looking for investment homes , although the sum actually invested
each year is probably much smaller than that . 
To find a business angel , check out the online directory
of the British Business Angels Association ( www . bbaa . org . uk )  . 
The European Business Angels Network website has directories
of national business angel associations both inside and outside
of Europe . Go to www . eban . org and click on ‘ Members ’ to find
individual business angels . 
Corporate Venture Funds
Venture capital firms often get their hands dirty taking a hand in the
management of the businesses they invest in . Another type of
business is also in the risk capital business , without it necessarily
being their main line of business . These firms , known as corporate
venturers , usually want an inside track to new developments in and
around the edges of their own fields of interest . 
Sinclair Beecham and Julian Metcalfe founded takeaway
food chain Pret a Manger with a £17 , 000 loan and a name
borrowed from a boarded-up shop . They had global ambitions
and they joined forces with the corporate venturing arm of a big
firm . It was only by cutting in McDonald ’ s , the burger giant , that
they could see any realistic way to dominate the world . They
sold a 33% stake for £25 million in 2001 to McDonald ’ s Ventures , 
LLC , a wholly-owned subsidiary of McDonald ’ s Corporation , the
arm of McDonalds that looks after its corporate venturing
activities . They could also have considered Cisco , Apple
Computers , IBM and Microsoft who also all have corporate
venturing arms . 
For an entrepreneur , corporate venture funds can provide a 
 ‘ friendly customer ’ and help to open doors . For the ‘ parent ’ it
provides a privileged ring-side seat as a business grows and so be
able to decide if the area is worth plunging into more deeply , or at
least gain valuable insights into new technologies or business
processes . 
Global Corporate Venturing ( www . globalcorporateventuring . com ) is a
new website devoted to publishing information on who ’ s who and
who ’ s doing what in the sector . 
Banks
Banks are the principal , and frequently the only , source of finance
for businesses that are not listed on a stock market or that don ’ t
have private equity backers . 
For long-term lending , banks can provide term loans for a number of
years , with either a variable interest rate payable or an interest rate
fixed for a number of years ahead . The proportion of fixed-rate loans
has increased from a third of all term loans to around one in two . In
some cases , moving between a fixed interest rate and a variable one
at certain intervals may be possible . Unlike in the case of an
overdraft , the bank cannot pull the rug from under you if
circumstances ( or the local manager ) change . 
Bankers look for asset security to back their loan and to provide a
near-certainty of getting their money back . They also charge an
interest rate that reflects current market conditions and their view
of the risk level of the proposal . 
Bankers like to speak of the ‘ five Cs ’ of credit analysis – factors they
look at when they evaluate a loan request . 
Character . Bankers lend money to borrowers who appear
honest and who have a good credit history . Before you apply
for a loan , obtain a copy of your credit report and clean up
any problems . 
You can check out your own business credit rating at
CheckSure ( www . checksure . biz )  . By using the comparative
ratios for your business sector you can see how to improve
your own rating . The service costs around £6 to £10
depending on the level of detail you require . 
Capacity . This is a prediction of the borrower ’ s ability to
repay the loan . For a new business , bankers look at the
business plan . For an existing business , bankers consider
financial statements and industry trends . 
Collateral . Bankers generally want a borrower to pledge an
asset that can be sold to pay off the loan if the borrower
lacks funds . 
Capital . Bankers scrutinise a borrower ’ s net worth , the
amount by which assets exceed debts . 
Conditions . Whether bankers give a loan can be influenced
by the current economic climate as well as by the amount . 
You can see an A to Z listing of business bank accounts at
www . find . co . uk / commercial / commercial_banking_centre / businessbanking where the top six or so are rated and reviewed . 
Governments around the world have schemes to make
raising money from banks easier for small and new businesses . 
These Small Firm Loan Guarantee Schemes are operated by
banks at the instigation of governments . They are aimed at
small and new businesses with viable business proposals that
have tried and failed to obtain a conventional loan because of a
lack of security . Loans are available for periods of between two
and ten years on sums from £5 , 000 to £250 , 000 . The government
guarantees 70–90 per cent of the loan . In return for the
guarantee , the borrower pays a premium of 1–2 per cent per
year on the outstanding amount of the loan . The commercial
aspects of the loan are matters between the borrower and the
lender . 
You can find out more about the UK Small Firms Loan
Guarantee Scheme on the Business Link website ( go to
www . businesslink . gov . uk and click on ‘ Finance and grants ’  ,  
 ‘ Finance options ,  ‘ Borrowing ’  , and ‘ Government lending
schemes ’  )  . 
As a means of short-term borrowing , banks can offer overdrafts – a
facility to cover you when you want to withdraw more money from a
bank account than it has funds available . The overdraft was
originally designed to cover the timing differences of , say , having to
acquire raw materials to manufacture finished goods that are later
sold . However , overdrafts have become part of the core funding of
most businesses , with a little over a quarter of all bank finance
provided in this way . 
Almost every type and size of business uses overdrafts . They are
very easy to arrange and take little time to set up . That is also their
inherent weakness . The key words in the arrangement document are
repayable on demand , which leaves the bank free to make and
change the rules as it sees fit .  ( This term is under constant review , 
and some banks may remove it from the arrangement .  ) With other
forms of borrowing , as long as you stick to the terms and
conditions , the loan is yours for the duration , but not with
overdrafts . Small businesses can expect to pay interest at three to
four per cent above base – the rate at which banks can borrow . 
Larger and more creditworthy firms may pay much less . 
Bonds , Debentures and Mortgages
Bonds , debentures and mortgages are all kinds of borrowing with
different rights and obligations for the parties concerned . A
mortgage is much the same for a business as for an individual . The
loan is for buying a particular property asset such as a factory , 
office or warehouse . Interest is payable and the loan itself is secured
against the property , so if the business fails , the mortgage can
substantially be redeemed . 
Companies wanting to raise funds for general business purposes , 
Companies wanting to raise funds for general business purposes , 
rather than a mortgage where a particular property is being bought , 
issue debentures or bonds . These run for a number of years , 
typically three years and upwards , with the bond or debenture
holder receiving interest over the life of the loan with the capital
returned at the end of the period . 
The key difference between debentures and bonds lies in their
security and ranking . Debentures are unsecured , so in the event of
the company being unable to pay interest or repay the sum , the
loaner may well get little or nothing back . Bonds are secured against
specific assets and so rank ahead of debentures for any pay out . 
Unlike bank loans that are usually held by the issuing bank , bonds
and debentures are sold to the public in much the same way as
shares . The interest demanded is a factor of the prevailing market
conditions and the financial strength of the borrower . 
You can find out more about raising these forms of finance on the
Business Link website ( www . businesslink . gov . uk )  . 
Leasing and Hire-Purchase
You can usually finance physical assets such as cars , vans , 
computers and office equipment by leasing them or buying them on
hire purchase . This leaves other funds free to cover the less tangible
elements in your cash flow . In this way , a business gets the use of
assets without paying the full cost all at once . 
Companies take out operating leases where you use the
equipment for less than its full economic life , as you might with
a motor vehicle , for example . The lessor takes the risk of the
equipment becoming obsolete , and assumes responsibility for
repairs , maintenance and insurance . As you , the lessee , pay for
this , the service is more expensive than a finance lease , where
you lease the equipment for most of its economic life , taking
care of the maintenance and insurance yourself . Leases can
normally be extended , often for fairly nominal sums , in the
latter years . 
Businesses that need lots of fixed assets such as computers , 
machinery or vehicles are the big customers for leasing . The
obvious attraction of leasing is that you need no deposit , which
leaves your working capital free for more profitable use elsewhere . 
Also , you know the cost from the start , making forward planning
simpler . Tax advantages over other forms of finance may even exist . 
Hire purchase differs from leasing in that you have the option to
eventually become the owner of the asset , after you make a series of
payments . 
You can find a leasing or hire purchase company
through the Finance and Leasing Association . Their website ( go
to www . fla . org . uk and click on ‘ For Businesses ’ and ‘ Business
Finance Directory ’  ) gives details of all UK-based businesses that
offer this type of finance . The website also has general
information on terms of trade and code of conduct . Euromoney
produce an annual World Leasing Yearbook that contains
details about 4 , 250 leasing companies worldwide ( go to their
website at www . euromoney . com and click on ‘ Leasing & Asset
Finance ’ and ‘ Books ’ for ordering information )  . You can , 
however , see a listing of most countries ’ leasing associations for
free in the ‘ Contributors ’ listing on this site . 
Factoring and Invoice Discounting
Customers take on average around 60 to 90 days to pay their
suppliers . In effect , this means that companies are granting a loan to
customers for that time . In periods of rapid growth , this can put a
strain on cash flow . One way to alleviate that strain is to factor
creditworthy customers ’ bills to a financial institution and receive
some of the funds as goods leave the door , and this speeds up the
cash flow . 
Factoring is an arrangement that allows a business to
receive up to 80 per cent of the cash due from customers more
quickly than normal . The factoring company in effect buys the
trade debts , provides a 100 per cent protection against bad
debts and can also provide a debtor accounting and
administration service . 
Factoring costs a little more than normal overdraft rates . The
factoring service costs between 0 . 5 and 3 . 5 per cent of the turnover , 
depending on volume of work , the number of debtors , average
invoice amount and other related factors . 
Factoring is generally only available to a business that invoices
other business customers for services provided . These customers
can be either in the business ’ s home market or overseas . Companies
that sell directly to the public , sell complex and expensive capital
equipment , or expect progress payments on long-term projects may
find factoring their debtor book to be difficult , if not impossible . 
Invoice discounting is a variation on the same theme . 
Factors collect in money owed by their clients ’ customers , take
a fee and pass the balance on , whereas invoice discounters
leave their clients to collect the money themselves . This could
be an advantage for firms that fear the factoring method might
reduce their contact with clients . Invoice discounting is , in any
case , typically available only to businesses with a turnover in
excess of £1 million . 
You can find an invoice discounter or factoring business through
the Asset Based Finance Association ’ s directory at
www . thefda . org . uk / public / membersList . asp . 
Grants , Incentives and Competitions
Surprisingly , there really is such a thing as a free lunch in the money
world . These free lunches come from benevolent governments
whose agenda is either to get businesses to locate in an area bereft
of business but jammed full of people looking for work , or to pioneer
new , unproven and risky technologies . Absolutely no evidence
exists that governments get any value out of this generosity , but
that ’ s the thing with governments – they feel they have to govern , 
and people are more prepared to listen to others that have open
wallets . 
Grants are constantly being introduced ( and withdrawn )  , 
but no system exists to let you know automatically . You have to
keep yourself informed . The Business Link website ( go to
www . businesslink . gov . uk and click on ‘ Finance and grants ’ and 
 ‘ Grants and government support ’  ) has advice on how to apply
for a grant as well as a directory of grants on offer . The
Microsoft Small Business Centre 
( www . microsoft . com / uk / businesscentral / euga / home . aspx ) has a
European Union Grant Advisor with a search facility to help you
find which of the 6 , 000 grants on offer might suit your business
needs . www . grants . gov is a guide to how to apply for over 1 , 000
federal government grants in the US . 
Governments aren ’ t the only guys with open wallets . 
More than a thousand annual awards around the world aimed at
businesses exist . They are awarded for such achievements as
being the greenest , cleanest , fastest ( growing , that is )  , best
company to work for and a thousand other plausible
superlatives to make you feel good . The guys giving these
awards are in it for the publicity , and heck , if you can get your
hands on some free money , swallow your pride and head on
down . Business plans are central to most of these competitions , 
which are sponsored by banks , the major accountancy bodies , 
chambers of commerce , local or national newspapers , business
magazines and the trade press . Government departments may
also have their own competitions as a means of promoting their
initiatives for exporting , innovation , job creation and so forth . 
You can find directories of business plan competitions at
www . smallbusinessnotes . com / planning / competitions . html and
www . awardsintelligence . co . uk . 
Using the Pension Fund
This financing strategy is mostly available to private companies with
a relatively limited number of participants – usually directors , 
partners , top managers and shareholders . In these cases , the
company can pay money out of business profits , thus escaping tax , 
into either a Small Self-Administered Scheme ( SSAS ) or a SelfInvested Personal Pension Plan ( SIPP )  . That scheme can then invest
in a narrow range of asset classes such as the company ’ s own
shares , purchase of commercial property and loans to the company , 
subject to certain conditions and with the approval of the pension
trustees . The trustees are themselves regulated by the Pensions
Regulator ( www . the pensionsregulator . gov . uk )  . The aim of any
pension investment must be to enhance the value of the pension
fund for the ultimate benefit of all the pensioners equally . 
The fun doesn ’ t stop at being able to use pensioners ’ 
money to invest in the business they work in . Both SSAS and
SIPP schemes can ( since April 2006 ) borrow up to 50 per cent of
their net assets to purchase property . So , if an SSAS / SIPP has
total assets of £100 , 000 , it can borrow a further £50 , 000 , thus
providing up to £150 , 000 to invest in qualifying business assets . 
You can get the lowdown on SSAS and SIPP pension schemes from
companies such as Westerby Trustee Service ( www . sipp-ssaspensions . co . uk ) and SIPPS Guide ( www . sippsguide . com )  . 
Chapter 18
Ten ( Plus One ) Questions Investors
Should Ask When Reading a Financial
Report
In This Chapter
Analysing sales and profit performance
Investigating changes in assets and liabilities
Looking for signs of financial distress
Examining asset utilisation and return on capital investment
You have only so much time to search for the most important
signals in a business ’ s financial report . For a quick read through a
financial report – one that allows you to decode the critical signals
in the financial statements – you need a checklist of key questions to
ask . 
Before you read a business ’ s annual financial report , get
up to speed on which products and services the business sells
and learn about the history of the business and any current
problems it ’ s facing . One place to find much of this information
is the company ’ s annual accounts filed at Companies House , 
which is a public document available to everyone .  ( You can
also usually find this information on the company ’ s website , in
the investor affairs section .  ) Company profiles are prepared by
securities brokers and investment advisers , and they ’ re very
useful . The Economist , Investors Chronicle and other national
newspapers , such as The Financial Times , are good sources of
information about public companies . 
Did Sales Grow ? 
A business makes profit by making sales ( although you do have to
take controlling expenses into account )  . Sales growth is the key to
long-run sustained profit growth . Even if profit is up , investors get
worried when sales revenue is flat . 
Start reading a financial report by comparing this year ’ s
sales revenue with last year ’ s , and with all prior years included
in the financial report . A company ’ s sales trend is the most
important factor affecting its profit trend . We dare you to find a
business that has had a steady downward sales trend line but a
steady upward profit line – you ’ d be looking for a long time . 
Did the Profit Ratios Hold ? 
Higher sales from one year to the next don ’ t necessarily mean
higher profit . You also need to look at whether the business was
able to maintain its profit ratio at the higher sales level . Recall that
the profit ratio is net income divided by sales revenue . If the
business earned , say , a 6 per cent profit ratio last year , did it
maintain or perhaps improve this ratio on its higher sales revenue
this year ? 
Also compare the company ’ s gross margin ratios from year to year . 
Cost-of-goods-sold expense is reported by companies that sell
products . Recall that gross margin equals sales revenue less cost of
goods sold . Any significant slippage in a company ’ s gross margin
ratio ( gross margin divided by sales revenue ) is a very serious
matter . Suppose that a company gives up two or three points ( one
point = 1 per cent ) of its gross margin ratio . How can it make up for
this loss ? Decreasing its other operating expenses isn ’ t easy or very
practical – unless the business has allowed its operating expenses
to become bloated . 
In most external financial reports , profit ratios are not
discussed openly , especially when things have not gone well for
the business . You usually have to go digging for these important
ratios and use your calculator . Articles in the financial press on
the most recent earnings of public corporations focus on gross
margin and profit ratios – for good reason . We always keep an
eye on profit as a percentage of sales revenue , even though we
have to calculate this key ratio for most businesses . We wish
that all businesses would provide this ratio . 
Were There Any Unusual or
Extraordinary Gains or Losses ? 
Every now and then , a business records an unusual or extraordinary
gain or loss . The first section of the profit and loss account reports
sales revenue and the expenses of making the sales and operating
the business . Also , interest and income tax expenses are deducted . 
Be careful : The profit down to this point may not be the final bottom
line . The profit down to this point is from the business ’ s ongoing , 
normal operations before any unusual , one-time gains or losses are
recorded . The next layer of the profit and loss account reports these
extraordinary , non-recurring gains or losses that the business
recorded during the period . 
These gains or losses are called extraordinary because they do not
recur – or at least should not recur , although some companies
report these gains and losses on a regular basis . These gains and
losses are caused by a discontinuity in the business – such as a
major organisational restructuring involving a reduction in the
workforce and paying substantial severance packages to laid-off
employees , selling off major assets and product lines of the
business , retiring a huge amount of debt at a big gain or loss , or
settling a huge lawsuit against the business . Generally , the gain or
loss is reported on one line net of the corporation tax effect for each
extraordinary item , and a brief explanation can be found in the
footnotes to the financial statements . 
Investors have to watch the pattern of these items over the years . 
An extraordinary gain or loss now and then is a normal part of doing
business and is nothing to be alarmed about . However , a business
that reports one or two of these gains or losses every year or every
other year is suspect . These gains or losses may be evidence of past
turmoil and future turbulence . We classify these businesses as highrisk investments – because you don ’ t know what to expect in the
future . 
In any case , we advise you to consider whether an
unusual loss is the cumulative result of inadequate accounting
for expenses in previous years . A large legal settlement , for
example , may be due to the business refusing to admit that it is
selling unsafe products year after year ; its liability finally
catches up with it . 
Did Earnings Per Share Keep Up
Did Earnings Per Share Keep Up
with Profit ? 
Chapter 14 explains that a publicly owned business with a simple
capital structure – meaning that the business is not required to
issue additional shares in the future – reports just one earnings per
share ( EPS ) for the period , which is called basic EPS . You calculate
basic EPS by using the actual number of shares owned by
shareholders . However , many publicly owned businesses have
complex capital structures that require them to issue additional
shares in the future . These businesses report two EPS numbers –
basic EPS and diluted EPS . The diluted EPS figure is based on a larger
number of shares that includes the additional number of shares that
will be issued under terms of management share options , 
convertible debt and other contractual obligations that require the
business to issue shares in the future . 
In analysing earnings per share , therefore , you may have to put on
your bifocals , as it were . For many businesses , you have to look at
both basic EPS and diluted EPS . We suppose you could invest only
in companies that report only basic EPS , but this investment
strategy would eliminate a large number of businesses from your
stock investment portfolio . Odds are , your stock investments
include companies that report both basic and diluted EPS . The two
EPS figures may not be too far apart , but then again , diluted EPS
may be substantially less than basic EPS for some businesses . 
Suppose you own stock in a public corporation that reports bottomline net income that is 10 per cent higher than last year ’ s . So far , so
good . But you know that the market price of your shares depends
on earnings per share ( EPS )  . Ask what happened to basic and
diluted EPS . Did both EPS figures go up 10 per cent ? Not necessarily
– the answer is often ‘ no ’  , in fact . You have to check . 
Public companies whose shares are traded on one of the national
stock exchanges ( London Stock Exchange , New York Stock
Exchange , NASDAQ and so on ) are required to report EPS in their
Exchange , NASDAQ and so on ) are required to report EPS in their
profit and loss accounts , so you don ’ t have to do any computations .  
( Private businesses whose shares are not traded do not have to
report EPS .  ) 
EPS increases exactly the same percentage that net income
increases only if the total number of shares remains constant . 
Usually , this is not the case . Many public corporations have a fair
amount of activity in their shares during the year . So they include a
schedule of changes in shareholders ’ equity during the year .  
( Chapter 8 discusses this financial summary of changes in
shareholders ’ equity .  ) Look at this schedule to find out how many
shares were issued during the year . Also , companies may purchase
some of their own shares during the year , which is reported in this
schedule . 
Suppose net income increased , say , 10 per cent , but
basic EPS increased only 6 . 8 per cent because the number of
shares issued by the business increased 3 per cent during the
year .  ( You can check the computation if you like .  ) You should
definitely look into why additional shares were issued . And if
diluted EPS does not keep pace with the company ’ s earnings
increase , you should pinpoint why the number of shares
included in the calculation of diluted EPS increased during the
period .  ( Maybe more management share options were awarded
during the year .  ) The number of shares may increase again next
year and the year after . Businesses do not comment on why the
percentage change in their EPS is not the same as the
percentage change in their net income . We wish that companies
were required to leave a clear explanation of any difference in
the percentage of change in EPS compared with the percentage
of change in net income . However , this is just wishful thinking
on our part . You have to ferret out this information yourself , 
which we advise you to do . 
An increase in EPS may not be due entirely to an
increase in net income , but rather to a decrease in the number
of shares . Cash-rich companies often buy their shares to reduce
the total number of shares that is divided into net income , 
thereby increasing basic and diluted EPS . You should pay close
attention to increases in EPS that result from decreases in the
number of shares . The long-run basis of EPS growth is profit
growth , although a decrease in the number of shares helps EPS
and , hopefully , the market price of the shares . 
Did the Profit Increase Generate a
Cash Flow Increase ? 
Increasing profit is all well and good , but you also should ask : Did
cash flow from profit increase ? Cash flow from profit is found in the
first section of the cash flow statement , which is one of the three
primary financial statements included in a financial report . The cash
flow statement begins with an explanation of cash flow from profit . 
Accountants use the term cash flow from operating
activities – which , in our opinion , is not nearly as descriptive as
cash flow from profit . The term profit is avoided like the plague
in external financial reports ; it ’ s not a politically correct word . 
So you may think that accountants would use the phrase cash
flow from net income . But no , the official pronouncement on the
cash flow statement mandated the term cash flow from operating
activities . Operating activities refers simply to sales revenue and
expenses , which are the profit-making operations of a business . 
We ’ ll stick with cash flow from profit – please don ’ t report us to
the accounting authorities . 
Almost all expenses are bad for cash flow , except one : 
depreciation . Depreciation expense is actually good for cash
flow . Each year , a business converts part of the cost of its fixed
assets back into cash through the cash collections from sales
made during the year . Over time , fixed assets are gradually used
up , so each year is charged with part of the fixed assets ’ cost by
recording depreciation expense . And each year , a business
retrieves cash for part of the cost of its fixed assets . Thus
depreciation expense decreases profit but increases cash flow . 
But net income plus depreciation does not equal cash flow from
profit – except in the imaginary scenario in which all the
company ’ s other operating assets ( mainly debtors and stock ) 
and all its operating liabilities ( mainly creditors and accrued
expenses payable ) don ’ t increase or decrease during the year . 
Here ’ s the key question : Should cash flow from profit change about
the same amount as net income changed , or is it normal for the
change in cash flow to be higher or lower than the change in net
income ? 
As a general rule , sales growth penalises cash flow from
profit in the short run . A business has to build up its debtors
and stock , and these increases hurt cash flow – although , 
during growth periods , a business also increases its creditors
and accrued expenses payable , which helps cash flow . The
asset increases , in most cases , dominate the liability increases , 
and cash flow from profit suffers . 
We strongly advise you to compare cash flow from operating
activities ( see , we use the officially correct term here ) with net
income for each of the past two or three years . Is cash flow from
profit about the same percentage of net income each year ? What
does the trend look like ? For example , last year , cash flow from
profit may have been 90 per cent of net income , but this year it may
have dropped to 50 per cent . Don ’ t hit the panic button just yet . 
A dip in cash flow from profit in one year actually may be good from
the long-run point of view – the business may be laying a good
foundation for supporting a higher level of sales . But then again , the
slowdown in cash flow from profit could present a short-term cash
problem that the business has to deal with . 
A company ’ s cash flow from profit may be a trickle
instead of a stream . In fact , cash flow from profit could be
negative ; in making a profit , the company could be draining its
cash reserves . Cash flow from profit is low , in most cases , 
because debtors from sales haven ’ t been collected and because
the business has made large increases in its inventories . These
large increases raise questions about whether all the
receivables will be collected and whether all the stock will be
sold at regular prices . Only time can tell . But generally speaking , 
you should be cautious and take the net income number that
the business reports with a grain of salt . 
Analysing cash flow from loss ( instead of from profit ) is
very important . When a company reports a loss for the year –
instead of a profit – an immediate question is whether the
company ’ s cash reserve will buy it enough time to move out of
the loss column into the profit column . When a business is in a
loss situation ( the early years of a start-up business , for
example ) and its cash flow from operating activities is negative , 
focus on the company ’ s cash balance and how long the
business can keep going until it turns the corner and becomes
profitable . Stock analysts use the term burn rate to refer to how
much cash outflow the business is using up each period . They
compare this measure of how much cash the business is
haemorrhaging each period to its present cash balance . The key
question is this : Does the business have enough cash on hand
to tide it over until it starts to generate positive cash flow from
profit , and if not , where will it get more money to burn until it
can record a profit ? 
Are Increases in Assets and Liabilities
Consistent with the Business ’ s
Growth ? 
Publicly owned businesses present their financial statements in a
three-year comparative format ( or sometimes a two-year
comparative format )  . Strictly speaking , you don ’ t have to provide
comparative financial statements – although all businesses , private
and public , are encouraged to present comparative financial
statements . Furthermore , business investors and lenders demand
comparative financial statements . Thus , three columns of numbers
are reported in profit and loss accounts , balance sheets and cash
flow statements – for the current and two preceding years . To keep
financial statement illustrations in this book as brief as possible , we
present only one year ; we do not include two additional columns for
the two previous years . Please keep this point in mind . 
Presenting financial statements in a three-year comparative format , 
as may be obvious , helps the reader make year-to-year comparisons . 
Of course , you have to deal with three times as many numbers in a
three-year comparative financial statement compared with a oneyear financial statement . And we should point out that the amounts
of changes are not presented ; you either eyeball the changes or use
a calculator to compute the amounts of changes during the year . For
example , the ending balances of a business ’ s property , plant and
equipment asset account may be reported as follows ( in millions of
pounds )  : £4 , 097 , £4 , 187 and £3 , 614 for the last three fiscal years . 
Only these ending balances are presented in the company ’ s
comparative balance sheet – the increase or decrease during the
year is not presented . 
A three-year comparative format enables you to see the general
trend of sales revenue and expenses from year to year and the
general drift in the amounts of the company ’ s assets , liabilities and
owners ’ equity accounts . You can easily spot any major differences
in each line of the cash flow statement across the years . Whether
you just cast a glance at adjacent amounts or actually calculate
changes , ask yourself whether the increases of a company ’ s assets
and liabilities reported in its balance sheet are consistent with the
sales growth of the business from year to year . 
Unusually large increases in assets that are greatly out of line with
the company ’ s sales revenue growth put pressure on cash flow and
could cast serious doubts on the company ’ s solvency – which we
explain in the next section . 
Can the Business Pay Its Liabilities ? 
A business can build up a good sales volume and have
very good profit margins , but if the company can ’ t pay its bills
on time , its profit opportunities could go down the drain . 
Solvency refers to the prospects of a business being able to
meet its debt and other liability payment obligations on time . 
Solvency analysis asks whether a business will be able to pay its
liabilities , looking for signs of financial distress that could cause
serious disruptions in the business ’ s profit-making operations . 
In short , even if a business has a couple of billion quid in the
bank , you should ask : How does its solvency look ? 
To be solvent doesn ’ t mean that a business must have cash in the
bank equal to its total liabilities . Suppose , for example , that a
business has £2 million in non-interest-bearing operating liabilities 
( mainly creditors and accrued expenses payable )  , £1 . 5 million in
overdraft ( due in less than one year ) and £3 . 5 million in long-term
debt ( due over the next five years )  . Thus , its total liabilities are £7
million . To be solvent , the business does not need £7 million in its
bank account . In fact , this would be foolish . 
There ’ s no point in having liabilities if all the money were kept in the
bank . The purpose of having liabilities is to put the money to good
use in assets other than cash . A business uses the money from its
liabilities to invest in non-cash assets that it needs to carry on its
profit-making operations . For example , a business buys products on
credit and holds these goods in stock until it sells them . It borrows
money to invest in its fixed assets . 
Solvency analysis asks whether assets can be converted quickly
back into cash so that liabilities can be paid on time . Will the assets
generate enough cash flow to meet the business ’ s liability payment
obligations as they come due ? 
Short-term solvency analysis looks a few months into the future of
the business . It focuses on the current assets of the business in
relation to its current liabilities ; these two amounts are reported in
the balance sheet . A rough measure of a company ’ s short-term
liability payment ability is its current ratio – current assets ( cash , 
debtors , stock and prepaid expenses ) are divided by current
liabilities ( creditors and accrued expenses payable , plus interest-
bearing debt coming due in the short term )  . A 2-to-1 current ratio
usually is a reasonable benchmark for a business – but don ’ t
swallow this ratio hook , line and sinker . 
A 2-to-1 current ratio is fairly conservative . Many
businesses can get by on a lower current ratio without alarming
their sources of short-term credit . 
Business investors and creditors also look at a second solvency
ratio called the quick ratio . This ratio includes only a company ’ s
quick assets – cash , debtors and short-term marketable investments
in other company shares ( if the company has any )  . Quick assets are
divided by current liabilities to determine the quick ratio . It ’ s also
called the acid-test ratio because it ’ s a very demanding test to put on
a business . More informally , it ’ s called the pounce ratio , as if all the
short-term creditors pounced on the business and demanded
payment in short order . 
Many people consider a safe acid-test ratio to be 1-to-1 –
£1 of quick assets for every £1 of current liabilities . However , be
careful with this benchmark . It may not be appropriate for
businesses that rely on heavy short-term debt to finance their
inventories . For these companies , it ’ s better to compare their
quick assets with their quick liabilities and exclude their shortterm notes payable that don ’ t have to be paid until stock is
sold . 
The current and acid-test ratios are relevant . But the
solvency of a business depends mainly on the ability of its
managers to convince creditors to continue extending credit to
the business and renewing its loans . The credibility of
management is the main factor , not ratios . Creditors
understand that a business can get into a temporary bind and
fall behind on paying its liabilities . As a general rule , creditors
are slow to pull the plug on a business . Shutting off new credit
may be the worst thing lenders and other creditors could do . 
This may put the business in a tailspin , and its creditors may
end up collecting very little . Usually , it ’ s not in their interest to
force a business into bankruptcy , except as a last resort . 
Also check out the gearing . If borrowings are growing faster than
retained profits or new shareholder investments , then gearing is
going up , as are the financing risks . Have a look at Chapter 14 to see
what gearing / leverage is all about . 
Are There Any Unusual Assets and
Liabilities ? 
Most businesses report a miscellaneous , catch-all account called
other assets . Who knows what might be included in here ? If the
balance in this account is not very large , trust that the auditor did
not let the business bury anything important in this account . 
Marketable securities is the asset account used for investments in
shares and bonds ( as well as other kinds of investments )  . 
Companies that have more cash than they need for their immediate
operating purposes put the excess funds to work earning
investment income rather than let the money lie dormant in a bank
checking account . The accounting rules for marketable securities
are fairly tight ; you needn ’ t be concerned about this asset . 
If you encounter an asset or liability you ’ re not familiar with , look in
the footnotes to the financial statements , which present a brief
explanation of what the accounts are and whether they affect profit
accounting .  ( We know , you don ’ t like reading footnotes ; neither do
we .  ) For example , many businesses have large liabilities for
unfunded pension plan obligations for work done in the past by
their employees . The liability reveals that the business has recorded
this component of labour expense in determining its profit over the
years . The liability could be a heavy demand on the future cash flow
of the business . 
How Well Are Assets Being Utilised ? 
The overall test of how well assets are being used is the asset
turnover ratio , which equals annual sales revenue divided by total
assets .  ( You have to calculate this ratio ; most businesses do not
report this ratio in their financial statements , although a minority
do .  ) This ratio tests the efficiency of using assets to make sales . 
Some businesses have low asset turnover ratios , less than 2-to-1 . 
Some have very high ratios , such as 5-to-1 . Each industry and retail
sector in the economy has a standard asset turnover ratio , but these
differ quite a bit from industry to industry and from sector to sector . 
There is no standard asset turnover ratio for all businesses . A
supermarket chain couldn ’ t make it if its annual sales revenues were
only twice its assets . Capital-intensive heavy manufacturers , on the
other hand , would be delighted with a 2-to-1 asset turnover ratio . 
Financial report readers are wise to track a company ’ s
asset turnover ratio from year to year . If this ratio slips , the
company is getting less sales revenue for each pound of assets . 
If the company ’ s profit ratio remains the same , it gets less profit
out of each pound of assets , which is not good news for equity
investors in the business . 
What Is the Return on Capital
Investment ? 
We need a practical example to illustrate the return on capital
investment questions you should ask . Suppose a business has £12
million total assets , and its creditors and accrued liabilities for
unpaid expenses are £2 million . Thus , its net operating assets – total
assets less its non-interest-bearing operating liabilities – are £10
million . We won ’ t tell you the company ’ s sales revenue for the year
just ended . But we will tell you that its earnings before interest and
tax ( EBIT ) were £1 . 32 million for the year . The basic question you
should ask is this : How is the business doing in relation to the total
capital used to make this profit ? 
EBIT is divided by assets ( net operating assets , in our way of
thinking ) to get the return on assets ( ROA ) ratio . In this case , the
company earned 13 . 2 per cent ROA for the year just ended : 
£1 , 320 , 000 EBIT ÷ £10 , 000 , 000 net operating assets = 13 . 2% ROA
Was this rate high enough to cover the interest rate on its debt ? 
Sure ; it ’ s doubtful that the business had to pay a 13 . 2 per cent
interest rate . Now for the bottom-line question : How did the
business do for its owners , who have a lot of capital invested in the
business ? 
The business uses £4 million total debt , on which it pays 8 per cent
annual interest . Thus , its total owners ’ equity is £6 million . The
business is organised as a company that pays , for example , 30 per
cent tax on its taxable income . 
Given the company ’ s capitalisation structure , its EBIT ( or profit
from operations ) for the year just ended was divided three ways : 
£320 , 000 interest on debt : £4 , 000 , 000 debt ´ 8 per cent
interest rate = £320 , 000
£300 , 000 income tax : £1 , 320 , 000 EBIT – £320 , 000 interest = 
£1 , 000 , 000 taxable income ; £1 , 000 , 000 taxable income ´ 30
per cent tax rate = £300 , 000 income tax
£700 , 000 net income : £1 , 320 , 000 operating earnings –
£320 , 000 interest – £300 , 000 income tax = £700 , 000 net
income
Net income is divided by owners ’ equity to calculate the return on
equity ( ROE ) ratio , which in this example is
£700 , 000 net income ÷ £6 , 000 , 000 owners ’ equity = 12% ROE
Some businesses report their ROE ratios , but many don ’ t – generally
accepted accounting principles don ’ t require the disclosure of ROE . 
In any case , as an investor in the business , would you be satisfied
with a 12 per cent return on your money ? 
You made only 4 per cent more than the debt holders , 
which may not seem much of a premium for the additional risks
you take on as an equity investor in the business . But you may
predict that the business has a bright future and over time your
investment will increase two or three times in value . In any
case , ROE is a good point of reference – although this one ratio
doesn ’ t give you a final answer regarding what to do with your
capital . Reading Tony Levene ’ s Investing For Dummies ( Wiley ) 
can help you make a wise decision . 
What Does the Auditor Say ? 
A business pays a lot of money for its audit , and you should read
what the auditor has to say . We ’ ll be frank : The wording of the
auditor ’ s report is tough going . Talk about jargon ! In any case , focus
on the sentence that states the auditor ’ s opinion on the financial
statements . In rough terms , the auditor gives the financial
statements a green light , a yellow light or a red light – green
meaning that everything ’ s okay ( as far as can be ascertained by the
process of the audit )  , yellow meaning that you should be aware of
something that prevents the auditor from giving a green light and
red meaning that the financial statements are seriously deficient . 
Look for the key words true and fair . These code words
mean that the audit firm has no serious disagreement with how
the business prepared its financial statements . This unqualified
opinion is called a clean opinion . Only in the most desperate
situations does the auditor give an adverse opinion , which in
essence says that the financial statements are misleading . If the
audit firm can ’ t give a clean opinion on the financial statements
or thinks that something about the financial statements should
be emphasised , a fourth paragraph is added to the standard
three-paragraph format of the audit report ( or additional
language is added to the one-paragraph audit report used by
the big accountancy firm PricewaterhouseCoopers )  . The
additional language is the tip-off ; look for a fourth paragraph ( or
additional language )  , and be sure to read it . The auditor may
express doubt about the business being able to continue as a
going concern . The solvency ratios discussed earlier should
have tipped you off . When the auditor mentions it , things are
pretty serious . 
Chapter 19
Ten Ways to Get a Better Handle on the
Financial Future
In This Chapter
Appreciating the difference between forecasts and objectives
Putting your maths to work
Unravelling the reasons for trends
Getting at the real facts
Keeping projections current
Building in assumptions
Managers are accustomed to using accounting to unravel the past . 
Accounts are usually a record of the effect of last year ’ s , month ’ s or
week ’ s decisions . Did your strategies for collecting money from
customers more quickly or reducing stock levels actually happen , 
and if so , did they deliver better profits ?  ( We cover this area in
Chapter 6 .  ) 
But the past , as the saying goes , is another country . The future is
where reputations are made and promotion achieved . Managers get
maximum value from their grasp of accounting and finance from
being able to blend that knowledge with some related skills to get a
better handle on the ground ahead . 
Sales Forecasts versus Sales
Objectives
Objectives
Sales drive much of a business ’ s activities ; they determine cash
flow , stock levels , production capacity and ultimately how profitable
or otherwise a business is . So , unsurprisingly , much effort goes into
attempting to predict future sales . A sales forecast isn ’ t the same as
a sales objective . An objective is what you want to achieve and will
shape a strategy to do so . A forecast is the most likely future
outcome given what has happened in the past and the momentum
that provides for the business . 
A forecast is made up of three components and to get an accurate
forecast you need to use the historic data to better understand the
impact of each on the end result : 
Underlying trend : This is the general direction – up , flat or
down – over the longer term , showing the rate of change . 
Cyclical factors : These are the short-term influences that
regularly superimpose themselves on the trend . For example , 
in the summer months you expect sales of swimwear , ice
cream and suntan lotion , to be higher than in the winter . Ski
equipment would follow a reverse pattern . 
Random movements : These are irregular , random spikes up
or down caused by unusual and unexplained factors . 
Dealing with Demand Curves
The price you charge for your goods and services is perhaps the
single most important number in the financial firmament . 
Predictions about what price to set influences everything from the
amount of materials you have to buy to achieve a given level of
profit ( the higher the price , the less you have to purchase )  , to the
amount of money you have to invest in fixed assets ( a low price may
involve selling a lot more to make a given level of profit , requiring a
higher level of productive resources )  . 
Figure 19-1 : 
The demand
curve . 
higher level of productive resources )  . 
The main economic concept that underpins almost the
whole subject of pricing is that of the price elasticity of demand . 
The concept itself is simple enough . The higher the price of an
item or service , the less of it you ’ re likely to sell . Obviously it ’ s
not quite that simple in practice ; you also need to consider the
number of buyers , their expectations , preference and ability to
pay , and the availability of substitute products . Figure 19-1
shows a theoretical demand curve . 
Figure 19-1 shows how the volume of sales of a particular good or
service alters with changes in price . You calculate the elasticity of
demand by dividing the percentage change in demand by the
percentage change in price . If a price is reduced by 50% ( say , from
£100 to £50 ) and the quantity demanded increased by 100% ( from
1 , 000 to 2 , 000 )  , the elasticity of demand coefficient is 2 ( 100 / 50 )  . 
Here the quantity demanded changes by a bigger percentage than
the price change , so demand is considered to be elastic . Were the
demand in this case to rise by only 25% , then the elasticity of
demand coefficient would be 0 . 5 ( 25 / 100 )  . Here the demand is
inelastic , as the percentage demand change is smaller than that of
the price change . 
Having a feel for elasticity is important in developing a business ’ s
financial strategy , but there ’ s no perfect scientific way to work out
what the demand coefficient is ; it has to be assessed by ‘ feel ’  . 
Unfortunately the price elasticity changes at different price levels . 
For example , reducing the price of vodka from £10 to £5 might
double sales , but halving it again may not have such a dramatic
effect . In fact it could encourage a certain group of buyers , those
giving it as a gift for example , to feel that giving something so cheap
is rather insulting . 
Maths Matters
The simplest way to predict the future is to assume that it will be
more or less the same as the recent past . Despite Henry Ford ’ s
attributed quote that history is bunk , very often the past is a very
good guide to what ’ s likely to happen in the fairly immediate future
– far enough ahead for budgeting purposes , if not for shaping longterm strategy . 
The three most common mathematical techniques that use this
approach are as follows : 
Moving average takes a series of data from the past , say , the
last six months ’ sales , adds them up , divides by the number
of months and uses that figure as the most likely forecast of
what will happen in month seven . This method works well in
a static , mature market place where change happens slowly , 
if at all . 
Weighted moving average gives more recent data more
significance than earlier data because it gives a better
representation of current business conditions . So before
adding up the series of data , each figure is weighted by
multiplying it by an increasingly higher factor as you get
closer to the most recent data . 
Exponential smoothing is a more sophisticated averaging
technique that gives exponentially decreasing weights as the
data gets older . More recent data is given relatively more
weight in making the forecasting . You can use double and
triple exponential smoothing to help with different types of
trend . 
Fortunately all you need to know is that these and other statistical
forecasting methods exist . The choice of which is the best
forecasting technique to use is usually down to trial and error . 
Various software programs calculate the best-fitting
forecast by applying each of these techniques to the historic
data you enter . See what actually happens and use the forecast
technique that ’ s closest to the actual outcome . Professor
Hossein Arsham of the University of Baltimore provides a useful
tool that enables you to enter data and see how different
forecasting techniques perform .  
( stat / otherapplets / ForecaSmo . htm # rmenu ) 
Duke University ’ s Fuqua School of Business provides a helpful link
to all their lecture material on forecasting 
( www . duke . edu / ~rnau / 411home . htm )  . 
Averaging Out Averages
A common way forecasts are predicted is around a single figure that
purports to be representative of a whole mass of often conflicting
data . This single figure is usually known as an average , with the
process of averaging seen as a way of smoothing over any conflicts . 
When some customers pay one price and others quite a different
one , an average is used as the basis for forecasting . That would be
all fine and dandy were it not for the fact that you have three
different ways of measuring an average ( the mean , median and
mode )  . In fact , averages are the most frequently confused and
misrepresented set of numbers in the whole field of forecasting . 
To analyse anything for forecasting purposes you first need a data
set such as that in Table 19-1 . 
You then have three ways of working with the numbers : 
The mean ( or average )  : This is the most common tendency
measure and is used as a rough and ready check for many
types of data . In Table 19-1 you add up the prices ( £105 ) and
divide by the number of customers ( 5 )  , to arrive at a mean , 
or average selling price of £21 . 
The median : The median is the value occurring at the centre
of a data set . Recasting the figures in Table 19-1 in order puts
Customer 4 ’ s purchase price of £15 in central position , with
two higher and two lower prices . The median comes into its
own in situations where the outlying values in a data set are
extreme , as they are in the example , where , in fact , most of
the customers buy for well below £21 . In this case the median
is a better measure of the average . 
Figure 19-2 : 
Scatter
diagram . 
Always use the median when the distribution is
skewed . You can use either the mean or the median when the
population is symmetrical because they ’ ll give very similar
results . 
The mode : The mode is the observation in a data set that
appears the most ; in this example it is £10 . So if you were
surveying a sample of customers you ’ d expect more of them
to say they were paying £10 for the products , even though
you know the average price is £21 . 
Looking for Causes
Often when looking at historic data ( the basis of all projections )  , a
relationship between certain factors becomes apparent . Look at
Figure 19-2 , which is a chart showing the monthly sales of
barbeques and the average temperature in the preceding month for
the past eight months . 
You can clearly see a relationship between temperature ( the
independent variable ) and sales ( the dependant variable )  . By
Figure 19-3 : 
Scatter
diagram with
the line of
best fit . 
drawing the line that most accurately represents the slope , called
the line of best fit ( see Figure 19-3 )  , you have a useful tool for
estimating what sales might be next month , given the temperature
that occurred this month . 
This example is a simple one . Real life data is usually more
complicated , so it ’ s harder to see a relationship between the
independent and dependant variables with real life data than it is
here . Fortunately , an algebraic formula known as linear regression
can calculate the line of best fit for you . 
A couple of calculations can test if a causal relationship
is strong ( even if strongly negative , the test is still useful for
predictive purposes ) and significant – the statisticians way of
telling you if you can rely on the data as an aid to predicting the
future . The tests are known as R-Squared and the Students t test , 
and all you need to know is that they exist and that you can
probably find the software to calculate them on your computer . 
Try Web-Enabled Scientific Services & Applications ’  
( www . wessa . net / slr . wasp ) free software , which covers almost
every type of statistic calculation . For help in understanding
statistical techniques , read Gerard E . Dallal ’ s book The Little
Handbook of Statistical Practice available free online 
( www . tufts . edu / ~gdallal / LHSP . HTM )  . At Princeton University ’ s
website you can find a tutorial and lecture notes on the subject
as taught to their Master of International Business students 
( 
Straddling Cycles
Economies tend to follow a cyclical pattern that moves from boom , 
when demand is strong , to slump , economists ’ shorthand for a
downturn . Politicians believe they have become better managers of
demand and proclaim the death of the cycle , but the ‘ this time it ’ s
different ’ school of thinking has been proved wrong time and time
again . The cycle itself is caused by the collective behaviour of
billions of people – the unfathomable ‘ animal spirits ’ of businesses
and households . Maynard Keynes , the British economist whose
strategy of encouraging governments to step up investment in bad
times did much to alleviate the slump in the 1930s , explained animal
spirits in the following way :  ‘ Most , probably , of our decisions to do
something positive , the full consequences of which will be drawn
out over many days to come , can only be taken as the result of
animal spirits – a spontaneous urge to action rather than inaction , 
and not as the outcome of a weighted average of quantitative
benefits multiplied by quantitative probabilities ’  . 
Added to the urge to act is the equally inevitable herd-like
behaviour that leads to excessive optimism and pessimism . From
the tulip mania in 17th-century Holland and the South Sea Bubble 
( 1711–1720 )  , to the Internet Bubble in 1999 and the collapse in US
Figure 19-4 : 
The textbook
economic
cycle .  
( 1711–1720 )  , to the Internet Bubble in 1999 and the collapse in US
real estate in 2008 , the story behind each bubble has been
uncomfortably familiar . Strong market demand for some commodity 
( such as gold , copper or oil )  , currency , property or type of share
leads the general public to believe the trend cannot end . Overoptimism leads the public at large to overextend itself in acquiring
the object of the mania , while lenders fall over each other to fan the
flames . Finally , either the money runs out or groups of investors
become cautious . Fear turns to panic selling , so creating a vicious
downward spiral that can take years to recover from . 
Economics is a science of the indistinctly knowable rather than the
exactly predictable . Although all cycles are difficult to understand
or predict with much accuracy , they do have discernable patterns
and some distinctive characteristics . Give some consideration to
where you think you are in the cycle and build that into your
projections . 
Figure 19-4 shows an elegant curve , which depicts the theoretical
textbook cycle . 
The National Bureau of Economic Research provides a
history of all US business cycle expansions and contractions
since 1854 ( www . nber . org / cycles . htm )  . The Foundation for the
Study of Cycles , an international research and educational
institution , provides a detailed explanation of different cycles 
(  )  . The Centre for
Growth and Business Cycle Research based in Manchester
University ’ s School of Social Sciences provides details of
current research , recent publications and downloadable
discussion papers on all aspects of business cycles 
( www . socialsciences . manchester . ac . uk / cgbcr )  . 
Surveying Future Trends
Surveys are the most common research method used in
organisations to get a handle on almost every aspect of future
demand . If you ask your customers how much they plan to spend on
their next holiday , car , haircut or laptop , you have a figure to base
your projections on . Leaving aside the practical aspects of
preparing and executing surveys ( read Statistics For Dummies by
Deborah J . Rumsey ( Wiley ) to find out about that )  , to be sure of the
degree to which surveys are likely to be meaningful , you need a
modest grasp of maths . 
The size of the survey you undertake is vital to its accuracy . You
frequently hear of political opinion polls taken on samples of 1 , 500–
2 , 000 voters . This is because the accuracy of your survey clearly
increases with the size of sample , as Table 19-2 shows : 
If on a sample size of 500 , your survey showed that 40 per cent of
your customers plan to spend £1 , 000 on your products , the true
proportion would probably lie between 35 . 6 and 44 . 4 per cent . A
sample of 250 completed replies is about the minimum to provide
meaningful information . 
Andrews University in the United States has a free set of
lecture notes explaining the subject of sample size
comprehensively 
( www . andrews . edu / ~calkins / math / webtexts / prod12 . htm )  . At
www . auditnet . org / docs / statsamp . xls you can find some great
spreadsheets that do the boring maths of calculating sample
size and accuracy for you . 
Talking To The Troops
Financial forecasts are usually in the domain of top management
and senior staff such as CFOs . However all the decisions that have a
direct bearing on these forecasts rely on information provided by
people on the front line . They know where the bodies are , so it
makes good sense to talk to them early in the planning process . 
makes good sense to talk to them early in the planning process . 
Also , you need their commitment because chances are they ’ ll have a
big influence on whether your projections bear fruit . 
This process is known as bottom up projection . It
involves , for example , building up a sales forecast customer by
customer for every product or service they buy or may buy . 
Bottom up projection also requires an estimate of how many
customers will be lost and won . Clearly only someone with
detailed knowledge can prepare this . You can check this against
your top down projection , based on , say , using a sales
forecasting technique such as those covered earlier in this
chapter . If you find a wide divergence between your theoretical
projections and those made by the front line troops , discuss
them and come up with a consensus that everyone can buy
into . 
Setting Out Assumptions
All future projections are based on assumptions – the stage of the
economic cycle , government strategies on tax and expenditure , 
market size and growth rates , the level and type of competition .  .  . 
oh yes , and the weather comes into future projections too . The
people running Heathrow hadn ’ t expected the last week of 2010 to
deliver so much snow it shut the airport just as peak Christmas
demand was about to get underway . 
Even the environment gets a look in here . Eyjafjallajökull , the
Icelandic volcano that erupted in April 2010 , caused air traffic
around Europe and across the Atlantic to grind to a halt for six days . 
Airlines lost up to half their annual profits , business passengers
were stranded for days and supply chains shortened by just-in-time
purchasing strategies dried up . Now , arguably , business could do
little directly or immediately to mitigate these problems , but the
little directly or immediately to mitigate these problems , but the
experience served to demonstrate the interconnection of seemingly
remote environmental factors and made more obvious the reasons
businesses have to take issues such as climate change seriously . 
Even if you are in no danger – unlike Lohachara , the first inhabited
island to be wiped off the face of the Earth by global warming in
2006 – you ’ ll eventually be affected by environmental issues . So
build them into your thinking when making future financial
projections , if only to state , for example ,  ‘ these plans are based on
the assumption that the weather will be no more extreme than in
the past fifty years ’  . 
Pay particular attention to any outside factors that can
have a significant effect on sales revenue – demand or price
pressures ; cost or availability of materials and key services ; 
labour costs , rents , taxes and exchange rates . 
Making Regular Revisions
Luca Paccioli , who wrote the world ’ s first accounting book over 500
years ago , claimed that ‘ frequent accounting makes for long
friendships ’  . No doubt he was hoping to sell more copies of his book 
( what author isn ’ t ?  )  , but he could have said much the same about
financial projections . The business world is dynamic , recently to an
alarming degree . Frequently revisit your projections to see if they
still hold good . Unforeseen and unforeseeable events such as the
loss of a major customer or the entry of a new player into the
market can throw plans off course . Sure , you may be able to get
back on track , but that may mean making more changes in the short
term to get to your long-term destination . 
Some managers think revising projections to be a sign of weakness . 
Maynard Keynes , one of the greatest economic gurus of all time and
Maynard Keynes , one of the greatest economic gurus of all time and
a man who made a fortune out of the stock market over the period
of the great depression , summed up the subject neatly :  ‘ When the
facts change , I change my mind .  ’ 
Revisions are one thing ; constant sail trimming is
something quite different . The army maxim – order , counter
order , disorder – is one that holds good here . Rolling quarterly
projections work best , giving the remaining planning period the
once-over while adding a new quarter . That way you always
have at least one full year ’ s horizon to your projection . 