Welcome to Getting Things Done
WELCOME TO A gold mine of insights into strategies for how to have
more energy , be more relaxed , and get a lot more accomplished
with much less effort . If you ' re like me , you like getting things
done and doing them well , and yet you also want to savor life in
ways that seem increasingly elusive if not downright impossible if
you ' re working too hard . This doesn ' t have to be an either-or
proposition . It is possible to be effectively doing while you are
delightfully being , in your ordinary workaday world . 
I think efficiency is a good thing . Maybe what you ' re doing is
important , interesting , or useful ; or maybe it isn ' t but it has to be
done anyway . In the first case you want to get as much return as
you can on your investment of time and energy . In
the second , you want to get on to other things as fast
as you can , without any nagging loose ends . 
And whatever you ' re doing , you ' d probably like to
be more relaxed , confident that whatever you ' re doing
at the moment is just what you need to be doing—that
having a beer with your staff after hours , gazing at your
sleeping child in his or her crib at midnight , answering
the e-mail in front of you , or spending a few informal
minutes with the potential new client after the meeting
is exactly what you ought to be doing , as you ' re doing it . 
Teaching you how to be maximally efficient and
relaxed , whenever you need or want to be , was my main purpose
in writing this book . 
xi
The art of resting
the mind and the
power of
dismissing from it
all care and worry
is probably one of
the secrets of our
great men . 
—Captain ]  . 
A . 
xii
WELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONE
I have searched for a long time , as you may have , for answers
to the questions of what to do , when to do it , and how to do it . 
And after twenty-plus years of developing and applying new
methods for personal and organizational productivity , alongside
years of rigorous exploration in the self-development arena , I can
attest that there is no single , once-and-for-all solution . No software , seminar , cool personal planner , or personal mission statement will simplify your workday or make your choices for you as
you move through your day , week , and life . What ' s more , just
when you learn how to enhance your productivity and decisionmaking at one level , you ' ll graduate to the next accepted batch of
responsibilities and creative goals , whose new challenges will defy
the ability of any simple formula or buzzword-du-jour to get you
what you want , the way you want to get it . 
But if there ' s no single means of perfecting personal organization and productivity , there are things we can do to facilitate
them . As I have personally matured , from year to year , I ' ve found
deeper and more meaningful , more significant things to focus on
and be aware of and do . And I ' ve uncovered simple processes that
we can all learn to use that will vastly improve our ability to deal
proactively and constructively with the mundane realities of the
world . 
What follows is a compilation of more than two decades ' 
worth of discoveries about personal productivity—a guide to
maximizing output and minimizing input , and to doing so in a
world in which work is increasingly voluminous and ambiguous . I
have spent many thousands of hours coaching people " in the
trenches " at their desks , helping them process and organize all of
their work at hand . The methods I have uncovered have proved to
be highly effective in all types of organizations , at every job level , 
across cultures , and even at home and school . After twenty years
of coaching and training some of the world ' s most sophisticated
and productive professionals , I know the world is hungry for these
methods . 
Executives at the top are looking to instill " ruthless execu-
WELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONE
tion " in themselves and their people as a basic standard . They
know , and I know , that behind closed doors , after hours , there
remain unanswered calls , tasks to be delegated , unprocessed issues
from meetings and conversations , personal responsibilities
unmanaged , and dozens of e-mails still not dealt with . Many of
these businesspeople are successful because the crises they solve
and the opportunities they take advantage of are bigger than the
problems they allow and create in their own offices and briefcases . 
But given the pace of business and life today , the equation is in
question . 
On the one hand , we need proven tools that can help people
focus their energies strategically and tactically without letting
anything fall through the cracks . On the other , we need to create
work environments and skills that will keep the most invested
people from burning out due to stress . We need positive workstyle standards that will attract and retain the best and brightest . 
We know this information is sorely needed in organizations . 
It ' s also needed in schools , where our kids are still not being
taught how to process information , how to focus on outcomes , or
what actions to take to make them happen . And for all of us individually , it ' s needed so we can take advantage of all the opportunities we ' re given to add value to our world in a sustainable , 
self-nurturing way . 
The power , simplicity , and effectiveness of what I ' m talking about
in Getting Things Done are best experienced as experiences , in real
time , with real situations in your real world . Necessarily , the book
must put the essence of this dynamic art of workflow management and personal productivity into a linear format . I ' ve tried
to organize it in such a way as to give you both the inspiring bigpicture view and a taste of immediate results as you go along . 
The book is divided into three parts . Part 1 describes the
whole game , providing a brief overview of the system and an
explanation of why it ' s unique and timely , and then presenting the
basic methodologies themselves in their most condensed and
xiii
xiv
WELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONE
basic form . Part 2 shows you how to implement the system . 
It ' s your personal coaching , step by step , on the nitty-gritty application of the models . Part 3 goes even deeper , describing the
subtler and more profound results you can expect when you incorporate the methodologies and models into your work and your
life . 
I want you to hop in . I want you to test this stuff out , even
challenge it . I want you to find out for yourself that what I promise is not only possible but instantly accessible to you personally . 
And I want you to know that everything I propose is easy to do . It
involves no new skills at all . You already know how to focus , how
to write things down , how to decide on outcomes and actions , and
how to review options and make choices . You ' ll validate that
many of the things you ' ve been doing instinctively and intuitively
all along are right . I ' ll give you ways to leverage those basic skills
into new plateaus of effectiveness . I want to inspire you to put all
this into a new behavior set that will blow your mind . 
Throughout the book I refer to my coaching and seminars
on this material . I ' ve worked as a " management consultant " for
the last two decades , alone and in small partnerships . My work
has consisted primarily of doing private productivity coaching
and conducting seminars based on the methods presented here . I 
( and my colleagues ) have coached more than a thousand individuals , trained hundreds of thousands of professionals , and delivered many hundreds of public seminars ; This is the background
from which I have drawn my experience and examples . 
The promise here was well described by a client of mine who
wrote ,  " When I habitually applied the tenets of this program it
saved my life .  .  . when I faithfully applied them , it changed my life . 
This is a vaccination against day-to-day fire-fighting ( the socalled urgent and crisis demands of any given workday ) and an
antidote for the imbalance many people bring upon themselves .  " 
Getting Things Done
part
The Art of Getting
Things Done
A New Practice for a New Reality
IT ' S POSSIBLE FOR a person to have an overwhelming number of
things to do and still function productively with a clear head and a
positive sense of relaxed control . That ' s a great way to live and
work , at elevated levels of effectiveness and efficiency . It ' s also
becoming a critical operational style required of successful and
high-performing professionals . You already know how to do
everything necessary to achieve this high-performance state . If
you ' re like most people , however , you need to apply these skills in
a more timely , complete , and systematic way so you can get on top
of it all instead of feeling buried . And though the
method and the techniques I describe in this book
are immensely practical and based on common sense , 
most people will have some major work habits that
must be modified before they can implement this
system . The small changes required—changes in the
way you clarify and organize all the things that command your attention—could represent a significant
shift in how you approach some key aspects of your day-to-day
work . Many of my clients have referred to this as a significant
paradigm shift . 
The methods I present here are all based on two key objectives :  ( 1 ) capturing all the things that need to get done—now , later , 
someday , big , little , or in between—into a logical and trusted system outside of your head and off your mind ; and ( 2 ) disciplining
yourself to make front-end decisions about all of me " inputs " you
3
Anxiety is caused
by a lack of control , 
organization , 
preparation , and
action .  
. —David
4
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
let into your life so that you will always have a plan for " next
actions " that you can implement or renegotiate at any moment . 
This book offers a proven method for this kind of highperformance workflow management . It provides good tools , tips , 
techniques , and tricks for implementation . As you ' ll discover , the
principles and methods are instantly usable and applicable to
everything you have to do in your personal as well as your professional life .  * You can incorporate , as many others have before you , 
what I describe as an ongoing dynamic style of operating in your
work and in your world . Or , like still others , you can simply use
this as a guide to getting back into better control when you feel
you need to . 
The Problem : New Demands , 
Insufficient Resources
Almost everyone I encounter these days feels he or she has too
much to handle and not enough time to get it all done . In the
course of a single recent week , I consulted with a partner in a
major global investment firm who was concerned that the new
corporate-management responsibilities he was being offered
would stress his family commitments beyond the limits ; and with
a midlevel human-resources manager trying to stay on top of her
150-plus e-mail requests per day fueled by the goal of doubling
the company ' s regional office staff from eleven hundred to two
thousand people in one year , all as she tried to protect a social life
for herself on the weekends . 
A paradox has emerged in this new millennium : people have 
* I consider " work ,  " in its most universal sense , as meaning anything that you
want or need to be different than it currently is . Many people make a distinction between " work " and " personal life ,  " but I don ' t : to me , weeding the garden
or updating my will is just as much " work " as writing this book or coaching a
client . All the methods and techniques in this book are applicable across that
life / work spectrum—to be effective , they need to be . 
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
enhanced quality of life , but at the same time they are adding to
their stress levels by taking on more than they have resources to
handle . It ' s as though their eyes were bigger than their stomachs . 
And most people are to some degree frustrated and perplexed
about how to improve the situation . 
Work No Longer Has Clear Boundaries
A major factor in the mounting stress level is that the
actual nature of our jobs has changed much more dramatically and rapidly than have our training for and
our ability to deal with work . In just the last half of
the twentieth century , what constituted " work " in the
industrialized world was transformed from assemblyline , make-it and move-it kinds of activity to what
Peter Drucker has so aptly termed " knowledge work .  " 
In the old days , work was self-evident . Fields
were to be plowed , machines tooled , boxes packed , 
cows milked , widgets cranked . You knew what work had to be
done—you could see it . It was clear when the work was finished , 
or not finished . 
Now , for many of us , there are no edges to most of our projects . Most people I know have at least half a dozen things they ' re
trying to achieve right now , and even if they had the
rest of their lives to try , they wouldn ' t be able to finish
these to perfection . You ' re probably faced with the
same dilemma . How good could that conference
potentially be ? How effective could the training program be , or the structure of your executives ' compensation package ? How inspiring is the essay you ' re
writing ? How motivating the staff meeting ? How
functional the reorganization ? And a last question : 
How much available data could be relevant to doing those projects " better "  ? The answer is , an infinite amount , easily accessible , 
or at least potentially so , through the Web . 
On another front , the lack of edges can create more work
5
Time is the
quality of nature
that keeps events
from happening all
at once . Lately it
doesn ' t seem to be
working . 
—Anonymous
Almost every
project could be
done better , and an
infinite quantity of
information is now
available that could
make that happen . 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
for everyone . Many of today ' s organizational outcomes require
cross-divisional communication , cooperation , and engagement . 
Our individual office silos are crumbling , and with them is going
the luxury of not having to read cc ' d e-mails from the marketing
department , or from human resources , or from some ad hoc , dealwith-a-certain-issue committee . 
Our Jobs Keep Changing
The disintegrating edges of our projects and our work in general
would be challenging enough for anyone . But now we must add
to that equation the constantly shifting definition of our jobs . I
often ask in my seminars ,  " Which of you are doing only what you
were hired to do ?  " Seldom do I get a raised hand . As amorphous
as edgeless work may be , if you had the chance to stick with some
specifically described job long enough , you ' d probably figure out
what you needed to do—how much , at what level—to stay
sane . 
But few have that luxury anymore , for two reasons : 
We can never
really be prepared
for that which is
wholly new . We
have to adjust , •
ourselves , and
every radical
adjustment is a
crisis in selfesteem : we undergo
a test , we have to
prove ourselves . It
needs subordinate
self-confidence to
face drastic change
without inner
trembling . 
—Eric
Hoffer
1 | The organizations we ' re involved with seem to
be in constant morph mode , with ever-changing
goals , products , partners , customers , markets , 
technologies , and owners . These all , by necessity , shake up structures , forms , roles , and
responsibilities . 
2 | The average professional is more of a free agent
these days than ever before , changing careers as
often as his or her parents once changed jobs . 
Even fortysomethings and fiftysomethings hold
to standards of continual growth . Their aims are
just more integrated into the mainstream now , 
covered by the catchall " professional , management , and executive development " —which simply means they won ' t keep doing what they ' re
doing for any extended period of time . 
6
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
Little seems clear for very long anymore , as far as what our
work is and what or how much input may be relevant
to doing it well . We ' re allowing in huge amounts of
information and communication from the outer
world and generating an equally large volume of
ideas and agreements with ourselves and others from
our inner world . And we haven ' t been well equipped to deal with
this huge number of internal and external commitments . 
The Old Models and Habits Are Insufficient
Neither our standard education , nor traditional time-management
models , nor the plethora of organizing tools available , such as
personal notebook planners , Microsoft Outlook , or Palm personal digital assistants ( PDAs )  , has given us a viable means of
meeting the new demands placed on us . If you ' ve tried to use any
of these processes or tools , you ' ve probably found
them unable to accommodate the speed , complexity , 
and changing priority factors inherent in what you
are doing . The ability to be successful , relaxed , and in
control during these fertile but turbulent times
demands new ways of thinking and working . There
is a great need for new methods , technologies , and
work habits to help us get on top of our world . 
The traditional approaches to time management and personal organization were useful in their time . They provided helpful reference points for a workforce that was just emerging from
an industrial assembly-line modality into a new kind of work that
included choices about what to do and discretion about when to
do it . When " time " itself turned into a work factor , personal calendars became a key work tool .  ( Even as late as the 1980s many
professionals considered having a pocket Day-Timer the essence
of being organized , and many people today think of their calendar
as the central tool for being in control .  ) Along with discretionary
time also came the need to make good choices about what to do .  
 " ABC " priority codes and daily " to-do " lists were key techniques
7
The burner I go , 
the behinder I get . 
—Anonymous
The winds and
waves are always
on the side of the
ablest navigators . 
—Edward Gibbon
8
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
that people developed to help them sort through their choices in
some meaningful way . If you had the freedom to decide what to
do , you also had the responsibility to make good choices , given
your " priorities .  " 
What you ' ve probably discovered , at least at some level , is
that a calendar , though important , can really effectively manage
only a small portion of what you need to organize . And daily
to-do lists and simplified priority coding have proven inadequate
to deal with the volume and variable nature of the average professional ' s workload . More and more people ' s jobs are made up of
dozens or even hundreds of e-mails a day , with no latitude left to
ignore a single request , complaint , or order . There are few people
who can ( or even should ) expect to code everything an " A ,  " a " B ,  " 
or a " C " priority , or who can maintain some predetermined list of
to-dos that the first telephone call or interruption from their boss
won ' t totally undo . 
The " Big Picture " vs . the Nitty-Gritty
At the other end of the spectrum , a huge number of business
books , models , seminars , and gurus have championed the " bigger
view " as the solution to dealing with our complex world . Clarifying major goals and values , so the thinking goes , gives order , 
meaning , and direction to our work . In practice , however , the
well-intentioned exercise of values thinking too often does not
achieve its desired results . I have seen too many of these efforts
fail , for one or more of the following three reasons : 
1 | There is too much distraction at the day-to-day , hour-tohour level of commitments to allow for appropriate focus on
the higher levels . 
2 | Ineffective personal organizational systems create huge subconscious resistance to undertaking even bigger projects and
goals that will likely not be managed well , and that will in
turn cause even more distraction and stress . 
3 | When loftier levels and values actually are clarified , it raises
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
the bar of our standards , making us notice that
much more that needs changing . We are already
having a serious negative reaction to the overwhelming number of things we have to do . And
what created much of the work that ' s on those
lists in the first place ? Our values ! 
Focusing on values
does not simplify
your life . It gives
meaning and
direction—and a
lot
more complexity . 
Focusing on primary outcomes and values is a critical exercise , certainly . But it does not mean there is less to do , or fewer
challenges in getting the work done . Quite the contrary : it just
ups the ante in the game , which still must be played day to day . 
For a human-resources executive , for example , deciding to deal
with quality-of-work-life issues in order to attract and keep key
talent does not make things simpler . 
There has been a missing piece in our new culture of knowledge work : a system with a coherent set of behaviors and tools
that functions effectively at the level at which work really happens . It must incorporate the results of big-picture thinking
as well as the smallest of open details . It must manage multiple tiers of priorities . It must maintain control over hundreds
of new inputs daily . It must save a lot more time and effort than
are needed to maintain it . It must make it easier to get things
done . 
The Promise : The " Ready State " 
of the Martial Artist
Reflect for a moment on what it actually might be like if your personal management situation were totally under control , at all levels and at all times . What if you could dedicate fully 100 percent
of your attention to whatever was at hand , at your own choosing , 
with no distraction ? 
It is possible . There is a way to get a grip on it all , stay
relaxed , and get meaningful things done with minimal effort , 
9
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
Life is denied by
lack of attention , 
whether it be to
cleaning windows
or trying to write
a masterpiece .  . 
—
Nadia
Boulanger
Your ability to
generate power is
directly proportional
to your ability to
relax . 
across the whole spectrum of your life and work . You
can experience what the martial artists call a " mind
like water " and top athletes refer to as the " zone ,  " 
within the complex world in which you ' re engaged . 
In fact , you have probably already been in this state
from time to time . 
It ' s a condition of working , doing , and being in
which the mind is clear and constructive things are
happening . It ' s a state that is accessible by everyone , 
and one that is increasingly needed to deal effectively
with the complexity of life in the twenty-first century . 
More and more it will be a required condition for
high-performance professionals who wish to maintain
balance and a consistent positive output in their work . 
World-class rower Craig Lambert has described how
it feels in Mind Over Water ( Houghton Miffin , 1998 )  : 
10
Rowers have a word for this frictionless state : swing .  .  .  . Recall
the pure joy of riding on a backyard swing : an easy cycle of
motion , the momentum coming from the swing itself . The swing
carries us ; we do not force it . We pump our legs to drive our arc
higher , but gravity does most of the work . We are not so much
swinging as being swung . The boat swings you . The shell wants
to move fast : Speed sings in its lines and nature . Our job is
simply to work with the shell , to stop holding it back with our
thrashing struggles to go faster . Trying too hard sabotages boat
speed . Trying becomes striving and striving undoes itself Social
climbers strive to be aristocrats but their efforts prove them no
such thing . Aristocrats do not strive ; they have already arrived . 
Swing is a state of arrival . 
The " Mind Like Water " Simile
In karate there is an image that ' s used to define the position of
perfect readiness :  " mind like water .  " Imagine throwing a pebble
into a still pond . How does the water respond ? The answer is , 
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
totally appropriately to the force and mass of the
input ; then it returns to calm . It doesn ' t overreact or
underreact . 
The power in a karate punch comes from speed , 
not muscle ; it comes from a focused " pop " at the end
of the whip . That ' s why petite people can learn to
break boards and bricks with their hands : it doesn ' t
take calluses or brute strength , just the ability to generate a focused thrust with speed . But a tense muscle is a slow one . 
So the high levels of training in the martial arts teach and demand
balance and relaxation as much as anything else . Clearing the
mind and being flexible are key . 
Anything that causes you to overreact or underreact can control you , and often does . Responding
inappropriately to your e-mail , your staff , your projects , your unread magazines , your thoughts about
what you need to do , your children , or your boss will
lead to less effective results than you ' d like . Most
people give either more or less attention to things
than they deserve , simply because they don ' t operate
with a " mind like water .  " 
Can You Get into Your " Productive State " 
When Required ? 
Think about the last time you felt highly productive . 
You probably had a sense of being in control ; you
were not stressed out ; you were highly focused on
what you were doing ; time tended to disappear 
( lunchtime already ?  )  ; and you felt you were making
noticeable progress toward a meaningful outcome . 
Would you like to have more such experiences ? 
And if you get seriously far out of that
state—and start to feel out of control , stressed
out , unfocused , bored , and stuck—do you have the
ability to get yourself back into it ? That ' s where the
11
If your mind is
empty , it is always
ready for anything ; 
it is open to
everything . 
—Sbunryu Suzuki
Anything that
causes you to
overreact or
underreact can
control you , and
often does . 
There is one thing
we can do , and the
happiest people are
those who can do
it to the limit of
their ability . We
can be completely
present . We can
be all here . We
can .  .  . give all
our attention to
the opportunity
before us . 
—
Mark
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
methodology of Getting Things Done will have the greatest impact
on your life , by showing you how to get back to " mind like water ,  " 
with all your resources and faculties functioning at a maximum level . 
The Principle : Dealing Effectively
with Internal Commitments
A basic truism I have discovered over twenty years of coaching
and training is that most of the stress people experience comes
from inappropriately managed commitments they make or
accept . Even those who are not consciously " stressed out " will
invariably experience greater relaxation , better focus , and
increased productive energy when they learn more effectively to
control the " open loops " of their lives . 
You ' ve probably made many more agreements with yourself
than you realize , and every single one of them-big or little—is
being tracked by a less-than-conscious part of you . These are the 
 " incompletes ,  " or " open loops ,  " which I define as anything pulling
at your attention that doesn ' t belong where it is , the way it is . 
Open loops can include everything from really big to-do items
like " End world hunger " to the more modest " Hire new assistant " 
to the tiniest task such as " Replace electric pencil sharpener .  " 
It ' s likely that you also have more internal commitments currently in play than you ' re aware of . Consider how many things you
feel even the smallest amount of responsibility to
change , finish , handle , or do something about . You
have a commitment , for instance , to deal in some
way with every new communication landing in your
e-mail , on your voice-mail , and in your in-basket . 
And surely there are numerous projects that you
sense need to be defined in your areas of responsibility , as well as goals and directions to be clarified , a
career to be managed , and life in general to be kept in balance . 
You have accepted some level of internal responsibility for every12
Anything that does
not belong where it
is , the way it is , is
an " open loop " 
pulling on your
attention . 
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
thing in your life and work that represents an open loop of any
sort . 
In order to deal effectively with all of that , you must first
identify and collect all those things that are " ringing your bell " 
in some way , and then plan how to handle them . That may seem
like a simple thing to do , but in practice most people don ' t know
how to do it in a consistent way . 
The Basic Requirements for Managing Commitments
Managing commitments well requires the implementation of
some basic activities and behaviors : 
•First of all , if it ' s on your mind , your mind isn ' t clear . Anything
you consider unfinished in any way must be captured in a trusted
system outside your mind , or what I call a collection bucket , that
you know you ' ll come back to regularly and sort through . 
•Second , you must clarify exactly what your commitment is and
decide what you have to do , if anything , to make progress
toward fulfilling it . 
•Third , once you ' ve decided on all the actions you need to take , 
you must keep reminders of them organized in a system you
review regularly . 
An Important Exercise to Test This Model
I suggest that you write down the project or situation that is most on
your mind at this moment . What most " bugs " you , distracts you , or
interests you , or in some other way consumes a large part of your
conscious attention ? It may be a project or problem that is really 
 " in your face ,  " something you are being pressed to handle , or a
situation you feel you must deal with sooner rather than later . 
Maybe you have a vacation trip coming up that you need to
make some major last-minute decisions about . Or perhaps you
just inherited six million dollars and you don ' t know what to do
with the cash . Whatever . 
13
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
Got it ? Good . Now describe , in a single written sentence , 
your intended successful outcome for this problem or situation . 
In other words , what would need to happen for you to check
this " project " off as " done "  ? It could be as simple as " Take the
Hawaii vacation ,  "  " Handle situation with customer X ,  "  " Resolve
college situation with Susan ,  "  " Clarify new divisional management structure ,  " or " Implement new investment strategy .  " All
clear ? Great . 
Now write down the very next physical action required to move
the situation forward . If you had nothing else to do in your life but
get closure on this , where would you go right now , and what visible action would you take ? Would you pick up a phone and make
a call ? Go to your computer and write an e-mail ? Sit down with
pen and paper and brainstorm about it ? Talk face-to-face with
your spouse , your secretary , your attorney , or your boss ? Buy nails
at the hardware store ? What ? 
Got the answer to that ? Good . 
Was there any value for you in these two minutes of thinking ? If you ' re like the vast majority of people who complete that
drill during my seminars , you ' ll be experiencing at
least a tiny bit of enhanced control , relaxation , and
focus . You ' ll also be feeling more motivated to actually do something about that situation you ' ve merely 
been thinking about till now . Imagine that motivation magnified a thousandfold , as a way to live and
work . 
If anything at all positive happened for you in this little exercise , think about this : What changed ? What happened to create that
improved condition within your own experience ? The situation itself
is no further along , at least in the physical world . It ' s certainly not
finished yet . What probably happened is that you acquired a clearer
definition of the outcome desired and the next action required . 
But what created that ? The answer is , thinking . Not a lot , just
enough to solidify your commitment and the resources required
to fulfill it . 
14
Think like a man
of action , act like a
man of thought .  ' 
—Henry Bergson
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
The Real Work of Knowledge Work
Welcome to the real-life experience of " knowledge work ,  " and a
profound operational principle : You have to think about your stuff
more than you realize but not as much as you ' re afraid you might . As
Peter Drucker has written ,  " In knowledge work .  .  . 
the task is not given ; it has to be determined .  ' What
are the expected results from this work ?  ' is .  .  . the
key question in making knowledge workers productive . And it is a question that demands risky decisions . There is usually no right answer ; there are
choices instead . And results have to be clearly specified , if productivity is to be achieved .  " 
Most people have a resistance to initiating the burst of
energy that it will take to clarify the real meaning , for them , of
something they have let into their world , and to decide what they
need to do about it . We ' re never really taught that we have to
think about our work before we can do it ; much of our daily
activity is already defined for us by the undone and unmoved
things staring at us when we come to work , or by the family to be
fed , the laundry to be done , or the children to be dressed at home . 
Thinking in a concentrated manner to define desired outcomes is
something few people feel they have to do . But in truth , outcome
thinking is one of the most effective means available for making
wishes reality . 
Why Things Are on Your Mind
Most often , the reason something is " on your mind " is that you
want it to be different than it currently is , and yet : 
• you haven ' t clarified exactly what the intended outcome is ; 
• you haven ' t decided what the very next physical action step is ; 
and / or
• you haven ' t put reminders of the outcome and the action
required in a system you trust . 
15
The ancestor of
every action is a
thought . 
—Ralph
Waldo
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
That ' s why it ' s on your mind . Until those thoughts have
been clarified and those decisions made , and the resulting data
has been stored in a system that you absolutely know
you will think about as often as you need to , your
brain can ' t give up the job . You can fool everyone
else , but you can ' t fool your own mind . It knows
whether or not you ' ve come to the conclusions you
need to , and whether you ' ve put the resulting outcomes and action reminders in a place that can be
trusted to resurface appropriately within your conscious mind . If you haven ' t done those things , it
won ' t quit working overtime . Even if you ' ve already
decided on the next step you ' ll take to resolve a problem , your mind can ' t let go until and unless you write yourself
a reminder in a place it knows you will , without fail , look . It
will keep pressuring you about that untaken next step , usually
when you can ' t do anything about it , which will just add to your
stress . 
16
Your Mind Doesn ' t Have a Mind of Its Own
At least a portion of your mind is really kind of stupid , in an interesting way . If it had any innate intelligence , it would remind you of the
things you needed to do only when you could do something about them . 
Do you have a flashlight somewhere with dead batteries in
it ? When does your mind tend to remind you that you need new
batteries ? When you notice the dead ones ! That ' s not very smart . 
If your mind had any innate intelligence , it would remind you
about those dead batteries only when you passed live ones in a
store . And ones of the right size , to boot . 
Between the time you woke up today and now , did you think
of anything you needed to do that you still haven ' t done ? Have
you had that thought more than once ? Why ? It ' s a waste of time
and energy to keep thinking about something that you make no
progress on . And it only adds to your anxieties about what you
should be doing and aren ' t . 
This constant , 
unproductive
preoccupation with
all the things we
have to do is the
single largest
consumer of time
and energy . 
—Kerry
CHAPTER 1 [ A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
It seems that most people let their minds run a lot of the
show , especially where the too-much-to-do syndrome is concerned . You ' ve probably given over a lot of your 
 " stuff ,  " a lot of your open loops , to an entity on your
inner committee that is incapable of dealing with
those things effectively the way they are—your mind . 
The Transformation of " Stuff " 
Here ' s how I define " stuff "  : anything you have allowed into your
psychological or physical world that doesn ' t belong where it is , but
for which you haven ' t yet determined the desired outcome and the
next action step . The reason most organizing systems
haven ' t worked for most people is that they haven ' t
yet transformed all the " stuff " they ' re trying to organize . As long as it ' s still " stuff ,  " it ' s not controllable . 
Most of the to-do lists I have seen over the years 
( when people had them at all ) were merely listings of 
 " stuff ,  " not inventories of the resultant real work that
needed to be done . They were partial reminders of a
lot of things that were unresolved and as yet untranslated into outcomes and actions—that is , the real outlines and details of what
the list-makers had to " do .  "  
 " Stuff " is not inherently a bad thing . Things that command
our attention , by their very nature , usually show up as " stuff .  " But
once " stuff " comes into our lives and work , we have an inherent
commitment to ourselves to define and clarify its meaning . That ' s
our responsibility as knowledge workers ; if " stuff " were already
transformed and clear , our value , other than physical labor , would
probably not be required . 
At the conclusion of one of my seminars , a senior manager of a
major biotech firm looked back at the to-do lists she had come in
with and said ,  " Boy , that was an amorphous blob of undoability !  " 
That ' s the best description I ' ve ever heard of what passes for organizing lists in most personal systems . The vast majority of people
have been trying to get organized by rearranging incomplete lists of
17
Rule your mind or
it will rule you . 
—
We need to
transform all the 
 " stuff " we ' re trying
to organize into
actionable stuff we
need to do . 
18
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
unclear things ; they haven ' t yet realized how much and what they
need to organize in order to get the real payoff . They need to gather
everything that requires thinking about and then do that thinking if
their organizational efforts are to be successful . 
The Process : Managing Action
You can train yourself , almost like an athlete , to be faster , more
responsive , more proactive , and more focused in knowledge
work . You can think more effectively and manage the results
with more ease and control . You can minimize the loose ends
across the whole spectrum of your work life and personal life
and get a lot more done with less effort . And you can make frontend decision-making about all the " stuff " you collect and create
standard operating procedure for living and working in this new
millennium . 
Before you can achieve any of that , though , you ' ll need to get
in the habit of keeping nothing on your mind . And the way to do
that , as we ' ve seen , is not by managing time , managing information , or managing priorities . After all : 
• you don ' t manage five minutes and wind up with six ; 
• you don ' t manage information overload—otherwise you ' d walk
into a library and die , or the first time you connected to the Web , 
or even opened a phone book , you ' d blow up ; and
• you don ' t manage priorities—you have them . 
Instead , the key to managing all of your " stuff " is managing
your actions . 
Managing Action Is the Prime Challenge
What you do with your time , what you do with information , 
and what you do with your body and your focus relative to your
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITY
priorities—those are the real options to which you must allocate
your limited resources . The real issue is how to make appropriate
choices about what to do at any point in time . The real issue is
how we manage actions . 
That may sound obvious . However , it might amaze you to
discover how many next actions for how many projects and commitments remain undetermined by most people . It ' s
extremely difficult to manage actions you haven ' t
identified or decided on . Most people have dozens of
things that they need to do to make progress on
many fronts , but they don ' t yet know what they are . 
And the common complaint that " I don ' t have time
to ____ "  ( fill in the blank ) is understandable because many projects seem overwhelming—and are overwhelming because you
can ' t do a project at all ! You can only do an action related to it . 
Many actions require only a minute or two , in the appropriate
context , to move a project forward . 
In training and coaching thousands of professionals , I have
found that lack of time is not the major issue for them ( though
they themselves may think it is )  ; the real problem is a
lack of clarity and definition about what a project
really is , and what the associated next-action steps
required are . Clarifying things on the front end , 
when they first appear on the radar , rather than on
the back end , after trouble has developed , allows
people to reap the benefits of managing action . 
The Value of a Bottom-Up Approach
I have discovered over the years the practical value of working on
personal productivity improvement from the bottom up , starting
with the most mundane , ground-floor level of current activity and
commitments . Intellectually , the most appropriate way ought to be
to work from the top down , first uncovering personal and corporate missions , then defining critical objectives , and finally focusing on the details of implementation . The trouble is , however , 
19
The beginning
is half of every
action . 
—Greek
Things rarely get
stuck because of
lack of time . They get
stuck because the
doing of them has
not been defined . 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
that most people are so embroiled in commitments on a day-today level that their ability to focus successfully on the larger horizon is seriously impaired . Consequently , a bottom-up approach is
usually more effective . 
Getting current on and in control of what ' s in your in-basket
and on your mind right now , and incorporating practices that can
help you stay that way , will provide the best means of broadening
your horizons . A creative , buoyant energy will be unleashed that
will better support your focus on new heights , and your confidence
will increase to handle what that creativity produces . An immediate sense of freedom , release , and inspiration naturally comes to
people who roll up their sleeves and implement this process . 
You ' ll be better equipped to undertake higher-focused
thinking when your tools for handling the resulting actions
for implementation are part of your ongoing operational style . 
There are more meaningful things to think about than your inbasket , but if your management of that level is not as
efficient as it could be , it ' s like trying to swim in
baggy clothing . 
Many executives I have worked with during the
day to clear the decks of their mundane " stuff " have
spent the following evening having a stream of ideas
and visions about their company and their future . 
This happens as an automatic consequence of
unsticking their workflow . 
Horizontal and Vertical Action Management
You need to control commitments , projects , and actions in two
ways—horizontally and vertically .  " Horizontal " control
maintains
coherence across all the activities in which you are involved . 
Imagine your psyche constantly scanning your environment like
police radar ; it may land on any of a thousand different items that
invite or demand your attention during any twenty-four-hour
period : the drugstore , the housekeeper , your aunt Martha , the
strategic plan , lunch , a wilting plant in the office , an upset cus20
Vision is not
enough ; it must be
combined with
venture . It is not
enough to stare up
the steps ; we must
step up the stairs . 
—Vaclav Havel
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY
tomer , shoes that need shining . You have to buy stamps , deposit
that check , make the hotel reservation , cancel a staff meeting , see
a movie tonight . You might be surprised at the volume of things
you actually think about and have to deal with just in one day . You
need a good system that can keep track of as many of them as possible , supply required information about them on demand , and
allow you to shift your focus from one thing to the next quickly
and easily .  
 " Vertical " control , in contrast , manages thinking up and
down the track of individual topics and projects . For example , 
your inner " police radar " lands on your next vacation as you and
your spouse talk about it over dinner—where and when you ' ll go , 
what you ' ll do , how to prepare for the trip , and so on . Or you and
your boss need to make some decisions about the new departmental reorganization you ' re about to launch . Or you just need to
get your thinking up to date on the customer you ' re about to call . 
This is " project planning " in the broad sense . It ' s focusing in on a
single endeavor , situation , or person and fleshing out whatever
ideas , details , priorities , and sequences of events may be required
for you to handle it , at least for the moment . 
The goal for managing horizontally and vertically is the
same : to get things off your mind and get things done . Appropriate action management lets you feel comfortable and in control as
you move through your broad spectrum of work and life , while
appropriate project focusing gets you clear about and on track
with the specifics needed . 
The Major Change : Getting It All Out of Your Head
There is no real way to achieve the kind of relaxed
control I ' m promising if you keep things only in your
head . As you ' ll discover , the individual behaviors
described in this book are things you ' re already
doing . The big difference between what I do and
what others do is that I capture and organize 100
percent of my " stuff " in and with objective tools at
There is usually an
inverse proportion
between how much
something is on
your mind and how
much it ' s getting
done . 
21
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
hand , not in my mind . And that applies to everything—little or big , 
personal or professional , urgent or not . Everything . 
I ' m sure that at some time or other you ' ve gotten to a place in
a project , or in your life , where you just had to sit down and make a
list . If so , you have a reference point for what I ' m talking about . 
Most people , however , do that kind of list-making drill only when
the confusion gets too unbearable and they just have to do something about it . They usually make a list only about the specific
area that ' s bugging them . But if you made that kind of review a
characteristic of your ongoing life- and work style , and you maintained it across all areas of your life ( not just the most " urgent "  )  , 
you ' d be practicing the kind of " black belt " management style I ' m
describing . 
I try to make intuitive choices based on my
options , instead of trying to think about what those
options are . I need to have thought about all of that
already and captured the results in a trusted way . I
don ' t want to waste time thinking about things more
than once . That ' s an inefficient use of creative energy
and a source of frustration and stress . 
And you can ' t fudge this thinking . Your mind will keep
working on anything that ' s still in that undecided state . But
there ' s a limit to how much unresolved " stuff " it can contain
before it blows a fuse . 
The short-term-memory part of your mind—the part that
tends to hold all of the incomplete , undecided , and unorganized 
 " stuff " —functions much like RAM on a personal computer . Your
conscious mind , like the computer screen , is a focusing tool , not a
storage place . You can think about only two or three things at once . 
But the incomplete items are still being stored in the short-termmemory space . And as with RAM , there ' s limited capacity ; there ' s
only so much " stuff " you can store in there and still have that part of
your brain function at a high level . Most people walk around with
their RAM bursting at the seams . They ' re constantly distracted , 
their focus disturbed by their own internal mental overload . 
22
There is no reason
ever to have the
same thought twice , 
unless you like
having that thought . 
CHAPTER 1 I A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITY
For example , in the last few minutes , has your mind wandered off into some area that doesn ' t have anything to do with
what you ' re reading here ? Probably . And most likely where your
mind went was to some open loop , some incomplete situation
that you have some investment in . All that situation did was rear
up out of the RAM part of your brain and yell at you , internally . 
And what did you do about it ? Unless you wrote it down and put
it in a trusted " bucket " that you know you ' ll review appropriately
sometime soon , more than likely you worried about it . Not the
most effective behavior : no progress was made , and
tension was increased . 
The big problem is that your mind keeps
reminding you of things when you can ' t do anything
about them . It has no sense of past or future . That
means that as soon as you tell yourself that you need
to do something , and store it in your RAM , there ' s a
part of you that thinks you should be doing that something all the
time . Everything you ' ve told yourself you ought to do , it thinks
you should be doing right now . Frankly , as soon as you have two
things to do stored in your RAM , you ' ve generated personal
failure , because you can ' t do them both at the same time . This
produces an all-pervasive stress factor whose source can ' t be pinpointed . 
Most people have been in some version of this mental stress
state so consistently , for so long , that they don ' t even know they ' re
in it . Like gravity , it ' s ever-present—so much so that those who
experience it usually aren ' t even aware of the pressure . The only
time most of them will realize how much tension they ' ve been
under is when they get rid of it and notice how different they feel . 
Can you get rid of that kind of stress ? You bet . The rest of
this book will explain how . 
23
It is hard to fight
an enemy who has
outposts in your
head . 
—Sally Kempton
Getting Control of
Your Life : The Five Stages of
Mastering Workflow
THE CORE PROCESS I teach for mastering the art of relaxed and controlled knowledge work is a five-stage method for managing
workflow . No matter what the setting , there are five discrete
stages that we go through as we deal with our work . We ( 1 ) collect
things that command our attention ;  ( 2 ) process what they mean
and what to do about them ; and ( 3 ) organize the results , which we 
( 4 ) review as options for what we choose to ( 5 ) do . 
This constitutes the management of the " horizontal " 
aspect of our lives—incorporating everything that
has our attention at any time . 
The method is straightforward enough in principle , and it is generally how we all go about our work in
any case , but in my experience most people can stand
significantly to improve their handling of each one of
the five stages . The quality of our workflow management is only as good as the weakest link in this fivephase chain , so all the links must be integrated
together and supported with consistent standards . 
Most people have major leaks in their collection
process . Many have collected things but haven ' t
processed or decided what action to take about them . Others make
good decisions about " stuff " in the moment but lose the value of
that thinking because they don ' t efficiently organize the results . Still
others have good systems but don ' t review them consistently
enough to keep them functional . Finally , if any one of these links is
24
The knowledge
that we consider
knowledge proves
itself in action . 
What we now
mean by
knowledge is
information in
action , 
information
focused on results . 
—Peter F . Drucker
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
weak , what someone is likely to choose to do at any point in time
may not be the best option . 
The dynamics of these five stages need to be understood , and
good techniques and tools implemented to facilitate their functioning at an optimal level . I have found it very helpful , if not
essential , to separate these stages as I move through my day . There
are times when I want only to collect input and not decide what to
do with it yet . At other times I may just want to process my notes
from a meeting . Or I may have just returned from a big trip and
need to distribute and organize what I collected and processed on
the road . Then there are times when I want to review the whole
inventory of my work , or some portion of it . And obviously a lot
of my time is spent merely doing something that I need to get
done . 
I have discovered that one of the major reasons many people
haven ' t had a lot of success with " getting organized " is simply that
they have tried to do all five phases at one time . Most , when they
sit down to " make a list ,  " are trying to collect the " most important
things " in some order that reflects priorities and sequences , without setting out many ( or any ) real actions to take . But if you don ' t
decide what needs to be done about your secretary ' s birthday , 
because it ' s " not that important " right now , that open loop will
take up energy and prevent you from having a totally effective , 
clear focus on what is important . 
This chapter explains the five phases in detail . Chapters 4
through 8 provide a step-by-step program for implementing an
airtight system for each phase , with lots of examples and best
practices . 
Collect
It ' s important to know what needs to be collected and how to collect it most effectively so you can process it appropriately . In order
for your mind to let go of the lower-level task of trying to hang on
25
26
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
to everything , you have to know that you have truly captured
everything that might represent something you have to do , and
that at some point in the near future you will process and review
all of it . 
Gathering 100 Percent of the " Incompletes " 
In order to eliminate " holes in the bucket ,  " you need to collect and
gather together placeholders for or representations of all the
things you consider incomplete in your world—that is , anything
personal or professional , big or little , of urgent or minor importance , that you think ought to be different than it currently is and
that you have any level of internal commitment to changing . 
Many of the things you have to do are being collected for you
as you read this . Mail is coming into your mailbox , memos are
being routed to your in-basket , e-mail is being funneled into your
computer , and messages are accumulating on your voice-mail . But
at the same time , you ' ve been " collecting " things in your environment and in your psyche that don ' t belong where they are , the way
they are , for all eternity . Even though it may not be as obviously 
 " in your face " as your e-mail , this " stuff " still requires some kind
of resolution—a loop to be closed , something to be done . Strategy
ideas loitering on a legal pad in a stack on your credenza ,  " dead " 
gadgets in your desk drawers that need to be fixed or thrown away , 
and out-of-date magazines on your coffee table all fall into this
category of " stuff .  " 
As soon as you attach a " should ,  "  " need to ,  " or " ought to " to
an item , it becomes an incomplete . Decisions you still need to
make about whether or not you are going to do something , for
example , are already incompletes . This includes all of your " I ' m
going to " s , where you ' ve decided to do something but haven ' t
started moving on it yet . And it certainly includes all pending and
in-progress items , as well as those things on which you ' ve done
everything you ' re ever going to do except acknowledge that you ' re
finished with them . 
In order to manage this inventory of open loops appropri-
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
ately , you need to capture it into " containers " that hold items in
abeyance until you have a few moments to decide what they are
and what , if anything , you ' re going to do about them . Then you
must empty these containers regularly to ensure that they remain
viable collection tools . 
Basically , everything is already being collected , in the larger
sense . If it ' s not being directly managed in a trusted external system of yours , then it ' s resident somewhere in your psyche . The fact
that you haven ' t put an item in your in-basket doesn ' t mean you
haven ' t got it . But we ' re talking here about making sure that everything you need is collected somewhere other than in your head . 
The Collection Tools
There are several types of tools , both low- and high-tech , that can
be used to collect your incompletes . The following can all serve as
versions of an in-basket , capturing self-generated input as well as
information coming from outside : 
• Physical in-basket
• Paper-based note-taking devices
• Electronic note-taking devices
• Voice-recording devices
• E-mail
The Physical In-Basket
The standard plastic , wood , leather , or wire tray is the most common tool for collecting paper-based materials and anything else
physical that needs some sort of processing : mail , magazines , 
memos , notes , phone slips , receipts—even flashlights with dead
batteries . 
Writing Paper and Pads
Loose-leaf notebooks , spiral binders , and steno and legal pads all
work fine for collecting random ideas , input , things to do , and so
on . Whatever kind fits your taste and needs is fine . 
27
28
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
Electronic Note-Taking
Computers can be used to type in notes for processing later . And
as character-recognition technology advances , a parade of digital
tools designed to capture data continues to be introduced . Handheld devices ( personal digital assistants , or PDAs ) and electronic
legal pads can both be used to collect all kinds of input . 
Auditory Capture
Available auditory devices include answering machines , voicemail , and dictating equipment , such as digital or microcassette
recorders . All of these can be useful for preserving an interim
record of things you need to remember or deal with . 
E-mail
If you ' re wired to the rest of the world through e-mail , your
software contains some sort of holding area for incoming messages and files , where they can be stored until they are viewed , 
read , and processed . Pagers and telephones can capture this kind
of input as well . 
Higher-Tech Devices
Now you can dictate into computers as well as hand-write into
them . As more and more communication is morphed into digital
and wireless formats , it will become easier to capture ideas ( with a
corresponding increase in the amount of data reaching us that we
need to manage !  )  .  
 " Computer !  "  
 " Yes , David ?  "  
 " I need bread .  "  
 " Yes , David .  " 
My needed grocery item has been collected . And as the organizing part of the action-management process is further digitized ,  
 " bread " will automatically be added to my electronic grocery list , 
and maybe even ordered and delivered . 
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
Whether high-tech or low-tech , all of the tools described above
serve as similar in-baskets , capturing potentially useful information , commitments , and agreements for action . You ' re probably
already using some version of most of them . 
The Collection Success Factors
Unfortunately , merely having an in-basket doesn ' t make it functional . Most people do have collection devices of some sort , but
usually they ' re more or less out of control . Let ' s examine the three
requirements to make the collection phase work : 
1 | Every open loop must be in your collection system and out
of your head . 
2 | You must have as few collection buckets as you can get by with . 
3 | You must empty them regularly . 
Get It All Out of Your Head
If you ' re still trying to keep track of too many things in your RAM , 
you likely won ' t be motivated to use and empty your in-baskets
with integrity . Most people are relatively careless about these tools
because they know they don ' t represent discrete , whole systems
anyway : there ' s an incomplete set of things in their in-basket and
an incomplete set in their mind , and they ' re not getting any payoff
from either one , so their thinking goes . It ' s like trying to play pinball on a machine that has big holes in the table , so the balls keep
falling out : there ' s little motivation to keep playing the game . 
These collection tools should become part of your life-style . 
Keep them close by so no matter where you are you can collect a
potentially valuable thought-—think of them as being as indispensable as your toothbrush or your driver ' s license or your glasses . 
Minimize the Number of Collection Buckets
You should have as many in-baskets as you need and as few as you
can get by with . You need this function to be available to you in
29
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
every context , since things you ' ll want to capture may show up
almost anywhere . If you have too many collection zones , however , 
you won ' t be able to process them easily or consistently . 
An excess of collection buckets is seldom a problem on the
high-tech end ; the real improvement opportunity for most people
is on the low-tech side , primarily in the areas of note-taking and
physical in-basket collection . Written notes need to be corralled
and processed instead of left lying embedded in stacks , notebooks , and drawers . Paper materials need to be funneled into
physical in-baskets instead of being scattered over myriad piles in
all the available corners of your world . 
Implementing standard tools for capturing
ideas and input will become more and more critical
as your life and work become more sophisticated . As
you proceed in your career , for instance , you ' ll probably notice that your best ideas about work will not
come to you at work . The ability to leverage that
thinking with good collection devices th
at hand is key to increased productivity . 
30
Empty the Buckets Regularly
The final success factor for collecting should be obvious : if you
don ' t empty and process the " stuff " you ' ve collected , your buckets
aren ' t serving any function other than the storage of amorphous
material . Emptying the bucket does not mean that you have to
finish what ' s in your voice-mail , e-mail , or in-basket ; it just means
you have to take it out of the container , decide what it is and what
should be done with it , and , if it ' s still unfinished , organize it into
your system . You don ' t put it back into " in "  ! Not emptying your
in-basket is like having garbage cans that nobody ever dumps—
you just have to keep buying new ones to hold all your trash . 
In order for you to get " in " to empty , your total actionmanagement system must be in place . Too much " stuff " is left
piled in in-baskets because of a lack of effective systems " downstream " from there . It often seems easier to leave things in " in " 
Men of lofty genius
•when they are
doing the least
•work are the most
active . 
—
Leonar
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
when you know you have to do something about them but can ' t
do it right then . The in-basket , especially for paper and e-mail , is
the best that many people can do in terms of organization—at
least they know that somewhere in there is a reminder of something they still have to do . Unfortunately , that safety net is lost
when the piles get out of control or the inventory of e-mails gets
too extensive to be viewed on one screen . 
When you master the next phase and know how to process
your incompletes easily and rapidly ,  " in " can return to its original
function . Let ' s move on to how to get those in-baskets and e-mail
systems empty without necessarily having to do the work now . 
Process
Teaching them the item-by-item thinking required to get their
collection buckets empty is perhaps the most critical improvement I have made for virtually all the people I ' ve worked with . 
When the head of a major department in a global corporation had
finished processing all her open items with me , she sat back in
awe and told me that though she had been able to relax about
what meetings to go to thanks to her trust in her calendar , she had
never felt that same relief about all the many other aspects of her
job , which we had just clarified together . The actions and information she needed to be reminded of were now identified and
entrusted to a concrete system . 
What do you need to ask yourself ( and answer ) about each
e-mail , voice-mail , memo , or self-generated idea that comes your
way ? This is the component of action management that forms the
basis for your personal organization . Many people try to " get
organized " but make the mistake of doing it with incomplete
batches of " stuff .  " You can ' t organize what ' s incoming—you can
only collect it and process it . Instead , you organize the actions
you ' ll need to take based on the decisions you ' ve made about
what needs to be done . The whole deal—both the processing
and
31
32 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
organizing phases—is captured in the center " trunk " of the
decision-tree model shown here . 
In later chapters , I ' ll coach you in significant detail through
each element of the process . For now , though , I suggest you select
a to-do list or a pile of papers from your in-basket and assess a few
items as we take an overview . 
What Is It ? 
This is not a dumb question . We ' ve talked about " stuff .  " And we ' ve
talked about collection buckets . But we haven ' t discussed what
stuff is and what to do about it . For example , many of the items
that tend to leak out of our personal organizing systems are amorphous forms that we receive from the government or from our
company—do we actually need to do something about them ? And
what about that e-mail from human resources , letting us know
that blah-blah about the blah-blah is now the policy of blah-blah ? 
I ' ve unearthed piles of messages in stacks and desk drawers that
were tossed there because the client didn ' t take just a few seconds
to figure out what in fact the communication or document was
really about . Which is why the next decision is critical . 
Is It Actionable ? 
There are two possible answers for this : YES and NO . 
No Action Required If the answer is NO , there are three possibilities : 
1 | It ' s trash , no longer needed . 
2 | No action is needed now , but something might need to be
done later ( incubate )  . 
3 | The item is potentially useful information that might be
needed for something later ( reference )  . 
These three categories can themselves be managed ; we ' ll get
into that in a later chapter . For now , suffice it to say that you need
33
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
a trash basket and < Del > key for trash , a " tickler " file or calendar
for material that ' s incubating , and a good filing system for reference information . 
Actionable This is the YES group of items , stuff about which
something needs to be done . Typical examples range from
an e-mail requesting your participation in a corporate service
project on such-and-such a date to the notes in your in-basket
from your face-to-face meeting with the group vice president
about a significant new project that involves hiring an outside
consultant . 
Two things need to be determined about each actionable item : 
1 | What " project " or outcome have you committed to ? and
2 | What ' s the next action required ? 
If It ' s About a Project .  .  . You need to capture that outcome on a 
 " Projects " list . That will be the stake in the ground that reminds
you that you have an open loop . A Weekly Review of the list ( see
page 46 ) will bring this item back to you as something that ' s still
outstanding . It will stay fresh and alive in your management system until it is completed or eliminated . 
What ' s the Next Action ? This is the critical question
for anything you ' ve collected ; if you answer it appropriately , you ' ll have the key substantive thing to organize . The " next action " is the next physical , visible
activity that needs to be engaged in , in order to move
the current reality toward completion . 
Some examples of next actions might be : 
34
•Call Fred re tel .  # for the garage he recommended . 
•Draft thoughts for the budget-meeting agenda . 
•Talk to Angela about the filing system we need to set up . 
•Research database-management software on the Web . 
It does not take
much strength to
do things , but it
requires a great
deal of strength to
decide what to do . 
—Elbert
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
These are all real physical activities that need to happen . 
Reminders of these will become the primary grist for the mill of
your personal productivity-management system . 
Do It , Delegate It , or Defer It Once you ' ve decided on the next
action , you have three options : 
1 | Do it . If an action will take less than two minutes , it should
be done at the moment it is defined . 
2 | Delegate it . If the action will take longer than two minutes , 
ask yourself , Am I the right person to do this ? If the answer
is no , delegate it to the appropriate entity . 
3 | Defer it . If the action will take longer than two minutes , and
you are the right person to do it , you will have to defer acting
on it until later and track it on one or more " Next Actions " 
lists . 
Organize
The outer ring of the workflow diagram shows the eight discrete
categories of reminders and materials that will result from your
processing all your " stuff .  " Together they make up a total system
for organizing just about everything that ' s on your plate , or could
be added to it , on a daily and weekly basis . 
For nonactionable items , the possible categories are trash , 
incubation tools , and reference storage . If no action is needed on
something , you toss it ,  " tickle " it for later reassessment , or file it so
you can find the material if you need to refer to it at another time . 
To manage actionable things , you will need a list of projects , storage
or files for project plans and materials , a calendar , a list of reminders of
next actions , and a list of reminders of things you ' re waiting for . 
All of the organizational categories need to be physically
contained in some form . When I refer to " lists ,  " I just mean
some sort of reviewable set of reminders , which could be lists on
35
36 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—ORGANIZING
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
notebook paper or in some computer program or even file folders
holding separate pieces of paper for each item . For instance , the
list of current projects could be kept on a page in a Day Runner ; it
could be a " To Do " category on a PDA ; or it could be in a file
labeled " Projects List .  " Incubating reminders ( such as " after
March 1 contact my accountant to set up a meeting "  ) may be
stored in a paper-based " tickler " file or in a paper- or computerbased calendar program . 
Projects
I define a project as any desired result that requires more than one
action step . This means that some rather small things that you
might not normally call projects are going to be on your " Projects " 
list . The reasoning behind my definition is that if one step won ' t
complete something , some kind of stake needs to be placed in the
ground to remind you that there ' s something still left to do . If
you don ' t have a placeholder to remind you about it , it will slip
back into RAM . Another way to think of this is as a list of open
loops . 
A Partial " Projects " List
Get new staff person on board R & D joint-venture video project
August vacation Produce new training compact disk
Staff off-site retreat Establish next year ' s seminar schedule
Publish book Orchestrate a one-hour keynote
Finalize computer upgrades . presentation
Update will Get proficient with videoconferencing
Finalize budgets access
Finalize new product line Finalize employment agreements
Get comfortable with new contact- Install new backyard lights
management software Establish formal relationships with South
Get reprints of Fortune article American rep
Get a publicist Finalize staff policies and procedures
Finish new orchard planting Get a new living-room chair
37
38
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
Projects do not need to be listed in any particular order , 
whether by size or by priority . They just need to be on a master list
so you can review them regularly enough to ensure that appropriate next actions have been defined for each of them . 
You don ' t actually do a project ; you can only do action steps
related to it . When enough of the right action steps have been
taken , some situation will have been created that matches your
initial picture of the outcome closely enough that you can call
it " done .  " The list of projects is the compilation of finish lines
we put before us , to keep our next actions moving on all tracks
appropriately . 
Project Support Material
For many of your projects , you will accumulate relevant information that you will want to organize by theme or topic or project
name . Your " Projects " list will be merely an index . All of the
details , plans , and supporting information that you may need as
you work on your various projects should be contained in separate
file folders , computer files , notebooks , or binders . 
Support Materials and Reference Files Once you have organized
your project support material by theme or topic , you will probably
find that it is almost identical to your reference material and could
be kept in the same reference file system ( a " Wedding " file
could be kept in the general-reference files , for instance )  . The
only difference is that in the case of active projects , support material may need to be reviewed on a more consistent basis to ensure
that all the necessary action steps are identified . 
I usually recommend that people store their support materials out of sight . If you have a good working reference file system
close enough at hand , you may find that that ' s the simplest way to
organize them . There will be times , though , when it ' ll be more
convenient to have the materials out and instantly in view and
available , especially if you ' re working on a hot project that you
need to check references for several times during the day . File
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
folders in wire standing holders or in stackable trays within easy
reach can be practical for this kind of " pending " paperwork . 
The Next-Action Categories
As the Workflow Diagram makes clear , the next-action decision
is central . That action needs to be the next physical , visible behavior , without exception , on every open loop . 
Any less-than-two-minute actions that you perform , and all
other actions that have already been completed , do not , of course , 
need to be tracked ; they ' re done . What does need to be tracked is
every action that has to happen at a specific time or on a specific
day ( enter these in your calendar )  ; those that need to be done as
soon as they can ( add these to your " Next Actions " lists )  ; and all
those that you are waiting for others to do ( put these on a " Waiting For " list )  . 
Calendar
Reminders of actions you need to take fall into two categories : 
those about things that have to happen on a specific day or time , 
and those about things that just need to get done as soon as possible . Your calendar handles the first type of reminder . 
Three things go on your calendar : 
• time-specific actions ; 
• day-specific actions ; and
• day-specific information . 
Time-Specific Actions This is a fancy name for appointments . 
Often the next action to be taken on a project is attending a meeting that has been set up to discuss it . Simply tracking that on the
calendar is sufficient . 
Day-Specific Actions These are things that you need to do sometime on a certain day , but not necessarily at a specific time . Perhaps
you told Mioko you would call her on Friday to check that the
39
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
report you ' re sending her is OK . She won ' t have the report until
Thursday , and she ' s leaving the country on Saturday , so Friday is
the time window for taking the action—but anytime Friday will
be fine . That should be tracked on the calendar for Friday but not
tied to any particular time slot—it should just go on the day . 
It ' s
useful to have a calendar on which you can note both timespecific and day-specific actions . 
Day-Specific Information The calendar is also the place to keep
track of things you want to know about on specific days—not necessarily actions you ' ll have to take but rather information that may
be useful on a certain date . This might include directions for
appointments , activities that other people ( family or staff ) will be
involved in then , or events of interest . It ' s also helpful to put
short-term " tickler " information here , too , such as a reminder to
call someone after the day they return from a vacation . 
No More " Daily To-Do " Lists Those three things are what go on
the calendar , and nothing else ! I know this is heresy to traditional
time-management training , which has almost universally taught that the " daily to-do list " is key . But
such lists don ' t work , for two reasons . 
First , constant new input and shifting tactical
priorities reconfigure daily work so consistently that
it ' s virtually impossible to nail down to-do items
ahead of time . Having a working game plan as a reference point is always useful , but it must be able to be
renegotiated at any moment . Trying to keep a list in writing on
the calendar , which must then be rewritten on another day if
items don ' t get done , is demoralizing and a waste of time . The 
 " Next Actions " lists I advocate will hold all of those action
reminders , even the most time-sensitive ones . And they won ' t
have to be rewritten daily . 
Second , if there ' s something on a daily to-do list that doesn ' t
absolutely have to get done that day , it will dilute the emphasis on
40
Blessed are the
flexible , for they
shall not be bent
out of shape . 
—
Michael
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
the things that truly do . If I have to call Mioko on Friday because
that ' s the only day I can reach her , but then I add five other , less
important or less time-sensitive calls to my to-do list , when the
day gets crazy I may never call Mioko . My brain will have to take
back the reminder that that ' s the one phone call I won ' t get
another chance at . That ' s not utilizing the system appropriately . 
The way I look at it , the calendar should be sacred territory . If you
write something there , it must get done that day or not at all . The
only rewriting should be for changed appointments . 
The " Next Actions " List ( s ) 
So where do all your action reminders go ? On " Next Actions " 
lists , which , along with the calendar , are at the heart of daily
action-management organization . 
Any longer-than-two-minute , nondelegatable action you
have identified needs to be tracked somewhere .  " Call Jim Smith
re budget meeting ,  "  " Phone Rachel and Laura ' s moms about
sleepaway camp ,  " and " Draft ideas re the annual sales conference " 
are all the kinds of action reminders that need to be kept in appropriate lists , or buckets , to be assessed as options for what we will
do at any point in time . 
If you have only twenty or thirty of these , it may be fine to
keep them all on one list labeled " Next Actions ,  " which you ' ll
review whenever you have any free time . For most of
us , however , the number is more likely to be fifty to
150 . In that case it makes sense to subdivide your 
 " Next Actions " list into categories , such as " Calls " to
make when you ' re at a phone or " Project Head Questions " to be asked at your weekly briefing . 
Nonactionable Items
You need well-organized , discrete systems to handle the items
that require no action as well as the ones that do . No-action systems fall into three categories : trash , incubation , and reference . 
41
Everything should
be made as simple
as possible , but not
simpler . 
—Albert Einstein
42
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
Trash
Trash should be self-evident . Throw away anything that has no
potential future action or reference value . If you leave this stuff
mixed in with other categories , it will seriously undermine the
system . 
Incubation
There are two other groups of things besides trash that require no
immediate action , but this stuff you will want to keep . Here again , 
it ' s critical that you separate nonactionable from actionable items ; 
otherwise you will tend to go numb to your piles , stacks , and lists
and not know where to start or what needs to be done . 
Say you pick up something from a memo , or read an e-mail , 
that gives you an idea for a project you might want to do someday , 
but not now . You ' ll want to be reminded of it again later so you
can reassess the option of doing something about it in the future . 
For example , a brochure arrives in the mail for the upcoming season of your local symphony . On a quick browse , you see that the
program that really interests you is still four months away—too
distant for you to move on it yet ( you ' re not sure what your travel
schedule will be that far out )  , but if you are in town , you ' d like to
go . What should you do about that ? 
There are two kinds of " incubate " systems that could work
for this kind of thing :  " Someday / Maybe " lists and a " tickler " file .  
 " Someday / Maybe " It can be useful and inspiring to maintain an
ongoing list of things you might want to do at some point but not
now . This is the " parking lot " for projects that would be impossible to move on at present but that you don ' t want to forget about
entirely . You ' d like to be reminded of the possibility at regular
intervals . 
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
Typical Partial " Someday / Maybe " List
Get a bass-fishing boat Create promotional videos of staff
Learn Spanish Find Stafford Lyons
Take a watercolor class Get a digital video camera * 
Get a sideboard for the kitchen Northern Italy trip
Build a lap pool Apprentice with my carpenter
Get Kathryn a scooter Spotlight our artwork
Take a balloon ride Build a koi pond
Build a wine cellar Digitize old photos and videos
Take a trip through Montana Have a neighborhood party
Learn Photoshop software capabilities Set up remote-server access at home
Set up a not-for-profit foundation
You ' ll probably have some subcategories in your master 
 " Someday / Maybe " list , such as
•CDs I might want
•Videos to rent
•Books to read
•Wine to taste
•Weekend trips to take
•Things to do with the kids
•Seminars to take
You must review this list periodically if you ' re going to get
the most value from it . I suggest you include a scan of the contents in your Weekly Review ( see page 46 )  .  
 " Tickler " File The most elegant version of holding for review is
the " tickler " file , sometimes also referred to as a " suspended " or 
 " follow-on " file . This is a system that allows you to almost literally
mail something to yourself , for receipt on some designated day in
the future . 
Your calendar can serve the same function . You might
remind yourself on your calendar for March 15 , for example , that
43
44
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
your taxes are due in a month ; or for September 12 , that Swan
Lake will be presented by the Bolshoi at the Civic Auditorium in
six weeks . 
For further details , refer to chapter 7 . 
Reference Material
Many things that come your way require no action but have
intrinsic value as information . You will want to keep and be able
to retrieve these as needed . They can be stored in paper-based or
digital form . 
Paper-based material—anything from the menu for a local
take-out deli to the plans , drawings , and vendor information for a
landscape project—is best stored in efficient physical-retrieval
systems . These can range from pages in a loose-leaf planner or
notebook , for a list of favorite restaurants or the phone numbers
of the members of a school committee , to whole file cabinets
dedicated to the due-diligence paperwork for a corporate merger . 
Electronic storage can include everything from networked
database information to ad hoc reference and archive folders
located in your communication software . 
The most important thing to remember here is that reference should be exactly that—information that can be easily
referred to when required . Reference systems generally take
two forms :  ( 1 ) topic- and area-specific storage , and ( 2 ) generalreference files . The first types usually define themselves in terms
of how they are stored—for example , a file drawer dedicated to
contracts , by date ; a drawer containing only confidential
employee-compensation information ; or a series of cabinets for
closed legal cases that might need to be consulted during future
trials . 
General-Reference Filing The second type of reference system is
one that everyone needs close at hand for storing ad hoc information that doesn ' t belong in some predesignated category . You need
somewhere to keep the instruction manual for your cell phone , 
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
the notes from the meeting about the Smith project , and those
few yen that you didn ' t get to change at the end of your last trip to
Tokyo ( and that you ' ll use when you go back there )  . 
The lack of a good general-reference file can be one of the
biggest bottlenecks in implementing an efficient personal actionmanagement system . If filing isn ' t easy and fast ( and even fun !  )  , 
you ' ll tend to stack things instead of filing them . If your reference
material doesn ' t have a nice clean edge to it , the line between
actionable and nonactionable items will blur , visually and psychologically , and your mind will go numb to the whole business . 
Establishing a good working system for this category of material
is critical to ensuring stress-free productivity ; we will explore it in
detail in chapter 7 . 
Review
It ' s one thing to write down that you need milk ; it ' s another to be
at the store and remember it . Likewise , writing down that you
need to call a friend for the name of an estate attorney is different
from remembering it when you ' re at a phone and have some discretionary time . 
You need to be able to review the whole picture of your life
and work at appropriate intervals and appropriate levels . For most
people the magic of workflow management is realized in the consistent use of the review phase . This is where you take a look at
all your outstanding projects and open loops , at what I call the
10 , 000-foot level ( see page 51 )  , on a weekly basis . It ' s your chance
to scan all the defined actions and options before you , thus radically increasing the efficacy of the choices you make about what
you ' re doing at any point in time . 
What to Review When
If you set up a personal organization system structured as I recommend , with a " Projects " list , a calendar ,  " Next Actions " lists , 
45
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
and a " Waiting For " list , not much will be required to maintain
that system . 
The item you ' ll probably review most frequently is your
calendar , which will remind you about the " hard landscape " for
the day—that is , what things will die if you don ' t do them . This
doesn ' t mean that the things written on there are the most 
 " important " in some grand sense—only that they have to get
done . At at any point in time , knowing what has to get done , and
when , creates a terrain for maneuvering . It ' s a good habit , as soon
as you conclude an action on your calendar ( a meeting , a phone
call , the final draft of a report )  , to check and see what else remains
to be done . 
After checking your calendar , you ' ll most often
turn to your " Next Actions " lists . These hold the
inventory of predefined actions that you can take if
you have any discretionary time during the day . If
you ' ve organized them by context (  " At Home ,  "  " At
Computer ,  "  " In Meeting with George "  )  , they ' ll come
into play only when those contexts are available .  
 " Projects ,  "  " Waiting For ,  " and " Someday / Maybe " lists need
to be reviewed only as often as you think they have to be in order
to stop you from wondering about them . 
Critical Success Factor : The Weekly Review
Everything that might potentially require action must be
reviewed on a frequent enough basis to keep your mind from taking back the job of remembering and reminding . In order to trust
the rapid and intuitive judgment calls that you make about
actions from moment to moment , you must consistently retrench
at some more elevated level . In my experience ( with thousands of
people )  , that translates into a behavior critical for success : the
Weekly Review . 
All of your open loops ( i . e .  , projects )  , active project plans , 
and " Next Actions ,  "  " Agendas ,  "  " Waiting For ,  " and even " Someday / 
Maybe " lists should be reviewed once a week . This also gives you
46
Review your lists as
often as you need
to , to get them off
your mind . 
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
an opportunity to ensure that your brain is clear and
that all the loose strands of the past few days have
been collected , processed , and organized . 
If you ' re like most people , you ' ve found that
things can get relatively out of control during the
course of a few days of operational intensity . That ' s
to be expected . You wouldn ' t want to distract yourself
from too much of the work at hand in an effort to
stay totally " squeaky clean " all the time . But in order
to afford the luxury of " getting on a roll " with confidence , you ' ll probably need to clean house once
a week . 
The Weekly Review is the time to
• Gather and process all your " stuff .  " 
• Review your system . 
• Update your lists . 
• Get clean , clear , current , and complete . 
The affairs of life
embrace a
multitude of
interests , and he
who reasons in any
one of them , 
without consulting
the rest , is a
visionary unsuited
to control the
business of the
world . 
—-James
Fenim
ore
Cooper
Most people don ' t have a really complete system , and they get
no real payoff from reviewing things for just that reason : their
overview isn ' t total . They still have a vague sense that something
may be missing . That ' s why the rewards to be gained from implementing this whole process are at least geometric : the
more complete the system is , the more you ' ll trust it . 
And the more you trust it , the more complete you ' ll
be motivated to keep it . The Weekly Review is a master key to maintaining that standard . 
Most people feel best about their work the week
before their vacation , but it ' s not because of the vacation itself . What do you do the last week before you
leave on a big trip ? You clean up , close up , clarify , and
renegotiate all your agreements with yourself and
others . I just suggest that you do this weekly instead
of yearly . 
47
Most people feel
best about their
work when they ' ve
cleaned up , closed
up , clarified , and
renegotiated all
their agreements
with themselves
and others . Do this
weekly instead of
yearly . 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
Do
The basic purpose of this workflow-management process is to
facilitate good choices about what you ' re doing at any
point in time . At 10 : 33 A . M . Monday , deciding
whether to call Sandy , finish the proposal , or process
your e-mails will always be an intuitive call , but with
the proper preplanning you can feel much more confident about your choices . You can move from hope to
trust in your actions , immediately increasing your
speed and effectiveness . 
Three Models for Making Action Choices
Let ' s assume for a moment that you ' re not resisting any of your 
 " stuff " out of insecurity or procrastination . There will always be a
large list of actions that you are not doing at any given moment . 
So how will you decide what to do and what not to do , and feel
good about both ? 
The answer is , by trusting your intuition . If you have collected , processed , organized , and reviewed all your current commitments , you can galvanize your intuitive judgment with some
intelligent and practical thinking about
your work
and values . 
I have developed three models that will be helpful for you to incorporate in your decision-making
about what to do . They won ' t tell you answers—
whether you call Frederick , e-mail your son at
school , or just go have an informal " how are you ?  " 
conversation with your secretary—but they will assist
you in framing your options more intelligently . And that ' s something that the simple time- and priority-management panaceas
can ' t do . 
Every decision to
act is an intuitive
one . The challenge
is to migrate from
hoping it ' s the right
choice to trusting
it ' s the right choice . 
You have more to
do than you can
possibly do . You
just need to feel
good about your
choices . 
CHAPTER 2 I GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
1 . The Four-Criteria Model for Choosing Actions in the Moment
At 3 : 22 on Wednesday , how do you choose what to do ? There are
four criteria you can apply , in this order : 
1 | Context
2 | Time available
3 | Energy available
4 | Priority
Context A few actions can be done anywhere ( like drafting ideas
about a project with pen and paper )  , but most require a specific
location ( at home , at your office ) or having some productivity tool
at hand , such as a phone or a computer . These are the first factors
that limit your choices about what you can do in the moment . 
Time Available When do you have to do something else } Having a meeting in five minutes would prevent doing many actions
that require more time . 
Energy Available How much energy do you have ? Some actions
you have to do require a reservoir of fresh , creative mental energy . 
Others need more physical horsepower . Some need very little of
either . 
Priority Given your context , time , and energy available , what
action will give you the highest payoff ? You have an hour , you ' re
in your office with a phone and a computer , and your energy is 7 . 3
on a scale of 10 . Should you call the client back , work on the proposal , process your voice-mails and e-mails , or check in with your
spouse to see how his or her day is going ? 
This is where you need to access your intution and begin to
rely on your judgment call in the moment . To explore that concept further , let ' s examine two more models for deciding what ' s 
 " most important " for you to be doing . 
49
50
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
2 . The Threefold Model for Evaluating Daily Work
When you ' re getting things done , or " working " in the universal
sense , there are three different kinds of activities you can be
engaged in : 
• Doing predefined work
• Doing work as it shows up
• Defining your work
Doing Predefined Work When you ' re doing predefined work , 
you ' re working off your " Next Actions " lists—completing tasks
that you have previously determined need to be done , managing
your workflow . You ' re making the calls you need to make , drafting
ideas you want to brainstorm , or preparing a list of things to talk
to your attorney about . 
Doing Work as It Shows Up Often things come up ad hoc—
unsuspected , unforeseen—that you either have to or choose to
respond to as they occur . For example , your partner walks into
your office and wants to have a conversation about the new product launch , so you talk to her instead of doing all the other things
you could be doing . Every day brings surprises—unplanned-for
things that just show up , and you ' ll need to expend at least some
time and energy on many of them . When you follow these leads , 
you ' re deciding by default that these things are more important
than anything else you have to do . 
Defining Your Work Defining your work entails clearing up your
in-basket , your e-mail , your voice-mail , and your meeting notes
and breaking down new projects into actionable steps . As you
process your inputs , you ' ll no doubt be taking care of some lessthan-two-minute actions and tossing and filing numerous things 
( another version of doing work as it shows up )  . A good portion of
this activity will consist of identifying things that need to get
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
done sometime , but not right away . You ' ll be adding to all of your
lists as you go along . 
Once you have defined all your work , you can trust that your
lists of things to do are complete . And your context , time , and
energy available still allow you the option of more than one thing
to do . The final thing to consider is the nature of your work , and
its goals and standards . 
3 . The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your Own Work
Priorities should drive your choices , but most models for determining them are not reliable tools for much of our real work
activity . In order to know what your priorities are , you have to
know what your work is . And there are at least six different perspectives from which to define that . To use an aerospace analogy , 
the conversation has a lot to do with the altitude . 
• 50 , 000 + feet : Life
• 40 , 000 feet : Three- to five-year vision
• 30 , 000 feet : One- to two-year goals
• 20 , 000 feet : Areas of responsibility
• 10 , 000 feet : Current projects
• Runway : Current actions
Let ' s start from the bottom up : 
Runway : Current Actions This is the accumulated list of all the
actions you need to take—all the phone calls you have to make , 
the e-mails you have to respond to , the errands you ' ve got to run , 
and the agendas you want to communicate to your boss and your
spouse . You ' d probably have three hundred to five hundred hours ' 
worth of these things to do if you stopped the world right now
and got no more input from yourself or anyone else . 
10 , 000 Feet : Current Projects Creating many of the actions that
you currently have in front of you are the thirty to one hundred
51
52
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
projects on your plate . These are the relatively short-term outcomes you want to achieve , such as setting up a home computer , 
organizing a sales conference , moving to a new headquarters , and
getting a dentist . 
20 , 000 Feet : Areas of Responsibility You create or accept most of
your projects because of your responsibilities , which for most
people can be defined in ten to fifteen categories . These are the
key areas within which you want to achieve results and maintain
standards . Your job may entail at least implicit commitments
for things like strategic planning , administrative support , staff
development , market research , customer service , or asset management . And your personal life has an equal number of such focus
arenas : health , family , finances , home environment , spirituality , 
recreation , etc . Listing and reviewing these responsibilities gives a
more comprehensive framework for evaluating your inventory of
projects . 
30 , 000 Feet : One- to Two-Year Goals What you want to be experiencing in the various areas of your life and work one to two years
from now will add another dimension to defining your work . 
Often meeting the goals and objectives of your job will require a
shift in emphasis of your job focus , with new areas of responsibility emerging . At this horizon personally , too , there probably are
things you ' d like to accomplish or have in place , which could add
importance to certain aspects of your life and diminish others . 
40 , 000 Feet : Three- to Five-Year Vision Projecting three to five
years into the future generates thinking about bigger categories : 
organization strategies , environmental trends , career and lifetransition circumstances . Internal factors include longer-term
career , family , and financial goals and considerations . Outerworld issues could involve changes affecting your job and organization , such as technology , globalization , market trends , and
CHAPTER 2 | GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE : THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW
competition . Decisions at this altitude could easily change what
your work might look like on many levels . 
50 , 000 + Feet Life This is the " big picture " view . Why does your
company exist ? Why do you exist ? The primary purpose for anything provides the core definition of what its " work " really is . It is
the ultimate job description . All the goals , visions , objectives , 
projects , and actions derive from this , and lead toward it . 
These altitude analogies are somewhat arbitrary , and in real
life the important conversations you will have about your focus
and your priorities may not fit exactly to one horizon or another . 
They can provide a useful framework , however , to remind you of
the multilayered nature of your " job " and resulting commitments
and tasks . 
Obviously , many factors must be considered before you feel
comfortable that you have made the best decision about what to
do and when .  " Setting priorities " in the traditional sense of focusing on your long-term goals and values , though obviously a necessary core focus , does not provide a practical framework for a vast
majority of the decisions and tasks you must engage in day to day . 
Mastering the flow of your work at all the levels you experience
that work provides a much more holistic way to get things done , 
and feel good about it . 
Part 2 of this book will provide specific coaching about how
to use these three models for making action choices , and how the
best practices for collecting , processing , planning , organizing , and
reviewing all contribute to your greatest success with them . 
53
Getting Projects Creatively
Under Way : The Five Phases of
Project Planning
You ' ve got to think
about the big
things while you ' re
doing small things , 
so that all the
small things go in
the right direction . 
—Alvin Toffler
THE KEY INGREDIENTS of relaxed control are ( 1 ) clearly
defined outcomes ( projects ) and the next actions
required to move them toward closure , and ( 2 ) reminders placed in a trusted system that is reviewed
regularly . This is what I call horizontal focus . Although it may seem simple , the actual application of
the process can create profound results . 
Enhancing " Vertical " Focus
Horizontal focus is all you ' ll need in most situations , most of the
time . Sometimes , however , you may need greater rigor and focus
to get a project under control , to identify a solution , 
or to ensure that all the right steps have been determined . This is where vertical focus comes in . Knowing how to think productively in this more " vertical " 
way and how to integrate the results into your personal system is the second powerful behavior set
needed for knowledge work . 
This kind of thinking doesn ' t have to be elaborate . Most of the thinking you ' ll need to do is informal , what I call back-of-the-envelope planning—the kind of
thing you do literally on the back of an envelope in a coffee shop
with a colleague as you ' re hashing out the agenda and structure of
54
The goal is to get
projects and
situations off your
mind , but not to
lose any potentially
useful ideas . 
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
a sales presentation . In my experience this tends to be the most
productive kind of planning you can do in terms of your output
relative to the energy you put into it . True , every once in a while
you may need to develop a more formal structure or plan to clarify
components , sequences , or priorities . And more detailed outlines
will also be necessary to coordinate more complex situations—if
teams need to collaborate about various project pieces , for example , or if business plans need to be drafted to convince an investor
you know what you ' re doing . But as a general rule , you can be
pretty creative with nothing more than an envelope and a pencil . 
The greatest need I ' ve seen in project thinking in the professional world is not for more formal models ; usually the people
who need those models already have them or can get them as part
of an academic or professional curriculum . Instead , I ' ve found
the biggest gap to be the lack of a project-focusing model for 
 " the rest of us .  " We need ways to validate and support our thinking , no matter how informal . Formal planning sessions and highhorsepower planning tools ( such as project software ) can certainly
be useful , but too often the participants in a meeting will need to
have another meeting—a back-of-the-envelope session—to
actually get a piece of work fleshed out and under control . More formal and structured meetings also tend to skip over at least one
critical issue , such as why the project is being done in the first
place . Or they don ' t allow adequate time for brainstorming , the
development of a bunch of ideas nobody ' s ever thought about that
would make the project more interesting , more profitable , or just
more fun . And finally , very few such meetings bring to bear sufficient rigor in determining action steps and accountabilities for the
various aspects of a project plan . 
The good news is , there is a productive way to think about
projects , situations , and topics that creates maximum value with
minimal expenditure of time and effort . It happens to be the way
we naturally think and plan , though not necessarily the way we
normally plan when we consciously try to get a project under control . In my experience , when people do more planning , more
55
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
informally and naturally , they relieve a great deal of stress and
obtain better results . 
The Natural Planning Model
You ' re already familiar with the most brilliant and creative planner in the world : your brain . You yourself are actually a planning
machine . You ' re planning when you get dressed , eat
lunch , go to the store , or simply talk . Although the
process may seem somewhat random , a quite complex series of steps in fact has to occur before your
brain can make anything happen physically . Your
mind goes through five steps to accomplish virtually
any task : 
56
1 | Defining purpose and principles
2 | Outcome visioning
3 | Brainstorming
4 | Organizing
5 | Identifying next actions
A Simple Example : Planning Dinner Out
The last time you went out to dinner , what initially caused you to
think about doing it ? It could have been any number of things—
the desire to satisfy hunger , socialize with friends , celebrate a special occasion , sign a business deal , or develop a romance . As soon
as any of these turned into a real inclination that you wanted to
move on , you started planning . Your intention was your purpose , 
and it automatically triggered your internal planning process . 
Your principles created the boundaries of your plan . You probably
didn ' t consciously think about your principles regarding going out
to dinner , but you thought within them : standards of food and
service , affordability , convenience , and comfort all may have
The most
experienced planner
in the world is your
brain . 
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
played a part . In any case , your purpose and principles were the
defining impetus and boundaries of your planning . 
Once you decided to fulfill your purpose , what were your
first substantive thoughts ? Probably not " point II . A . 3 . b . in plan .  " 
Your first ideas were more likely things like " Italian food at Giovanni ' s ,  " or " Sitting at a sidewalk table at the Bistro Cafe .  " You
probably also imagined some positive picture of what you might
experience or how the evening would turn out—maybe the people involved , the atmosphere , and / or the outcome . That was your
outcome visioning . Whereas your purpose was the why of your
going out to dinner , your vision was an image of the what—of the
physical world ' s looking , sounding , and feeling the ways that best
fulfilled your purpose . 
Once you ' d identified with your vision , what did your mind
naturally begin doing ? What did it start to think about ?  " What
time should we go ?  "  " Is it open tonight ?  "  " Will it be crowded ?  "  
 " What ' s the weather like ?  "  " Should we change clothes ?  "  " Is there
gas in the car ?  "  " How hungry are we ?  " That was brainstorming . 
Those questions were part of the naturally creative process that
happens once you commit to some outcome that hasn ' t happened
yet . Your brain noticed a gap between what you were looking
toward and where you actually were at the time , and it began to
resolve that " cognitive dissonance " by trying to fill in the blanks . 
This is the beginning of the " how " phase of natural planning . But
it did the thinking in a somewhat random and ad hoc fashion . 
Lots of different aspects of going to dinner just occurred to you . 
You almost certainly didn ' t need to actually write all of them
down on a piece of paper , but you did a version of that process in
your mind .  * 
Once you had generated a sufficient number of ideas and
details , you couldn ' t help but start to organize them . You may 
* If , however , you were handling the celebration for your best friend ' s recent triumph , the complexity and detail that might accrue in your head should warrant
at least the back of an envelope ! 
57
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
have thought or said ,  " First we need to find out if the restaurant is
open "  , or " Let ' s call the Andersons and see if they ' d like to go out
with us .  " Once you ' ve generated various thoughts relevant to the
outcome , your mind will automatically begin to sort them by
components ( subprojects )  , priorities , and / or sequences of events . 
Components would be :  " We need to handle logistics , people , and
location .  " Priorities would be :  " It ' s critical to find out if the client
really would like to go to dinner .  " Sequences would be :  " First we
need to check whether the restaurant is open , then call the
Andersons , then get dressed .  " 
Finally ( assuming that you ' re really committed to the project—
in this case , going out to dinner )  , you focus on the next action that
you need to take to make the first component actually happen .  " Call
Suzanne ' s to see if it ' s open , and make the reservation .  " 
These five phases of project planning occur naturally for
everything you accomplish during the day . It ' s how you create
things—dinner , a relaxing evening , a new product , or a new company . You have an urge to make something happen ; you image the
outcome ; you generate ideas that might be relevant ; you sort those
into a structure ; and you define a physical activity that would
begin to make it a reality . And you do all of that naturally , without
giving it much thought . 
Natural Planning Is Not Necessarily Normal
But is the process described above the way your committee is
planning the church retreat ? Is it how your IT team is approaching the new system installation ? Is it how you ' re organizing the
wedding or thinking through the potential merger ? 
Have you clarified the primary purpose of the project and communicated it to everyone who ought to know it ? And have you
agreed on the standards and behaviors you ' ll need to
adhere to to make it successful ? 
Have you envisioned success and considered
all the innovative things that might result if you
achieved it ? 
58
Have you
envisioned wild
success lately ? 
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
Have you gotten all possible ideas out on the table—
everything you need to take into consideration that might affect
the outcome ? 
Have you identified the mission-critical components , key
milestones , and deliverables ? 
Have you defined all the aspects of the project that could be
moved on right now , what the next action is for each part , and
who ' s responsible for what ? 
If you ' re like most people I interact with in a coaching or
consulting capacity , the collective answer to these questions is , 
probably not . There are likely to be at least some components of
the natural planning model that you haven ' t implemented . 
In some of my seminars I get participants to actually plan a
current strategic project that uses this model . In only a few minutes
they walk themselves through all five phases , and usually end up
being amazed at how much progress they ' ve made compared with
what they have tried to do in the past . One gentleman came up
afterward and told me ,  " I don ' t know whether I should thank you or
be angry . I just finished a business plan I ' ve been telling myself
would take months , and now I have no excuses for not doing it !  " 
You can try it for yourself right now if you like . Choose one
project that is new or stuck or that could simply use some
improvement . Think of your purpose . Think of what a successful
outcome would look like : where would you be physically , financially , in terms of reputation , or whatever ? Brainstorm potential
steps . Organize your ideas . Decide on the next actions . Are you
any clearer about where you want to go and how to get there ? 
The Unnatural Planning Model
To emphasize the importance of utilizing the natural planning
model for the more complex things we ' re involved with , let ' s contrast it with the more " normal " model used in most
environments—
what I call unnatural planning . 
59
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
When the " Good Idea " Is a Bad Idea
Have you ever heard a well-intentioned manager start a meeting
with the question ,  " OK , so who ' s got a good idea about this ?  " 
What is the assumption here ? Before any evaluation of
what ' s a " good idea " can be trusted , the purpose must
be clear , the vision must be well defined , and all the
relevant data must have been collected ( brainstormed ) and analyzed ( organized )  .  " What ' s a good
idea ?  " is a good question , but only when you ' re about
80 percent of the way through your thinking ! Starting there would probably blow anyone ' s creative
mental fuses . 
Trying to approach any situation from a perspective that is not
the natural way your mind operates will be difficult . People do it all
the time , but it almost always engenders a lack of clarity and
increased stress . In interactions with others , it opens the door for
egos , politics , and hidden agendas to take over the discussion ( generally speaking , the most verbally aggressive will run the show )  . 
And if it ' s just you , attempting to come up with a " good idea " before
defining your purpose , creating a vision , and collecting lots of initial
bad ideas is likely to give you a case of creative constipation . 
Let ' s Blame Mrs . Williams
If you ' re like most people in our culture , the only formal training
you ' ve ever had in planning and organizing proactively was in the
fourth or fifth grade . And even if that wasn ' t the only education
you ' ve had in this area , it was probably the most emotionally
intense ( meaning it sank in the deepest )  . 
Mrs . Williams , my fourth-grade teacher , had to
teach us about organizing our thinking ( it was in her
lesson plans )  . We were going to learn to write reports . 
But in order to write a well-organized , successful
report , what did we have to write first ? That ' s right—
an outline ! 
60
If you ' re waiting to
have a good idea
before you have any
ideas , you won ' t
have many ideas . 
Outlines were easy , 
as long as you
wrote the report
first . 
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
Did you ever have to do that , create an outline to begin with ? 
Did you ever stare at a Roman numeral I at the top of your page
for a torturous period of time and decide that planning and organizing ahead of time were for people very different from you ? 
Probably . 
In the end , I did learn to write outlines . I just wrote the
report first , then made up an outline from the report , after the
fact . 
That ' s what most people learned about planning from our
educational system . And I still see outlines done after the fact , just
to please the authorities . In the business world , they ' re often
headed " Goals " and " Objectives .  " But they still have very little to
do with what people are doing or what they ' re inspired about . 
These documents are sitting in drawers and in e-mails somewhere , bearing little relationship to operational reality . 
The Reactive Planning Model
The unnatural planning model is what most people consciously
think of as " planning ,  " and because it ' s so often artificial and
irrelevant to real work , people just don ' t plan . At least not on the
front end : they resist planning meetings , presentations , and
strategic operations until the last minute . 
But what happens if you don ' t plan ahead of
time ? In many cases , crisis !  (  " Didn ' t you get the tickets ? I thought you were going to do that ?  !  "  ) Then , 
when the urgency of the last minute is upon you , the
reactive planning model ensues . 
What ' s the first level of focus when the stuff
hits the fan ? Action ! Work harder ! Overtime ! More people ! Get
busier ! And a lot of stressed-out people are thrown at the situation . 
Then , when having a lot of busy people banging into
each other doesn ' t resolve the situation , someone gets more
61
When you find
yourself in a hole , 
stop digging . 
—Will
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
sophisticated and says ,  " We need to get organized !  "  ( Catching on
now ?  ) Then people draw boxes around the problem and label
them . Or redraw the boxes and relabel them . 
At some point they realize that just redrawing
boxes isn ' t really doing much to solve the problem . 
Now someone ( much more sophisticated ) suggests
that more creativity is needed .  " Let ' s brainstorm !  " 
With everyone in the room , the boss asks ,  " So , who ' s
got a good idea here ?  "  ( Thank you , Mrs . Williams .  ) 
When not much happens , the boss may surmise that his staff
has used up most of its internal creativity . Time to hire a consultant ! Of course , if the consultant is worth his salt , at some point
he is probably going to ask the big question :  " So , what are you
really trying to do here , anyway ?  "  ( vision , purpose )  . 
The reactive style is the reverse of the natural model . It will
always come back to a top-down focus . It ' s not a matter of
whether the natural planning will be done—just when , and at
what cost . 
62
Natural Planning Techniques : The Five Phases
It goes without saying , but still it must be said again : thinking in
more effective ways about projects and situations can make things
happen sooner , better , and more successfully . So if our minds plan
naturally anyway , what can we learn from that ? How can we use
that model to facilitate getting more and better results in our
thinking ? 
Let ' s examine each of the five phases of natural planning and
see how we can leverage these contexts . 
Purpose
It never hurts to ask the " why ?  " question . Almost anything you ' re
currently doing can be enhanced and even galvanized by more
Don ' t just do
something . Stand
there . 
—Rochelle Myer
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
scrutiny at this top level of focus . Why are you going
to your next meeting ? What ' s the purpose of your
task ? Why are you having friends over for a barbeque
in the backyard ? Why are you hiring a marketing
director ? Why do you have a budget ? 
I admit it : this is nothing but advanced common
sense . To know and to be clear about the purpose of
any activity are prime directives for clarity , creative
development , and cooperation . But it ' s common
sense that ' s not commonly practiced , simply because it ' s so easy
for us to create things , get caught up in the form of what we ' ve
created , and let our connection with our real and primary intentions slip . 
I know , based upon thousands of hours spent in many offices
with many sophisticated people , that the " why ?  " question cannot
be ignored . When people complain to me about having too many
meetings , I have to ask ,  " What is the purpose of the meetings ?  " 
When they ask ,  " Who should I invite to the planning session ?  " I
have to ask ,  " What ' s the purpose of the planning session ?  " Until
we have the answer to my questions , there ' s no possible way to
come up with an appropriate response to theirs . 
The Value of Thinking About " Why " 
Here are just some of the benefits of asking " why ?  "  : 
• It defines success . 
• It creates decision-making criteria . 
• It aligns resources . 
• It motivates . 
• It clarifies focus . 
• It expands options . 
Let ' s take a closer look at each of these in turn . 
People love to win . 
If you ' re not totally
clear about the
purpose of what
you ' re doing , you
have no chance of
winning . 
63
Fanaticism
consists of
redoubling your
efforts when you
have forgotten
your aim . 
—
George
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
about the purpose of what you ' re doing , you have no
chance of winning . Purpose defines success . It ' s the
primal reference point for any investment of time
and energy , from deciding to run for elective office to
designing a form . 
Ultimately you can ' t feel good about a staff
meeting unless you know what the purpose of the
meeting was . And if you want to sleep well , you ' d better have a
good answer when your board asks why you fired your V . P . of
marketing or hired that hotshot M . B . A . as your new finance
director . You won ' t really know whether or not your business plan
is any good until you hold it up against the success criterion that
you define by answering the question " Why do we need a business
plan ?  " 
It Creates Decision-Making Criteria How do you decide whether
to spend the money for a five-color brochure or just
go with a two-color ? How do you know whether it ' s
worth hiring a major Web design firm to handle your
new Web site ? 
It all comes down to purpose . Given what you ' re
trying to accomplish , are these resource investments
required , and if so , which ones ? There ' s no way to
know until the purpose is clarified . 
It Aligns Resources How should we spend our staffing allocation
in the corporate budget ? How do we best use the cash flow right
now to maximize our viability as a retailer over the next year ? 
Should we spend more money on the luncheon or the speakers for
the monthly association meeting ? 
In each case , the answer depends on what we ' re really trying
to accomplish—the why . 
64
It Defines Success People are starved for " wins " these days . We
love to play games , and we like to win , or at least be in a position
where we could win . And if you ' re not totally clear
Celebrate any
progress . Don ' t
•wait to get perfect . 
—Ann McGee
Cooper
Often the only way
to make a hard
decision is to come
back to the
purpose . 
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
It Motivates Let ' s face it : if there ' s no good reason to be doing
something , it ' s not worth doing . I ' m often stunned by how many
people have forgotten why they ' re doing what they ' re doing—and
by how quickly a simple question like " Why are you doing that ?  " 
can get them back on track . 
It Clarifies Focus When you land on the real purpose for anything you ' re doing , it makes things clearer . Just taking two minutes and writing out your primary reason for doing something
invariably creates an increased sharpness of vision , much like
bringing a telescope into focus . Frequently , projects and situations
that have begun to feel scattered and blurred grow clearer when
someone brings it back home by asking ,  " What are we really trying to accomplish here ?  " 
It Expands Options Paradoxically , even as purpose brings things
into pinpoint focus , it opens up creative thinking about wider
possibilities . When you really know the underlying 
 " why " —for the conference , for the staff party , for the
elimination of the management position , or for the
merger—it expands your thinking about how to
make the desired result happen . When people write
out their purpose for a project in my seminars , they
often claim it ' s like a fresh breeze blowing through
their mind , clarifying their vision of what they ' re
doing . 
Is your purpose clear and specific enough ? If you ' re truly
experiencing the benefits of a purpose focus—motivation , clarity , 
decision-making criteria , alignment , and creativity—then your
purpose probably is specific enough . But many " purpose statements " are too vague to produce such results .  " To have a good
department ,  " for example , might be too broad a goal . After all , 
what constitutes a " good department "  ? Is it a group of people who
are highly motivated , collaborating in healthy ways , and taking
65
If you ' re not sure
why you ' re doing
something , you can
never do enough
of it . 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
initiative ? Or is it a department that comes in under budget ? In
other words , if you don ' t really know when you ' ve met your purpose or when you ' re off track , you don ' t have a viable directive . 
The question " How will I know when this is off-purpose ?  " must
have a clear answer . 
Principles
Of equal value as prime criteria for driving and directing a project are
the standards and values you hold . Although people seldom think
about these consciously , they are always there . And if they are violated , the result will inevitably be unproductive distraction and stress . 
A great way to think about what your principles
are is to complete this sentence :  " I would give others
totally free rein to do this as long as they .  .  .  " —what ? 
What policies , stated or unstated , will apply to your
group ' s activities ?  " As long as they stayed within
budget "  ?  " satisfied the client "  ?  " ensured a healthy
team "  ?  " promoted a positive image "  ? 
It can be a major source of stress when others
engage in or allow behavior that ' s outside your standards . If you never have to deal with this issue , you ' re
truly graced . If you do , some constructive conversa- 
. tion about and clarification of principles could
align the energy and prevent unnecessary conflict . 
You may want to begin by asking yourself ,  " What behavior
might undermine what I ' m doing , and how can I prevent
it ?  " That will give you a good starting point for defining your
standards . 
Another great reason for focusing on principles is the clarity
and reference point they provide for positive conduct . How do
you want or need to work with others on this project to ensure its
success ? You yourself are at your best when you ' re acting how ? 
Whereas purpose provides the juice and the direction , 
principles define the parameters of action and the criteria for
excellence of behavior . 
66
Simple , clear
purpose and
principles give rise
to complex and
intelligent
behavior . Complex
rules and
regulations give
rise to simple and
stupid behavior . 
—Dee
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
Vision / Outcome
In order most productively to access the conscious and unconscious resources available to you , you must have a clear picture in
your mind of what success would look , sound , and feel like . Purpose and principles furnish the impetus and the monitoring , but
vision provides the actual blueprint of the final result . This is the 
 " what ?  " instead of the " why ?  " What will this project or situation
really be like when it successfully appears in the world ? 
For example , graduates of your seminar are demonstrating
consistently applied knowledge of the subject matter . Market
share has increased 2 percent within the northeastern region over
the last fiscal year . Your daughter is clear about your guidelines
and support for her first semester in college . 
The Power of Focus
Since the 1960s thousands of books have expounded on the value
of appropriate positive imagery and focus . Forward-looking focus
has even been a key element in Olympic-level sports training , 
with athletes imagining the physical effort , the positive energy , 
and the successful result to ensure the highest level of unconscious
support for their performance . 
We know that the focus we hold in our minds
affects what we perceive and how we perform . This is
as true on the golf course as it is in a staff meeting or
during a serious conversation with a spouse . My
interest lies in providing a model for focus that is
dynamic in a practical way , especially in project
thinking . 
When you focus on something—the vacation you ' re going
to
take , the meeting you ' re about to go into , the product you want to
launch—that focus instantly creates ideas and thought patterns
you wouldn ' t have had otherwise . Even your physiology will
respond to an image in your head as if it were reality . 
67
Imagination is
more important
than knowledge . 
—Albert Einstein
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
The Reticular Activating System The May 1957 issue of Scientific
American contained an article describing the discovery of the
reticular formation at the base of the brain . The reticular formation is basically the gateway to your conscious awareness ; it ' s the
switch that turns on your perception of ideas and data , the thing
that keeps you asleep even when music ' s playing but wakes you if
a special little baby cries in another room . 
Just like a computer , your brain has a search
function—but it ' s even more phenomenal than a
computer ' s . It seems to be programmed by what we
focus on and , more primarily , what we identify with . 
It ' s the seat of what many people have referred to as
the paradigms we maintain . We notice only what
matches our internal belief systems and identified
contexts . If you ' re an optometrist , for example , you ' ll
tend to notice people wearing eyeglasses across a
crowded room ; if you ' re a building contractor , you
may notice the room ' s physical details . If you focus
on the color red right now and then just glance
around your environment , if there is any red at all , 
you ' ll see even the tiniest bits of it . 
The implications of how this filtering works—
how we are unconsciously made conscious of information—could fill a weeklong seminar . Suffice it to
say that something automatic and extraordinary happens in your mind when you create and focus on a
clear picture of what you want . 
Clarifying Outcomes
There is a simple but profound principle that
emerges from understanding the way your perceptive
filters work : you won ' t see how to do it until you see
yourself doing it . 
It ' s easy to envision something happening if it has happened
before or you have had experience with similar successes . It can be
68
Your automatic
creative mechanism
is teleological . That
is , it operates in
terms of goals and
end results . Once
you give it a
definite goal to
achieve , you can
depend upon its
automatic guidance
system to take you
to that goal much
better than " you " 
ever could by
conscious thought .  
 " You " supply the
goal by thinking in
terms of end
results . Your
automatic
mechanism then
supplies the means
whereby . 
—Maxwell Maltz
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
quite a challenge , however , to identify with images of
success if they represent new and foreign territory—
that is , if you have few reference points about what
an event might actually look like and little experience
of your own ability to make it happen . 
Many of us hold ourselves back from imaging a
desired outcome unless someone can show us how to get there . 
Unfortunately , that ' s backward in terms of how our minds work
to generate and recognize solutions and methods . 
One of the most powerful skills in the world of knowledge
work , and one of the most important to hone and develop , is creating clear outcomes . This is not as self-evident as it
may sound . We need to constantly define ( and redefine ) what we ' re trying to accomplish on many different levels , and consistently reallocate resources
toward getting these tasks completed as effectively
and efficiently as possible . 
What will this project look like when it ' s done ? 
How do you want the client to feel , and what do you want him to
know and do , after the presentation ? Where will you be in your
career three years from now ? How would the ideal V . P . of finance
do his job ? What would your Web site really look like and have as
capabilities if it could be the way you wanted it ? 
Outcome / vision can range from a simple statement of the
project , such as " Finalize computer-system implementation ,  " 
to a completely scripted movie depicting the future scene in all
its glorious detail . Here are three basic steps for developing a
vision : 
1 | View the project from beyond the completion date . 
2 | Envision " WILD SUCCESS "  !  ( Suspend " Yeah , but .  .  .  "  ) 
3 | Capture features , aspects , qualities you imagine in place . 
When I get people to focus on a successful scenario of their
project , they usually experience heightened enthusiasm and think
69
You often need to
make it up in your
mind before you
can make it happen
in your life . 
I always wanted to
be somebody . I
should have been
more specific . 
—Lily
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
of something unique and positive about it that hadn ' t occurred to
them before .  " Wouldn ' t it be great if .  .  .  " is not a bad way to start
thinking about a situation , at least for long enough to have the
option of getting an answer . 
The best way to get
a good idea is to
get lots of ideas . 
—Linus Pauling
Your mind wants to
fill in the blanks
between here and
there , but in
somewhat random
order . 
Brainstorming
Once you know what you want to have happen , and
why , the " how " mechanism is brought into play . 
When you identify with some picture in your mind
that is different from your current reality , you automatically start filling in the gaps , or brainstorming . 
Ideas begin to pop into your head in somewhat random order—little ones , big ones , not-so-good ones , 
good ones . This process usually goes on internally for
most people about most things , and that ' s often sufficient . For example , you think about what you want
to say to your boss as you ' re walking down the hall to
speak to her . But there are many other instances
when writing things down , or capturing them in
some external way , can give a tremendous boost to
productive output and thinking . 
70
Capturing Your Ideas
Over the last few decades , a number of graphics-oriented brainstorming techniques have been introduced to help develop creative thinking about projects and topics . They ' ve been called
things like mind-mapping , clustering , patterning , webbing , and
fish-boning . Although the authors of these various processes may
portray them as being different from one another , for most of us
end-users the basic premise remains the same : give yourself permission to capture and express any idea , and then later on figure
out how it fits in and what to do with it . If nothing else ( and there
is plenty of " else "  )  , this practice adds to your efficiency—when
you have the idea , you grab it , which means you won ' t have to go 
 " have the idea " again . 
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
The most popular of these techniques is called mindmapping , a name coined by Tony Buzan , a British researcher in
brain functioning , to label this process of brainstorming ideas onto a
graphic format . In mind-mapping , the core idea is presented in the
center , with associated ideas growing out in a somewhat free-form
fashion around it . For instance , if I found out that I had to move my
office , I might think about computers , changing my business cards , 
all the connections I ' d have to change , new furniture , moving the
phones , purging and packing , and so on . If I captured these thoughts
graphically it might start to look something like this : 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
You could do this kind of mind-mapping on Post-its that
could be stuck on a whiteboard , or you could input ideas into a
word processor or outlining program on the computer . 
Distributed Cognition
The great thing about external brainstorming is that in addition to
capturing your original ideas , it can help generate many new ones
that might not have occurred to you if you didn ' t have
a mechanism to hold your thoughts and continually
reflect them back to you . It ' s as if your mind were to
say ,  " Look , I ' m only going to give you as many ideas
as you feel you can effectively use . If you ' re not collecting them in some trusted way , I won ' t give you
that many . But if you ' re actually doing something
with the ideas—even if it ' s just recording them for
later evaluation—then here , have a bunch ! And , oh wow ! That
reminds me of another one , and another ,  " etc . 
Psychologists are beginning to label this and similar
processes " distributed cognition .  " It ' s getting things out of your
head and into objective , reviewable formats . But my English
teacher in high school didn ' t have to know about the theory to
give me the key :  " David ,  " he said ,  " you ' re going to college , and
you ' re going to be writing papers . Write all your notes and quotes
on separate three-by-five cards . Then , when you get ready to
organize your thinking , just spread them all out on the floor , see
the structure , and figure out what you ' re missing .  " Mr . Edmundson was teaching me a major piece of the natural
planning model ! 
Few people can hold their focus on a topic for
more than a couple of minutes , without some objective structure and tool or trigger to help them . Pick a
big project you have going right now and just try to
think of nothing else for more than sixty seconds . 
This is pretty hard to do unless you have a pen and
paper in hand and use those " cognitive artifacts " 
72
Nothing is more
dangerous than an
idea when it is the
only one you have . 
—Emile Chartier
Only he who
handles his ideas
lightly is master of
his ideas , and only
he who is master of
his ideas is not
enslaved by them . 
—Lin Yutang
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
as the anchor for your ideas . Then you can stay with it for hours . 
That ' s why good thinking can happen while you ' re working on a
computer document about a project , mind-mapping it on a legal
pad of on a paper tablecloth in a hip restaurant , or just having a
meeting about it with other people in a room that allows you to
hold the context ( a whiteboard with nice wet markers really helps
there , too )  . 
Brainstorming Keys
Many techniques can be used to facilitate brainstorming and outof-the-box thinking . The basics principles , however , can be summed
up as follows : 
• Don ' t judge , challenge , evaluate , or criticize . 
• Go for quantity , not quality . 
• Put analysis and organization in the background . 
Don ' t Judge , Challenge , Evaluate , or Criticize It ' s easy for the
unnatural planning model to rear its ugly head in brainstorming , 
making people jump to premature evaluations and
critiques of ideas . If you care even slightly about what
a critic thinks , you ' ll censure your expressive process
as you look for the " right " thing to say . There ' s a very
subtle distinction between keeping brainstorming on
target with the topic and stifling the creative process . 
It ' s also important that brainstorming be put into the
overall context of the planning process , because if
you think you ' re doing it just for its own sake , it can seem trite and
inappropriately off course . If you can understand it instead as
something you ' re doing right now , for a certain period , before you
move toward a resolution at the end , you ' ll feel more comfortable
giving this part of the process its due . 
This is not to suggest that you should shut off critical thinking , though—everything ought to be fair game at this stage . It ' s
just wise to understand what kinds of thoughts you ' re having and
73
A good way to find
out what something
might be is to
uncover ail the
things it ' s probably
not . 
74
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
to park them for use in the most appropriate way . The primary
criterion must be expansion , not contraction . 
Go for Quantity , Not Quality Going for quantity keeps your
thinking expansive . Often you won ' t know what ' s a good idea
until you have it . And sometimes you ' ll realize it ' s a good idea , or
the germ of one , only later on . You know how shopping at a big
store with lots of options lets you feel comfortable about your
choice ? The same holds true for project thinking . The greater the
volume of thoughts you have to work with , the better the context
you can create for developing options and trusting your choices . 
Put Analysis and Organization in the Background Analysis and
evaluation and organization of your thoughts should be given as
free a rein as creative out-of-the-box thinking . But in the brainstorming phase , this critical activity should not be the driver . 
Making a list can be a creative thing to do , a way to consider
the people who should be on your team , the customer requirements for the software , or the components of the business plan . 
Just make sure to grab all that and keep going until you get into
the weeding and organizing of focus that make up the next stage . 
Organizing
If you ' ve done a thorough job of emptying your head of all the
things that came up in the brainstorming phase , you ' ll notice that
a natural organization is emerging . As my high school English
teacher suggested , once you get all the ideas out of your head and
in front of your eyes , you ' ll automatically notice natural relationships and structure . This is what most people are referring to
when they talk about " project plans .  " 
Organizing usually happens when you identify components
and subcomponents , sequences or events , and / or priorities . What
are the things that must occur to create the final result ? In what
order must they occur ? What is the most important element to
ensure the success of the project ? 
CHAPTER 3 | GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY :  . THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
This is the stage in which you can make good use of structuring tools ranging from informal bullet points , scribbled literally on the back of an envelope , to project-planning
software like Microsoft Project . When a project calls
for substantial objective control , you ' ll need some
type of hierarchical outline with components and
subcomponents , and / or a GANTT-type chart showing stages of the project laid out over time , with
independent and dependent parts and milestones
identified in relationship to the whole . 
Creative thinking doesn ' t stop here ; it just takes another
form . Once you perceive a basic structure , your mind will start
trying to " fill in the blanks .  " Identifying three key things that you
need to handle on the project , for example , may cause you to
think of a fourth and a fifth when you see them all lined up . 
The Basics of Organizing
The key steps here are : 
• Identify the significant pieces . 
• Sort by ( one or more )  : 
• components
• sequences
• priorities
• Detail to the required degree . 
I have never seen any two projects that needed to have
exactly the same amount of structure and detail developed in
order to get things off people ' s minds and moving successfully . 
But almost all projects can use some form of creative thinking
from the left side of the brain , along the lines of " What ' s the
plan ?  " 
Next Actions
The final stage of planning comes down to decisions about the
allocation and reallocation of physical resources to actually get
75
A " project plan " 
identifies the
smaller outcomes , 
which can then be
naturally planned . 
76
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE
«
the project moving . The question to ask here is ,  " What ' s the next
action ?  " 
As we noted in the previous chapter , this kind of grounded , 
reality-based thinking , combined with clarification of the desired
outcome , forms the critical component of knowledge work . In my
experience , creating a list of what your real projects are and consistently managing your next action for each one will constitute
90 percent of what is generally thought of as project planning . 
This " runway level " approach will make you " honest " about all
kinds of things : Are you really serious about doing this ? Who ' s
responsible ? Have you thought things through enough ? 
At some point , if the project is an actionable one , this nextaction decision must be made .  * Answering the question about
what specifically you would do about something physically if you
had nothing else to do will test the maturity of your thinking
about the project . If you ' re not yet ready to answer that question , you have more to flesh out at some prior level in the natural
planning sequence . 
The Basics
• Decide on next actions for each of the current moving parts of
the project . 
• Decide on the next action in the planning process , if necessary . 
Activating the " Moving Parts " A project is sufficiently planned
for implementation when every next-action step has been decided
on every front that can actually be moved on without some other
component ' s having to be completed first . If the project has multiple components , each of them should be assessed appropriately
by asking ,  " Is there something that anyone could be doing on this
right now ?  " You could be coordinating speakers for the confer- 
* You can also plan nonactionable projects and not need a next action—for example , designing your dream house . The lack of a next action by default makes it a 
 " someday / maybe " project .  .  . and that ' s fine for anything of that nature . 
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
ence , for instance , at the same time that you ' re finding the appropriate site . 
In some cases there will be only one aspect that can be activated , and everything else will depend on the results of that . So
there may be only one next action , which will be the linchpin for
all the rest . 
More to Plan ? What if there ' s still more planning to be done
before you can feel comfortable with what ' s next ? There ' s still an
action step—it is just a process action . What ' s the next step in the
continuation of planning ? Drafting more ideas . E-mailing Ana
Maria and Sean to get their input . Telling your assistant to set up
a planning meeting with the product team . 
The habit of clarifying the next action on projects , no matter
what the situation , is fundamental to you staying in relaxed control . 
When the Next Action Is Someone Else ' s .  .  . If the next action is
not yours , you must nevertheless clarify whose it is ( this is a primary use of the " Waiting For " action list )  . In a group-planning
situation , it isn ' t necessary for everyone to know what the next
step is on every part of the project . Often all that ' s required is to
allocate responsibility for parts of the project to the appropriate
persons and leave it up to them to identify next actions on their
particular pieces . 
This next-action conversation forces organizational clarity . 
Issues and details emerge that don ' t show up until someone holds
everyone ' s " feet to the fire " about the physical-level reality of
resource allocation . It ' s a simple , practical discussion to foster , and
one that can significantly stir the pot and identify weak links . 
How Much Planning Do You Really Need to Do ? 
How much of this planning model do you really need to flesh out , 
and to what degree of detail ? The simple answer is , as much as
you need to get the project off your mind . 
In general , the reason things are on your mind is that the
77
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE j PART ONE
outcome and the action step ( s ) have not been appropriately
defined , and / or reminders of them have not been put in places
where you can be trusted to look for them appropriately . Additionally , you may not have developed the details , perspectives , and
solutions sufficiently to trust the efficacy of your blueprint . 
Most projects , given my definition of a project as an outcome
requiring more than one action , need no more than a listing
of their outcome and next action for you to get
them off your mind . You need a new stockbroker ? 
You just have to call a friend for a recommendation . You want to set up a printer at home ? You
just need to surf the Web to check out different
models and prices . I estimate that 80 percent of
projects are of that nature . You ' ll still be doing the full planning
model on all of them , but only in your head , and just enough
to figure out next actions and keep them going until they ' re
complete . 
Another 15 percent or so of projects might require at least
some external form of brainstorming—maybe a mind-map or a
few notes in a word processor or PowerPoint file . That might be
sufficient for planning meeting agendas , your vacation , or a
speech to the local chamber of commerce . 
A final 5 percent of projects might need the deliberate application of one or more of the five phases of the natural planning
model . The model provides a practical recipe for unsticking
things , resolving them , and moving them forward productively . 
Are you aware of a need for greater clarity , or greater action , on
any of your projects ? If so , using the model can often be the key to
making effective progress . 
Need More Clarity ? 
If greater clarity is what you need , shift your thinking up the
natural planning scale . People are often very busy { action ) but
nonetheless experience confusion and a lack of clear direction . 
They need to pull out their plan , or create one { organize )  . If there ' s
78
If the project is still
on your mind , 
there ' s more
planning to do . 
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
a lack of clarity at the planning level , there ' s probably a need for
more brainstorming to generate a sufficient inventory of ideas to
create trust in the plan . If the brainstorming session gets bogged
down with fuzzy thinking , the focus should shift back to the
vision of the outcome , ensuring that the reticular filter in the brain
will open up to deliver the best how-to thinking . If the outcome / 
vision is unclear , you must return to a clean analysis of why you ' re
engaged in the situation in the first place { purpose )  . 
Need More to Be Happening ? 
If more action is what ' s needed , you need to move down the
model . There may be enthusiasm about the purpose of a project
but at the same time some resistance to actually
fleshing out what fulfilling it in the real world might
look like . These days , the task of " improving quality
of work life " may be on the radar for a manager , but
often he won ' t yet have defined a clear picture of the
desired result . The thinking must go to the specifics
of the vision . Again , ask yourself ,  " What would the
outcome look like ?  " 
If you ' ve formulated an answer to that question , but things
are still stuck , it ' s probably time for you to grapple with some of
the " how " issues and the operational details and perspectives 
{ brainstorming )  . I often have clients who have inherited a relatively
clearly articulated project , like " Implement the new performancereview system ,  " but who aren ' t moving forward because they
haven ' t yet taken a few minutes to dump some ideas out about
what that might entail . 
If brainstorming gets hung up ( and very often it does for
more " blue sky " types )  , rigor may be required to do some evaluation of and decision-making about mission-critical deliverables
that have to be handled { organizing )  . This is sometimes the case
when an informal back-and-forth meeting that has generated lots
of ideas ends without producing any decision about what actually
needs to happen next on the project . 
79
Plans get you into
things but you ' ve
got to work your
way out . 
—
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE
And if there is a plan , but the rubber still isn ' t hitting the
road like it should , someone needs to assess each component with
the focus of " What ' s the next action , and who ' s got it ?  " One manager , who had taken over responsibility many months in advance
for organizing a major annual conference , asked me how to prevent the crisis all-nighters her team had experienced near the
deadline the previous year . When she produced an outline of the
various pieces of the project she ' d inherited , I asked ,  " Which
pieces could actually be moved on right now ?  " After identifying
half a dozen , we clarified the next action on each one . It was off
and running . 
In the last two chapters , I have covered the basic models of how to
stay maximally productive and in control , with minimal effort , at
the two most basic levels of our life and work : the actions we take
and the projects we enter into that generate many of those
actions . 
The fundamentals remain true—you must be
responsible for collecting all your open loops , applying a front-end thought process to each of them , and
managing the results with organization , review , and
action . 
For all those situations that you have any level
of commitment to complete , there is a natural planning process that goes on to get you from here to
there . Leveraging that five-phase model can often
make the evolution easier , faster , and more productive . 
These models are simple to understand and easy to implement . Applying them creates remarkable results . You need essentially no new skills—you already know how to write things down , 
clarify outcomes , decide next actions , put things into categories , 
review it all , and make intuitive choices . Right now you have the
ability to focus on successful results , brainstorm , organize your
thinking , and get moving on your next steps . 
But just knowing how to do all of those things does not pro80
You need no new
skills to increase
your productivityjust a new set of
behaviors about
when and where to
apply them . 
CHAPTER 3 I GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY : THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING
duce results . Merely having the ability to be highly productive , 
relaxed , and in control doesn ' t make you that way . If you ' re like
most people , you can use a coach—someone to walk you step by
step through the experience and provide some guideposts and
handy tricks along the way , until your new operational style is elegantly embedded . 
You ' ll find that in part 2 . 
81
part
2
Practicing
Stress-Free
Productivity
Getting Started : Setting Up
the Time , Space , and Tools
IN PART 2 we ' ll move from a conceptual framework and limited
application of workflow mastery to full-scale implementation and
best practices . Going through this program often gives people a
level of relaxed control they may never have experienced before , 
but it usually requires the catalyst of step-by-step procedures to
get there . To that end , I ' ll provide a logical sequence of things to
do , to make it as easy as possible for you to get on board and glean
the most value from these techniques . 
Implementation—Whether Ail-Out or
Casual—Is a Lot About " Tricks " 
If you ' re not sure you ' re committed to an all-out implementation
of these methods , let me assure you that a lot of the value people
get from this material is good " tricks .  " Sometimes
just one good trick can make it worthwhile to range
through this information : I ' ve had people tell me , for
example , that the best thing they got from my twoday seminar was advice on setting up and using a
tickler file . Tricks are for the not-so-smart , not-soconscious part of us . To a great degree , the highestperforming people I know are those who have
installed the best tricks in their lives . I know that ' s
85
It is easier to act
yourself into a
better way of
feeling than to feel
yourself into a
better way of
action . 
—0 . H . Mowrer
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
true of me . The smart part of us sets up things for us to do that the
not-so-smart part responds to almost automatically , creating
behavior that produces high-performance results . We trick ourselves into doing what we ought to be doing . 
For instance , if you ' re a semiregular exerciser like me , you
probably have your own little tricks to get you to exercise . My best
trick is costume—the clothing I put on or take off . If I put on exercise gear , I ' ll start to feel like exercising ; if I don ' t , I ' m very likely
to feel like doing something else . 
Let ' s look at an example of a real productivity trick . You ' ve
probably taken work home that you had to bring back the next
day , right ? It was mission-critical that you not forget it the next
morning . So where did you put it the night before ? Did you put it
in front of the door , or on your keys , so you ' d be sure to take it
with you ? For this you got a higher education ? What a sophisticated piece of self-management technology you ' ve installed in
your life ! But actually that ' s just what it is . The smart part of you
the night before knows that the not-so-smart part of you first
thing in the morning may barely be conscious .  " What ' s this in
front of the door !  ? Oh , that ' s right , I ' ve got to take this with me !  " 
What a class act . But really , it is . It ' s a trick I call Put It in
Front of the Door . For our purposes the " door " is going to be the
door of your mind , not your house . But it ' s the same idea . 
If you were to take out your calendar right now and look
closely at every single item for the next fourteen
days , you ' d probably come up with at least one " Ohthat-reminds-me-I-need-to_____________ .  " If you
then captured that value-added thought into some place that
would trigger you to act , you ' d feel better already , 
have a clearer head , and get more positive things
done . It ' s not rocket science , just a good trick . 
If you take out a clean sheet of paper right now , 
along with your favorite writing instrument , and for
three minutes focus solely on the most awesome project on your mind , I guarantee you ' ll have at least one
86
You increase
your productivity
and creativity
exponentially when
you think about the
right things at the
right time and have
the tools to capture
your value-added
thinking . 
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS 
 " Oh , yeah , I need to consider __ .  " Then capture what shows up
in your head on the piece of paper and put it where you might
actually use the idea or information . You won ' t be one ounce
smarter than you were ten minutes ago , but you ' ll have added
value to your work and life . 
Much of learning how to manage workflow in a " black belt " 
way is about laying out the gear and practicing the moves so that
the requisite thinking happens more automatically and it ' s a lot
easier to get engaged in the game . The suggestions that follow
about getting time , space , and tools in place are all trusted methods for making things happen at a terrific new level . 
If you ' re sincere about making a major leap forward in your
personal management systems , I recommend that you pay close
attention to the details and follow through on the suggestions
provided below in their entirety . The whole will be greater than
the sum of the parts . You ' ll also discover that the execution of this
program will produce real progress on real things that are going
on in your life right now . We ' ll get lots done that you want to get
done , in new and efficient ways that may amaze you . 
Setting Aside the Time
I recommend that you create a block of time to initialize this
process and prepare a workstation with the appropriate space , furniture , and tools . If your space is properly set up and streamlined , 
it can reduce your unconscious resistance to dealing with your
stuff and even make it attractive for you to sit down and crank
through your input and your work . An ideal time frame for most
people is two whole days , back to back .  ( Don ' t be put off by that if
you don ' t have that long to spend , though : doing any of the activities I suggest will be useful , no matter how much or how little
time you devote to them . Two days are not required to benefit
from these techniques and principles—they will start to pay off
almost instantly .  ) Implementing the full collection process can
87
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
take up to six hours or more , and processing and deciding on
actions for all the input you ' ll want to externalize and capture into
your system can easily take another eight hours . Of course you
can also collect and process your stuff in chunks , but it ' ll be much
easier if you can tackle that front-end portion in one fell swoop . 
The ideal time for me to work with a professional is on a
weekend or holiday because the chance of outside disturbance is
minimal then . If I work with someone on a typical workday , we
first make sure that no meetings are scheduled and only emergency interruptions are allowed ; phone calls are routed to voicemail , or logged by secretaries for review and handling during a
break . I don ' t recommend using " after hours " for this work . It usually means seriously reduced horsepower and a big tendency to
get caught up in " rabbit trails .  "  * 
For many of the executives I work with , holding the world back
for two contiguous days is the hardest part of the whole process—
the perceived necessity to be constantly available for meetings and
communications when they ' re " at work " is difficult for them to let go
of . That ' s why we often resort to weekends . If you work in an open
cubicle or office , it will be even more of a challenge to isolate sufficient time blocks on a regular workday during office hours . 
It ' s not that the procedure itself is so " sacred "  ; it ' s just that it
takes a lot of psychic energy to collect and process
such a large inventory of open loops , especially when
they ' ve been " open ,  "  " undecided ,  " or " stuck " for way
too long . Interruptions can double the time it takes
to get through everything . If you can get to ground
zero in one contained time period , it gives you a huge
sense of control and accomplishment and frees up a
reservoir of energy and creativity . Later on you can
88 
* After hours is actually a good time to crank through a group of similar tasks
that you wouldn ' t normally do in the course of your typical workday , like
filing
a big backlog of papers , organizing photographs , surfing the Web about your
upcoming vacation location , or processing expense receipts . 
Dedicate two days
to this process , and
it will be worth
many times that in
terms of your
productivity and
mental health . 
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
maintain your system in shorter spurts around and " between the
lines " of you regular day . 
Setting Up the Space
You ' ll need a physical location to serve as a central cockpit of control . If you already have a desk and office space set up where you
work , that ' s probably the best place to start . If you work from a
home office , obviously that will be your prime location . If you
already have both , you ' ll want to establish identical , even interchangeable systems in both places . 
The basics for a work space are just a writing surface and
room for an in-basket . Some people , such as a foreman in a
machine shop , an intake nurse on a hospital floor , or your children ' s nanny , won ' t need much more than that . The writing surface will of course expand for most professionals , to include a
phone , a computer , stacking trays , working file drawers , reference
shelves . Some may feel the need for a fax , a printer , a VCR , and / 
or multimedia conferencing equipment . The seriously selfcontained will also want gear for exercise , leisure , and hobbies . 
A functional work space is critical . If you don ' t already have a
dedicated work space and in-basket , get them now . That goes for
students , homemakers , and retirees , too . Everyone must have a
physical locus of control from which to deal with everything else . 
If I had to set up an emergency workstation in just a few
minutes , I would buy a door , put it on top of two two-drawer filing cabinets ( one at each end )  , place three stack-baskets on it , and
add a legal pad and pen . That would be my home base ( if I had
time to sit down , I ' d also buy a stool !  )  . Believe it or not , I ' ve been
in several executive offices that wouldn ' t be as functional . 
If You Go to an Office , You ' ll Still Need a Space at Home
Don ' t skimp on work space at home . As you ' ll discover through
this process , it ' s critical that you have at least a satellite home
89
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
system identical to the one in your office . Many people I ' ve worked with have been somewhat embarrassed by the degree of chaos that reigns in their
homes , in contrast to their offices at work ; they ' ve
gotten tremendous value from giving themselves
permission to establish the same setup in both places . 
If you ' re like many of them , you ' ll find that a weekend spent setting up a home workstation can make a revolutionary change in your ability to organize your life . 
An Office Space in Transit
If you move around much , as a business traveler or just as a person
with a mobile life-style , you ' ll also want to set up an efficiently
organized micro-office-in-transit . More than likely this will consist of a briefcase , pack , or satchel with appropriate folders and
portable workstation supplies . 
Many people lose opportunities to be productive because
they ' re not equipped to take advantage of the odd moments and
windows of time that open up as they move from one place to
another , or when they ' re in off-site environments . The combination of a good processing style , the right tools , and good interconnected systems at home and at work can make traveling a highly
leveraged way to get certain kinds of work done . 
Don ' t Share Space ! 
It is imperative that you have your own work space—or at least your
own in-basket and a physical place in which to process paper . Too
many married couples I ' ve worked with have tried to work out of a
single desk at home , and it always makes light-years of difference
when they expand to two workstations . Far from being the " separation " they expect , the move in fact relieves them of a subtle stress in
their relationship about managing the stuff of their shared lives . 
One couple even decided to set up an additional mini-workstation
in the kitchen for the stay-at-home mom , so she could process
work while keeping an eye on their infant in the family room . 
90
You must have a
focused work
space— at home , 
at
work , and if
possible even in
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
Some organizations are interested in the concept of " hoteling " —that is , having people create totally self-contained and
mobile workstation capabilities so they can " plug in " anywhere in
the company , at any time , and work from there . I have my doubts
about how well that concept will work in practice . A friend who
was involved in setting up an " office of the future " model in Washington , D . C .  , for the U . S . government , claimed that hoteling
tended to fall apart because of the " Mine !  " factor—people wanted
their own stuff . I suggest there ' s a deeper reason for the failure : there
needs to be zero resistance at the less-than-conscious level for us to
use the systems we have . Having to continually reinvent our inbasket , our filing system , and how and where we process our stuff
can only be a source of incessant distraction . 
You can work virtually everywhere if you have a
clean , compact system and know how to process your
stuff rapidly and portably . But you ' ll still need a 
 " home base " with a well-grooved set of tools and
sufficient space for all the reference and support
material that you ' ll want somewhere close at hand
when you " land .  " Most people I work with need at
least four file drawers for their general-reference and projectsupport types of paper-based materials—and it ' s hard to imagine
that all of that could ever be totally and easily movable . 
Getting the Tools You ' ll Need
If you ' re committed to a full implementation of this workflow
process , there are some basic supplies and equipment that you ' ll
need to get you started . As you go along , you ' re likely to dance
between using what you ' re used to and evaluating the possibilities
for new and different gear to work with . 
Note that good tools don ' t necessarily have to be expensive . 
Often , on the low-tech side , the more " executive " something
looks , the more dysfunctional it really is . 
91
It is critical that you
have your own
work space . You
want to use your
systems , not just
think about them . 
92
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
The Basic Processing Tools
Let ' s assume you ' re starting from scratch . In addition to a desktop
work space , you ' ll need : 
•Paper-holding trays ( at least three ) 
•A stack of plain letter-size paper
•A pen / pencil
•Post-its ( 3X3s ) 
•Paper clips
•Binder clips
•A stapler and staples
•Scotch tape
•Rubber bands
•An automatic labeler
•File folders
•A calendar
•Wastebasket / recycling bins
Paper-Holding Trays
These will serve as your in-basket and out-basket , with one or
two others for work-in-progress support papers and / or your " read
and review " stack . The most functional trays are the side-facing
letter or legal stackable kinds , which have no " lip " on them to
keep you from sliding out a single piece of paper . 
Plain Paper
You ' ll use plain paper for the initial collection process . Believe it
or not , putting one thought on one full-size sheet of paper can
have enormous value . Although most people will wind up processing their notes into some sort of list organizer , a few will actually stick with the simple piece-of-paper-per-thought system . In
any case , it ' s important to have plenty of letter-size writing paper
or tablets around to make capturing ad hoc input easy . 
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
Post-its , Clips , Stapler , Etc . 
Post-its , clips , stapler , tape , and rubber bands will
come in handy for routing and storing paper-based
materials . We ' re not finished with paper yet ( if you
haven ' t noticed !  )  , and the simple tools for managing
it are essential . 
The Labeler
The labeler is a surprisingly critical tool in our work . 
Thousands of executives and professionals and homemakers I
have worked with now have their own automatic labelers , and my
archives are full of their comments , like ,  " Incredible—I wouldn ' t
have believed what a difference it makes !  " The labeler will be used
to label your file folders , binder spines , and numerous other
things . 
At this writing , I recommend the Brother labeler—it ' s the
most user-friendly . Get the least expensive one that sits on a desk
and has an AC adapter ( so you won ' t have to worry about batteries )  . Also get a large supply of cassettes of label tape—black letters
on white tape ( instead of clear ) are much easier to read and allow
you to relabel folders you might want to reuse . 
You can get software and printer sheets to make computergenerated labels , but I prefer the stand-alone tool . If you have to
wait to do your filing or labeling as a batch job , you ' ll most likely
resist making files for single pieces of paper , and it ' ll add the formality factor , which really puts the brakes on this system . 
File Folders
You ' ll need plenty of file folders ( get letter size if you can , legal
size if you must )  . You may also need an equal number of
Pendaflex-style file-folder hangers , if your filing system requires
them . Plain manila folders are fine—color-coding is a level of
complexity that ' s hardly ever worth the effort . Your generalreference filing system should just be a simple library . 
93
Moment-to-moment
collecting , thinking , 
processing , and
organizing are
challenging enough ; 
always ensure that
you have the tools
to make them as
easy as possible . 
94
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Calendar
Although you may not need a calendar just to collect your incomplete items , you ' ll certainly come up with actions that need to be
put there , too . As I noted earlier , the calendar should be used
not
to hold action lists but to track the " hard landscape " of things
that
have to get done on a specific day or at a specific time . 
Most professionals these days already have some sort of
working calendar system in place , ranging from pocket week-ata-glance booklets , to loose-leaf organizers with day- , week- , 
month- , and year-at-a-glance options , to single-user software
organizers , to group-ware calendars used companywide , like Outlook or Lotus Notes . 
The calendar has often been the central tool that people
rely
on to " get organized .  " It ' s certainly a critical component in managing particular kinds of data and reminders of the commitments
that relate to specific times and days . There are many reminders
and some data that you will want a calendar for , but you won ' t be
stopping there : your calendar will need to be integrated with a
much more comprehensive system that will emerge as you apply
this method . 
You may wonder what kind of calendar would be best for you
to use , and I ' ll discuss that in more detail in the next chapter . For
now , just keep using the one you ' ve got . After you develop a feel
for the whole systematic approach , you ' ll have a better reference
point for deciding about graduating to a different tool . 
Wastebasket / Recycling Bins
If you ' re like most people , you ' re going to toss a lot more stuff
than you expect , so get ready to create a good bit of trash . Some
executives I have coached have found it extremely useful to
arrange for a large Dumpster to be parked immediately outside
their offices the day we work together ! 
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
Do You Need an Organizer ? 
Whether or not you ' ll need an organizer will depend on a number
of factors . Are you already committed to using one ? How do you
want to see your reminders of actions , agendas , and projects ? 
Where and how often might you need to review them ? Because
your head is not the place in which to hold things , 
you ' ll obviously need something to manage your triggers externally . You could maintain everything in a
purely low-tech fashion , by keeping pieces of paper
in folders . Or you could even use a paper-based notebook or planner , or a digital version thereof . Or you
could even employ some combination of these . 
All of the low-tech gear listed in the previous
section is used for various aspects of collecting , processing , and
organizing . You ' ll use a tray and random paper for collecting . As
you process your in-basket , you ' ll complete many less-than-twominute actions that will require Post-its , a stapler , and paper clips . 
The magazines , articles , and long memos that are your longerthan-two-minute reading will go in another of the trays . And
you ' ll probably have quite a bit just to file . What ' s left—maintaining a project inventory , logging calendar items and action and
agenda reminders , and tracking the things you ' re waiting for—
will require some form of lists , or reviewable groupings of similar
items . 
Lists can be managed simply in a low-tech way , as pieces of
paper kept in a file folder ( e . g .  , separate sheets / notes for each person you need to call in a " Calls " file )  , or they can be arranged in a
more " mid-tech " fashion , in loose-leaf notebooks or planners ( a
page titled " Calls " with the names listed down the sheet )  . Or they
can be high-tech , digital versions of paper lists ( such a " Calls " 
category in the " To Do " section of a Palm PDA or in Microsoft
Outlook " Tasks "  )  . 
In addition to holding portable reference material ( e . g .  , 
telephone / address info )  , most organizers are designed for managing
95
Once you know how
to process your
stuff and what to
organize , you really
just need to create
and manage lists . 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
lists .  ( Your calendar is actually a form of a list—with time- and
day-specific action reminders listed chronologically .  ) Probably
thousands of types of organizers have been on the market since the
1980s , from the early rash of pocket Day-Timers to the current
flood of high-tech personal digital assistants ( PDAs ) and PCbased software products like Microsoft Outlook and Lotus Notes . 
Should you implement the Getting Things Done
process into what you ' re currently using , or should
you install something new ? The answer is , do
whichever one will actually help you change your
behavior so you ' ll use the tools appropriately . There
are efficiency factors to consider here , too . Do you
get a lot of digital information that would be easier to
track with a digital tool ? Do you need a paper-based
calendar for all the appointments you have to make
and change rapidly on the run ? Do you need reminders of things
like calls you have to make when it ' s not easy to carry file folders ? 
And so on . There are also the aesthetic and enjoyment factors . 
I ' ve done some of my best planning and updating for myself when
I simply wanted some excuse to use ( i . e .  , play with ) my Palm
organizer while waiting for dinner in a restaurant ! 
When considering whether to get and use an organizer , and
if so , which one , keep in mind that all you really need to do is
manage lists . You ' ve got to be able to create a list on the run and
review it easily and as regularly as you need to . Once you know
what to put on the lists , and how to use them , the medium really
doesn ' t matter . Just go for simplicity , speed , and fun . 
The Critical Factor of a Filing System
A simple and highly functional personal reference
system is critical to this process . The filing system at
hand is the first thing I assess before beginning the
workflow process in anyone ' s office . As I noted in
chapter 2 , the lack of a good general-reference system can be one of the greatest obstacles to imple96
One of the best
tricks for enhancing
your personal
productivity is
having organizing
tools that you love
to use . 
If your filing system
isn ' t fast , functional , 
and fun , you ' ll resist
the whole process . 
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
menting a personal management system , and for most of the executives I have personally coached , it represents one of the biggest
opportunities for improvement . Many times I have driven to the
local office-supply store with a client and bought a filing cabinet , 
a big stock of file folders , and a labeler , just so we could create an
appropriate place in which to put two-thirds of the " stuff " lying
around his / her desk and credenza and even on the office floors . 
We ' re concerned here mostly with general-reference filing—
as distinct from discrete filing systems devoted to contracts , financial information , or other categories of data that deserve their
own place and indexing . General-reference files should hold articles , brochures , pieces of paper , notes , printouts , faxes—basically
anything that you want to keep for its interesting or useful data
and that doesn ' t fit into your specialized filing systems and won ' t
stand up by itself on a shelf ( as will large software manuals and
seminar binders )  . 
If you have a trusted secretary or assistant who maintains
that system for you , so you can put a " File as X " Post-it on the
document and send it " out " to him or her , great . But ask yourself if
you still have some personally interesting or confidential support
material that should be accessible at any moment , even when your
assistant isn ' t around . If so , you ' ll still need your own system , 
either in your desk or right beside it somewhere . 
Success Factors for Filing
I strongly suggest that you maintain your own personal , at-hand
filing system . It should take you less than one minute to pick
something up out of your in-basket or print it from e-mail , decide
it needs no action but has some potential future value , and finish
storing it in a trusted system . If it takes you longer than a minute
to complete that sequence of actions , you have a significant
improvement opportunity , since you probably won ' t file the document ; you ' ll stack it or stuff it instead . Besides being fast , the system needs to be fun and easy , current and complete . Otherwise
you ' ll unconsciously resist emptying your in-basket because you
97
98
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
know there ' s likely to be something in there that ought to get filed , 
and you won ' t even want to look at the papers . Take heart : I ' ve seen
people go from resisting to actually enjoying sorting through their
stacks once their personal filing system is set up and humming . 
You must feel equally comfortable about filing a single piece
of paper on a new topic—even a scribbled note—in its own file
as
you would about filing a more formal , larger document . Because it
requires so much work to make and organize files , people either
don ' t keep them or have junked-up cabinets and drawers full of all
sorts of one-of-a-kind items , like a menu for the local take-out
cafe or the current train schedule . 
Whatever you need to do to get your reference system to that
quick and easy standard for everything it has to hold , do it . My
system works wonderfully for me and for many others who try it , 
and I highly recommend that you consider incorporating all of
the following guidelines to really make reference filing automatic . 
Keep Your General-Reference Files at Hand ' s Reach Filing has to
be instantaneous and easy . If you have to get up every time you
have some ad hoc piece of paper you want to file , you ' ll tend to
stack it instead of filing it , and you ' re also likely to just resist the
whole in-basket process ( because you subconsciously know there ' s
stuff in there that might need filing !  )  . Many people I have
coached have redesigned their office space so they have four
general-reference file drawers literally in " swivel distance ,  " instead
of across their room . 
One Alpha System I have one A—Z alphabetical filing system , not
multiple systems . People have a tendency to want to use their files
as a personal organization system , and therefore they attempt to
organize them by projects or areas of focus . This magnifies geometrically the number of places something isn ' t when you forget
where you filed it . One simple alpha system files everything by
topic , project , person , or company , so it can be in only three or
four places if you forget exactly where you put it . You can usually
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
put at least one subset of topics on each label , like " Gardening—
pots " and " Gardening—ideas .  " These would be filed under G . 
Currently I have four file drawers for my general-reference
files , and each is clearly marked on the outside— " A-E ,  "  " F-L ,  " 
and so on—so I don ' t have to think about where something goes
once it ' s labeled . 
Every once in a while someone has such a huge amount of
reference material on one topic or project that it should be put in
its own discrete drawer or cabinet . But if it is less than a half a file
drawer ' s worth , I recommended including it in the single general
alphabetical system . 
Have Lots of Fresh Folders I keep a giant stack of fresh , new file
folders instantly at hand and reachable from where I sit to process
my in-basket . Nothing is worse than having something to file and
not having an abundance of folders to grab from to make the
process easy . At any given time I want to have an inventory of
almost half a file drawer full of unused or reusable folders . Rule of
thumb : reorder when the number drops below a hundred . 
Keep the Drawer Less Than Three-Quarters Full Always try to
keep your file drawers less than three-quarters full . If they ' re
stuffed , you ' ll unconsciously resist putting things in there , and reference materials will tend to stack up instead . If a drawer is starting to get tight , I may purge it while I ' m on hold on the phone . 
I know almost no one who doesn ' t have overstuffed file
drawers . If you value your cuticles , and if you want to get rid of your
unconscious resistance to filing , then you must keep the drawers
loose enough that you can insert and retrieve files without effort . 
Some people ' s reaction to this is " I ' d have to buy more file cabinets !  " as if that were something horrible . Help me out here . If the
stuff is worth keeping , it ' s worth keeping so that it ' s easily accessible , 
right ? And if it ' s not , then why are you keeping it ? It ' s said that we ' re
in the Information Age ; if there ' s any validity to that , and if you ' re
doing anything that hinders your usage of it .  .  . not smart . 
99
100
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
You may need to create another tier of reference storage to
give yourself sufficient working room with your general-reference
files at hand . Material such as finished project notes and " dead " 
client files may still need to be kept , but can be stored off-site or at
least out of your work space . 
Label Your File Folders with an Auto Labeler Typeset labels change
the nature of your files and your relationship to them . Labeled files
feel comfortable on a boardroom table ; everyone can identify them ; 
you can easily see what they are from a distance and in your briefcase ; and when you open your file drawers , you get to see what looks
almost like a printed index of your files in alphabetical order . It
makes it fun to open the drawer to find or insert things . 
Perhaps later in this new millennium the brain scientists will
give us some esoteric and complex neurological explanation for why
labeled files work so effectively . Until then , trust me . Get a labeler . 
And get your own . To make the whole system work without a hitch , 
you ' ll need to have it at hand all the time , so you can file something
whenever you want . And don ' t share ! If you have something to file
and your labeler ' s not there , you ' ll just stack the material instead of
filing it . The labeler should be as basic a tool as your stapler . 
Get High-Quality Mechanics File cabinets are not the place to
skimp on quality . Nothing is worse than trying to open a heavy
file drawer and hearing that awful screech ! that happens when you
wrestle with the roller bearings on one of those $29 . 95 " special
sale " cabinets . You really need a file cabinet whose drawer , even
when it ' s three-quarters full , will glide open and click shut with
the smoothness and solidity of a door on a German car . I ' m not
kidding . 
Get Rid of Hanging Files If You Can At the risk of seriously
offending a lot of people who are already using hanging files , I
recommend that you totally do away with the hanging-file hardware and use just plain folders standing up by themselves in the
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
file drawer , held up by the movable metal plate in the back . Hanging folders are much less efficient because of the effort it takes to
make a new file ad hoc and the formality that imposes on the filing system . 
Here ' s an e-mail I received recently from a senior manager
who actually took my advice after avoiding it for a couple of years
because of his investment in the hanging hardware : 
Your system is FANTASTIC !  ! I ' ve completely redone my files at
home and at work—it only took a combined four days to do it , 
but I ' ve done away with Pendaflex and have gone to the manila
folder system , with A-Z and nothing else . WOW ! It ' s so much
easier . My desk for some reason is a lot neater , too , without those
stacks of " to be filed " stuff hanging around ! 
But If You Can ' t .  .  . Many people are stuck with
the hanging-file system , at least at work , because
side-opening hanging-folder filing cabinets have
become standard corporate issue . If you have to work
with hanging files , then I recommend that you : 
• Label the files , not the hangers . That lets you carry
the file folders for meetings and when traveling , 
without taking the hanger . 
In the fire zone of
real work , if it takes
longer than sixty
seconds to file
something , you
won ' t file , you ' ll
stack . 
• Use only one file folder per hanger . This will keep the drawer visually neat and prevent the weirdness that results when multiple
files make a hanger uneven . Having to recalibrate files in an
alpha system every time a folder gets full is too much trouble . 
• Keep a big supply of plain hangers and new file folders in the
front of your first file drawer so you can make new files and store
them in a flash . 
101
102
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
Purge Your Files at Least Once a Year Cleaning house in your files
regularly keeps them from going stale and seeming like a black
hole , and it also gives you the freedom to keep anything on a
whim " in case you might need it .  " You know everything will be
reassessed within a few months anyway , and you can redecide
then what ' s worth keeping and what isn ' t . As I say , I purge my
files while I ' m on hold on the phone ( or marking time on a conference call that ' s dragging on and on !  )  . 
I recommend that all organizations ( if they don ' t have one
already ) establish a Dumpster Day , when all employees get to
come to work in sneakers and jeans , put their phones on do-notdisturb , and get current with all their stored stuff .  * Dumpsters are
brought in , and everyone has permission to spend the whole day
in purge mode . A personal Dumpster Day is an ideal thing to put
into your tickler file , either during the holidays , at year ' s end , or
around early-spring tax-preparation time , when you might want
to tie it in with archiving the previous year ' s financial files . 
One Final Thing to Prepare .  .  . 
You ' ve blocked off some time , you ' ve gotten a work area set up , 
and you ' ve got the basic tools to start implementing the methodology . Now what ? 
If you ' ve decided to commit a certain amount of time to setting up your workflow system , there ' s one more thing that you ' ll
need to do to make it maximally effective : you must clear the
decks of any other commitments for the duration of the session . 
If there ' s someone you absolutely need to call , or something
your secretary has to handle for you or you have to check with
your spouse about , do it now . Or make an agreement with your- 
* A great time to do this is Christmas Eve Day , or some similar near-holiday
that falls on a workday . Most people are in " party mode " anyway , so it ' s an ideal
opportunity to get funky and clean house . 
CHAPTER 4 | GETTING STARTED : SETTING UP THE TIME , SPACE , AND TOOLS
self about when you will do it , and then put some reminder of that
where you won ' t miss it . It ' s critical that your full psychic attention be available for the work at hand . 
Almost without exception , when I sit down to begin coaching people , even though they ' ve blocked out time and committed
significant money to utilize me as a resource for that time , they
still have things they ' re going to have to do before we quit for the
day , and they haven ' t arranged for them yet in their own systems .  
 " Oh , yeah , I ' ve got to call this client back sometime today ,  " they ' ll
say , or " I have to check in with my spouse to see if he ' s gotten the
tickets for tonight .  " It bespeaks a certain lack of awareness and
maturity in our culture , I think , that so many sophisticated people
are ignoring those levels of responsibility to their own psyche , on
an ongoing operational basis . 
So have you handled all that ? Good . Now it ' s time to gather
representatives of all of your open loops into one place . 
103
104
Collection : Corralling Your " Stuff " 
IN CHAPTER 2 I described the basic procedures for collecting your work . 
This chapter will lead you in more detail through the process of
getting all your incompletes , all your " stuff ,  " into one place—into 
 " in .  " That ' s the critical first step in getting to the state of " mind like
water .  " Just gathering a few more things than you currently have
will probably create a positive feeling for you . But if you can hang in
there and really do the whole collection process , 100 percent , it will
change your experience dramatically and give you an important
new reference point for being on top of your work . 
When I coach a client through this process , the collection
phase usually takes between one and six hours , though it did take
all of twenty hours with one person ( finally I told him ,  " You get
the idea "  )  . It can take longer than you think if you are committed
to a full-blown capture that will include everything at work and
everywhere else . That means going through every storage area
and every nook and cranny in every location , including cars , 
boats , and other homes , if you have them . 
Be assured that if you give yourself at least a couple of hours
to tackle this part , you can grab the major portion of things outstanding . And you can even capture the rest by creating relevant
placeholding notes—for example ,  " Purge and process boat storage shed " and " Deal with hall closet .  " 
In the real world , you probably won ' t be able to keep your
stuff 100 percent collected all of the time . If you ' re like most people , you ' ll move too fast and be engaged in too many things dur-
CHAPTER 5 I COLLECTION : CORRALLING YOUR " STUFF " 
ing the course of a week to get all your ideas and commitments
captured outside your head . But it should become an ideal standard that keeps you motivated to consistently " clean house " of all
the things about your work and life that have your attention . 
Ready , Set .  .  . 
There are very practical reasons to gather everything before you
start processing it : 
1 | it ' s helpful to have a sense of the volume of stuff you have to
deal with ; 
2 | it lets you know where the " end of the tunnel " is ; and
3 | when you ' re processing and organizing , you don ' t want to be
distracted psychologically by an amorphous mass of stuff
that might still be " somewhere .  " Once you have all the things
that require your attention gathered in one place , you ' ll automatically be operating from a state of enhanced focus and
control . 
It can be daunting to capture into one location , at one time , 
all the things that don ' t belong where they are . It may even seem a
little counterintuitive , because for the most part , most of that stuff
was not , and is not ,  " that important "  ; that ' s why it ' s still lying
around . It wasn ' t an urgent thing when it first showed up , and
probably nothing ' s blown up yet because it hasn ' t been dealt with . 
It ' s the business card you put in your wallet of somebody you
thought you might want to contact sometime . It ' s the little piece
of techno-gear in the bottom desk drawer that you ' re missing a
part for . It ' s the printer that you keep telling yourself you ' re going
to move to a better location in your office . These are the kinds of
things that nag at you but that you haven ' t decided either to deal
with or to drop entirely from your list of open loops . But because
you think there still could be something important in there , that
105
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO 
 " stuff " is controlling you and taking up more psychic energy than it
deserves . Keep in mind , you can feel good about what you ' re not
doing , only when you know what you ' re not doing . 
So it ' s time to begin . Grab your in-basket and a half-inch
stack of plain paper for your notes , and let ' s .  .  .  
.  .  . Go ! 
Physical Gathering
The first activity is to search your physical environment for anything that doesn ' t belong where it is , the
way it is , permanently , and put it into your in-basket . 
You ' ll be gathering things that are incomplete , things
that have some decision about potential action tied
to them . They all go into " in ,  " so they ' ll be available
for later processing . 
106
What Stays Where It Is
The best way to create a clean decision about whether something
should go into the in-basket is to understand clearly what shouldn ' t
go in . Here are the four categories of things that can remain
where they are , the way they are , with no action tied to them : 
• Supplies
• Reference material
• Decoration
• Equipment
Supplies .  .  . include anything you need to keep because you use
it regularly . Stationery , business cards , stamps , staples , Post-it
pads , legal pads , paper clips , ballpoint refills , batteries , forms you
need to fill out from time to time , rubber bands—all of these
qualify . Many people also have a " personal supplies " drawer at
work containing dental floss , Kleenex , breath mints , and so on . 
Train yourself to
notice and collect
anything that
doesn ' t belong
where it is forever . 
CHAPTER 5 I COLLECTION : CORRALLING YOUR " STUFF " 
Reference Material .  .  . is anything you simply keep for information as needed , such as manuals for your software , the local takeout deli menu , or your kid ' s soccer schedule . This category
includes your telephone and address information , any material
relevant to projects , themes , and topics , and sources such as dictionaries , encyclopedias , and almanacs . 
Decoration .  .  . means pictures of family , artwork , and fun and
inspiring things pinned to your bulletin board . You also might
have plaques , mementos , and / or plants . 
Equipment .  .  . is obviously the telephone , computer , fax , printer , 
wastebasket , furniture , and / or VCR . 
You no doubt have a lot of things that fall into these four categories—basically all your tools and your gear , which have no
actions
tied to them . Everything else goes into " in .  " But many of the
things you might initially interpret as supplies , reference , decoration , or equipment could also have action associated with them
because they still aren ' t exactly the way they need to be . 
For instance , most people have , in their desk drawers and on
their credenzas and bulletin boards , a lot of reference materials
that either are out of date or need to be organized somewhere
else . Those should go into " in .  " Likewise , if your supplies drawer
is out of control , full of lots of dead or unorganized stuff , that ' s an
incomplete that needs to be captured . Are the photos of your kids
current ones ? Is the artwork what you want on the wall ? Are the
mementos really something you still want to keep ? Is the furniture precisely the way it should be ? Is the computer set up the way
you want it ? Are the plants in your office alive ? In other words , 
supplies , reference materials , decoration , and equipment may
need to be tossed into the in-basket if they ' re not just where they
should be , the way they should be . 
107
108
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Issues About Collecting
As you engage in the collecting phase , you may run into one or
more of the following : 
• you ' ve got a lot more than will fit into one in-basket ; 
• you ' re likely to get derailed into purging and organizing ; 
• you may have some form of stuff already collected and
organized ; and / or
• you ' re likely to run across some critical things that you want to
keep in front of you . 
What If an Item Is Too Big to Go in the In-Basket ? If you can ' t
physically put something in the in-basket , then write a note on a
piece of letter-size plain paper to represent it . For instance , if you
have a poster or other piece of artwork behind the door to your
office , just write " Artwork behind door " on a letter-size piece of
paper and put the paper in the in-basket . 
Be sure to date it , too . This has a couple of benefits . If your
organization system winds up containing some of these pieces of
paper representing something else , it ' ll be useful to know when the
note was created . It ' s also just a great habit to date everything you
hand-write , from Post-it notes to your assistant , to voice-mails you
download onto a pad , to notes you take on a phone call with a
client . The 3 percent of the time that this little piece of information will be extremely useful makes it worth developing the habit . 
What If the Pile Is Too Big to Fit into the In-Basket ? If you ' re like
98 percent of my clients , your initial gathering activity will collect
much more than can be comfortably stacked in an in-basket . If
that ' s the case , just create stacks around the in-basket , and maybe
even on the floor underneath it . Ultimately you ' ll be emptying the
in-stacks , as you process and organize everything . In the meantime , though , make sure that there ' s some obvious visual distinction between the stacks that are " in " and everything else . 
CHAPTER 5 | COLLECTION : CORRALLING YOUR " STUFF " 
Instant Dumping If it ' s immediately evident that something is
trash , go ahead and toss it when you see it . For some of my clients , 
this marks the first time they have ever cleaned their center desk
drawer ! 
If you ' re not sure what something is or whether it ' s worth
keeping , go ahead and put it into " in .  " You ' ll be able to decide
about it later , when you process the in-basket . What you don ' t
want to do is to let yourself get wrapped up in things piece by
piece , trying to decide this or that . You ' ll do that later anyway if
it ' s in " in ,  " and it ' s easier to make those kinds of choices when
you ' re in processing mode . The objective for the collection process
is to get everything into " in " as quickly as possible so you ' ve appropriately retrenched and " drawn the battle lines .  " 
Be Careful of the Purge-and-Organize Bug ! Many people get hit
with the purge-and-organize virus as they ' re going through various areas of their office ( and their home )  . If that happens to you , 
it ' s OK , so long as you have a major open window of time to get
through the whole process ( like at least a whole week ahead of
you )  . Otherwise you ' ll need to break it up into chunks and capture them as little projects or actions to do , with reminders in your
system , like " Purge four-drawer cabinet " or " Clean office closet .  " 
What you don ' t want to do is let yourself get caught running
down a rabbit trail cleaning up some piece of your work and then
not be able to get through the whole action-management implementation process . It may take longer than you think , and you
want to go for the gold and finish processing all your stuff and setting up your system as soon as possible . 
What About Things That Are Already on Lists and in Organizers '  ? 
You may already have some lists and some sort of organization
system in place . But unless you ' re thoroughly familiar with this
workflow-processing model and have implemented it previously , 
I recommend that you treat those lists as items still to be processed , like everything else in " in .  " You ' ll want your system to be
109
110
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
consistent , and it ' ll be necessary to evaluate everything from the
same viewpoint to get it that way .  
 " But I Can ' t Lose That Thing .  .  .  !  " Often in the collection
process someone will run across a piece of paper or a document
that causes her to say ,  " Oh , my God ! I forgot about that ! I ' ve got to
deal with that !  " It could be a phone slip with a return call she was
supposed to handle two days before , or some meeting notes that
remind her of an action she was supposed to take weeks ago . She
doesn ' t want to put whatever it is into the huge stack of other stuff
in her in-basket because she ' s afraid she might lose track of it
again . 
If that happens to you , first ask yourself if it ' s something that
really has to be handled before you get though this initial implementation time . If so , best deal with it immediately so you get it
off your mind . If not , go ahead and put it into " in .  " You ' re going to
get all that processed and emptied soon anyway , so it won ' t be
lost . 
If you can ' t deal with the action in the moment , and you still
just have to have the reminder right in front of you , go ahead and
create an " emergency " stack somewhere close at hand . It ' s not an
ideal solution , but it ' ll do . Keep in mind that some potential anxiousness is going to surface as you make your stuff more conscious
to you than it ' s been . Create whatever supports you need . 
Start with Your Desktop
Ready now ? OK . Start piling those things on your desk into " in .  " 
Often there ' ll be numerous things right at hand that need to go
in
there . Many people use their whole desktop as " in "  ; if you ' re one
of them , you ' ll have several stacks around you to begin your " in " 
collection with . Start at one end of your work space and move
around , dealing with everything on every cubic inch . Typical
items will be : 
•Stacks of mail and memos
•Phone slips
CHAPTER 5 | COLLECTION : CORRALLING YOUR " STUFF " 
• Collected business cards
• Notes from meetings
Resist the urge to say , as almost everyone does initially ,  " Well , I
know what ' s in that stack , and that ' s where I want to leave it .  " 
That ' s exactly what hasn ' t worked before , and it all needs to go
into the in-basket . 
As you go around your desktop , ask yourself if you have any
intention of changing any of the tools or equipment there . Is your
phone OK ? Your computer ? The desk itself ? If anything needs
changing , write a note about it and toss it into " in .  " 
Desk Drawers
Next tackle the desk drawers , if you have them , one at a time . Any
attention on anything in there ? Any actionable items ? Is there
anything that doesn ' t belong there ? If the answer to any of these
questions is yes , put the actionable item into " in " or write a note
about it . Again , whether you use this opportunity to clean and
organize the drawers or simply make a note to do it later will
depend on how much time you have and how much stuff is in
there . 
Countertops
Continue working your way around your office , collecting everything sitting on the tops of credenzas or counters or cabinets that
doesn ' t belong there permanently . Often there will be stacks of
reading material , mail , and miscellaneous folders and support
material for actions and projects . Collect it all . 
Maybe there is reference material that you ' ve already used
and just left out . If that ' s so , and if you can return it to the file
cabinet or the bookshelf in just a second , go ahead and do that . Be
careful to check with yourself , though , about whether there is
some potential action tied to the material before you put it away . 
If there is , put it into " in " so you can deal with it later in the
process . 
111
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Inside the Cabinets
Now look inside the cabinets . What ' s in there ? These are perfect
areas for stashing large supplies and reference materials , and
equally seductive for holding deeper levels of stuff . 
Any broken or out-of-date things in there ? Often I ' ll
find collectibles and nostalgia that aren ' t meaningful
to my clients any longer . One general manager of an
insurance office , for example , wound up tossing out
at least a small Dumpster ' s worth of " recognition " 
awards he had accumulated over the years . 
Again , if some of these areas are out of control and need
purging and organizing , write that on a note and toss it into " in .  " 
Floors , Walls , and Shelves
Anything on bulletin boards that needs action ? Anything tacked
onto the walls that doesn ' t belong there ? Any attention on your
pictures , artwork , plaques , or decorations ? How about the open
shelves ? Any books that need to be read or donated ? Any catalogs , manuals , or three-ring binders that are out of date or have
some potential action associated with them ? Any piles or stacks of
things on the floor ? Just scoot them over next to your in-basket to
add to the inventory . 
Equipment , Furniture , arid Fixtures
Is there anything you want to do to or change about any of your
office equipment or furniture or the physical space itself ? Does
everything work ? Do you have all the lighting you need ? If there are
actionable items , you know what to do : make a note and put it in " in .  " 
Other Locations
Depending on the scope of what you ' re addressing in this process , 
you may want to do some version of the same kind of gathering
anywhere else you keep stuff . If you ' re determined to get to a
really empty head , it ' s imperative that you do it everywhere . 
112
Consider whether
your collectible and
nostalgia items are
still meaningful to
you . 
CHAPTER 5 I COLLECTION : CORRALLING YOUR " STUFF " 
Some executives I work with find it immensely
valuable to take me home with them and have me
walk them through this process there as well . Often
they ' ve allowed the " not so important " trap to ensnare
them in their home life , and it has gnawed away at
their energy . 
Don ' t let the " not
so important " trap
gnaw away your
energy at home . 
Mental Gathering : The Mind-Sweep
Once you feel you ' ve collected all the physical things in your environment that need processing , you ' ll want to collect anything else
that may be residing in your psychic RAM . What has your attention that isn ' t represented by something already in your in-basket ? 
This is where the stack of plain paper really comes into play . 
I recommend that you write out each thought , each idea , each
project or thing that has your attention , on a separate sheet of paper . 
You could make one long list on a pad , but given how you will
later be processing each item individually , it ' s actually more effective to put everything on separate sheets . You will likely not keep
these pieces of paper ( unless you decide that low-tech is your best
organizing method )  , but it ' ll be handy to have them as discrete
items to deal with as you ' re processing . 
It will probably take you between twenty minutes and an
hour to clear your head onto separate notes , after you ' ve gathered
everything else . You ' ll find that things will tend to occur to you in
somewhat random fashion—little things , big things , personal
things , professional things , in no particular order . 
In this instance , go for quantity . It ' s much better to overdo
this process than to risk missing something . You can always toss
the junk later . Your first idea may be " Save the ozone layer ,  " and
then you ' ll think ,  " I need cat food !  " Grab them all . Don ' t be surprised if you discover you ' ve created quite a stack of paper in " in " 
during this procedure . 
113
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO 
 " Trigger " List
To assist in clearing your head , you may want to review the
following " Incompletion Triggers " list , item by item , to see if
you ' ve forgotten anything . Often you ' ll just need a jog to unearth
something lurking in a corner of your mind . Remember , when
something occurs to you , write it on a piece of paper and toss it
into " in .  "  
 " Incompletion Triggers " List
Professional
Projects started , not completed
Projects that need to be started
Commitments / promises to others
Boss / partners
Colleagues
Subordinates
Other people in organization 
 " Outside " people
Customers
Other organizations
Professionals
Communications to make / get , 
Internal / External
Initiate or respond to : 
Phone calls
Voice-mail
E-mail
Pages
Faxes
Letters
Memos
Other writing to finish / submit
Reports
Evaluations / reviews
Proposals
Articles
Promotional materials
Manuals / instructions
Rewrites and edits
Meetings that need to be set / requested
Who needs to know about what
decisions ? 
Significant read / review
Financial
Cash flow
Statistics
Budgets
Forecasts / projections
P & Ls
Balance sheet
Credit line
Planning / organizing
Formal planning ( goals , targets , 
objectives ) 
Current projects ( next stages ) 
Upcoming projects
114
CHAPTER 5 I COLLECTION : CORRALLING YOUR " STUFF " 
Business / marketing plans
Organizational initiatives
Upcoming events
Meetings
Presentations
Organizational structuring
Changes in facilities
Installation of new systems / equipment
Travel
Banks
Receivables
Payables
Petty cash
Administration
Legal issues
Insurance
Personnel
Policies / procedures
Customers
Internal
External
Marketing
Promotion
Sales
Customer service
Systems
Phones
Computers
Office equipment
Other equipment
Utilities
Filing
Storage
Inventories
Supplies
Office / site
Office organization 
, Furniture
Decorations
Waiting for .  .  . 
Information
Delegated tasks / projects
Completions critical to projects
Replies to : 
Letters
Memos
Calls
Proposals
Requisitions
Reimbursements
Petty cash
Insurance
Ordered items
Items being repaired
Tickets
Decisions of others
Professional development
Training / seminars
Things to learn
Things to look up
Skills to practice / learn especially re : 
computers
Tape / video training
Resumes
Outside education
Research— need to find out about .  .  . 
Professional wardrobe
115
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Personal
Projects started , not completed
Projects that need to be started
Commitments / promises to others
Spouse
Children
Family
Friends
Professionals
Borrowed items
Projects : other organizations
Service
Civic
Volunteer
Communications to make / get
Family
Friends
Professional
Initiate or respond to : 
Phone calls
Letters
Cards
Upcoming events
Special occasions
Birthdays
Anniversaries
Weddings
Graduations
Holidays . 
Travel
Weekend trips
Vacations
Social events
Cultural events
Sporting events
R & D— things to do
Places to go
People to meet / invite
Local attractions
Administration
Financial
Bills
Banks
Investments
Loans
Taxes
Insurance
Legal affairs
Filing
Waiting for .  .  . 
Mail order
Repair
Reimbursements
Loaned items
Medical data
RSVPs
Home / household
Landlords
Property ownership
Legal
Real estate
Zoning
Taxes
Builders / contractors
Heating / air-conditioning
Plumbing
Electricity
Roofing
Landscape
116
CHAPTER 5 | COLLECTION : CORRALLING YOUR " STUFF " 
Driveway
Walls / floors / ceilings
Decoration
Furniture
Utilities
Appliances
Lightbulbs / wiring
Kitchen things
Washer / dryer / vacuum
Areas to organize / clean
Computers
Software
Hardware
Connections
CD-ROM
E-mail / Internet
TV
VCR
Music / CDs / tapes
Cameras / film
Phones
Answering machine
Sports equipment
Closets / clothes
Garage / storage
Vehicle repair / maintenance
Tools
Luggage
Pets
Health care
Doctors
Dentists
Specialists
Hobbies
Books / records / tapes / disks
Errands
Hardware store
Drugstore
Market
Bank
Cleaner
Stationer
Community
Neighborhood
Schools
Local government
Civic issues
The " In " Inventory
If your head is empty of everything , personally and professionally , 
then your in-basket is probably quite full , and likely spilling over . 
In addition to the paper-based and physical items in your inbasket , your inventory of " in " should include any resident voicemails and all the e-mails that are currently staged in the " in " area
of your communication software . It should also include any items
117
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
on your organizer lists for which you have not yet determined
next actions . 
I usually recommend that clients download
their voice-mails onto paper notes and put those into
their in-baskets , along with their whole organizer
notebooks , which usually need significant reassessment . If you ' ve been using something like a Palm
PDA or Microsoft Outlook or Lotus Organizer for
anything other than calendar and telephone / address
functionality , I suggest you print out any task and todo lists and put them , too , into your in-basket . 
E-mails are best left where they are , because of their volume
and the efficiency factor of dealing with them within their own
minisystem . 
But " In " Doesn ' t Stay in " In " 
When you ' ve done all that , you ' re ready to take the next step . You
don ' t want to leave anything in " in " for an indefinite period of
time , because then it would without fail creep back into your psyche again , since your mind would know you weren ' t dealing with
it . Of course , one of the main factors in people ' s resistance to collecting stuff into " in " is the lack of a good processing and organizing methodology to handle it . 
That brings us to the next chapter :  " Getting ' In ' to Empty .  " 
118
Connection is
completed when
you can easily see
the edges to the
inventory of
everything that is
complete . 
Processing : Getting " In " to Empty
ASSUMING THAT YOU have collected everything that has your attention , your job now is to actually get to the bottom of " in .  " Getting 
 " in " to empty doesn ' t mean actually doing all the actions and
projects that you ' ve collected . It just means identifying each item
and deciding what it is , what it means , and what you ' re going to
do with it . 
When you ' ve finished processing " in ,  " you will have
1 | trashed what you don ' t need ; 
2 | completed any less-than-two-minute actions ; 
3 | handed off to others anything that can be delegated ; 
4 | sorted into your own organizing system reminders of
actions that require more than two minutes ; and
5 | identified any larger commitments ( projects ) you now have , 
based on the input . 
To get an overview of this process , you may find it useful
here to refer to the Workflow Diagram on page 120 . The center
column illustrates all the steps involved in processing and deciding your next actions . 
This chapter focuses on the components in the diagram ' s
center column , the steps from " in " to next action . You ' ll immediately see the natural organization that results from following this
process for each of your open loops . For instance , if you pick up
something from " in " and realize ,  " I ' ve got to call Andrea about
119
120 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING
CHAPTER 6 I PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
that , but I ' ve got to do it on Monday , when she ' s in her office ,  " 
then you ' ll defer that action immediately and enter it into your
calendar for Monday . 
I recommend that you read through this chapter and the
next one , on organizing your actions , before you actually start
processing what you ' ve collected in " in .  " It may save you some
steps . When I coach clients through this process , it invariably
becomes a dance back and forth between the simple decisionmaking stage of processing the open loops and the trickier task of
figuring out the best way to enter these decisions in a client ' s particular organization system . 
Many of my coaching clients , for example , are eager to
get set up personally on a PDA organizer that will synchronize with Microsoft Outlook , which their company is using for
e-mail and scheduling . The first thing we have to do ( after
we ' ve collected the in-basket ) is make sure all their hardware
and software are working . Then we clean up ( print out and
erase , usually ) everything they have previously tried to organize
in their Outlook task lists and put it all into " in .  " Then we establish some working categories such as " Calls ,  "  " Errands ,  "  " Agendas ,  "  " At Computer ,  " and so on . As we begin to process the
in-basket , the client can go immediately to his computer and
type his action steps directly into the system he will ultimately
depend on . 
If you ' re not sure yet what you ' re going to be using as a personal reminder system , don ' t worry . You can begin very appropriately with the low-tech initial process of notes on pieces of paper . 
You can always upgrade your tools later , once you have your system in place . 
Processing Guidelines
The best way to learn this model is by doing . But there are a few
basic rules to follow : 
121
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
• Process the top item first . 
• Process one item at a time . 
• Never put anything back into " in .  " 
Top Item First
Even if the second item down is a personal note to you from the
president of your country , and the top item is a piece of junk mail , 
you ' ve got to process the junk mail first ! That ' s an
exaggeration to make a point , but the principle is an
important one : everything gets processed equally . 
The verb " process " does not mean " spend time on .  " It
just means " decide what the thing is and what action
is required , and then dispatch it accordingly .  " You ' re going to get
to the bottom of the basket as soon as you can anyway , and you
don ' t want to avoid dealing with anything in there . 
Emergency Scanning Is Not Processing
Most people get to their in-basket or their e-mail and look for the
most urgent , most fun , or most interesting stuff to deal with first .  
 " Emergency scanning " is fine and necessary sometimes ( I do
it , too )  . Maybe you ' ve just come back from an off-site meeting
and have to be on a long conference call in fifteen minutes . So
you check to make sure there are no land mines about to explode
and to see if your client has e-mailed you back OK ' ing the big
proposal . 
But that ' s not processing your in-basket ; it ' s emergency
scanning . When you ' re in processing mode , you must get into the
habit of starting at one end and just cranking through items one
at a time , in order . As soon as you break that rule , and process only
what you feel like processing , and in whatever order , you ' ll invariably begin to leave things unprocessed . Then you will no longer
have a functioning funnel , and it will back up all over your desk
and office . 
122
Process does
not mean " spend
time on .  " 
CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
LIFOorFIFO ? 
Theoretically , you should flip your in-basket upside down and
process first the first thing that came in . As long as you go from
one end clear through to the other within a reasonable period of
time , though , it won ' t make much difference . You ' re
going to see it all in short order anyway . And if you ' re
going to attempt to clear up a big backlog of e-mails
staged in " in ,  " you ' ll actually discover it ' s more efficient to process the last-in first because of all the discussion threads that accumulate on top of one
another . 
One Item at a Time
You may find you have a tendency , while processing your inbasket , to pick something up , not know exactly what you want to
do about it , and then let your eyes wander onto another item farther down the stack and get engaged with it . That item may be
more attractive to your psyche because you know right away what
to do with it—and you don ' t feel like thinking about what ' s in
your hand . This is dangerous territory . What ' s in your hand is
likely to land on a " hmppphhh " stack on the side of your desk
because you become distracted by something easier , more important , or more interesting below it . 
Most people also want to take a whole stack of things out of
the in-basket at once , put it right in front of them , and try to
crank through it . Although I empathize with the desire to " deal
with a big chunk ,  " I constantly remind clients to put back everything but the one item on top . The focus on just one thing forces
the requisite attention and decision-making to get through all
your stuff . And if you get interrupted ( which is likely )  , you won ' t
have umpteen parts of " in " scattered around outside the tray and
out of control again . 
123
The in-basket is a
processing station , 
not a storage bin . 
124
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
The Multitasking Exception
There ' s a subtle exception to the one-item-at-a-time rule . Some
personality types really need to shift their focus away from something for at least a minute in order to make a decision about it . 
When I see this going on with someone , I let him take two or
sometimes three things out at once as he ' s processing . It ' s then
easier and faster for him to make a choice about the action
required . 
Remember , multitasking is an exception—and it works
only
if you hold to the discipline of working through every item in
short order , and never avoid any decision for longer than a minute
or two . 
Nothing Goes Back into " In " 
There ' s a one-way path out of " in .  " This is actually what was
meant by the old admonition to " handle things once ,  " though
handling things just once is in fact a bad idea . If you did that , 
you ' d never have a list , because you would finish everything as
soon as you saw it . You ' d also be highly ineffective and inefficient , 
since most things you deal with are not to be acted upon the first
time you become aware of them . Where the advice does hold is in
eliminating the bad habit of continually picking things up out of 
 " in ,  " not deciding what they mean or what you ' re going to do
about them , and then just leaving them there . A better admonition would be ,  " The first time you pick something up from your
in-basket , decide what to do about it and where it goes . Never put
it back in " in .  " 
The Key Processing Question :  
 " What ' s the Next Action ?  " 
You ' ve got the message . You ' re going to deal with one item at a
time . And you ' re going to make a firm next-action decision about
CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
each one . This may sound easy—and it is—but
it
requires you to do some fast , hard thinking . Much of
the time the action will not be self-evident ; it will
need to be determined . 
On that first item , for example , do you need to
call someone ? Fill something out ? Get information
from the Web ? Buy something at the store ? Talk to
your secretary ? E-mail your boss ? What ? If there ' s an
action , its specific nature will determine the next set
of options . But what if you say ,  " There ' s really nothing to do with this "  ? 
I am rather like a
mosquito in a
nudist camp ; I
know what I want
to do , but I don ' t
know where to
begin . 
—Stephen Bayne
What If There Is No Action ? 
It ' s likely that a portion of your in-basket will require no action . 
There will be three types of things in this category : 
•Trash
•Items to incubate
•Reference material
Trash
If you ' ve been following my suggestions , you ' ll no doubt already
have tossed out a big pile of stuff . It ' s also likely that you will have
put stacks of material into " in " that include things you don ' t need
anymore . So don ' t be surprised if there ' s still a lot more to throw
away as you process your stuff . 
Processing all the things in your world will make you more
conscious of what you are going to do and what you should not be
doing . One director of a foundation I worked with discovered that
he had allowed way too many e-mails ( thousands !  ) to accumulate—
e-mails that in fact he wasn ' t ever going to respond to anyway . He
told me that using my method forced him to " go on a healthy
diet " about what he would allow to hang around his world as an
incompletion . 
It ' s likely that at some point you ' ll come up against the question
125
126
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
of whether or not to keep something for future reference . I have
two ways of dealing with that : 
• When in doubt , throw it out . 
• When in doubt , keep it . 
Take your pick . I think either approach is fine . You just need to
trust your intuition and be realistic about your space . Most people
have some angst about all of this because their systems have never
really been totally functional and clear-edged before . If you make
a clean distinction between what ' s reference and supplies and
what requires action , and if your reference system is simple and
workable , you can easily keep as much material as you can accommodate . Since no action is required on it , it ' s just a matter of
physical space and logistics . 
Filing experts can offer you more detailed guidelines about
all this , and your CPA can provide record-retention timetables
that will tell you how long you should keep what kinds of documentation . My suggestion is that you make the distinction about
whether something is actionable or not . Once it ' s clear that no
action is needed , there ' s room for lots of options . 
Incubate
There will probably be things in your in-basket about which you
will say to yourself ,  " There ' s nothing to do on this now , but there
might be later .  " Examples of this would be : 
• A flier announcing a chamber of commerce breakfast with a
guest speaker you might want to hear , but it ' s two weeks away , 
and you ' re not sure yet if you ' ll be at home then or out of town
on a business trip . 
• An agenda for a board meeting you ' ve been invited to attend in
three weeks . No action is required on it , other than your briefing
yourself a day ahead of the meeting by reading the agenda . 
CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
• An advertisement for the next Quicken software upgrade for
your personal finances . Do you really need this next version ? 
You don ' t know .  .  . you ' d rather sleep on it for another week . 
• An idea you had about something you might want to do for
next year ' s annual sales meeting . There ' s nothing to do on this
now , but you ' d like to be reminded when the time comes to
start planning for it . 
• A note to yourself about taking a watercolor class , which you
have zero time for right now . 
What do you do with these kinds of things ? There are two
options that could work : 
• Write them on a " Someday / Maybe " list . 
• Put them on your calendar or in a " tickler " file . 
The point of all of these incubation procedures is that they
give you a way to get the items off your mind right now and let
you feel confident that some reminder of the possible action will
resurface at an appropriate time . I ' ll elaborate on these in more
detail in the next chapter , on organizing . For now , just put a Postit on such items , and label them " maybe " or " remind on October 17 ,  " and set them aside in a " pending " category you will be
accumulating for later sorting .  * 
Reference
Many of the things you will uncover in " in " will need no action but
may have value as potentially useful information about projects 
* One of your extra stack baskets is ideal for this purpose . Use it temporarily
during this initial processing to gather things to organize later . Afterward you
can use it to hold pending work-in-progress papers and physical reminders of
next actions . 
127
128
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
4ft
and topics . Ideally , you have already set up a workable filing system 
( as described in chapter 4 ) for your reference and support information . As you come across material in your in-basket and e-mail
that you ' d like to keep for archival or support purposes , file it . 
You ' ll probably discover that there are lots of miscellaneous
kinds of things that you want to keep but have piled up in stacks
or stuffed into drawers because your reference system was too formal or just plain nonexistent . Let me remind you here that a lessthan-sixty-second , fun-to-use general-reference filing system
within arm ' s reach of where you sit is a mission-critical component of full implementation of this methodology . In the " battle
zone " of real life , if it ' s not easy , fast , and fun to file , you ' ll stack
instead of organizing . And then it will become much more difficult to keep things processed . 
Whenever you come across something you want to keep , 
make a label for it , put it in a file folder , and tuck that into your filing drawer . Or put a Post-it on it instructing your secretary or
assistant to do the same . In my early days of coaching I used to
give my clients permission to keep a " To File " pile . No longer . I
discovered that if you can ' t get it into your system immediately , 
you ' re probably not ever going to . If you won ' t do it now , you
likely won ' t do it later , either . 
And If There Is an Action .  .  . What Is It ? 
This is the biggie . If there ' s something that needs to be done
about the item in " in ,  " then you need to decide what exactly
that next action is .  " Next Actions " again , means the next physical , 
visible activity that would be required to move the situation toward
closure . 
This is both easier and more difficult than it sounds . 
The next action should be easy to figure out , but there are
often some quick analyses and several planning steps that haven ' t
occurred yet in your mind , and these have to happen before you
can determine precisely what has to happen to complete the item , 
even if it ' s a fairly simple one . 
CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
Let ' s look at a sample list of the things that a person might
typically have his attention on . 
•Clean the garage
• Do my taxes
•- Conference I ' m going to
•Bobby ' s birthday
• Press release
• Performance reviews
• Management changes
Although each of these items may seem relatively clear as a
task or project , determining the next action on each one will take
some thought . 
• Clean the garage 
.  .  . Well , I just have to get in there and start . No , wait a minute , 
there ' s a big refrigerator in there that I need to get rid of first . I should
find out if John Patrick wants it for his camp . I should .  .  . 
• Call John re refrigerator in garage
What about .  .  . 
• Do my taxes 
.  .  . but I actually cant start on them until I have my last K-l
back . Can ' t do any thing until then . So I ' m .  .  . 
• Waiting for K-l from Acme Trust
And for the .  .  . 
• Conference I ' m going to
129
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO 
.  .  . I need to find out whether Sandra is going to prepare a press
kit for us . I guess I need to .  .  . 
• E-mail Sandra re press kits for the conference 
.  .  . and so forth . The action steps— " Call John ,  "  
 " Waiting
for K-l ,  "  " E-mail Sandra " —are what need to be decided about
everything that is actionable in your in-basket . 
The Action Step Needs to Be the Absolute Next Physical Thing to Do
Remember that these are physical , visible activities . Many people
think they ' ve determined the " next action " when they get it down
to " set meeting .  " But that ' s not the next action , 
because it ' s not descriptive of physical behavior . How
do you set a meeting ? Well , it could be with a phone
call or an e-mail , but to whom ? Decide . If you don ' t
decide now , you ' ll still have to decide at some other
point , and what this process is designed to do is actually get you to finish the thinking exercise about this
item . If you haven ' t identified the next physical
action required to kick-start it , there will be a psychological gap every time you think about it even
vaguely . You ' ll tend to resist noticing it . 
When you get to a phone or to your computer , you want to
have all your thinking completed so you can use the tools you
have and the location you ' re in to more easily get things done , 
having already defined what there is to do . 
What if you say to yourself ,  " Well , the next thing I need to
do is decide what to do about this ?  " That ' s a tricky one . Deciding
isn ' t really an action , because actions take time , and deciding
doesn ' t . There ' s always some physical activity that
can be done to facilitate your decision-making . 
Ninety-nine percent of the time you just need more
information before you can make a decision . That
additional information can come from external
130
Until you know
what the next
physical action is , 
there ' s still more
thinking required
before anything can
happen . 
Determine what you
need to do in order
to decide . 
CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
sources (  " Call Susan to get her input on the proposal "  ) or from
internal thinking (  " Draft ideas about new reorganization "  )  . 
Either way , there ' s still a next action to be determined in order to
move the project forward . 
Once You Decide What the Action Step is
You have three options once you decide what the next action
really is . 
• Do it ( if the action takes less than two minutes )  . 
• Delegate it ( if you ' re not the most appropriate person to do the
action )  . 
• Defer it into your organization system as an option for work to
do later . 
Do It
If the next action can be done in two minutes or less , do it when
you first pick the item up . If the memo requires just a thirtysecond reading and then a quick " yes "  /  " no "  / other response on a
Post-it back to the sender , do it now . If you can browse the catalog
in just a minute or two to see if there might be anything of interest in it , browse away , and then toss it , route it , or reference it as
required . If the next action on something is to leave a quick message on someone ' s voice-mail , make the call now . 
Even if the item is not a " high priority " one , do it now if
you ' re ever going to do it at all . The rationale for the two-minute
rule is that that ' s more or less the point where it starts taking
longer to store and track an item than to deal with it the first time
it ' s in your hands-—in other words , it ' s the efficiency cutoff . If the
thing ' s not important enough to be done , throw it away . If it is , 
and if you ' re going to do it sometime , the efficiency factor should
come into play . 
Many people find that getting into the habit of following the
two-minute rule creates a dramatic improvement in their productivity . One vice president of a large software company told me
131
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
that it gave him an additional hour a day of quality discretionary
time ! He was one of those 300-e-mails-a-day high-tech executives , highly focused for most of the workday on
three key initiatives . Many of those e-mails were
from people who reported to him—and they needed
his eyes on something , his comments and OKs , in
order to move forward . But because they were not on a topic in
his rifle sights , he would just stage the e-mails in " in ,  " to get to 
 " later .  " After several thousand of them piled up , he would have to
go in to work and spend whole weekends trying to catch up . That
would have been OK if he were twenty-six , when everything ' s an
adrenaline rush anyway , but he was in his thirties and had young
kids . Working all weekend was no longer acceptable behavior . 
When I coached him we went through all 800-plus e-mails he
currently had in " in .  " It turned out that a lot could be dumped , 
quite a few needed to be filed as reference , and many others
required less-than-two-minute replies that he whipped through . I
checked with him a year later , and he was still current ! He never
let his e-mails mount up beyond a screenful anymore . He said it
had changed the nature of his division because of the dramatic
decrease in his own response time . His staff thought he was now
made of Teflon ! 
That ' s a rather dramatic testimonial , but it ' s an indication of
just how critical some of these simple processing behaviors can be , 
especially as the volume and speed of the input increase for you
personally . 
Two minutes is in fact just a guideline . If you have a long
open window of time in which to process your in-basket , you can
extend the cutoff for each item to five or ten minutes . If you ' ve got
to get to the bottom of all your input rapidly , in order to figure out
how best to use your afternoon , then you may want to shorten the
time to one minute , or even thirty seconds , so you can get through
everything a little faster . 
It ' s not a bad idea to time yourself for a few of these while
you ' re becoming familiar with the process . Most clients I work
132
The two-minute
rule is magic . 
CHAPTERS | PROCESSING : SETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
with have difficulty estimating how long two minutes actually is , and they greatly underestimate how
long certain actions are likely to take . For instance , if
your action is to leave someone a message , and you
get the real person instead of his or her voice-mail , 
the call will usually take quite a bit longer than two
minutes . 
There ' s nothing you really need to track about
your two-minute actions—you just do them . If , however , you take
an action and don ' t finish the project with that one action , you ' ll
need to clarify what ' s next on it , and manage that according to the
same criteria . For instance , if you act to replace the cartridge in
your favorite pen and discover that you ' re out of cartridge refills , 
you ' ll want to decide on the next action about getting them (  " Buy
refills at the store "  ) and do , delegate , or defer it appropriately . 
Adhere to the two-minute rule and see how much you get
done in the process of clearing out your " in " stacks . Many people
are amazed by how many two-minute actions are possible , often
on some of their most critical current projects . 
Let me make one more observation regarding the twominute rule , this time as it relates to your comfort with typing
e-mails . If you ' re in a large-volume e-mail environment , you ' ll
greatly improve your productivity by increasing your typing speed
and using the shortcut keyboard commands for your operating
system and your common e-mail software . Too many sophisticated professionals are seriously hamstrung because they still hunt
and peck and try to use their mouse too much . More work could
be dispatched faster by combining the two-minute rule with
improved computer skills . I ' ve found that many executives aren ' t
resisting technology , they ' re just resisting their keyboards ! 
Delegate It
If the next action is going to take longer than two minutes , ask
yourself ,  " Am I the best person to be doing it ?  " If not , hand it off
to the appropriate party , in a systematic format . 
133
You ' ll be surprised
how many twominute actions you
can perform even
on your most
critical projects . 
134
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
Delegation is not always downstream . You may decide ,  " This
has got to get over to Customer Service ,  " or " My boss needs to
put his eyes on this next ,  " or " I need my partner ' s point of view on
this .  " 
A " systematic format " could be any of the following : 
•Send the appropriate party an e-mail . 
•Write a note or an overnote on paper and route the item " out " 
to that person . 
•Leave him or her a voice-mail . 
•Add it as an agenda item on a list for your next real-time
conversation with that person . 
•Talk to him or her directly , either face-to-face or by phone . 
Although any of these options can work , I would recommend them in the above order , top to bottom . E-mail is usually
the fastest mode into the system ; it provides an electronic record ; 
and the receiver gets to deal with it at his or her convenience . 
Written notes are next because they too can get into the system
immediately , and the recipient then has a physical particle to use
as an organizational reminder . If you ' re passing on paper-based
material as part of the handoff , a written communication is obviously the way to go ; as with e-mail , the person you hand it off to
can then deal with it on his or her own schedule . Voice-mail can
be efficient , and many professionals live by it ; the downside is that
tracking becomes an additional requirement for both you and the
recipient , and what you say is not always what gets heard . Next
would be saving the communication on an agenda list or in a
folder for your next regular meeting with the person . Sometimes
this is necessary because of the sensitive or detailed nature of the
topic , but it then must wait to get moving until that meeting
occurs . The least preferable option would be to interrupt what
both you and the person are doing to talk about the item . This is
immediate , but it hampers workflow for both of you and has the
same downside as voice-mail : no written record . 
CHAPTER 6 I PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
Tracking the Handoff If you do delegate an action to someone
else , and if you care at all whether something happens as a result , 
you ' ll need to track it . As I will walk you through in the next
chapter , about organizing , you ' ll see that a significant category to
manage is " Waiting For .  " 
As you develop your own customized system , what you
eventually hand off and then track could look like a list in a planner , a file folder holding separate papers for each item , and / or a
list categorized as " Waiting For " in your software . For now , if you
don ' t have a trusted system set up already , just put a note on a
piece of paper— " W / F : reply from Bob " —and put that into a 
 " Pending " stack of notes in a separate pile or tray that may result
from your processing . 
What If the Ball Is Already in Someone Else ' s Court ? In the example cited above about waiting for the last K-l to come in so you
can do your taxes , the next action is currently on someone else ' s
plate . In such situations you will also want to track the action as a
delegated item , or as a " Waiting For .  " On the paper that says " Do
my taxes ,  " write something like " Waiting for K-l from Acme
Trust " and put that into your " Pending " stack . 
It ' s important that you record the date on everything you
hand off to others . This , of all the categories in your personal system , is the most crucial one to keep tabs on . The few times you
will actually want to refer to that information (  " But I called and
ordered that on March 12 "  ) will make it worth establishing this as
a lifelong habit . 
Defer It
It ' s likely that most of the next actions you determine for things in 
 " in " will be yours to do and will take longer than two minutes to
complete . A call you need to make to a customer ; an e-mail you
need to spend a little time thinking about and drafting to your
team ; a gift you need to buy for your brother at the stationery
store ; a piece of software you need to download from the Web and
135
136
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
try out ; a conversation you must have with your spouse about an
investment you think you should make—all of these fit that
description . 
These actions will have to be written down somewhere and
then organized in the appropriate categories so you can access
them when you need to . For the moment , go ahead and put Postits on the pieces of paper in " in ,  " with the action written on them , 
and add these to the " Pending " stack of papers that have been
processed . 
The " Pending " Things That Are Left
If you follow the instructions in this chapter , you ' ll dump a mess
of things , file a bunch , do a lot of two-minute actions , and hand
off a number of items to other people . You ' ll also wind up with
a stack of items that have actions associated with them that you
still need to do—soon , someday , or on a specific date—and
reminders of things you ' re waiting on from other people . This 
 " Pending " group is made up of the actions you ' ve delegated or
deferred . It is what still needs to be organized in some fashion in
your personal system , a topic I ' ll cover in step-by-step detail
in the next chapter . 
Identifying the Projects You Have
This last step in getting to the bottom of " in " requires a shift in
perspective from the single-action details to the larger picture—
your projects . 
Again , I define a " project " as any outcome you ' re committed
to achieving that will take more than one action step to complete . 
If you look through an inventory of actions that you have already
been generating— " Call Frank about the car alarm "  ;  " E-mail
Bernadette re conference materials " —you ' ll no doubt recognize a
number of things that are larger than the single action you ' ve
defined . There ' s still going to be something about " car alarm " to
CHAPTER 6 | PROCESSING : GETTING " IN " TO EMPTY
do after the call to Frank , and there will still be something to handle about the conference after the e-mail to Bernadette . 
I hope you ' re able to see the very practical reason for defining
projects as broadly as I do : If the action step you ' ve identified will
not complete the commitment , then you ' ll need
some stake in the ground to keep reminding you
of actions you have pending until you have closure . 
You need to make a list of projects . A " Projects " list
may include anything from " Give holiday party " to 
 " Divest the Widget product line " to " Finalize compensation package .  " The purpose of this list is not to
reflect your priorities but just to ensure that you ' ve
got placeholders for all those open loops . 
Whether you draw up your " Projects " list while you ' re initially processing your in-basket or after you ' ve set up your action
lists doesn ' t really matter . It just needs to be done at some point , 
and it must be maintained , as it ' s the key driver for reviewing
where you are and where you want to be . 
For now , let ' s make sure your organizing setup is " all systems go .  " 
137
Right now you
probably have
between thirty and a
hundred projects . 
Organizing : Setting Up the
Right Buckets
HAVING A TOTAL and seamless system of organization in place gives
you tremendous power because it allows your mind to let go of
lower-level thinking and graduate to intuitive focusing , undistracted by matters that haven ' t been dealt
with appropriately . But your physical organization
system must be better than your mental one in order
for that to happen . 
In this chapter I ' ll lead you through the organizing
steps and tools that will be required as you process your in-basket . As
you initially process " in ,  " you ' ll create lists and groupings of things
you want to organize and you ' ll invariably think of additional
items to include . In other words , your organization system is not 
 '  ' something that you ' ll necessarily create all at once , in
a vacuum . It will evolve as you process your stuff and
test out whether you have put everything in the best
place for you . 
The outer ring of the Workflow Diagram 
( opposite ) shows the main groupings into which
things will go as you decide what they are and what needs to be
done about them . 
138
Airtight organization
is required for your
focus to remain on
the broader horizon . 
I got it all together , 
but I forgot where
I put it . 
—
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—ORGANIZING
139
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
The Basic Categories
There are seven primary types of things that you ' ll want to keep 
track of and manage from an organizational perspective : 
• A " Projects " list 
• Project support material 
• Calendared actions and information 
• " Next Actions " lists
• A " Waiting For " list
• Reference material
• A " Someday / Maybe " list
The Importance of Hard Edges
It ' s critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely distinct
from one another . They each represent a discrete type of agreement we make with ourselves , and if they lose their edges and
begin to blend , much of the value of organizing will be lost . 
If you put reference materials in the same pile as
things you still want to read , for example , you ' ll go
numb to the stack . If you put items on your " Next
Actions " lists that really need to go on the calendar , 
because they have to occur on specific days , then you
won ' t trust your calendar and you ' ll continually have to
reassess your action lists . If you have a project that you ' re
not going to be doing anything about for some time , it must go onto
your " Someday / Maybe " list so you can relate to the " Projects " list
with the rigorous action-generating focus it needs . And if something
you ' re " Waiting For " is included on one of your action lists , you ' ll
continually get bogged down by nonproductive rethinking . 
All You Really Need Is Lists and Folders
Once you know what you need to keep track of ( covered in the
previous chapter , on Processing )  , all you really need is lists and
140
The categories must
be kept visually , 
physically , and
psychologically
separate . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
folders for reference and support materials . Your lists 
( which , as I ' ve indicated , could also be items in folders ) will keep track of projects and someday / maybes , 
as well as the actions you ' ll need to take on your
active open loops . Folders ( digital or paper-based ) 
will be required to hold your reference material and
the support information for active projects . 
Lots of people have been making lists for years
but have never found the procedure to be particularly
effective . There ' s rampant skepticism about systems
as simple as the one I ' m recommending . But most
list-makers haven ' t put the appropriate things on
their lists , or have left them incomplete , which has kept the lists
themselves from being very functional . Once you know what goes
on the lists , however , things get much easier ; then you just need a
way to manage them . 
As I ' ve said , you shouldn ' t bother to create some external
structuring of the priorities on your lists that you ' ll then have to
rearrange or rewrite as things change . Attempting to impose such
scaffolding has been a big source of frustration in many people ' s
organizing . You ' ll be prioritizing more intuitively as you see the
whole list , against quite a number of shifting variables . The list is
just a way for you to keep track of the total inventory of active
things to which you have made a commitment , and to have that
inventory available for review . 
When I refer to a " list ,  " keep in mind that I mean nothing
more than a grouping of items with some similar characteristic . A
list could look like one of three things :  ( 1 ) a file folder with separate paper notes for the items within the category ;  ( 2 ) an actual
list on a titled piece of paper ( often within a loose-leaf organizer
or planner )  ; or ( 3 ) an inventory in a software program or on a
digital assistant , such as Microsoft Outlook task categories or a
category on a handheld PDA . 
141 
/ would not give a
fig for the
simplicity on this
side of complexity , 
but I would give
my life for the
simplicity on the
other side of
complexity . 
—Oliver Wendell
Holmes
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Organizing Action Reminders
If you ' ve emptied your in-basket , you ' ll undoubtedly have created
a stack of " Pending " reminders for yourself , representing longerthan-two-minute actions that cannot be delegated to someone
else . You ' ll probably have anywhere from twenty to sixty or seventy or more such items . You ' ll also have accumulated reminders
of things that you ' ve handed off to other people , and perhaps
some things that need be placed in your calendar or a " Someday / 
Maybe " kind of holder . 
You ' ll want to sort all of this into groupings that make sense
to you so you can review them as options for work to do when you
have time . You ' ll also want to decide on the most appropriate way
physically to organize those groups , whether as items in folders or
on lists , either paper-based or digital . 
The Actions That Go on Your Calendar
For the purposes of organization , as I ' ve said , there are two basic
kinds of actions : those that must be done on a certain day and / or
at a particular time , and those that just need to be done as soon as
you can get to them , around your other calendared items . Calendared action items can be either time-specific ( e . g .  ,  " 4 : 00—5 : 00
meet with Jim "  ) or day-specific (  " Call Rachel Tuesday to see if she
got the proposal "  )  . 
As you were processing your in-basket , you probably came
across things that you put right into your calendar as they showed
up . You may have realized that the next action on
getting a medical checkup , for example , was to call
and make the appointment , and so ( since the action
required two minutes or less ) you actually did it when
it occurred to you . Writing the appointment into
your calendar as you made it would then have been
common sense . 
What many people want to do , however , based
142
The calendar should
show only the " hard
landscape " around
which you do the
rest of your actions . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
on old habits of writing daily to-do lists , is put actions on the calendar that they think they ' d really like to get done next Monday , say , 
but that then actually might not , and that might then have to be
taken over to following days . Resist this impulse . You need to trust
your calendar as sacred territory , reflecting the exact hard edges of
your day ' s commitments , which should be noticeable at a glance
while you ' re on the run . That ' ll be much easier if the only things in
there are those that you absolutely have to get done on that day . 
When the calendar is relegated to its proper role in organizing , the
majority of the actions that you need to do are left in the category of 
 " as soon as possible , against all the other things I have to do .  " 
Organizing As-Soon-As-Possible Actions by Context
Over many years I have discovered that the best way to be
reminded of an " as soon as I can " action is by the particular context
required for that action—that is , either the tool or the location or
the person needed to complete it . For instance , if the action requires
a computer , it should go on an " At Computer " list . If your action
demands that you be out in your car driving around ( such as stopping by the bank or going to the hardware store )  , the " Errands " list
would be the appropriate place to track it . If the next step is to talk
about something face-to-face with your partner Emily , putting it
into an " Emily " folder or list makes the most sense . 
How discrete these categories will need to be will depend on 
( 1 ) how many actions you actually have to track ; and ( 2 ) how
often you change the contexts within which to do them . 
If you are that rare person who has only twenty-five next
actions , a single " Next Actions " list might suffice . It could include
items as diverse as " Buy nails " and " Talk to boss about staff
changes " and " Draft ideas about off-site meeting .  " If , however , 
you have fifty or a hundred next actions pending , keeping all of
those on one big list would make it too difficult to see what you
needed to see ; each time you got any window of time to do something , you ' d have to do unproductive resorting . If you happened to
be on a short break at a conference , during which you might be
143
144
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
able to make some calls , you ' d have to identify the items that were
calls among a big batch of unrelated items . When you went out to
do odds and ends , you ' d probably want to pick out your errands
and make another list . 
Another productivity factor that this kind of organization
supports is leveraging your energy when you ' re in a certain mode . 
When you ' re in " phone mode ,  " it helps to make a lot of phone
calls—just crank down your " Calls " list . When your computer is up
and running and you ' re cruising along digitally , it ' s useful to get as
much done on-line as you can without having to shift into another
kind of activity . It takes more energy than most people realize to
unhook out of one set of behaviors and get into another kind of
rhythm and tool set . And obviously , when a key person is sitting in
front of you in your office , you ' d be wise to have all the things you
need to talk about with him or her immediately at hand . 
The Most Common Categories of Action Reminders
You ' ll probably find that at least a few of the following common
list headings for next actions will make sense for you : 
• " Calls " 
• " At Computer " 
• " Errand ' s " 
• " Office Actions " or " At Office "  ( miscellaneous ) 
• " At Home " 
• " Agendas "  ( for people and meetings ) 
• " Read / Review "  
 " Calls " This is the list of all the phone calls you need to make ; 
you can work off it as long as you have a phone available . The
more mobile you are ( especially if you have a cell phone )  , the
more useful you ' ll find it to have one single list of all your calls : 
those strange little windows of time that you wind up with when
you ' re off-site or traveling—on a break or waiting for a plane , 
maybe—offer a perfect opportunity to work down your list . Hav-
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
ing a discrete " Calls " list makes it much easier to focus and intuitively pick the best call to make in the moment . 
I -suggest that you take the time to write the phone number
itself alongside each item . There are many situations in which you
would probably make the call if the number was already there in
front of you but not if you had to look it up .  
 " At Computer " If you work with a computer—particularly if you
move around with a laptop or have a PC at work and another one
at home—it can be helpful to group all those actions that you
need to do when it ' s on and running . This will allow you to see all
your options for computer work to do , reminding you of all the
e-mails you need to send , the documents you need to draft or edit , 
and so on . 
Because I fly a lot , I even maintain an " Online " action list , separate from my " At Computer " 
one . When I ' m on a plane , I can ' t easily connect to
the Web or to my server , as many actions require . So
instead of having to rethink what I can and can ' t do
whenever I look at my " At Computer " list , I can trust
that none of my " At Computer " actions require that I
be connected , which frees my mind to make choices
based on other criteria . 
If you have a computer only at work , you may
not need a separate " At Computer " list ;  " Office Actions " may
cover those actions because the office is the only place you can do
them anyway .  ( Similarly , if you have a computer only at home , 
and it ' s not a laptop , you may be able to put computer-specific
actions on your " At Home " list .  )  
 " Errands " It makes a lot of sense to group together in one place
reminders of all the things you need to do when you ' re " out and
about .  " When you know you need to get in your car and go somewhere , it ' s great to be able to look at the list while you ' re on the
road . Actions like " Get stock certificates from safety-deposit box ,  " 
145
Think carefully
about where and
howyou can and
can ' t do which
actions , and
organize your lists
accordingly . 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO 
 " Pick up pictures at framers ,  " and " Buy petunias at nursery " would
all go here . 
This list could , of course , be nothing more elaborate than a
Post-it that you keep in your planner somewhere , or a screen in an 
 " Errands " category of the " To Do " section on your Palm organizer . 
It ' s often helpful to track sublists within individual 
 " Errands " items . For instance , as soon as you realize you need
something from the hardware store , you might want to make 
 " Hardware Store " the list item and then append a sublist of all the
things you want to pick up there , as you think of them . On the
low-tech end , you could create a " Hardware Store " Post-it ; on
the high-tech side , if you were using a digital list , you
could attach a " note " to " Hardware Store " on your list
and input the details there . 
Because I travel in major metropolitan areas so
much , I keep two " Errands " lists— " Errands—Ojai "  
( where I live ) and " Errands—Anywhere ,  " for all
those other things I can pick up even when I ' m on
the road .  " T-connectors for irrigation " would go on 
 " Errands—
Ojai ,  " but " Get dress socks " would go on " Errands—Anywhere .  "  
 " Office Actions '  /  " At Office " If you work in an office , there will be
certain things that you can do only there , and a list of those will
be a useful thing to have in front of you then—though obviously , 
if
you have a phone and a computer in your office , and you have 
 " Calls " and " At Computer " as separate lists , they ' ll be in play as
well . I ' d use an " Office Actions " or " At Office " list for anything that
required an Internet connection available only , or even most conveniently , in the office—for example , a reminder to download a
large software program from the Web would go on this list for me .  
 " At Home " Many actions can be done only at home , and it makes
sense to keep a list specific to that context . I ' m sure you ' ve got
numerous personal and around-the-house projects , and often the
146
We must strive to
reach that
simplicity that lies
beyond
sophistication . 
—-John Gardner
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
next thing to do on them is just to do them .  " Hang new print ,  "  
 " Organize CDs ,  " and " Switch closets to winter clothes " would be
typical items for this grouping . 
If you have an office at home , as I do , anything that can be
done only there goes on the " At Home " list .  ( If you work only at
home and don ' t go to another office , you won ' t need an " Office
Actions " list at all—the " At Home " list will suffice .  )  
 " Agendas " Invariably you ' ll find that many of your next actions
need to either occur in a real-time interaction with someone or be
brought up in a committee , team , or staff meeting . 
You have to talk to your partner about an idea for
next year ; you want to check with your spouse about
his schedule for the spring ; you need to delegate a
task to your secretary that ' s too complicated to
explain in an e-mail . And you must make an
announcement at the Monday staff meeting about
the change in expense-report policies . 
These next actions should be put on separate 
 " Agenda " lists for each of those people and for that meeting ( assuming that you attend it regularly )  . Professionals who keep a file folder
to hold all the things they need to go over with their boss already
use a version of this method . If you ' re conscientious about determining all your next actions , though , you may find that you ' ll
need somewhere between three and fifteen of these kinds of lists . I
recommend that separate files or lists be kept for bosses , partners , 
assistants , spouses , and children . You should also keep the same kind
of list for your attorney , financial adviser , accountant , and / or computer consultant , as well as for anyone else with whom you might
have more than one thing to go over the next time you talk on the
phone . 
If you participate in standing meetings—staff meetings , 
project meetings , board meetings , committee meetings , whatever—they , too , deserve their own files , in which you can collect
things that will need to be addressed on those occasions . 
147
Standing meetings
and people you deal
with on an ongoing
basis may need
their own " Agenda " 
lists . 
148
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
Often you ' ll want to keep a running list of things to go over
with someone you ' ll be interacting with only for a limited period
of time . For instance , if you have a contractor doing a significant
piece of work on your house or property , you can create a list for
him for the duration of the project . As you ' re walking around the
site after he ' s left for the day , you may notice several things you
need to talk with him about , and you ' ll want that list to be easy to
capture and to access as needed . 
Given the usefulness of this type of list , your system should
allow you to add " Agendas " ad hoc , as needed , quickly and simply . 
For example , inserting a page for a person or a meeting within an 
 " Agenda " section in a loose-leaf notebook planner takes only seconds , 
as does adding a dedicated " Memo " in a PDA ' s " Agenda " category .  
 " Read / Review " You will no doubt have discovered in your inbasket a number of things for which your next action is to read . I
hope you will have held to the two-minute rule and dispatched a
number of those quick-skim items already—tossing , filing , or
routing them forward as appropriate . 
To-read items that you know will demand more than two
minutes of your time are usually best managed in a separate physical stack-basket labeled " Read / Review .  " This is still a " list " by my
definition , but one that ' s more efficiently dealt with by grouping the documents and magazines themselves in a tray and / or
portable folder . 
For many people , the " Read / Review " stack can get quite
large . That ' s why it ' s critical that the pile be reserved only for
those longer-than-two-minute things that you actually want to
read when you have time . That can be daunting enough in itself , 
but things get seriously out of control and psychologically numbing when the edges of this category are not clearly defined . A
pristine delineation will at least make you conscious of the inventory , and if you ' re like most people , having some type of selfregulating mechanism will help you become more aware of what
you want to keep and what you should just get rid of . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
It ' s practical to have that stack of reading material at hand
and easy to grab on the run when you ' re on your way to a meeting
that may be late starting , a seminar that may have a
window of time when nothing is going on , or a dentist appointment that may keep you waiting to get
your teeth cleaned . Those are all great opportunities
to crank through that kind of reading . People who
don ' t have their " Read / Review " material organized
can waste a lot of time , since life is full of weird little
windows when it could be processed . 
Organizing " Waiting For " 
Like reminders of the actions you need to do , reminders of all
the things that you ' re waiting to get back from or get done by
others have to be sorted and grouped . You won ' t necessarily be
tracking discrete action steps here , but more often final deliverables or projects that others are responsible for , such as the tickets
you ' ve ordered from the theater , the scanner that ' s coming for
the office , the OK on the proposal from your client , and so
on . When the next action on something is up to someone else , 
you don ' t need an action reminder , just a trigger about what
you ' re waiting for from whom . Your role is to review that list as
often as you need to and assess whether you ought to be taking
an action such as checking the status or lighting a fire under the
project . 
You ' ll probably find it works best to keep this " Waiting For " 
list close at hand , in the same system as your own " Next Actions " 
reminder lists . The responsibility for the next step may bounce
back and forth many times before a project is finished . For example , you may need to make a call to a vendor to request a proposal
for a piece of work ( on your " Calls " list .  ) Having made the call , 
you then wait for the vendor to get back to you with the proposal 
( the proposal goes to your " Waiting For " list )  . When the proposal comes in , you have to review it ( it lands in your " Read / Review " 
stack-basket )  . Once you ' ve gone over it , you send it to your boss
149
Those who make
the worst use of
their time are the
first to complain of
its shortness . 
—-Jean
de
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
for her approval ( now it ' s back on your " Waiting For " list )  . And
so on .  * 
You ' ll get a great feeling when you know that your " Waiting
For " list is the complete inventory of everything you care about
that other people are supposed to be doing . 
Using the Original Item as Its Own Action Reminder
The most efficient way to track your action reminders is to add
them to lists or folders as they occur to you . The originating trigger won ' t be needed after you have processed it . You
might take notes in the meeting with your boss , but
you can toss those after you ' ve pulled out any projects
and actions associated with them . While some people try to archive voice-mails that they still need
to " do something about ,  " that ' s not the most effective way to manage the reminders embedded in them . 
There are some exceptions to this rule , however . Certain
kinds of input will most efficiently serve as their own reminders of
required actions , rather than your having to write something
about them on a list . This is particularly true for some paperbased materials and some e-mails . 
Managing Paper-Based Workflow
Some things are their own best reminders of work to be done . The
category of " Read / Review " articles , publications , and documents
is the most common example . It would obviously be overkill to
write " Review Fortune magazine " on some action list when you
could just as easily toss the magazine itself into your " Read / 
Review " basket to act as the trigger . 
150 
* Digital list managers ( like the Palm ' s ) or low-tech papers in separate folders
have an advantage , here over lists on paper because they let you easily move an
item from one category to another as the action changes , without your having
to rewrite anything . 
Keep actionable
e-mails and paper
separated from all
the rest . 
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
Another example : people who find it easier to deal with bills
by paying them all at one time and in one location will want to
keep their bills in a folder or stack-basket labeled " Bills to Pay "  
( or , more generically ,  " Financial to Process "  )  . Similarly , receipts
for expense reporting should be either dealt with at the time
they ' re generated or kept in their own " Receipts to Process " envelope or folder .  * 
The specific nature of your work , your input , and your workstation may make it more efficient to organize other categories
using only the original paper itself . A customer-service professional , for instance , may deal with numerous requests that show
up in a standard written form , and in that case maintaining a basket or file containing only those actionable items is the best way to
manage them . 
Whether it makes more sense to write reminders on a list or
to use the originating documents in a basket or folder will depend
to a great extent on logistics . Could you use those reminders
somewhere other than at your desk ? If so , the portability of the
material should be considered . If you couldn ' t possibly do that
work anywhere but at your desk , then managing reminders of it
solely at your workstation is the better choice . 
Whichever option you select , the reminders should be in
visibly discrete categories based upon the next action required . If
the next action on a service order is to make a call , it should be in
a " Calls " group ; if the action step is to review information and
input it into the computer , it should be labeled " At Computer .  " 
Most undermining of the effectiveness of many workflow systems
I see is the fact that all the documents of one type ( e . g .  , service
requests ) are kept in a single tray , even though different kinds of
actions may be required on each one . One request needs a phone 
* This approach can be dangerous , however , if you don ' t put those " Bills to Pay " 
or " Receipts to Process " in front of your face as consistently as you should . Just
having them " organized " isn ' t sufficient to get them off your mind—you ' ve also
got to review them appropriately . 
151
152
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
call , another needs data reviewed , and still another is waiting for
someone to get back with some information—but they ' re all
sorted together . This arrangement can cause a person ' s mind to
go numb to the stack because of all the decisions that are still
pending about the next-action level of doing . 
My personal system is highly portable , with almost everything kept on lists , but I still maintain two categories of paperbased reminders . I travel with a " Read / Review " plastic file folder
and another one labeled " Data Entry .  " In the latter I put anything
for which the next action is simply to input data into my computer ( business cards that need to get into my telephone / address
list , quotes for my " Quotes " database , articles about restaurants I
want to put on my " Travel—Cities " sublists , etc .  )  . 
Managing E-mail-Based Workflow
Like some paper-based materials , e-mails that need action are
sometimes best as their own reminders—in this case within the
tracked e-mail system itself . This is especially likely to be true if
you get a lot of e-mail and spend a lot of your work time with your
e-mail software booted up . E-mails that you need to act on may
then be stored within the system instead of having their embedded actions written out on a list . 
Many of my clients have found it helpful to set up two or
three unique folders on their e-mail navigator bars . True , most
folders in e-mail should be used for reference or archived materials , but it ' s also possible to set up a workable system that will keep
your actionable messages discretely organized , outside of the " in " 
area itself ( which is where most people keep them )  . 
I recommend that you create one folder for any longer-thantwo-minute e-mails that you need to act on ( again , you should be
able to dispatch many messages right off the bat by following the
two-minute rule )  . The folder name should begin with a prefix letter or symbol so that ( 1 ) it looks different from your reference
folders and ( 2 ) it sits at the top of your folders in the navigator bar . 
Use something like the "  @  " sign in Microsoft or the dash (  " - "  ) in
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
Lotus , which sort into their systems at the top . Your resulting 
 " FACTION " folder will hold those e-mails that you need to do
something about . 
Next you can create a folder titled "  @ WAITING FOR ,  " 
which will show up in the same place as the "  @ ACTION " folder . 
Then , as you receive e-mails that indicate that someone is going
to do something that you care about tracking , you can drag them
over into the "  @ WAITING FOR " file . It can also hold reminders
for anything that you delegate via e-mail : when you forward
something , or use e-mail to make a request or delegate an action , 
just save a copy into the "  @ WAITING FOR " file .  * 
Some applications ( such as Lotus Notes ) allow you to file a
copy of an e-mail into one of your folders as you send it ( with a 
 " Send and File " button )  . Others ( e . g .  , Outlook ) will simultaneously save only into your universal " Sent Mail " folder . In the latter
case , what seems to work best for many is to copy (  " cc " or " bcc "  ) 
themselves when they delegate via e-mail , and then to pull that
copy into their "  @ WAITING FOR " folder .  ( It ' s relatively easy to
program Outlook to automatically send any e-mail that you " cc " 
to yourself into a designated folder , which would replicate the
process just described .  ) 
Getting E-mail " In " to " Empty " The method detailed above will
enable you to actually get everything out of your e-mail in-basket , 
which will be a huge boon to your clarity about and control of
your day-to-day work . You ' ll reclaim " in " as " in ,  " so anything
residing there will be like a message on your answering
machine—a blinking light telling you you need to process something ! Most people use their e-mail " in " for staging still-undecided
actionable things and reference , a practice that rapidly numbs
the mind : they know they ' ve got to reassess everything every 
* Microsoft Outlook allows users to copy or move e-mails into its " Tasks " context , which , if organized according to my recommended categories , could work
equally well . 
153
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
time they glance at the screen . If you never had more
than a screenful of e-mails , this approach might
be reasonably functional , but with the volume most
professionals are dealing with these days , that doesn ' t
apply . 
Again , getting " in " empty doesn ' t mean you ' ve
handled everything . It means that you ' ve DELETED what you
could , FILED what you wanted to keep but don ' t need to act on , 
DONE the less-than-two-minute responses , and moved into
your reminder folders all the things you ' re waiting for and all your
actionable e-mails . Now you can open the "  @ ACTION " file and
review the e-mails that you ' ve determined you need to spend time
on . Isn ' t that process easier to relate to than fumbling through
multiple screens , fearing all the while that you may miss something that ' ll blow up on you ? 
A Caution About Dispersing Reminders of Your Actions
There ' s an obvious danger in putting reminders of
things you need to do somewhere out of sight . The
function of an organization system is primarily to
supply the reminders you need to see when you need
to see them , so you can trust your choices about what
you ' re doing ( and what you ' re not doing )  . Before you leave the
office for the day , the actionable e-mails that you still have pending must be reviewed individually , just like your " Calls " or " At
Computer " lists . In essence ,  "  @ ACTION " is an extension of your 
 " At Computer " list and should be handled in exactly the same
fashion . Your paper-based " Pending " workflow must likewise be
assessed like a list if the paper materials are being used as your
only reminders . 
Distributing action triggers in a folder , on lists , and / or in an
e-mail system is perfectly OK , as long as you review all of the categories to which you ' ve entrusted your triggers equally , as required . You
don ' t want things lurking in the recesses of your systems and not
being used for their intended purpose : reminding you . 
154
It requires much
less energy to
maintain e-mail at
a zero base than at
a thousand base .  
 " Out of sight , out of
mind " is not really
out of mind . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
In order to hang out with friends or take a long , aimless walk
and truly have nothing on your mind , you ' ve got to know where
all your actionable items are located , what they are , and that they
will wait . And you need to be able to do that in a few seconds , 
not days . 
Organizing Project Reminders
Creating and maintaining one list of all your projects ( that is , 
again , every commitment or desired outcome that may require
more than one action step to complete ) can be a profound experience ! You probably have more of them than you think . If you
haven ' t done so already , I recommend that initially you make a 
 " Projects " list in a very simple format , similar to the ones you ' ve
used for your lists of actions : it can be a category in a digital organizer , a page in a loose-leaf planner , or even a single file folder
labeled " PROJECTS ,  " with either a master list or separate sheets
of paper for each one . 
The " Projects " List ( s ) 
The " Projects " list is not meant to hold plans or details about your
projects themselves , nor should you try to keep it arranged by priority or size or urgency—it ' s just a comprehensive index of your
open loops . You actually won ' t be working off of the " Projects " list
during your day-to-day activities ; for the most part , your action
lists and any ad hoc tasks that come up will constitute your tactical
in-the-moment focus . Remember , you can ' t do a project , you can only do the action steps it requires . 
The real value of the " Projects " list lies in the
complete review it can provide ( at least once a week )  , 
allowing you to ensure that you have action steps
defined for all of your projects , and that nothing is
slipping through the cracks . A quick glance at this
list from time to time will enhance your underlying
155
A complete and
current " Projects " 
list is the major
operational tool for
moving from treehugging to forest
management . 
156
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
sense of control . You ' ll also know that you have an inventory
available to you ( and to others ) whenever it seems advisable to
evaluate workload ( s )  . 
One List , or Subdivided ? 
Most people find that one list is the best way to go because
it serves as a master inventory rather than as a daily prioritizing guideline . The organizing system merely provides placeholders
for all your open loops and options so your mind can more
easily make the necessary intuitive , moment-to-moment strategic
decisions . 
Frankly , it doesn ' t matter how many different lists of projects
you have , so long as you look at the contents of all of them as
often as you need to , since for the most part you ' ll do that in one
fell swoop during your Weekly Review . 
Some Common Ways to Subsort Projects
There are some situations in which it makes good sense to subsort a " Projects " list . Let ' s look at these one by one . 
Personal / Professional Many people feel more comfortable seeing their lists divided up between personal and professional 
* projects . If you ' re among them , be advised that your " Personal " 
list will need to be reviewed as judiciously as your " Professional " 
one , and not just saved for weekends . Many actions on personal
things will need to be handled on weekdays , exactly like everything else . And often some of the greatest pressures on professionals stem from the personal aspects of their lives that they are
letting slip . 
Delegated Projects If you ' re a senior manager or executive , you
probably have several projects that you are directly responsible for
but have handed off to people who report to you . While you
could , of course , put them on your " Waiting For " list , it might
make better sense to create a " Projects—Delegated " list to
track
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
them : your task will be simply to review the list regularly enough
to ensure that everything on it is moving along appropriately . 
Specific Types of Projects Some professionals have as part of their
work several different projects of the same type , which in some
instances it maybe valuable to group together as a sublist of " Projects .  " For example , I maintain a separate category called " Projects
to Deliver ,  " a chronological listing of all the upcoming seminars , 
coaching , and consulting assignments I ' ve committed to . These
events are " projects " like the rest , in that I need to keep noting
whether things are moving along on and in place for them until
they ' re completed . But I find it helpful to see them all organized
on one list , in the order in which they are coming up on my calendar , apart from my other projects . 
If you are a real estate agent , sell consulting services , or
develop proposals for a relatively small number of prospective
clients in any profession , you will likely find it useful to see all of
your outstanding " sales relationships in progress " in one view . 
This could be a separate list in your planner called " Client
Projects in Development ,  " or if you already have file folders for
each in-progress project , it may suffice to group them all in one
file stand on your credenza . Just realize that this approach will
work only if it represents a complete set of all of those situations that require action , and only if you review them regularly
along with the rest of your projects , keeping them current and
conscious . 
What About Subprojects ? 
Some of your projects will likely have major subprojects , each of
which could in theory be seen as a whole project . If you ' re moving
into a new house , for instance , and are upgrading and changing
much of the property , you may have a list of actionable items like 
 " Finalize landscaping ,  "  " Renovate kitchen ,  "  " Rewire basement ,  " 
and so on , all of which could in themselves be considered separate
projects . Do you make all of this one entry on your " Projects " 
157
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
list—say ,  " Finish new home renovations " —or do you write
up
each of the subprojects as an individual line item ? 
Actually , it won ' t matter , as long as you review all the components of the project as frequently as you need to to stay productive . No external tool or organizing format is going to be perfect
for sorting both horizontally across and vertically down through
all your projects ; you ' ll still have to be aware of the whole in some
cohesive way ( such as via your Weekly Review )  . If you make the
large project your one listing on your " Projects " list , you ' ll want to
keep a list of the subprojects and / or the project plan itself as " project support material " to be reviewed when you come to that major
item . I would recommend doing it this way if big pieces of the
project are dependent on other pieces getting done first . In that
scenario you might have subprojects with no next actions attached
to them because they are in a sense " waiting for " other things to
happen before they can move forward . For instance , you might
not be able to start on " Renovate kitchen " until you finish " Rewire
basement .  " However , you might be able to proceed on " Finalize
landscaping " independent of either of the other subprojects . You
would therefore want a next action to be continually current on 
 " Rewire basement " and " Finalize landscaping .  " 
Don ' t be too concerned about which way is best . If you ' re not 
* sure , I ' d vote for putting your Big Projects on the " Projects " list
and holding the subpieces in your project support
material , making sure to include them in your
Weekly Review , If that arrangement doesn ' t feel
quite right , try including the active and independent
subprojects as separate entries on your master list . 
There ' s no perfect system for tracking all your
projects and subprojects the same way . You just need
to know you have projects and , if they have associated
components , where to find the appropriate reminders
for them . 
158
How you list
projects and
subprojects is up to
you ; just be sure
you know where to
find all the moving
parts . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
Project Support Materials
Project support materials are not project actions , and they ' re not
project reminders . They ' re resources to support your actions and
thinking about your projects . 
Don ' t Use Support Material for Reminding Typically , people use
stacks of papers and thickly stuffed file folders as reminders that 
( 1 ) they ' ve got a project , and ( 2 ) they ' ve got to do something about
it . They ' re essentially making support materials serve as action
reminders . The problem is that next actions and " Waiting For " 
items on these projects have usually not been determined and are
psychologically still embedded in the stacks and the folders—
giving them the aura of just more " stuff " that repels its ( un ) organizer instead of attracting him or her to action . When you ' re on
the run , in the heat of the activities of the day , files like that are
the last thing you ' ll want to pick up and peruse for actions . You ' ll
actually go numb to the files and the piles because they don ' t
prompt you to do anything and they simply create more anxiety . 
If you ' re in this kind of situation , you must first add the project itself to your " Projects " list , as a reminder that there ' s an outcome to be achieved . Then the action steps and " Waiting For " 
items must be put onto their appropriate action reminder lists . 
Finally , when it ' s time to actually do an action , like making a call to
someone about the project , you can pull out all the materials you
think you might need to have as support during the conversation . 
To reiterate , you don ' t want to use support materials as your
primary reminders of what to do—that should be relegated to
your action lists . If , however , the materials contain project plans
and overviews in addition to ad hoc archival and reference information , you may want to keep them a little more visibly accessible
than you do the pure reference materials in your filing cabinet . 
The latter place is fine for support stuff , too , so long as you have
the discipline to pull out the file drawer and take a look at the
plan every time you do your Weekly Review . If not , you ' re better
159
160
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
off storing those kinds of project support files in a standing
file holder or a separate " Pending " stack-basket on your desk or
credenza . 
To return to the previous example of moving into a new
house , you could have a folder labeled " New House " containing
all the plans and details and notes about the landscaping and
the kitchen and the basement . In your Weekly Review , when
you came to " Finish new home renovations " on your " Projects " 
list , you ' d pull out the " New House " file and thumb through all
your notes to ensure that you weren ' t missing any possible next
actions . Those actions would then get done , delegated , or
deferred onto your action lists , and the folder would be refiled
until you needed it again for doing the actions or for your next
Weekly Review . 
Many people who interact with prospects and clients
have attempted to use client folders and / or contact-management
software such as Act ! to " manage the account .  " The problem
here is that some material is just facts or historical data that
needs to be stored as background for when you might be able to
use it , and some of what must be tracked is the actions required
to move the relationships forward . The latter can be more effectively organized within your action-lists system . Client information is just that , and it can be folded into a general-reference
file on the client or stored within a client-focused library .  ( I
use Act ! for the single great feature it offers of allowing me
to cross-reference general company information and significant interactions with key people within the company . It ' s just
a good client-centered database .  ) If I need to call a client , I
don ' t want that reminder embedded anywhere but on my " Calls " 
list . 
Organizing Ad Hoc Project Thinking
In chapter 3 , I suggested that you will often have ideas that you ' ll
want to keep about projects but that are not necessarily next
actions . Those ideas fall into the broad category of " project sup-
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
port materials ,  " and may be anything from a notion about something you might want to do on your next vacation to a clarification of some major components in a project plan . These thoughts
could come as you ' re driving down the freeway listening to a news
story on the radio , or reading a relevant article . What
do you do with that kind of material ? 
My recommendation here is that you consider
where you ' re keeping tabs on the project or topic
itself , how you might add information to it in that
format , and where you might store any more extensive data associated with it . Most professionals will have several
options for how to handle support materials , including attaching
notes to a list item , organizing digital information in e-mail
and / or databases , and maintaining paper-based files and notes in
notebooks . 
Attached Notes Most organizing software allows you to attach a
digital " note " to a list or calendar entry . If you ' re keeping a " Projects " list within the software , you can go to the project you had a
thought about , open or attach a " note " to it , and type in your idea . 
This is an excellent way to capture " back-of-the-envelope " project
thinking . If your " Projects " list is paper-based , you can attach a
Post-it note next to the item on your master list or , if you ' re a lowtech type , on the item ' s separate sheet . In any case , you ' ll need to
remember to look at the attachment when you review your project , to make use of the data . 
E-mail and Databases E-mails that might contain good information related to your projects can be held in a dedicated e-mail folder 
( just follow the instructions on pages 152-53 for "  @ ACTION " 
and call it something like "  @ PROJECTS "  )  . You may also find it
worthwhile , if you don ' t have one already , to set up a more rigorous kind of digital database for organizing your thinking on a
project or topic . If your company uses Lotus Notes , for example , 
you can create a project database either for your own private use
161
There is no need " 
ever to lose an idea
about a project , 
theme , or topic . 
162
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
on your PC or to be shared with others in your network .  * It ' s
worth looking into some of the other types of free-form databases
that are on the market , too—even just for your own use . It ' s great
to be able to cut and paste from the Web or from e-mails and drop
data under a topic somewhere or type in your own thoughts . Be
sure , also , to explore the technology and tools that you already
have—just learning how to use all the lists and attachments in
something like the Palm organizer may provide you with sufficient " back-of-the-envelope " capability . 
Paper-Based Files Having a separate file folder devoted to each
project makes a lot of sense when you ' re accumulating paperbased materials ; it may be low-tech , but it ' s an elegant solution
nonetheless . Simplicity and ease of handling make for a good
general-reference filing system—one that lets you feel comfortable about creating a folder for scraps of paper from a meeting . 
Pages in Notebooks A great advantage of paper-based loose-leaf
notebooks is that you can dedicate a whole page or group of pages
to an individual project . For years I maintained a midsize notebook
with a " Projects " list in front and a " Project Support " section
toward the back , where I always had some blank pages to capture
any random thinking or plans and details about projects on my list . 
Each of the methods described above can be effective in organizing project thinking . The key is that you must consistently look
for any action steps inherent in your project notes , and review the
notes themselves as often as you think is necessary , given the
nature of the project . 
You ' ll also want to clear out many of your notes once they 
* Many Lotus Notes users don ' t even realize they can do this , but in fact it ' s one
of the program ' s most powerful features . If you have Notes , check with your
resident IT resource person and have him or her request system permission and
show you how . 
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
become inactive or unreal , to keep the whole system from catching the " stale " virus . I ' ve found a lot of value in capturing these
types of thoughts , more for the way it consistently helps my
thinking process than because I end up using every idea ( most I
don ' t !  )  . But I try to make sure not to let my old thoughts stay
around too long , pretending they ' re useful when they ' re not . 
Organizing Nonactionable Data
Interestingly , one of the biggest problems with most people ' s personal management systems is that they blend a few actionable
things with a large amount of data and material that has value but
no action attached . Having good , consistent structures with
which to manage the nonactionable items in our work and lives is
as important as managing our action and project reminders . 
When the nonactionable items aren ' t properly managed , they
clog up the whole process . 
Unactionable items fall into two large categories : reference
materials and reminders of things that need no action now but
might at a later date . 
Reference Materials
Much of what comes across your desk and into your life in general
is reference material . There ' s no action required , but it ' s information that you want to keep , for a variety of reasons . Your major
decisions will be how much to keep , how much room to dedicate
to it , what form it should be stored in , and where . Much of that
will be a personal or organizational judgment call based upon
legal or logistical concerns or personal preferences . The only time
you should have attention on your reference material is when you
need to change your system in some way because you have too
much or too little information , given your needs or preferences . 
The problem most people have psychologically with all their
stuff is that it ' s still " stuff " —that is , they haven ' t decided what ' s
163
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
actionable and what ' s not . Once you ' ve made a clean distinction
about which is which , what ' s left as reference should have no
pull or incompletion associated with it—it ' s just your library . 
Your only decision then is how big a library you want . When
you ' ve fully implemented this action-management methodology , you can be as big a packrat as your space ( physical
and digital ) will allow . As I ' ve increased the size of the hard
disk in my computer , I ' ve kept that much more e-mail in my
archives . The more the merrier , as far as I ' m concerned , since
increasing the volume of pure reference material adds no psychic
weight . 
The Variety of Reference Systems
There are a number of ways to organize reference material , and
many types of tools to use . What follows is a brief discussion of
some of the most common . 
• General-reference filing—paper and e-mail
• Large-category filing
• Rolodexes and contact managers
• Libraries and archives
General-Reference Filing As I ' ve said , a good filing
system is critical for processing and organizing your
stuff . It ' s also a must for dealing with the sometimes
huge volume of paper-based materials that are valuable for you for one reason or another . Ideally you
will already have set up a general-reference filing system as you were processing " in .  " You need to feel
comfortable storing even a single piece of paper that
you might want to refer to later , and your system
must be informal and accessible enough that it ' s a snap to file it
away in your alphabetized general-reference system , right at hand
where you work . If you ' re not set up that way yet , look back at
chapter 4 for help on this topic . 
164
Your filing system
should be a simple
library of data , 
easily
retrievable—
not your reminder
for actions , 
projects , priorities , 
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
Most people seem to wind up with 200 to 400 paper-based
general-reference files and 30 to 100 e-mail reference folders . 
Large-Category Filing Any topic that requires more than fifty
file folders should probably be given its own section or drawer , 
with its own alpha-sorted system . For instance , if you ' re managing
a corporate merger and need to keep hold of a lot of the paperwork , you may want to dedicate two or three whole file cabinets to
all the documentation required in the due-diligence process . If
gardening or sailing or cooking is your passion , you may need at
least a whole file drawer for those designated hobbies . 
Bear in mind that if your " area of focus " has support material
that could blend into other " areas of focus ,  " you may run into the
dilemma of whether to store the information in general reference
or in the specialized reference files . When you read a great article
about wood fencing and want to keep it , does that go in your 
 " Garden " cabinet or in the general system with other information
about home-related projects ? As a general rule , it ' s best to stick
with one general-reference system except for a very limited number of discrete topics . 
Rolodexes and Contact Managers Much of the information that
you need to keep is directly related to people in your network . You
need to track contact information of all sorts—home and office
phone numbers and addresses , cell-phone numbers , fax numbers , 
e-mail addresses , and so on . In addition , if you find it useful , you
may want to maintain information about birthdays , names of
friends ' and colleagues ' family members , hobbies , favorite wines
and foods , and the like . In a more rigorous professional vein , you
may need or want to track hire dates , performance-review dates , 
goals and objectives , and other potentially relevant data for staff
development purposes . 
The telephone / address section of most of the organizers sold
in the last fifty years is probably ( along with the calendar ) their
most commonly used component . Everyone needs to keep track
165
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
of phone numbers . It ' s instructive to note that this is purely and
simply reference material . No action is required—this is just
information that you might need to access in the future . 
So there ' s no big mystery about how to organize it , aside
from the logistics for your individual needs . Again , the only problem comes up when people try to make their Rolodexes serve as
tools for reminding them about things they need to do . That
doesn ' t work . As long as all the actions relative to people you
know have been identified and tracked in your action reminder
lists , there ' s no role for telephone and address systems to fill other
than being a neutral address book . 
The only issue then becomes how much information you
need to keep and where and in what equipment you need to keep
it in order to have it accessible when you want it . Nothing ' s perfect in that regard , but as the small digital tools become easier to
use and connect to larger databases , you ' ll be able to have more
information at hand with the same or less effort . 
Libraries and Archives : Personalized Levels Information that
might be useful lives at many levels . You could probably find out
pretty much anything if you were willing to dig deep enough . The
question of how much to keep , how close , and in what form , will
be a changing reality , given the variables of your needs and your
particular comfort levels with data . Relative to your personal
organization and productivity , this is not a core issue , 
so long as all of your projects and actions are in a
control system that you work with regularly . Reference material in all its forms then becomes nothing
more or less than material to capture and create
access to according to your particular proclivities and
requirements . 
Some degree of consistency will always make
things easier . What kinds of things do you need with you all the
time ? Those must go into your ubiquitous planner or PDA . What
do you need specifically for meetings or off-site events ? That
166
If material is purely
for reference , the
only issue is
whether it ' s worth
the time and space
required to keep it . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
should be put into your briefcase , pack , satchel , or purse . What
might you need when you ' re working in your office ? That should
be put into your personal filing system or your networked computer . What about rare situations relative to your job ? Material
needed for those could be archived in departmental files or offsite storage . What could you find anytime you might need it , on
the Web ? You don ' t need to do anything with that information , 
unless you need it when you ' re away from a Web connection , in
which case you should print the data out when you ' re online and
store it in a file you can take with you . 
Do you see how that personal organization of reference
material is simply a logistical issue ? Distinguishing actionable
things from nonactionable ones is the key success factor in this
arena . Once you ' ve done that , you have total freedom to manage
and organize as much or as little reference material as you want . 
It ' s a highly individual decision that ought to be based on the ratio
of the value received to the time and effort required to capture and
maintain it . 
Someday / Maybes
The last thing to deal with in your organization system is how to
track things that you may want to reassess in the future . These
could range from a special trip you might want to take one day , to
books you might want to read , to projects you might want to
tackle in the next fiscal year , to skills and talents you might want
to develop . For a full implementation of this model
you ' ll need some sort of " back burner " or " on hold " 
component . 
There are several ways to stage things for later
review , all of which will work to get them off your
current radar and your mind . You can put the items
on various versions of " Someday / Maybe " lists or
trigger them on your calendar or in a paper-based 
 " tickler " system . 
167
Someday / Maybe ' s
are not throwaway
items . They may be
some of the most
interesting and
creative things
you ' ll ever get
involved with . 
168
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO 
 " Someday / Maybe " List
It ' s highly likely that if you did a complete mind-sweep when you
were collecting things out of your psychic RAM , you came up with
some things you ' re not sure you want to commit to .  " Learn Spanish ,  "  " Get Marcie a horse ,  "  " Climb Mt , Washington ,  " and " Build a
guest cottage " are typical projects that fall into this category . 
If you haven ' t already done it , I recommend that you create a 
 " Someday / Maybe " list in whatever organizing system you ' ve chosen . Then give yourself permission to populate that list with all
the items of that type that have occurred to you so far . You ' ll
probably discover that simply having the list and starting to fill it
out will cause you to come up with all kinds of creative ideas . 
You may also be surprised to find that some of the things you
write on the list will actually come to pass , almost without your
making any conscious effort to make them happen . If you
acknowledge the power of the imagination to foster changes in
perception and performance , it ' s easy to see how having a 
 " Someday / Maybe " list out in front of your conscious mind could
potentially add many wonderful adventures to your life and work . 
We ' re likely to seize opportunities when they arise if we ' ve already
identified and captured them as a possibility . That has certainly
been my own experience : learning to play the flute and how to sail
big boats both started in this category for me . In addition to
your in-basket , there are two rich sources to tap for your " Someday / Maybe " list : your creative imagination and your list of current
projects . 
Make an Inventory of Your Creative Imaginings What are the
things you really might want to do someday if you have the time , 
money , and inclination ? Write them on your have " Someday / 
Maybe " list . Typical categories include : 
•Things to get or build for your home
•Hobbies to take up
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
•Skills to learn
•Creative expressions to explore
•Clothes and accessories to buy
•Toys ( gear !  ) to acquire
•Trips to take
•Organizations to join
•Service projects to contribute to
•Things to see and do
Reassess Your Current Projects Now ' s a good time to review your 
 " Projects " list from a more elevated perspective ( that is , the standpoint of your job and goals ) and consider whether
you might transfer some of your current commitments to " Someday / Maybe .  " If on reflection you
realize that an optional project doesn ' t have a chance
of getting your attention for the next months or
more , move it to this list . 
Special Categories of " Someday / Maybe " 
More than likely you have some special interests that involve lots
of possible things to do . It can be fun to collect these on lists . For
instance : 
• Food—recipes , menus , restaurants , wines
•Children—things to do with them
•Books to read
•CDs to buy
• Videos to buy / rent
•Cultural events to attend
• Gift ideas
• Garden ideas
•Web sites to surf
•Weekend trips to take
• Meeting ideas
• Party ideas
169
What lies in our
power to do , lies in
our power not
to do . 
—
170
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
• Ideas—Misc .  ( meaning you don ' t know where else to put
them !  ) 
These kinds of lists can be a cross between reference and 
 " Someday / Maybe " —reference because you can just collect and
add to lists of good wines or restaurants or books , to consult as
you like ;  " Someday / Maybe " because you might want to review the
listed items on a regular basis to remind yourself to try one or
more of them at some point . 
In any case , this is another great reason to have an organizing
system that makes it easy to capture things that may add value
and variety and interest to your life—without clogging your mind
and work space with undecided , unfinished business . 
The Danger of " Hold and Review " Files and Piles
Many people have created some sort of " Hold and Review " pile or
file ( or whole drawer ) that vaguely fits within the category of 
 " Someday / Maybe .  " They tell themselves ,  " When I have time , I
may like to get to this ,  " and a " Hold and Review " file seems a convenient place to put it . I personally don ' t recommend this particular kind of subsystem , because in virtually every case I have come
across , the client " held " but didn ' t " review ,  " and there was numbness and resistance about the stack . The value of " someday / 
maybe " disappears if you don ' t put your conscious awareness back
on it with some consistency . 
Also , there ' s a big difference between something that ' s managed well , as a " Someday / Maybe " list , and something that ' s just a
catchall bucket for " stuff .  " Usually much of that stuff needs to be
tossed , some of it needs to go into " Read / Review ,  " some needs
to be filed as reference , some belongs on the calendar or in a
tickler file ( see page 173 ) for review in a month or perhaps at the
beginning of the next quarter , and some actually has next actions
on it . Many times , after appropriately processing someone ' s 
 " Hold and Review " drawer or file , I ' ve discovered there was nothing left in it ! 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
Using the Calendar for Future Options
Your calendar can be a very handy place to park reminders of
things you might want to consider doing in the future . Most of the
people I ' ve coached were not nearly as comfortable with their calendars as they could have been ; otherwise they probably would
have found many more things to put in there . 
One of the three uses of a calendar is for day-specific information . This category can include a number of things , but one of the
most creative ways to utilize this function is to enter things that
you want to take off your mind and reassess at some later date . 
Here are a few of the myriad things you should consider inserting : 
•Triggers for activating projects
•Events you might want to participate in
•Decision catalysts
Triggers for Activating Projects If you have a project that you
don ' t really need to think about now but that deserves a flag at
some point in the future , you can pick an appropriate date and put
a reminder about the project in your calendar for that day . It
should go in some day-specific ( versus time-specific ) calendar slot
for the things you want to be reminded of on that day ; then when
the day arrives , you see the reminder and insert the item as an
active project on your " Projects " list . Typical candidates for this
treatment are : 
•Special events with a certain lead time for handling ( product
launches , fund-raising drives , etc .  ) 
•Regular events that you need to prepare for , such as budget
reviews , annual conferences , planning events , or meetings ( e . g .  , 
when should you add next year ' s " annual sales conference " to
your " Projects " list ?  ) 
•Key dates for significant people that you might want to do something about ( birthdays , anniversaries , holiday gift-giving , etc .  ) 
171
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Events You Might Want to Participate In You probably get notices
constantly about seminars , conferences , speeches , and social and
cultural events that you may want to decide about attending as the
time gets closer . So figure out when that " closer " time is and put a
trigger in your calendar on the appropriate date—for example :  
 " Chamber of Commerce breakfast tomorrow ?  "  
 " Tigers season tickets go on sale today "  
 " PBS special on Australia tonight 8 : 00 P . M .  "  
 " Church BBQ next Saturday " 
If you can think of any jogs like these that you ' d like to put
into your system , do it right now . 
Decision Catalysts Once in a while there may be a significant
decision that you need to make but can ' t ( or don ' t want to ) make
right away . That ' s fine , as long as you ' ve concluded that the additional information you need has to come from an internal rather
than an external source ( e . g .  , you need to sleep on it )  .  
( Obviously , external data you need in order to make a
decision should go on your " Next Actions " or " Waiting For " lists .  ) But in order to move to a level of OKness about not deciding , you ' d better put out a safety
net that you can trust to get you to focus on the issue
appropriately in the future . A calendar reminder can
serve that purpose .  * 
Some typical decision areas in this category include : 
• Hire / fire
• Merge / acquire / sell / divest
• Change job / career
172 
* If you ' re using a group-accessible calendar , you must maintain discretion about
these kinds of triggers . Digital calendars usually have " private " categorization
functions you can use for entries you don ' t necessarily want everyone to see . 
It ' s OK to decide not
to decide—as long
as you have a
decide-not-todecide system . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
This is a big topic to devote so little space to , I know , but go
ahead and ask yourself ,  " Is there any major decision for which I
should create a future trigger , so I can feel comfortable just ' hanging out ' with it for now ?  " If there is , put some reminder in your
calendar to revisit the issue . 
The " Tickler " File
One elegant way to manage nonactionable items that may need
an action in the future is the " tickler " file .  * A three-dimensional
version of a calendar , it allows you to hold physical reminders of
things that you want to see or remember—not now , but in the
future . It can be an extremely functional tool , allowing you to in
effect set up your own post office and " mail " things to yourself for
receipt on a designated future date . I myself have used a tickler file
for years and can ' t imagine being without it . 
Essentially the tickler is a simple file-folder system that
allows you to distribute paper and other physical reminders in
such a way that whatever you want to see on a particular date in
the future " automatically " shows up that day in your in-basket . 
If you have a secretary or assistant , you can entrust at least a
part of this task to him or her , assuming that he / she has some
working version of this or a similar system . Typical examples
would be : 
• " Hand me this agenda the morning of the day I have the
meeting .  " 
• " Give this back to me on Monday to rethink , since it applies to
a meeting on Wednesday .  " 
• " Remind me about the Hong Kong trip two weeks ahead , and
we ' ll plan the logistics .  " 
Then every day of the week , that day ' s folder is pulled and
reviewed .  
* Also referred to as a " suspense ,  "  " bring forward ,  " or " follow-up " file . 
173
174
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
While you can ( and probably should ) utilize staff to handle
as much of this as is appropriate , I recommend that , if you can
integrate it into your life-style , you maintain your own tickler file . 
There are many useful functions it can perform , at least some of
which you may want to avail yourself of outside the pale of your
assistant ' s responsibilities . I use my tickler file to manage my
travel tickets and confirmations ; paper-based travel directions , 
agendas , and maps ; reminders of event notifications that come in
the mail ; information about " might-want-to-buy " kinds of things
I want to reconsider in the future ; and so forth . 
Bottom line : the tickler file demands only a one-second-perday new behavior to make it work , and it has a payoff value
logarithmically greater than the personal investment . 
Setting Up a Tickler File You need forty-three folders—thirtyone daily files labeled " 1 " through " 31 ,  " and twelve more labeled
with the names of the months of the year . The daily files are kept
in front , beginning with the file for tomorrow ' s date ( if today is
October 5 , then the first file would be " 6 "  )  . The succeeding daily
files represent the days of the rest of the month (  " 6 " through 
 " 31 "  )  . Behind the " 31 " file is the monthly file for the next month 
(  " November "  )  , and behind that are the daily files " 1 " though " 5 .  " 
Following that are the rest of the monthly files (  " December " 
through " October "  )  . The next daily file is emptied into your inbasket every day , and then the folder is refiled at the back of the
dailies ( at which point , instead of October 6 , it represents November 6 )  . In the same way , when the next monthly file reaches the
front ( on October 31 after you empty the daily file , the " November " file will be the next one , with the daily files " 1 " through " 31 " 
behind it )  , it ' s emptied into the in-basket and refiled at the back
of the monthlies to represent November a year from now . This is a 
 " perpetual " file , meaning that at any given time it contains files for
the next thirty-one days and the next twelve months . 
The big advantage of using file folders for your tickler system is
that they allow you to store actual documents ( the form that needs
FILE-FOLDER-STYLE SAMPLE SETUP ( OCTOBER 5 ) 
to be filled out on a certain day , the memo that needs to be reviewed
then , the telephone note that needs action on a specific date , etc .  )  . 
In order for the system to work , you must update it every
day . If you forget to empty the daily file , you won ' t trust the system to handle important data , and you ' ll have to manage those
things some other way . If you leave town ( or don ' t access the file
on the weekend )  , you must be sure to check the folders for the
days you ' ll be away , before you go . 
175
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
176
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
Checklists : Creative Reminders
The last topic in personal system organization that deserves some
attention is the care and feeding of checklists , those recipes of
potential ingredients for projects , events , and areas of value , interest , and responsibility . 
The most creative checklists are often generated at the back
end of a good consulting process with a team or company . Good
ones also show up as areas of focus for training staff or hiring into
job slots . 
When I ' m clearing in-baskets with clients and reviewing
other things they ' re concerned about , we often run across little 
 " Memos to Self " like : 
• Exercise more regularly . 
• Make sure we have evaluation forms for each training . 
• Spend more quality time with my kids . 
• Do more proactive planning for the division . 
• Maintain good morale with my team . 
• Ensure we are in alignment with corporate strategy . 
• Keep the client billing process up to date . 
What should you do with these " fuzzier " kinds of internal
commitments and areas of attention ? 
First , Clarify Inherent Projects and Actions
For much of this kind of " stuff ,  " there is still a project and / or an
action that needs to be defined .  " Exercise more regularly " really
translates for many people into " Set up regular exercise program "  
( project ) and " Call Sally for suggestions about personal trainers "  
( real action step )  . In such cases , inherent projects and actions still
need to be clarified and organized into a personal system . 
But there are some things that don ' t quite fit into that
category . 
CHAPTER 7 I ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
Blueprinting Key Areas of Work and Responsibility
Objectives like " Maintain good physical conditioning " or " Physical health and vitality " may still need to be built into some sort of
overview checklist that will be reviewed regularly . You have multiple layers of outcomes and standards playing on your psyche and
your choices at any point in time , and knowing what those are , at
all the different levels , is always a good idea . 
I suggested earlier that there are at least six levels of your 
 " work " that could be defined , and that each level deserves its own
acknowledgment and evaluation . A complete inventory of everything you hold important and are committed to on each of those
levels would represent an awesome checklist . It might include : 
•Career goals
• Service
• Family
•Relationships
•Community
• Health and energy
• Financial resources
•Creative expression
And then moving down a level , within your job , you
might want some reminders of your key areas of responsibility , 
your staff , your values , and so on . A list of these might contain
points like : 
• Team morale
• Processes
• Timelines
• Staff issues
•Workload
•Communication
177
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
All of these items could in turn be included on the lists in
your personal system , as reminders to you , as needed , to keep the
ship on course , on an even keel . 
The More Novel the Situation , the More Control Is Required
The degree to which any of us needs to maintain checklists and
external controls is directly related to our unfamiliarity with the
area of responsibility . If you ' ve been doing what you ' re doing for a
long time , and there ' s no pressure on you to change in that area , 
you probably need minimal external personal organization to stay
on cruise control . You know when things must happen , and how
to make them happen , and your system is fine , status quo . Often , 
though , that ' s not the case . 
Many times you ' ll want some sort of checklist to help you
maintain a focus until you ' re more familiar with what you ' re
doing . If your CEO suddenly disappeared , for example , and you
had instantly to fill his shoes , you ' d need some overviews and
outlines in front of you for a while to ensure that you had all the
mission-critical aspects of the job handled . And if you ' ve just been
hired into a new position , with new responsibilities that are relatively unfamiliar to you , you ' ll want a framework of control and 
, structure , if only for the first few months . 
There have been times when I needed to make a list of areas
that I had to handle , temporarily , until things were under control . 
For instance , when my wife and I decided to create a
brand-new structure for a business we ' d been
involved with for many years , I took on areas of
responsibility I ' d never had to deal with before—
namely , accounting , computers , marketing , legal , and
administration . For several months I needed to keep
a checklist of those responsibilities in front of me to
ensure that I filled in the blanks everywhere and managed the
transition as well as I could . After the business got onto " cruise
control " to some degree , I no longer needed that list . 
178
Checklists can be
highly useful to let
you know what you
don ' t need to be
concerned about . 
CHAPTER 7 | ORGANIZING : SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
Checklists at All Levels
Be open to creating any kind of checklist as the urge strikes you . 
The possibilities are endless—from " Core Life Values " to " Things
to Take Camping .  " Making lists , ad hoc , as they occur to you , is
one of the most powerful yet subtlest and simplest procedures
that you can install in your life . 
To spark your creative thinking , here ' s a list of some of the
topics of checklists I ' ve seen and used over the years : 
•Personal Affirmations ( i . e .  , personal value statements ) 
•Job Areas of Responsibility ( key responsibility areas ) 
•Travel Checklist ( everything to take on or do before a trip ) 
•Weekly Review ( everything to review and / or update on a weekly
basis ) 
•Training Program Components ( all the things to handle when
putting on an event , front to back ) 
•Clients
•Conference Checklist ( everything to handle when putting on a
conference ) 
•Focus Areas ( key life roles and responsibilities ) 
•Key People in My Life / Work ( relationships to assess regularly
for completion and opportunity development ) 
•Organization Chart ( key people and areas of output to manage
and maintain ) 
•Personal Development ( things to evaluate regularly to ensure
personal balance and progress ) 
Get comfortable with checklists , both ad hoc and more permanent . Be ready to create and eliminate them as required . 
Appropriately used , they can be a tremendous asset in personal
productivity . 
If in fact you have now collected everything that represents an open
loop in your life and work , processed each one of those items in
179
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
terms of what it means to you and what actions are required , and
organized the results into a complete system that holds a current
and complete overview—large and small—of all your present
and 
 " someday " projects , then you ' re ready for the next phase of implementation in the art of stress-free productivity—the review
process .  
\ 
180
Reviewing : Keeping Your
System Functional
THE PURPOSE OF this whole method of workflow management is not
to let your brain become lax , but rather to enable it to move
toward more elegant and productive activity . In order to earn that
freedom , however , your brain must engage on some consistent
basis with all your commitments and activities . You must be
assured that you ' re doing what you need to be doing , and that it ' s
OK to be not doing what you ' re not doing . Reviewing your system
on a regular basis and keeping it current and functional are prerequisites for that kind of control . 
If you have a list of calls you must make , for example , the
minute that list is not totally current with all the calls you need to
make , your brain will not trust the system , and it won ' t get relief
from its lower-level mental tasks . It will have to take back the job
of remembering , processing , and reminding , which , as you should
know by now , it doesn ' t do very effectively . 
All of this means your system cannot be static . In order to
support appropriate action choices , it must be kept up to date . 
And it should trigger consistent and appropriate evaluation of
your life and work at several horizons . 
There are two major issues that need to be handled at this point : 
•What do you look at in all this , and when ? 
•What do you need to do , and how often , to ensure that all of it
works as a consistent system , freeing you to think and manage at
a higher level ? 
181
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
A real review process will lead to enhanced and proactive
new thinking in key areas of your life and work . Such thinking emerges from both focused concentration and serendipitous brainstorming , which will be triggered and galvanized
by a consistent personal review of your inventory of actions and
projects . 
What to Look At , When
Your personal system and behaviors need to be established in such
a way that you can see all the action options you need to see , when
you need to see them . This is really just common sense , but few
people actually have their processes and their organization honed
to the point where they are as functional as they could be . 
When you have access to a phone and any discretionary
time , you ought to at least glance at the list of all the phone calls
you need to make , and then either direct yourself to the best one
to handle or give yourself permission to feel OK about not bothering with any of them . When you ' re about to go in for a discussion with your boss or your partner , take a moment to review the
outstanding agendas you have with him or her , so you ' ll know that
you ' re using your time most effectively . When you need to pick up
something at the dry cleaner ' s , first quickly review all the other
errands that you might be able to do en route . 
People often ask me ,  " How much time do you
spend looking at your system ?  " My answer is simply ,  
 " As much time as I need to to feel comfortable about
what I ' m doing .  " In actuality it ' s an accumulation of
two seconds here , three seconds there . What most
people don ' t realize is that my lists are in one sense
my office . Just as you might have Post-its and stacks
of phone slips at your workstation , so do I on my 
 " Next Actions " lists . Assuming that you ' ve completely collected , 
processed , and organized your stuff , you ' ll most likely take only a
182
A few seconds a
day is usually all
you need for review , 
as long as you ' re
looking at the right
things at the right
time . 
CHAPTER 8 | REVIEWING : KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL
few brief moments here and there to access your system for dayto-day reminders . 
Looking at Your Calendar First
Your most frequent review will probably be of your daily calendar , 
and your daily tickler folder if you ' re maintaining one , to see the 
 " hard landscape " and assess what has to get done . You need to
know the time-and-space parameters first . Knowing that you
have wall-to-wall meetings from 8 : 00 A . M . through 6 : 00 P . M .  , for
example , with barely a half-hour break for lunch , will help you
make necessary decisions about any other activities .  
.  .  . Then Your Action Lists
After you review all your day- and time-specific commitments
and handle whatever you need to about them , your next most frequent area for review will be the lists of all the actions you could
possibly do in your current context . If you ' re in your office , for
instance , you ' ll look at your lists of calls , computer actions , and inoffice things to do . This doesn ' t necessarily mean you will actually
be doing anything on those lists ; you ' ll just evaluate them against
the flow of other work coming at you to ensure that you make the
best choices about what to deal with . You need to feel confident
that you ' re not missing anything critical . 
Frankly , if your calendar is trustworthy and your action lists
are current , they may be the only things in the system you ' ll need
to refer to more than every couple of days . There have been many
days when I didn ' t need to look at any of my lists , in fact , because
it was clear from the front end—my calendar—what I wouldn ' t
be
able to do . 
The Right Review in the Right Context
You may need to access any one of your lists at any time . When
you and your spouse are decompressing at the end of the day , 
and you want to be sure you ' ll take care of the " business " the two
of you manage together about home and family , you ' ll want to
183
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
look at your accumulated agendas for him or her . On the other
hand , if your boss pops in for a face-to-face conversation about
current realities and priorities , it will be highly functional for you
to have your " Projects " list up to date and your " Agenda " list for
him or her right at hand . 
Updating Your System
The real trick to ensuring the trustworthiness of the whole organization system lies in regularly refreshing your psyche and your system
from a more elevated perspective . That ' s impossible to
do , however , if your lists fall too far behind your reality . 
You won ' t be able to fool yourself about this : if your system is out of date , your brain will be forced to fully
engage again at the lower level of remembering . 
This is perhaps the biggest challenge of all . 
Once you ' ve tasted what it ' s like to have a clear head
and feel in control of everything that ' s going on , can
you do what you need to to maintain that as an
operational standard ? The many years I ' ve spent
researching and implementing this methodology
with countless people have proved to me that the magic key to the
sustainability of the process is the Weekly Review . 
The Power of the Weekly Review
If you ' re like me and most other people , no matter how good your
intentions may be , you ' re going to have the world come at you
faster than you can keep up . Many of us seem to have it in our
natures consistently to entangle ourselves in more than we have
the ability to handle . We book ourselves back to back in meetings
all day , go to after-hours events that generate ideas and commitments we need to deal with , and get embroiled in engagements
and projects that have the potential to spin our creative intelligence into cosmic orbits . 
1
184
To make
knowledge
productive , we
will have to learn
to see both forest
and tree . We will
have to learn to
connect . 
—Peter F . 
CHAPTER 8 | REVIEWING : KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL
That whirlwind of activity is precisely what makes the
Weekly Review so valuable . It builds in some capturing , reevaluation , and reprocessing time to keep you in balance . There is simply no way to do this necessary
regrouping while you ' re trying to get everyday work
done . 
The Weekly Review will also sharpen your intuitive focus on your important projects as you deal
with the flood of new input and potential distractions coming at you the rest of the week . You ' re going
to have to learn to say no—faster , and to more things—in order to
stay afloat and comfortable . Having some dedicated time in
which to at least get up to the project level of thinking goes a long
way toward making that easier . 
What Is the Weekly Review ? 
Very simply , the Weekly Review is whatever you need to do to get
your head empty again . It ' s going through the five phases of
workflow management—collecting , processing , organizing , and
reviewing all your outstanding involvements—until you can honestly say ,  " I absolutely know right now everything I ' m not doing
but could be doing if I decided to .  " 
From a nitty-gritty , practical standpoint , here is the drill that
can get you there : 
Loose Papers Pull out all miscellaneous scraps of paper , business
cards , receipts , and so on that have crept into the crevices of your
desk , clothing , and accessories . Put it all into your in-basket for
processing . 
Process Your Notes Review any journal entries , meeting notes , or
miscellaneous notes scribbled on notebook paper . List action
items , projects , waiting-fors , calendar events , and someday / 
maybes , as appropriate . File any reference notes and materials . 
Stage your " Read / Renew " material . Be ruthless with yourself , 
185
You will invariably
take in more
opportunities than
your system can
process on a daily
basis . 
186
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
processing all notes and thoughts relative to interactions , projects , 
new initiatives , and input that have come your way since your last
download , and purging those not needed . 
Previous Calendar Data Review past calendar dates in detail for
remaining action items , reference information , and so on , and
transfer that data into the active system . Be able to archive your
last week ' s calendar with nothing left uncaptured . 
Upcoming Calendar Look at future calendar events ( long- and
short-term )  . Capture actions about arrangements and preparations for any upcoming events . 
Empty Your Head Put in writing ( in appropriate categories ) any
new projects , action items , waiting-fors , someday / maybes , and so
forth that you haven ' t yet captured . 
Review " Projects "  ( and Larger Outcome ) Lists Evaluate the status
of projects , goals , and outcomes one by one , ensuring that at least
one current kick-start action for each is in your system . 
Review " Next Actions " Lists Mark off completed actions . Review
for reminders of further action steps to capture . 
Review " Waiting For " List Record appropriate actions for any
needed follow-up . Check off received items . 
Review Any Relevant Checklists Is there anything you haven ' t
done that you need to do ? 
Review " Someday / Maybe " List Check for any projects that may
have become active and transfer them to " Projects .  " Delete items
no longer of interest . 
CHAPTER 8 | REVIEWING : KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL
Review " Pending " and Support Files Browse through all workin-progress support material to trigger new actions , completions , 
and waiting-fors . 
Be Creative and Courageous Are there any new , wonderful , harebrained , creative , thought-provoking , risk-taking ideas you can
add to your system ? 
This review process is common sense , but few
of us do it as well as we could , and that means as
regularly as we should to keep a clear mind and a
sense of relaxed control . 
The Right Time and Place for the Review
The Weekly Review is so critical that it behooves you
to establish good habits , environments , and tools to
support it . Once your comfort zone has been established for the kind of relaxed control that Getting
Things Done is all about , you won ' t have to worry too
much about making yourself do your review—you ' ll
have to to get back to your personal standards again . 
Until then , do whatever you need to , once a
week , to trick yourself into backing away from the
daily grind for a couple of hours—not to zone out , 
but to rise up at least to " 10 , 000 feet " and catch up . 
If you have the luxury of an office or work space
that can be somewhat isolated from the people and interactions of
the day , and if you have anything resembling a typical Mondayto-Friday workweek , I recommend that you block out two hours
early every Friday afternoon for the review . Three factors make
this an ideal time : 
• The events of the week are likely to be still fresh enough for you
to be able to do a complete postmortem (  " Oh , yeah , I need to
make sure I get back to her about .  .  .  "  )  . 
187 
 " Point of view " 
is that qulntessentially human
solution to
information
overload , an
intuitive process of
reducing things to
an essential
relevant and
manageable
minimum .  .  .  . In
a world of
hyperabundant
content , point of
view will become
the scarcest of
resources . 
—Paul
188
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
•When you ( invariably ) uncover actions that require reaching
people at work , you ' ll still have time to do that before they leave
for the weekend . 
• It ' s great to clear your psychic decks so you can go into the
weekend ready for refreshment and recreation , with nothing on
your mind . 
You may be the kind of person , however , who doesn ' t have
normal weekends . I , for example , often have as much to do on
Saturday and Sunday as on Wednesday . But I do have the
luxury (  ?  ) of frequent long plane trips , which provide an ideal
opportunity for me to catch up . A good friend and client of mine , 
an executive in the world ' s largest aerospace company , has his own
Sunday-night ritual of relaxing in his home office and processing
the hundreds of notes he ' s generated during his week of back-toback meetings . 
Whatever your life-style , you need a weekly regrouping
ritual . You likely have something like this ( or close to it ) already . If
so , leverage the habit by adding into it a higher-altitude review
process . 
The people who find it hardest to make time for this review
are those who have constantly on-demand work and home environments , with zero built-in time or space for regrouping . The
most stressed professionals I have met are the ones who have to be
mission-critically reactive at work ( e . g .  , high-level equities traders
and chiefs of staff ) and then go home to a couple of under-tenyear-old children and a spouse who also works . The more fortunate
of them have a one-hour train commute . 
If you recognize yourself in that picture , your greatest challenge will be to build in a consistent process of regrouping , when
your world is not directly in your face . You ' ll need to either accept
the requirement of an after-hours time at your desk on a Friday
night or establish a relaxed but at-work kind of location and time
at home . 
CHAPTER 8 I REVIEWING : KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL
Executive Operational Review Time I ' ve coached many executives to block out two hours on their calendars on Fridays . For
them the biggest problem is how to balance quality thinking and
catch-up time with the urgent demands of mission-critical interactions . This is a tough call . The most senior and savvy of them , 
however , know the value of sacrificing the seemingly
urgent for the truly important , and they create their
islands of time for some version of this process . 
Even the executives who have integrated a consistent reflective time for their work , though , often
seem to give short shrift to the more mundane review
and catch-up process at the " 10 , 000-foot " level . Between wall-towall meetings and ambling around your koi pond with a chardonnay at sunset , there ' s got to be a slightly elevated level of reflection
and regrouping required for operational control and
focus . If you think you have all your open loops fully
identified , clarified , assessed , and actionalized , you ' re
probably kidding yourself . 
The " Bigger Picture " Reviews
Yes , at some point you must clarify the larger outcomes , the long-term goals , the visions and principles that ultimately drive and test your decisions . 
What are your key goals and objectives in your
work ? What should you have in place a year or three
years from now ? How is your career going ? Is this the
life-style that is most fulfilling to you ? Are you doing
what you really want or need to do , from a deeper
and longer-term perspective ? 
The explicit focus of this book is not at those 
 " 30 , 000- " to " 50 , 000 + -foot " levels . Urging you to
operate from a higher perspective is , however , its
implicit purpose—to assist you in making your total
189
Your best thoughts
about work won ' t
happen while you ' re
at work . 
Thinking is the
very essence of and
the most difficult
thing to do in , 
business and in
life . Empire
builders spend
hour-after-hour on
mental work .  .  . 
while others party . 
If you ' re not consciously aware of
putting forth the
effort to exert selfguided integrated
thinking .  .  . then
you ' re giving in to
laziness and no
longer control your
life . 
—David Kekich
190
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
life expression more fulfilling and better aligned with the bigger
game we ' re all about . As you increase the speed and agility with
which you clear the " runway " and " 10 , 000-foot " levels of your life
and work , be sure to revisit the other levels you ' re engaged in , now
and then , to maintain a truly clear head . 
How often you ought to challenge yourself with that type of
wide-ranging review is something only you can know . The principle I must affirm at this juncture is this : 
You need to assess your life and work at the appropriate horizons , making the appropriate decisions , at the appropriate intervals , 
in order to really come clean . 
Which brings us to the ultimate point and challenge of all this
personal collecting , processing , organizing , and reviewing methodology : It ' s 9 : 22 A . M . Wednesday morning—what do you do ? 
Doing : Making the
Best Action Choices
WHEN IT COMES to your real-time , plow-through , get-it-done workday , how do you decide what to do at any given point ? 
As I ' ve said , my simple answer is , trust your
heart . Or your spirit . Or , if you ' re allergic to those
kinds of words , try these : your gut , the seat of your
pants , your intuition . 
That doesn ' t mean you throw your life to the
winds—unless , of course , it does . I actually went
down that route myself with some vengeance at one
point in my life , and I can attest that the lessons were
valuable , if not necessarily necessary .  * 
As outlined in chapter 2 ( pages 48-53 )  , I have
found three priority frameworks to be enormously helpful in the
context of deciding actions : 
•The four-criteria model for choosing actions in the moment
•The threefold model for evaluating daily work
•The six-level model for reviewing your own work 
* There are various ways to give it all up . You can ignore the physical world and
its realities and trust in the universe . I did that , and it was a powerful experience . And one I wouldn ' t wish on anyone . Surrendering to your inner awareness , however , and its intelligence and practicality in the worlds you live in , is
the higher ground . Trusting yourself and the source of your intelligence is a
more elegant version of freedom and personal productivity . 
191
Ultimately and
always you must
trust your intuition . 
There are many
things you can do , 
however , that can
increase that trust . 
192
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
These happen to be shown in reverse hierarchical order—
that is , the reverse of the typical strategic top-down perspective . 
In keeping with the nature of the Getting Things Done methodology , I have found it useful to once again work from the bottom , 
up , meaning I ' ll start with the most mundane levels . 
The Four-Criteria Model for
Choosing Actions in the Moment
Remember that you make your action choices based on the following four criteria , in order : 
1 | Context
2 | Time available
3 | Energy available
4 | Priority
Let ' s examine each of these in the light of how you can best
structure your systems and behaviors to take advantage of its
dynamics . 
Context
At any point in time , the first thing to consider is , what could you
possibly do , where you are , with the tools you have ? Do you have a
phone ? Do you have access to the person you need to talk with
face-to-face about three agenda items ? Are you at the store where
you need to buy something ? If you can ' t do the action because
you ' re not in the appropriate location or don ' t have the appropriate tool , don ' t worry about it . 
As I ' ve said , you should always organize your action
reminders by context— " Calls ,  "  " At Home ,  "  " At Computer ,  "  
 " Errands ,  "  " Agenda for Joe ,  "  " Agenda for Staff Meeting ,  " and
so on . Since context is the first criterion that comes into play in
your choice of actions , context-sorted lists prevent unnecessary
CHAPTER 9 | DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
reassessments about what to do . If you have a bunch of things to
do on one to-do list , but you actually can ' t do many of them in the
same context , you force yourself to continually keep reconsidering
all of them . 
If you ' re stuck in traffic , and the only actions you can take are
calls on your cell phone , you want to be able to pull out just your 
 " Calls " list . Your action lists should fold in or out , based on what
you could possibly do at any time . 
A second real benefit accrues from organizing all your
actions by the physical context needed : that in itself forces you to
make the all-important determination about the next physical
action on your stuff . All of my action lists are set up this way , so I
have to decide on the very next physical action before I can know
which list to put an item on ( is this something that requires the
computer ? a phone ? being in a store ?  )  . People who give themselves a " Misc .  " action list ( i . e .  , one not specific to a context ) often
let themselves slide in the next-action decision , too . 
I frequently encourage clients to structure their list categories early on as they ' re processing their in-baskets , because that
automatically grounds their projects in the real things that need to
get done to get them moving . 
Time Available
The second factor in choosing an action is how much time you
have before you have to do something else . If your meeting is
starting in ten minutes , you ' ll most likely select a different action
to do right now than you would if the next couple of hours were
clear . 
Obviously , it ' s good to know how much time you have at
hand ( hence the emphasis on calendar and watch )  . A total-life
action-reminder inventory will give you maximum information
about what you need to do , and make it much easier to match
your actions to the windows you have . In other words , if you have
ten minutes before that next meeting , find a ten-minute thing to
do . If your lists have only the " big " or " important " things on them , 
193
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
no item listed may be possible to handle in a ten-minute period . If
you ' re going to have to do those shorter action things anyway , the
most productive way to get them done is to utilize the little " weird
time " windows that occur throughout the day . 
Energy Available
Although you can increase your energy level at times
by changing your context and redirecting your focus , 
you can do only so much . The tail end of a day taken
up mostly by a marathon budget-planning session is
probably not the best time to call a prospective client
or start drafting a performance-review policy . It
might be better to call the airline to change a reservation , process some expense receipts , or skim a trade
journal . 
Just as having all your next-action options available allows
you to take advantage of various time slots , knowing about everything you ' re going to need to process and do at some point
will allow you to match productive activity with your vitality
level . 
I recommend that you always keep an inventory of things
that need to be done that require very little mental or creative
horsepower . When you ' re in one of those low-energy states , 
do them . Casual reading ( magazines , articles , and catalogs )  , 
telephone / address data that need to be inputted onto your computer , file purging , backing up your laptop , even just watering
your plants and filling your stapler—these are some of the myriad
things that you ' ve got to deal with sometime anyway . 
This is one of the best reasons for having very
clean edges to your personal management system : it
makes it easy to continue doing productive activity
when you ' re not in top form . If you ' re in a low-energy
mode and your reading material is disorganized , your
receipts are all over the place , your filing system is
chaotic , and your in-basket is dysfunctional , it just
194
We all have times
•when we think
more effectively , 
and times when
we should not be
thinking at all . 
—Daniel Cohen
There is no reason
not to be highly
productive , even
when you ' re not in
top form . 
CHAPTER 9 | DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
seems like too much work to do to find and organize the tasks at
hand ; so you simply avoid doing anything at all and then you feel
even worse . One of the best ways to increase your energy is to
close some of your loops . So always be sure to have some easy
loops to close , right at hand . 
These first three criteria for choosing action ( context , time , and
energy ) bespeak the need for a complete next-action reminder
system . Sometimes you won ' t be in a mode to do that kind of
■ thinking ; it needs to have already been done . If it is , you can operate much more " in your zone " and choose from delineated actions
that fit the situation . 
Priority
Given the context you ' re in and the time and energy you have , the
obvious next criterion for action choice is relative priority :  " Out of
all my remaining options , what is the most important thing for
me to do ?  "  
 " How do I decide my priorities ?  " is a question I
frequently hear from people I ' m working with . It
springs from their experience of having more on their
plate to do than they can comfortably handle . They
know that some hard choices have to be made , and
that some things may not get done at all . 
At the end of the day , in order to feel good about
what you didn ' t get done , you must have made some conscious
decisions about your responsibilities , goals , and values . That
process invariably includes an often complex interplay with the
goals , values , and directions of your organization and of the other
significant people in your life , and with the importance of those
relationships to you . 
195
It is impossible to
feel good about
your choices unless
you are clear about
what your work
really is . 
196
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
The Threefold Model for
Evaluating Daily Work
Setting priorities assumes that some things will be more important
than others , but important relative to what ? In this context , the
answer is , to your work—that is , the job you have accepted from
yourself and / or from others . This is where the next two frameworks
need to be brought to bear in your thinking . They ' re about defining
your work . Keep in mind that though much of this methodology
will be within the arena of your professional focus , I ' m using " work " 
in the universal sense , to mean anything you have a commitment to
making happen , personally as well as professionally . 
These days , daily work activity itself presents a relatively new
type of challenge to most professionals , something that it ' s helpful to understand as we endeavor to build the most productive
systems . As I explained earlier , during the course of the workday , 
at any point in time , you ' ll be engaged in one of three types of
activities : 
• Doing predefined work
• Doing work as it shows up
• Defining your work
You may be doing things on your action lists , doing things as
they come up , or processing incoming inputs to determine what
work that needs to be done , either then or later , from your lists . 
This is common sense . But many people let themselves get
wrapped around the second activity—dealing with things that
show up ad hoc—much too easily , and let the other two slide , to
their detriment . 
Let ' s say it ' s 10 : 26 A . M . Monday , and you ' re in your office . 
You ' ve just ended a half-hour unexpected phone call with a
prospective client . You have three pages of scribbled notes from
the conversation . There ' s a meeting scheduled with your staff at
CHAPTER 9 | DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
eleven , about half an hour from now . You were out late last night
with your spouse ' s parents and are still a little frayed around the
edges ( you told your father-in-law you ' d get back to him about .  .  . 
what ?  )  . Your assistant just laid six telephone messages in front of
you . You have a major strategic-planning session coming up in
two days , for which you have yet to formulate your ideas . The oil
light in your car came on as you drove to work this morning . And
your boss hinted as you passed her earlier in the hall that she ' d like
your thoughts on the memo she e-mailed you yesterday , before
this afternoon ' s three o ' clock meeting . 
Are your systems set up to maximally support
dealing with this reality , at 10 : 26 on Monday morning ? If you ' re still keeping things in your head , and if
you ' re still trying to capture only the " critical " stuff on
your lists , I suggest that the answer is no . 
I ' ve noticed that people are actually more comfortable dealing with surprises and crises than they
are taking control of processing , organizing , reviewing , and assessing that part of their work that is not as
self-evident . It ' s easy to get sucked into " busy " and 
 " urgent " mode , especially when you have a lot of unprocessed and
relatively out-of-control work on your desk , in your e-mail , and
on your mind . 
In fact , much of our life and work just shows up in the
moment , and it usually becomes the priority when it does . It ' s
indeed true for most professionals that the nature of their job
requires them to be instantly available to handle new work as
it appears in many forms . For instance , you need to pay attention to your boss when he shows up and wants a few minutes
of your time . You get a request from a senior executive that suddenly takes precedence over anything else you thought you
needed to do today . You find out about a serious problem with fulfilling a major customer ' s order , and you have to take care of it
right away . 
These are all understandable judgment calls . But the angst
197
It is often easier to
get wrapped up in
the urgent demands
of the moment than
to deal with your inbasket , e-mail , and
the rest of your
open loops . 
198
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
begins to mount when the other actions on your lists are not
reviewed and renegotiated by you or between you and everyone
else . The constant sacrifices of not doing the work you have
defined on your lists can be tolerated only if you know what you ' re
not doing . That requires regular processing of your in-basket 
( defining your work ) and consistent review of complete lists of all
your predetermined work . 
If choosing to do work that just showed up instead of doing
work you predefined is a conscious choice , based on your best call , 
that ' s playing the game the best way you can . Most people , however , have major improvements to make in how they clarify , manage , and renegotiate their total inventory of projects and actions . If
you let yourself get caught up in the urgencies of the moment , 
without feeling comfortable about what you ' re not dealing with , 
the result is frustration and anxiety . Too often the stress and
lowered effectiveness are blamed on the " surprises .  " If you know
what you ' re doing , and what you ' re not doing , surprises are just
another opportunity to be creative and excel . 
In addition , when the in-basket and the action lists get
ignored for too long , random things lying in them tend to surface
as emergencies later on , adding more ad hoc work-as-it-shows-up
to fuel the fire . 
Many people use the inevitablity of an almost infinite stream
of immediately evident things to do as a way to avoid the responsibilities of defining their work and managing their total inventory . It ' s easy to get seduced into not-quite-so-critical stuff that is
right at hand , especially if your in-basket and your personal organization are out of control . Too often " managing by wandering
around " is an excuse for getting away from amorphous piles of
stuff . 
This is where the need for knowledge-work athletics really
shows up . Most people did not grow up in a world where defining
the edges of work and managing huge numbers of open loops were
required . But when you ' ve developed the skill and , habits of processing input rapidly into a rigorously defined system , it becomes
CHAPTER 9 I DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
much easier to trust your judgment calls about the dance of what
to do , what to stop doing , and what to do instead . 
The Moment-to-Moment Balancing Act
At the black-belt level , you can shift like lightning from one foot
to the other and back again . While you ' re processing your inbasket , for example , your assistant comes in to tell
you about a situation that needs immediate attention . No sweat—your tray is still there , with everything still to be processed in one stack , ready to be
picked up again when you can get back to it . While
you ' re on hold on the phone , you can be reviewing
your action lists and getting a sense of what you ' re
going to do when the call is done . While you wait for
a meeting to start , you can work down the " Read / 
Review " stack you ' ve brought with you . And when
the conversation you weren ' t expecting with your
boss shrinks the time you have before your next
meeting to twelve minutes , you can easily find a way
to use that window to good advantage . 
You can do only one of these work activities at a time . If you
stop to talk to someone in his or her office , you ' re not working off
your lists or processing incoming stuff . The challenge is to feel
confident about what you have decided to do . 
So how do you decide ? This again will involve your intuitive
judgments—how important is the unexpected work , against all
the rest ? How long can you let your in-basket go unprocessed and
all your stuff unreviewed and trust that you ' re making good decisions about what to do ? 
People often complain about the interruptions that prevent
them from doing their work . But interruptions are unavoidable in
life . When you become elegant at dispatching what ' s coming in
and are organized enough to take advantage of the " weird time " 
windows that show up , you can switch between one task and the
other rapidly . You can be processing e-mails while you ' re on hold
199
To ignore the
unexpected ( even if
it were possible ) 
would be to live
without
opportunity , 
spontaneity , and
the rich moments
of which " life " is
made . 
—Stephen Covey
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
on a conference call . But you must learn to dance
among many tasks to keep a healthy balance of your
workflow . Your choices will still have to be calibrated
against your own clarity about the nature and goals
of your work . 
Your ability to deal with surprise is your competitive edge . But at a certain point , if you ' re not
catching up and getting things under control , staying
busy with only the work at hand will undermine your
effectiveness . And ultimately , in order to know whether you
should stop what you ' re doing and do something else , you ' ll need
to have to have a good sense of what your job requires and how
that fits into the other contexts of your life . The only way you can
have that is to evaluate your life and work appropriately at multiple horizons . 
The Six-Level Model for
Reviewing Your Own Work
The six levels of work as we saw in chapter 2 ( pages 51-53 ) may
be thought of in terms of altitude : 
• 50 , 000 + feet : Life
• 40 , 000 feet : Three- to five-year visions
• 30 , 000 feet : One- to two-year goals
• 20 , 000 feet : Areas of responsibility
• 10 , 000 feet : Current projects
• Runway : Current actions
It makes sense that each of these levels should enhance and
align with the ones above it . In other words , your priorities will sit
in a hierarchy from the top down . Ultimately , if the phone call
you ' re supposed to make clashes with your life purpose or values , 
to be in sync with yourself you won ' t make it . If your job structure
200
Do ad hoc work as
it shows up , not
because it is the
path of least resistance , but because
it is the thing you
need to do , vis-a-vis
all the rest . 
CHAPTER 9 | DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
doesn ' t match up with where you need to be a year from now , 
you should rethink how you ' ve framed your areas of focus and
responsibilities , if you want to get where you ' re going most efficiently . 
Let ' s look at that first example from the bottom up . The
phone call you need to make ( action ) is about the deal you ' re
working on ( project )  , which would increase sales ( responsibility )  . 
This particular deal would give you the opportunity to move up in
the sales force ( job goal ) because of the new market
your company wants to penetrate ( organization vision )  . 
And that would get you closer to the way you want to
be living , both financially and professionally ( life )  . 
Or , from the other direction , you ' ve decided
that you want to be your own boss and unlock some of
your unique assets and talents in a particular area that
resonates with you ( life )  . So you create a business for
yourself ( vision )  , with some short-term key operational objectives ( job goal )  . That gives you some critical roles you need to
fulfill to get it rolling ( responsibility )  , with some immediate
outcomes to achieve ( projects )  . On each of those projects you ' ll
have things you need to do , as soon as you can do them ( next
actions )  . 
The healthiest approach for relaxed control and inspired
productivity is to manage all the levels in a balanced fashion . At
any of these levels , it ' s critical to identify all the open loops , all the
incompletions , and all the commitments that you have right now , 
as best you can . Without an acceptance and an objective assessment of what ' s true in the present , it ' s always difficult to cast off
for new shores . What ' s on your answering machine ? What are
your projects relative to your kids ? What are you responsible for in
the office ? What ' s pushing on you to change or attracting you to
create in the next months or years ? These are all open loops in
your psyche , though often it takes deeper and more introspective
processes to identify the bigger goals and subtler inclinations . 
There is magic in being in the present in your life . I ' m always
201
Your work is to
discover your work
and then with all
your heart to give
yourself to it . 
—
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
amazed at the power of clear observation simply
about what ' s going on , what ' s true . Finding out the
exact details of your personal finances , clarifying the
historical data about the company you ' re buying , or
getting the facts about who really said what to whom
in an interpersonal conflict can be constructive , if not
downright healing . 
Getting things done , and feeling good about it , means being
willing to recognize , acknowledge , and appropriately manage all
the things that have your consciousness engaged . Mastering the
art of stress-free productivity requires it . 
Working from the Bottom Up
In order to create productive alignment in your life , you could quite
reasonably start with a clarification from the top down . Decide why
you ' re on the planet . Figure out what kind of life and
work and life-style would best allow you to fulfill that
contract . What kind of job and personal relationships
would support that direction ? What key things would
you need to put in place and make happen right now , 
and what could you do physically as soon as possible , 
to kick-start each of those ? 
In truth , you can approach your priorities from
any level , at any time . I always have something that I
could do constructively to enhance my awareness and focus on
each level . I ' m never lacking in more visions to elaborate , goals to
reassess , projects to identify or create , or actions to decide on . The
trick is to learn to pay attention to the ones you need to at the
appropriate time , to keep you and your systems in balance . 
Because everything will ultimately be driven by the priorities
of the level above it , any formulation of your priorities would
obviously most efficiently begin at the top . For example , if you
spend time prioritizing your work and then later discover that it ' s
not the work you think you ought to be doing , you may have 
 " wasted " time and energy that could have been better spent defin202
The best place to
succeed is where
you are with what
you have . 
—Charles
You ' re never lacking
in opportunities to
clarify your
priorities at any
level . Pay attention
to which horizon is
calling you . 
CHAPTER 9 1 DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
ing the next job you really want . The problem is that without a
sense of control at the implementation levels ( current projects and
actions )  , and without inner trust in your own ability to manage
those levels appropriately , trying to manage yourself from the top
down often creates frustration . 
From a practical perspective , I suggest going
from the bottom up instead . I ' ve coached people
from both directions , and in terms of lasting value , I
can honestly say that getting someone in control of
the details of his or her current physical world , and
then elevating the focus from there , has never
missed . 
The primary reason to work from this bottomup direction is that it clears the psychic decks to begin with , 
allowing your creative attention to focus on the more meaningful
and elusive visions that you may need to challenge yourself to
identify . Also , this particular method has a high degree of flexibility and freedom , and it includes a thinking and organizing practice that is universal and effective no matter what it ' s focused on . 
That makes it worth learning , no matter what the actual content
you ' re dealing with at the moment may be . Change your mind , 
and this process will help you adjust with maximum speed . And
knowing that you have that ability will give you permission to
play a bigger game . It ' s truly empowering . 
While the " 50 , 000-foot level " is obviously the most important
context within which to set priorities , experience has shown me
that when we understand and implement all the levels of work
in which we are engaged , especially the runway and 10 , 000-foot
levels , we gain greater freedom and resources to do the bigger
work that we ' re all about . Although a bottom-up approach is
not a key conceptual priority , from a practical perspective it ' s
a critical factor in achieving a balanced , productive , and comfortable life . 
203
Trying to manage
from the top down , 
when the bottom is
out of control , may
be the least
effective approach . 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
Runway The first thing to do is make sure your action lists are
complete , which in itself can be quite a task . Those who focus on
gathering and objectifying all of those items discover that there
are many they ' ve forgotten , misplaced , or just not recognized . 
Aside from your calendar , if you don ' t have at least fifty next
actions and waiting-fors , including all the agendas for people and
meetings , I would be skeptical about whether you really had all of
them . If you ' ve followed through rigorously with the steps and
suggestions in part 2 , though , you may have them already . If not , 
and you do want to get this level up-to-date , set aside some time
to work through chapters 4 through 6 in real implementation
mode . 
When you ' ve finished getting this level of control current , 
you ' ll automatically have a more grounded sense of immediate
priorities , which is almost impossible to achieve otherwise . 
10 , 000 Feet Finalize your " Projects " list . Does it
truly capture all the commitments you have that will
require more than one action to get done ? That will
define the boundaries of the kind of week-to-week
operational world you ' re in and allow you to relax
your thinking for longer intervals . 
If you make a complete list of all of the things
you want to have happen in your life and work at this
level , you ' ll discover that there are actions you need
to do that you hadn ' t realized . Just creating this objective inventory will give you a firmer basis on which to make decisions about
what to do when you have discretionary time . Invariably when
people get their " Projects " list up-to-date , they discover there are
several things that could be done readily to move things they care
about forward . 
Very few people have this clear data defined and available to
themselves in some objective form . Before any discussion about
what should be done this afternoon can take place , this information must be at hand . 
204
Taking the inventory
of your current
work at all levels
will automatically
produce greater
focus , alignment , 
and sense of
priorities . 
CHAPTER 9 | DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
Again , if you ' ve been putting into practice the methodology
of Getting Things Done , your " Projects " list will be where it needs
to be . For most of our coaching clients , it takes ten to fifteen
hours of collecting , processing , and organizing to get to the point
of trusting the thoroughness of their inventory . 
20 , 000 Feet This is the level of " current job responsibilities .  " 
What are the " hats " you wear ? Professionally , this would relate to
your current position and work . Personally , it would include the
roles you ' ve taken on in your family , in your community , and of
course with yourself as a functioning person . 
You may have some of these roles already defined and
written out . If you ' ve recently taken a new position and there ' s
an agreement or contract about your areas of responsibility , 
that would certainly be a good start . If you ' ve done any kind
of personal goal-setting and values-clarifying exercises in the
past and still have any materials you created then , add those to the
mix . 
Next I recommend that you make and keep a list called 
 " Areas of Focus .  " You might like to separate this into " Professional " and " Personal " sublists , in which case you ' ll want to use
them both equally for a consistent review This is one of the most
useful checklists you can create for your own self-management . It
won ' t require the kind of once-a-week recalibration
that the " Projects " list will ; more likely it will have
meaning on a longer recursion cycle . Depending on
the speed of change in some of the more important
areas of your life and work , this should be used as a
trigger for potential new projects every one to three
months . 
You probably have somewhere between four and seven key
areas of responsibility in your work , and a similar number personally . Your job may include things like staff development , systems
design , long-range planning , administrative support , marketing , 
and scheduling , or responsibility for facilities , fulfillment , quality
205
If you ' re not totally
sure what your job
is , it will always feel
overwhelming . 
206
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PAHT TWO
control , asset management , and so on . If you ' re your own business , your attention will be on many more areas than if you have a
very specialized function in a large organization . The rest of your
life might entail areas of focus such as parenting , partnering , 
church , health , community service , home management , financial
management , self-development , creative expression , and so forth . 
The operational purpose of the " Areas of Focus " list is to
ensure that you have all your projects and next actions defined , so
you can manage your responsibilities appropriately . If you were to
create an accounting of those and evaluate them objectively , in
terms of what you ' re doing and should be doing , you ' ll undoubtedly
uncover projects you need to add to your " Projects " list . You may , in
reviewing the list , decide that some areas are just fine and are being
taken care of . Then again , you may realize that something has been 
 " bugging " you in one area and that a project should be created to
shore it up .  " Areas of Focus " is really just a more abstract and refined
version of the " Triggers " list we covered earlier . 
Every client I have coached in the last twenty years has
uncovered at least one important gap at this level of discussion . 
For instance , a common " hat " a manager or executive wears is 
 " staff development .  " Upon reflection , most realize they need to add
a project or two in that area , such as " Upgrade our performancereview process .  " 
A discussion of " priorities " would have to incorporate all of
these levels of current agreements between yourself and others . If
you get this " job description " checklist in play and keep it current , 
you ' ll probably be more relaxed and in control than most people
in our culture . It will certainly go a long way toward moving you
from hope to trust as you make the necessary on-the-run choices
about what to do . 
30 , 000 to 50 , 000 + Feet Whereas the three lower levels have
mostly to do with the current state of things—your actions , projects , and areas of responsibility—from here up the factors of the
future and your direction and intentions are primary . There is still
CHAPTER 9 I DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
an inventory to take at these plateaus , but it ' s more
about " What is true right now about where I ' ve
decided I ' m going and how I ' m going to get there ?  " 
This can range from one-year goals in your job 
(  " 30 , 000 feet "  ) to a three-year vision for your career
and personal net worth (  " 40 , 000 feet "  ) to intuiting
your life purpose and how to maximize its expression 
(  " 50 , 000 + feet "  )  . 
I ' m blending the three uppermost levels together here
because situations often can ' t easily be pigeonholed into one or
another of these categories . Also , since Getting Things Done is
more about the art of implementation than about how to define
goals and vision , I won ' t offer a rigorous examination here . But by
its very nature this investigation can broach potentially deep and
complex arenas , which could include business strategy , organization development , career planning , and life direction and values . 
For our purposes , the focus is on capturing what motivators
exist for you in current reality that determine the inventory of
what your work actually is , right now . Whether your directions
and goals should be changed—based on deeper thinking , analysis , 
and intuition—could be another discussion . Even so , there are
probably some things you can identify right now that can help
you get current in your own thinking about your work and what ' s
important in it . 
If you were to intuitively frame a picture of what you think
you might be doing twelve to eighteen months from now , or what
the nature of your job will look like at that point , what would that
trigger ? At this level , which is subtler , there may be things personally you need to let go of , and people and systems that may need
to be developed to allow the transition . And as the job itself is a
moving target , given the shifting sands of the professional world
these days , there may need to be projects defined to ensure viability of the outputs in your area . 
In the personal arena , this is where you would want to consider things like :  " My career is going to stagnate unless I assert my
207
When you ' re not
sure where you ' re
going , you ' ll never
know when enough
is enough . 
208
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
own goals more specifically to my boss ( or my boss ' s boss )  .  " Or 
 " What new things are my children going to be doing next year , 
and what do I need to do differently because of that ?  " Or " What
preparation do I need to ensure that I can deal with this health
problem we ' ve just uncovered ?  " 
Through a longer scope you might assess : How is your career
going ? How is your personal life moving along ? What is your
organization doing relative to changes in the environment , and
what impact does that have on you ? These are the one-to-fiveyear-horizon questions that , when I ask them , elicit different and
important kinds of answers from everyone . 
Not long ago I coached someone in a large international
bank who , after a few months of implementing this methodology
and getting control of his day-to-day inventory of work , decided
the time was right to invest in his own start-up high-tech firm . 
The thought had been too intimidating for him to address initially , but working from the " runway level " up made it much more
accessible and a natural consequence of thinking at this horizon . 
If you ' re involved in anything that has a future of longer than
a year ( marriage , kids , a career , a company , an art form )  , you would
do well to think about what you might need to be doing to manage things along that vector . 
Questions to ask yourself here are : 
•What are the longer-term goals and objectives in my
organization , and what projects do I need to have in place
related to them to fulfill my responsibilities ? 
•What longer-term goals and objectives have I set for myself , 
and what projects do I need to have in place to make them
happen ? 
•What other significant things are happening that could affect
my options about what you I ' m doing ? 
CHAPTER 9 | DOING : MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES
Here are some examples of the kinds of issues that show up
at this level of conversation : 
•The changing nature of your job , given the shifting priorities of
the company . Instead of managing the production of your own
training programs in-house , you ' re going to outsource them to
vendors . 
•The direction in which you feel you need to move in your
career . You see yourself doing a different kind of job a year
from now , and you need to make a transition out of the one
you have while exploring the options for a transfer or
promotion . 
•The organization direction , given globalization and expansion . 
You see a lot of major international travel looming on the
horizon for you , and given your life-style preferences , you need
to consider how to readjust your career plans . 
•Life-style preferences and changing needs . As your kids get
older , your need to be at home with them is diminishing , and
your interest in investment and retirement planning is growing . 
At the topmost level of thinking , you ' ll need to ask some of
the ultimate questions . Why does your company exist ? Why do
you exist ? What is the core DNA of your existence , personally
and / or organizationally , that drives your choices . This is the " big
picture " stuff with which hundreds of books and gurus and models are devoted to helping you grapple .  
 " Why ?  "  : this is the great question with which we all struggle . 
You can have all the other levels of your life and work shipshape , defined , and organized to a T . Still , if you ' re the slightest
bit off course in terms of what at the deepest level you want or are
called to be doing , you ' re going to be uncomfortable . 
209
210
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Getting Priority Thinking Off Your Mind
Take at least a few minutes , if you haven ' t already done so , to jot
down some informal notes about things that occurred to you
while you ' ve been reading this chapter . Whatever popped into
your mind at these more elevated levels of your inner radar , write
it down and get it out of your head . 
Then process those notes . Decide whether what you wrote
down is something you really want to move on or not . If not , 
throw the note away , or put it on a " Someday / Maybe " list or in a
folder called " Dreams and Goals I Might Get Around to at Some
Point .  " Perhaps you want to continue accumulating more of this
kind of future thinking and would like to do the exercise with
more formality—for example , by drafting a new business plan
with your partners , designing and writing out your idea of a
dream life with your spouse , creating a more specific career map
for the next three years for yourself , or just getting a personal
coach who can lead you through those discussions and thought
processes . If so , put that outcome on your " Projects " list , and
decide the next action . Then do it , hand it off to get done , or put
the action reminder on the appropriate list . 
With that done , you may want to turn your focus to developmental thinking about specific projects that have been identified
but not fleshed out as fully as you ' d like . You ' ll want to ensure that
you ' re set up for that kind of " vertical " processing . 
Getting Projects Under Control
CHAPTERS 4 THROUGH 9 have given you all the tricks and methods you
need to clear your head and make intuitive choices about what to
do when . That ' s the horizontal level—what needs your attention
and action across the horizontal landscape of your life . The last
piece of the puzzle is the vertical level—the digging deep and piein-the-sky thinking that can leverage your creative brainpower . 
That gets us back to refining and energizing our project planning . 
The Need for More Informal Planning
After years of working with thousands of professionals down in
the trenches , I can safely say that virtually all of us could be doing
more planning , more informally and more often , about our projects and our lives . And if we did , it would relieve a lot of pressure
on our psyches and produce an enormous amount of creative output with minimal effort . 
I ' ve discovered that the biggest improvement opportunity in
planning does not consist of techniques for the highly elaborate
and complex kinds of project organizing that professional project
managers sometimes use ( like GANTT charts )  . Most of the people who need those already have them , or at least have access to
the training and software required to learn about them . The real
need is to capture and utilize more of the creative , proactive
thinking we do—or could do . 
211
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
The major reason for the lack of this kind of effective valueadded thinking is the dearth of systems for managing the potentially infinite amount of detail that could show up
as a result . This is why my approach tends to be
bottom-up . If you feel out of control with your current actionable commitments , you ' ll resist focused
planning . An unconscious pushback occurs . As you
begin to apply these methods , however , you may find
that they free up enormous creative and constructive
thinking . If you have systems and habits ready to
leverage your ideas , your productivity can expand exponentially . 
In chapter 3 , I covered in some detail the five phases of project planning that take something from the idea stage into physical
reality . 
What follows is a compilation of practical tips
and techniques to facilitate the natural , informal
planning processes I recommend . Although these
suggestions are all based on common sense , they ' re
not followed nearly as frequently as they could be . 
Put them to use whenever and as often as you can , 
instead of saving up your thinking for big formal
meetings . 
212
Which Projects Should You Be Planning ? 
Most of the outcomes you have identified for your " Projects " list
will not need any kind of front-end planning , other than the sort
you do in your head , quickly and naturally , to come up with a next
action on them . The only planning needed for " Get car
inspected ,  " for example , would be to decide to check the phone
book for the nearest inspection location and call and set up a time . 
There are two types of projects , however , that deserve at least
some sort of planning activity :  ( 1 ) those that still have your attention even after you ' ve determined their next actions , and ( 2 ) those
The middle of
every successful
project looks like a
disaster . 
—Rosabeth
Moss
You need to set up
systems and tricks
that get you to think
about your projects
and situations more
frequently , more
easily , and in more
depth . 
CHAPTER 10 | GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL
about which potentially useful ideas and supportive detail just
show up . 
The first type—the projects that you know have other things
about them that must be decided on and organized—will need a
more detailed approach than just identifying a next action . For
these you ' ll need a more specific application of one or more of the
other four phases of the natural planning model : purpose and
principles , vision / outcome , brainstorming , and / or organizing . 
The second type—the projects for which ideas just show up , 
ad hoc , on a beach or in a car or in a meeting—need to have an
appropriate place into which these associated ideas can be captured . Then they can reside there for later use as needed . 
Projects That Need Next Actions About Planning
There are probably a few projects you can think of right now , off
the top of your head , that you know you want to get more objectified , fleshed out , and under control . Perhaps you have an important meeting coming up and you know you have to prepare an
agenda and materials for it . Or you ' ve just inherited the job of
coordinating the annual associates ' conference , and you ' ve got to
get it organized as soon as possible so you can start delegating significant pieces . Or you ' ve got to clarify a job description for a new
position on your team to give to Human Resources . If you haven ' t
done it already , get a next action now that will start the planning
process for each of these , and put it on the appropriate action list . 
Then proceed with further planning steps . 
Typical Planning Steps
The most common types of planning-oriented actions will be
your own brainstorming and organizing , setting up meetings , and
gathering information . 
Brainstorming Some of the projects that have your attention
right now will require you to do your own free-form thinking ; this
is especially true of those for which you were not clear about what
213
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
the next action would be when you made that decision . These
should all have a next action , such as " Draft ideas re X .  " 
You need to decide where and how you want to do that
action , in order to know which action list to put it on . Do you do
this kind of thinking best on a computer , or by hand-writing your
thoughts on paper ? I may choose either medium , depending on
what my intuition tells me . For me this next action would go
either on my " At Computer " list or on " Anywhere "  ( because I can
draw mind-maps wherever I am , as long as I have pen and paper )  . 
Organizing You may have some projects for which you have
already collected notes and miscellaneous support materials , and
you just need to sort through them and get them into a more structured form . In this case , your next action would likely be " Organize
Project X notes .  " If you have to be in your office to do that 
( because that ' s where the files are , and you don ' t want to carry
them around )  , that action should go on your " At Office " action list . 
If you ' re carrying the project notes around with you in a folder , or
in a portable organizer or on a laptop , then the " Organize .  .  .  " 
action would go on an " Anywhere " or " Misc .  " action list if you ' re
going to do it by hand , or on " At Computer " if you ' re going to use a
word processor , outliner , or project-planning software . 
One of the greatest
blocks to organizational productivity
is the lack of
decision by a senior
person about the
necessity of a meeting , and with whom , 
to move an important issue
forward . 
Setting Up Meetings Often , progress will be made
on project thinking when you set up a meeting with
the people you ' d like to have involved in the brainstorming . That usually means sending an e-mail to
the whole group or to an assistant to get it calendared , or making a phone call to the first person to
nail down a time . 
Gathering Information Sometimes the next task on
project thinking is to gather more data . Maybe you
need to talk to someone to get his or her input (  " Call
Bill re his thoughts on the managers ' meeting "  )  . Or
214
CHAPTER 10 | GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL
you need to look through the files you just inherited from last
year ' s conference (  " Review Associate Conference archive files "  )  . 
Or you want to surf the Web to get a sense of what ' s happening 
 " out there " on a new topic you ' re exploring (  " R & D search firms
for sales executives "  )  . 
Random Project Thinking
Don ' t lose any ideas about projects that could potentially be useful . Many times you ' ll think of something you don ' t want to forget
when you ' re a place that has nothing to do with the project . You ' re
driving to the store , for example , and you think of a great way that
you might want to start off the next staff meeting . Or you ' re stirring the spaghetti sauce in the kitchen and it occurs to you that
you might want to give out nice tote bags to participants in the
upcoming conference . Or you ' re watching the evening news when
you suddenly remember another key person you might want to
include in the advisory council you ' re putting together . 
If these aren ' t specifically next actions that can go directly on
your action lists , you ' ll still need to capture and organize them
somewhere that makes sense . Of course the most critical tools for
ensuring that nothing gets lost is your collection system—your
in-basket , pad , and paper ( or equivalents ) at work and at home , 
and in a portable version ( an index card ) while you ' re out and
about . You need to hold all your ideas until you later decide what
to do with them . 
Tools and Structures That Support
Project Thinking
No matter at what level project ideas show up , it ' s great to have
good tools always close at hand for capturing them as they occur . 
Once they ' ve been captured , it ' s useful to have access to them
whenever you need to refer to them . 
215
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
Thinking Tools
One of the great secrets to getting ideas and increasing your productivity is utilizing the function-follows-form phenomenon—
great tools can trigger good thinking .  ( I ' ve come up
with some of my most productive thoughts when
playing with my Palm organizer in an airport , waiting for a flight !  ) 
If you aren ' t writing anything down , it ' s
extremely difficult to stay focused on anything for
more than a few minutes , especially if you ' re by yourself . But when you utilize physical tools to keep your
thinking anchored , you can stay engaged constructively for hours . 
Writing Instruments
Keep good writing tools around all the time so you never have any
unconscious resistance to thinking due to not having
anything to capture it with . If I don ' t have something to write with , I can sense that I ' m not as comfortable letting myself think about projects and
situations . 
Conversely , I have done some great thinking
and planning at times just because I wanted to use
my nice-looking , smooth-writing ballpoint pen ! You
may not be inspired by cool gear like I am , but if you
are , do yourself a favor and invest in quality writing
tools . 
I also suggest that you keep nice ballpoint pens at the stations where you ' re likely to want to take notes—particularly near
the phones around your house . 
216
Luck affects
everything . Let
your hook always
be cast ; in the
stream where you
least expect it there
will be a fish . 
—
Function often
follows form . Give
yourself a context
for capturing
thoughts , and
thoughts will occur
that you don ' t yet
know you have . 
CHAPTER 10 | GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL
Paper and Pads
In addition to writing tools , you should always have functional
pads of paper close at hand . Legal pads work well because you can
easily tear off pages with ideas and notes and toss
them into your in-basket until you get a chance to
process them . Also you will often want to keep some
of your informal mind-maps , and you can put those
separate pieces of paper in appropriate file folders
without having to rewrite them . 
Easels and Whiteboards
If you have room for them , whiteboards and / or easel pads are very
functional thinking tools to use from time to time . They give you
plenty of space on which to jot down ideas , and it can be useful to
keep them up in front of you for while , as you incubate on a topic . Whiteboards are great to have on a
wall in your office and in meeting rooms , and the
bigger the better . If you have children , I recommend
that you install one in their bedrooms ( I wish I ' d
grown up with the encouragement to have as many
ideas as I could !  )  . Be sure to keep plenty of fresh markers on hand ; 
it ' s frustrating to want to start writing on a whiteboard and find
that all the markers are dry and useless . 
Whenever two or more people are gathered for a meeting , 
someone should start writing somewhere where the other ( s ) can
see . Even if you erase your thoughts after a few minutes , just the
act of writing them down facilitates a constructive thinking
process like nothing else .  ( I ' ve found it immensely helpful at times
to draw informal diagrams and notes on paper tablecloths , place
mats , or even napkins in restaurants , if I didn ' t have my own pad
of paper at hand .  ) 
217
Where is your
closest pad ? Keep it
closer . 
How do I know
what I think , until
I hear what I say ? 
—E . M . Forster
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I PART TWO
The Computer
Many times I like to think on my laptop , in my word processor . 
There are so many things I might want to do later on with my
thinking , and it feels terrific to already have it in some digital
form for later editing and cutting and pasting into
various other applications . Once I ' ve booted up and
the screen is ready in front of me , I find that thinking
just automatically starts to happen . This is another
good reason to ensure that your typing and keyboard
skills are sufficient to make engaging with the computer at least
easy , if not downright fun . 
The Support Structures
In addition to good tools ubiquitously at hand , it is productive to
have accessible formats into which project thinking can be captured . Much as a pen and paper in front of you supports brainstorming , having good tools and places for organizing project
details facilitates the more linear planning that many projects
need . 
Create File Folders or Loose-Leaf Pages as Needed
A good general-reference filing system , right at hand and easy to
use , is not only critical to manage the general workflow process , 
but highly functional for project thinking as well . Often a project
begins to emerge when it ' s triggered by relevant data , notes , and
miscellaneous materials , and for this reason , you ' ll want to create
a folder for a topic as soon as you have something to put in it . If
your filing system is too formal ( or nonexistent )  , you ' ll probably
miss many opportunities to generate a project focus sufficiently
early . As soon as you return from that first meeting with your initial notes about a topic that has just emerged on the horizon , create a file and store them in it right away ( after you have gleaned
any next actions , of course )  . 
Many times , in coaching clients , I find that the mere act of
218
Leverage your
computer as a think
station . 
CHAPTER 10 | GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL
creating a file for a topic into which we can organize random
notes and potentially relevant materials gives them a significantly
improved sense of control . It ' s a way of physically , visibly , and psychologically getting their " arms around it .  " 
If you like to work with a loose-leaf notebook or
planner , it ' s good to keep an inventory of fresh note
paper or graph paper that you can use to set up a page
on a theme or project as it shows up . While some
projects may later deserve a whole tabbed section or
even an entire notebook of their own , they don ' t start
out that way . And most of your projects may need
only a page or two to hold the few ideas you need to
track . 
Software Tools
Software is in one sense a dark black hole to explore in search of
good " project management " tools . For the most part , the applications that are specifically designed for project organizing are way
too complex , with too much horsepower to really be functional for
98 percent of what most people need to manage . They ' re appropriate only for the very small percentage of the professional world
that actually needs them . The rest of us usually find bits and
pieces of applications more informal and project-friendly . As I ' ve
noted , I have never seen any two projects that needed the same
amount of detailing and structure to get them under control . So it
would be difficult to create any one application that would suffice
for the majority . 
Digital Outlining Most of what anyone needs to structure his
or her thinking about projects can be found in any kind of application that has a simple hierarchical outlining function . I
used to use a Symantec program called Grandview , and now I
often use Microsoft Word for just this kind of project planning . 
Here ' s a piece of an outline I created for one of our own planning
sessions : 
219
If you don ' t have a
good system for
filing bad ideas , you
probably don ' t have
one for filing good
ones , either . 
220
The great thing about outlining applications is that they can
be as complex or as simple as required . There are numerous software programs that provide this kind of basic hierarchical structuring . The trick is to find one that you feel comfortable with , so
you can rapidly get familiar with how to insert headings and subheadings and move them around as needed . Until you can stop
focusing on how to use the program , you ' ll resist booting it up and
using it to think and organize . 
It doesn ' t really matter where you put this kind of thinking , 
so long as it ' s easily accessible so you can input and review it as
needed . 
Brainstorming Applications Several applications have been
developed specifically to facilitate the brainstorming process .  
 " Inspiration " was one , based on the mind-mapping techniques of
PRACTICIN
CHAPTER 10 I GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL
Tony Buzan . It had some useful features , but me , I ' ve gone back
to paper and cool pen for the kind of rapid , informal thinking I
usually need to do . 
The problem with digitizing brainstorming is that for the
most part we don ' t need to save what we brainstorm in the way we
brainstormed it—the critical thing is the conclusions we
develop
from that raw thinking . The slick brainstorming-capture tools , 
like electronic whiteboards and digital handwriting-copying gear , 
ultimately will probably not be as successful as the manufacturers
hoped . We don ' t need to save creative thinking so much as we do
the structures we generate from it . There are significant differences among collecting and processing and organizing , and different tools are usually required for them . You might as well dump
ideas into a word processor . 
Project-Planning Applications As I ' ve mentioned , most projectplanning software is too rigorous for the majority of the project
thinking and planning we need to do . Over the years I ' ve seen
these programs more often tried and discontinued than utilized as
a consistent tool . When they ' re used successfully , they ' re usually
highly customized to fit very specific requirements for the company or the industry . 
I anticipate that less structured and more functional applications will emerge in the coming years , based on the ways we
naturally think and plan . Until then , best stick with some good
and simple outliner . 
Attaching Digital Notes
If you are using a digital organizer , much of the project planning
you need to capture outside your head can in fact be satisfactorily
managed in an attached note field . If you have the project itself as
an item on a list on a Palm , or as a task in Microsoft Outlook , you
can open the accompanying " Note " section and jot ideas , bullet
points , and subcomponents of the project . Just ensure that you
review the attachment appropriately to make it useful . 
221
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO
How Do I Apply All This in My World ? 
Just as your " Next Actions " lists need to be up-to-date , so , 
too , does your " Projects " list . That done , give yourself a block of
time , ideally between one and three hours , to handle
as much of the " vertical " thinking about each project
as you can . 
At the very least , right now or as soon as possible , take those few of your projects that you have the
most attention on or interest in right now and do
some thinking and collecting and organizing on
them , using whatever tools seem most appropriate . 
Focus on each one , one at a time , top to bottom . 
As you do , ask yourself ,  " What about this do I want to know , capture , or remember ?  " 
You may just want to mind-map some thoughts on a piece of
paper , make a file , and toss the paper into it . You may come up
with some simple bullet-point headings to attach as a 
 " note " in your software organizer . Or you could create a Word file and start an outline on it . 
The key is to get comfortable with having and
using your ideas . And to acquire the habit of focusing
your energy constructively , on intended outcomes
and open loops , before you have to . 
222
Clear the deck , 
create a context , 
and do some
creative project
thinking . You ' ll then
be way ahead of
most people . 
Let our advance
worrying become
advance thinking
and planning . 
—
Winston
part
3
The Power of the
Key Principles
11
The Power of the Collection Habit
THERE ' S MUCH MORE to these simple techniques and models than may
appear at first glance . Indeed , they offer a systematic method to
keep your mind distraction-free , ensuring a high level of efficiency and effectiveness in your work . That in itself would be sufficient reason to implement these practices . 
But there are even greater implications for the fundamental
principles at work here . What follows in the next three chapters
is an accounting of my experience , over the last twenty years , 
of the subtler and often more profound effects that can transpire from the implementation of these basic principles . The
longer-term results can have a significant impact on you as an
individual , and they can positively affect larger organizational cultures as well . 
When people with whom you interact notice that without
fail you receive , process , and organize in an airtight manner the
exchanges and agreements they have with you , they begin to trust
you in a unique way . Such is the power of capturing placeholders
for anything that is incomplete or unprocessed in your life . It
noticeably enhances your mental well-being and improves the
quality of your communications and relationships , both personally and professionally . 
225
226
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
The Personal Benefit
How did it feel to go through the collecting and downloading
activity ? Most people say it feels so bad , and yet feels so good . 
How can that be ? 
If you ' re like most people who go through the full collection process , you probably felt some form of anxiety . Descriptive
terms like " overwhelmed ,  "  " panic ,  "  " frustration ,  "  " fatigue ,  " and 
 " disgust " tend to come up when I ask seminar participants to
describe their emotions in going through a minor version of this
procedure . And is there anything you think you ' ve procrastinated
on in that stack ? If so , you have guilt automatically associated
with it— " I could have , should have , ought to have ( before now ) 
done this .  " 
At the same time , did you experience any sense of release , or
relief , or control as you were did the drill ? Most people say yes , 
indeed . How does that happen ? Totally opposite emotional states
showing up as you ' re doing a single exercise , almost at the same
time—anxiety and relief ; overwhelmed and in control . What ' s
going on here ? 
When you understand the source of your negative feelings
about all your stuff , you ' ll discover , as I did , the way to get rid of
them . And if you experienced any positive feelings from collecting your stuff , you actually began the process of eliminating the
negativity yourself . 
The Source of the Negative Feelings
Where do the not-so-good feelings come from ? Too much to do ? 
No , there ' s always too much to do . If you felt bad simply because
there was more to do than you could do , you ' d never get rid of that
feeling . Having too much to do is not the source of the negative
feeling . It comes from a different place . 
How have you felt when someone broke an agreement with
CHAPTER 11 I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT
you ? Told you they would meet you Thursday at 4 : 00 P . M . and never
showed or called ? How did that feel ? Frustrating , I imagine . The
price people pay when they break agreements in the world is the disintegration of trust in the relationship—a negative
consequence . 
But what are all those things in your in-basket ? 
Agreements you ' ve made with yourself . Your negative
feelings are simply the result of breaking those agreements—they ' re the symptoms of disintegrated selftrust . If you tell yourself to draft a strategic plan , when
you don ' t do it , you ' ll feel bad . Tell yourself to get organized , and if you fail to , welcome to guilt and frustration . Resolve to spend more time with your kids and
don ' t—voila ! anxious and overwhelmed . 
How Do You Prevent Broken Agreements with Yourself ? 
If the negative feelings come from broken agreements , you have
three options for dealing with them and eliminating the negative
consequences : 
• Don ' t make the agreement . 
• Complete the agreement . 
• Renegotiate the agreement . 
All of these can work to get rid of the unpleasant feelings . 
Don ' t Make the Agreement
It probably felt pretty good to take a bunch of your old stuff , 
decide that you weren ' t going to do anything with it , and just toss
it into the trash . One way to handle an incompletion in your
world is to just say no ! 
You ' d lighten up if you would just lower your standards . 
If you didn ' t care so much about things being up to a certain
227
The sense of
anxiety and guilt
doesn ' t come from
having too much to
do ; it ' s the
automatic result of
breaking
agreements with
yourself . 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
level—your parenting , your school system , your team ' s morale , the
software code—you ' d have fewer things to do .  * 
I doubt you ' re going to lower your standards . But once you
really understand what it means , you ' ll probably make fewer
agreements . I know I did . I used to make a lot of them , just to win
people ' s approval . When I realized the price I was paying on the
back end for not keeping those agreements , I became a lot more
conscious about the ones I made . One insurance executive I
worked with described the major benefit he derived from implementing this system :  " Previously I would just tell everyone ,  ' Sure , 
I ' ll do it ,  ' because I didn ' t know how much I really had to do . Now
that I ' ve got the inventory clear and complete , just to maintain my
integrity I have had to say ,  ' No , I can ' t do that , I ' m sorry .  ' The
amazing thing is that instead of being upset with my
refusal , everyone was impressed by my discipline !  " 
Another client , an entrepreneur in the personal
coaching business , recently told me that making an
inventory of his work had eliminated a huge amount
of worry and stress from his life . The discipline of
putting everything he had his attention on into his
in-basket caused him to reconsider what he really
wanted to do anything about . If he wasn ' t willing to toss a note
about it into " in ,  " he just let it go ! 
I consider that very mature thinking . One of the best things
about this whole method is that when you really take the responsibility to capture and track what ' s on your mind , you ' ll think
twice about making commitments internally that you don ' t really
need or want to make . Not being aware of all you have to do is
228 
* It has been a popular concept in the self-help world that focusing on your values will simplify your life . I contend the opposite : the overwhelming amount of
things that people have to do comes from their values . Values are critical elements for meaning and direction . But don ' t kid yourself—the more you focus
on them , the more things you ' re likely to feel responsible for taking on . Your
values may make it easier for you to make decisions , but don ' t think they ' ll
make things any simpler . 
Maintaining an
objective inventory
of your work makes
it much easier to
say no with
integrity . 
CHAPTER 11 I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT
much like having a credit card for which you don ' t know the balance or the limit—it ' s a lot easier to be irresponsible . 
Complete the Agreement
Of course , another way to get rid of the negative feelings about
your stuff is to just finish it and be able to mark it off as done . You
actually love to do things , as long as you get the feeling that you ' ve completed something . If you ' ve begun
to complete less-than-two-minute actions as they
surface in your life , I ' m sure you can attest to the psychological benefit . Most of my clients feel fantastic
after just a couple of hours of processing their piles , 
just because of how many things they accomplish
using the two-minute rule . 
One of your better weekends may be spent just finishing up a
lot of little errands and tasks that have accumulated around your
house and in your personal life . Invariably when you capture all
the open loops , little and big , and see them on a list in front of
you , some part of you will be inspired ( or creatively disgusted or
intimidated enough ) to go knock them off the list . 
We all seem to be starved for a win . It ' s great to satisfy
that by giving yourself doable tasks you can start and finish
easily . 
Have you ever completed something that wasn ' t initially on a
list , so you wrote it down and checked it off ? Then you know
what I mean . 
There ' s another issue here , however . How
would you feel if your list and your stack were
totally—and successfully—completed ? You ' d probably be bouncing off the ceiling , full of creative energy . 
Of course , within three days , guess what you ' d have ? 
Right—another list , and probably an even bigger
one ! You ' d feel so good about finishing all your stuff you ' d likely
take on bigger , more ambitious things to do . 
Not only that , but if you have a boss , what do you think he or
229
Out of the strain of
the doing , into the
peace of the done . 
—-Julia Louis
Woodruff
It ' s a lot easier
to complete
agreements when
you know what
they are . 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
she is going to do , after noticing the high levels of competency
and productivity you ' re demonstrating ? Right again—give you
more things to do ! It ' s the catch-22 of professional development : 
the better you get , the better you ' d better get . 
So , since you ' re not going to significantly lower your standards , or stop creating more things to do , you ' d better get comfortable with the third option , if you want to keep from stressing
yourself out . 
Renegotiate Your Agreement
Suppose I ' d told you I would meet you Thursday at 4 : 00 P . M .  , 
but after I made the appointment , my world changed . Now , given
my new priorities , I decide I ' m not going to meet you Thursday
at four . But instead of simply not showing up , what had I better
do , to maintain the integrity of the relationship ? Correct—call
and change the agreement . A renegotiated agreement is not a
broken one . 
Do you understand yet why getting all your
stuff out of your head and in front of you makes you
feel better ? Because you automatically renegotiate
your agreements with yourself when you look at
them , think about them , and either act on them that
very moment or say ,  " No , not now .  " Here ' s the problem : it ' s impossible to renegotiate agreements with
yourself that you can ' t remember you made ! 
The fact that you can ' t remember an agreement
you made with yourself doesn ' t mean that you ' re not
holding yourself liable for it . Ask any psychologist
how much of a sense of past and future that part of your psyche
has , the part that was storing the list you dumped : zero . It ' s all
present tense in there . That means that as soon as you tell yourself
that you should do something , if you file it only in your shortterm memory , there ' s a part of you that thinks you should be
doing it all the time . And that means that as soon as you ' ve given
yourself two things to do , and filed them only in your head , 
230
It is the act of
forgiveness that
opens up the only
possible way to
think creatively
about the future at
all . 
—
Father
CHAPTER 11 I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT
you ' ve created instant and automatic stress and failure , because
you can ' t do them both at the same time . 
If you ' re like most people , you ' ve probably got some storage
area at home—maybe a garage that you told yourself a while back 
( maybe even six years ago !  ) you ought to clean and organize . If so , 
there ' s a part of you that likely thinks you should ' ve been cleaning
your garage twenty-four hours a day for the past six years ! No
wonder people are so tired ! And have you heard that little voice
inside your own mental committee every time you walk by your
garage ?  " Why are we walking by the garage ?  ! Aren ' t we supposed
to be cleaning it !  ?  " Because you can ' t stand that whining , nagging
part of yourself , you never even go in the garage anymore if you
can help it . If you want to shut that voice up , you have three
options for dealing with your agreement with yourself : 
1 | Lower your standards about your garage ( you may have done
that already )  .  " So I have a crappy garage .  .  . who cares ?  " 
2 | Keep the agreement—clean the garage . 
3 | At least put " Clean garage " on a " Someday / Maybe " list . 
Then , when you review that list weekly and you see that
item , you can tell yourself ,  " Not this week .  " The next time
you walk by your garage , you won ' t hear a thing internally , 
other than " Ha ! Not this week .  " 
I ' m quite sincere about this . It seems that there ' s a part of our
psyche that doesn ' t know the difference between an agreement
about cleaning the garage and an agreement about buying a company . In there , they ' re both just agreements—kept or broken . If
you ' re holding something only internally , it will be a broken
agreement if you ' re not moving on it in the moment . 
The Radical Departure from Traditional Time Management
This method is significantly different from traditional timemanagement training . Most of those models leave you with the
impression that if something you tell yourself to do isn ' t that
231
232
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES | PART THREE
important , then it ' s not that important—to track , manage , or deal
with . But in my experience that ' s inaccurate , at least in terms of
how a less-than-conscious part of us operates . It is how our conscious mind operates , however , so every agreement must be made
conscious . That means it must be captured , objectified , and
reviewed regularly in full conscious awareness so that you can put
it where it belongs in your self-management arena . If that doesn ' t
happen , it will actually take up a lot more psychic energy than it
deserves . 
In my experience , anything that is held only in " psychic
RAM " will take up either more or less attention than it deserves . 
The reason to collect everything is not that everything is equally
important , it ' s that it ' s not . Incompletions , uncollected , take on a
dull sameness in the sense of the pressure they create and the
attention they tie up . 
How Much Collection Is Required ? 
You ' ll feel better collecting anything that you haven ' t collected yet . 
When you say to yourself ,  " Oh , that ' s right , I need to get butter
next time I ' m at the store ,  " and you write it on your grocery list , 
you ' ll feel better . When you remember ,  " I ' ve got to call my banker
about the trust fund ,  " and you write that down someplace where
you know you ' ll see it when you ' re at a phone , you ' ll feel better . 
But there will be a light-year ' s difference when you know you
have it all . 
When will you know how much you have left in your head to
collect ? Only when there ' s nothing left . If some part of you is even
vaguely aware that you don ' t have it all , you can ' t really know what
percentage you have collected . How will you know when there ' s
nothing left ? When nothing else shows up as a reminder in your
mind . 
This doesn ' t mean that your mind will be empty . If you ' re
conscious , your mind will always be focusing on something . But if
it ' s focusing on only one thing at a time , without distraction , 
you ' ll be in your " zone .  " 
CHAPTER 11 I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT
I suggest that you use your mind to think about things , rather
than think of them . You want to be adding value as you think
about projects and people , not simply reminding yourself they
exist . To fully realize that more productive place , you will need to
capture it all . It takes focus and a change of habit to train yourself
to recognize and download even the smallest agreements with
yourself as they ' re created in your mind . Doing the collection
process as fully as you can , and then incorporating the behavior of
capturing all the new things as they emerge , will be empowering
and productive . 
When Relationships and Organizations
Have the Collection Habit
What happens when everyone involved on a team—in a marriage , in a department , on a staff , in a family , in a company—can
be trusted not to let anything slip through the cracks ? Frankly , 
once you ' ve achieved that , you ' ll hardly think about whether people are dropping the ball anymore-—there will be much bigger
things to occupy your attention . 
But if communication gaps are still an issue , there ' s likely
some layer of frustration and a general nervousness in the culture . 
Most people feel that without constant baby-sitting and handholding , things could disappear in the system and then blow up at
any time . They don ' t realize that they ' re feeling this because
they ' ve been in this situation so consistently that they relate to
it as if it were a permanent law , like gravity . It doesn ' t have to be
that way . 
I have noticed this for years . Good people who haven ' t incorporated these behaviors come into my environment , and they
stick out like a sore thumb . I ' ve lived with the standards of clear
psychic RAM and hard , clean edges on in-baskets for more than
two decades now . When a note sits idle in someone ' s in-basket
unprocessed , or when he or she nods " yes , I will " in a conversation
233
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
but doesn ' t write anything down , my " uh-oh " bell rings . This is
unacceptable behavior in my world . There are much bigger fish to
fry than worrying about leaks in the system . 
I need to trust that any request or relevant information I put on a voice-mail , in an e-mail , in a conversation , or in a written note will get into the other
person ' s system and that it will be processed and
organized , soon , and available for his or her review as
an option for action . If the recipient is managing
voice-mails but not e-mail and paper , I have now been hamstrung
to use only his or her trusted medium . That should be unacceptable behavior in any organization that cares about whether things
happen with the least amount of effort . 
When change is required , there must be trust that the initiatives for that change will be dealt with appropriately . Any intact
system will ultimately be only as good as its weakest link , and
often that Achilles ' heel is a key person ' s dulled responsiveness to
communications in the system . 
I especially notice this when I walk around organizations
where in-baskets are either nonexistent , or overflowing and obviously long unprocessed . These cultures usually suffer from serious 
 " interruptitis " because they can ' t trust putting communications
into the system . 
Where cultures do have solid systems , down through the
level of paper , the clarity is palpable . It ' s hardly even a conscious
concern , and everyone ' s attention is more focused . The same is
true in families that have instituted in-baskets—for the parents , 
the children , the nanny , the housekeeper , or anyone else with
whom family members frequently interact . People often grimace
when I tell them that my wife , Kathryn , and I put things in each
other ' s in-baskets , even when we ' re sitting within a few feet of
each other ; to them it seems " cold and mechanical .  " Aside from
being an act of politeness intended to avoid interrupting the
other ' s work in progress , the practice actually fosters more warmth
and freedom between us , because mechanical things are being
234
Bailing water in a
leaky boat diverts
energy from rowing
the boat . 
CHAPTER 11 | THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT
handled in the system instead of tying up our attention in the
relationship . 
Unfortunately , you can ' t legislate personal systems . Everyone
must have his or her own way to deal with what he or
she has to deal with . You can , however , hold people
accountable for outcomes , and for tracking and managing everything that comes their way . And you can
give them the information in this book . Then , at
least , they ' ll have no excuse for letting something fall
through the cracks . 
This doesn ' t mean that everyone has to do
everything . I hope I have described a way to relate to
our relatively new knowledge-based world that gives
room for everyone to have a lot more to do than he or
she can do . The critical issue will be to facilitate a
constant renegotiation process with all involved , so
they feel OK about what they ' re not doing . That ' s
real knowledge work , at a more sophisticated level . But there ' s little hope of getting there without having bulletproof collection
systems in play . Remember , you can ' t renegotiate an agreement
with yourself that you can ' t remember you made . And you certainly can ' t renegotiate agreements with others that you ' ve lost
track of . 
When groups of people collectively adopt the 100 percent
collection standard , they have a tight ship to sail . It doesn ' t mean
they ' re sailing in the right direction , or even that they ' re on the
right ship ; it just means that the one they ' re on , in the direction
it ' s going , is doing that with the most efficient energy it can . 
235
Organizations must
create a culture in
which it is
acceptable that
everyone has more
to do than he or she
can do , and in
which it is sage to
renegotiate
agreements about
what everyone is
not doing . 
The Power of the
Next-Action Decision
I HAVE A personal mission to make " What ' s the next action ?  " part of
the global thought process . I envision a world in which no meeting or discussion will end , and no interaction cease , without a
clear determination of whether or not some action is needed—
and if it is , what it will be , or at least who has responsibility for it . 
I envision organizations adopting a standard that anything that
lands in anyone ' s " ten acres " will be evaluated for action required , 
and the resulting decisions managed appropriately . Imagine the
freedom that would allow to focus attention on bigger issues and
opportunities . 
Over the years I have noticed an extraordinary
shift in energy and productivity whenever individuals and groups installed " What ' s the next action ?  " as
a fundamental and consistently asked question . As
simple as the query seems , it is still somewhat rare to
find it fully operational where it needs to be . 
One of the greatest challenges you may
encounter is that once you have gotten used to 
 " What ' s the next action ?  " for yourself and those
around you , interacting with people who aren ' t asking it can be highly frustrating . It clarifies things so
quickly that dealing with people and environments that don ' t use
it can seem nightmarish . 
We are all accountable to define what , if anything , we are
committed to make happen as we engage with ourselves and
236
When a culture
adopts " What ' s the
next action ?  " as a
standard operating
query , there ' s an
automatic increase
in energy , 
productivity , clarity , 
and focus . 
CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION
others . And at some point , for any outcome that we have an internal commitment to complete , we must make the decision about
the next physical action required . There ' s a great difference , however , between making that decision when things show up and
doing it when they blow up . 
The Source of the Technique
I learned this simple but extraordinary next-action technique
twenty years ago from a longtime friend and managementconsulting mentor of mine , Dean Acheson ( no relation to the
former secretary of state )  . Dean had spent many prior years consulting with executives and researching what was required to free
the psychic logjams of many of them about projects and situations
they were involved in . One day he just started picking up each
individual piece of paper on an executive ' s desk and forcing him to
decide what the very next thing was that he had to do to move it
forward . The results were so immediate and so profound for the
executive that Dean continued for years to perfect a methodology
using that same question to process the in-basket . Since then
both of us have trained and coached thousands of people with this
key concept , and it remains a foolproof technique . It never fails to
greatly improve both the productivity and the peace of mind of
the user to determine what the next physical action is that will
move something forward . 
Creating the Option of Doing
How could something so simple be so powerful— " What ' s the
next action ?  " 
To help answer that question , I invite you to revisit for a
moment your mind-sweep list ( see page 113 )  . Or at least to think
about all the projects that are probably sitting around in your
237
238
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
psyche . Do you have a sense that they haven ' t been moving along
as consistently and productively as they could be ? You ' ll probably
admit that yes , indeed , a few have been a little bit " stuck .  " 
If you haven ' t known for sure whether you needed to make a
call , send an e-mail , look up something , or buy an item at the
store as the very next thing to move on , it hasn ' t been getting
done . What ' s ironic is that it would likely require only about ten
seconds of thinking to figure out what the next action would be
for almost everything on your list . But it ' s ten seconds of thinking
that most people haven ' t done about most things on their list . 
For example , a client will have something like " tires " on a
list . 
I then ask ,  " What ' s that about ?  " 
He responds ,  " Well , I need new tires on my car .  "  
 " So what ' s the next action ?  " 
At that point the client usually wrinkles up his forehead , 
ponders for a few moments , and expresses his conclusion :  " Well , I
need to call a tire store and get some prices .  " 
That ' s about how much time is required to decide what the 
 " doing " would look like on almost everything . It ' s just the few seconds of focused thinking that most people have not yet done
about most of their stuff . 
It will probably be true , too , that the person who needs tires
on his car has had that on his radar for quite a while . It ' s also likely
that he ' s been at a phone hundreds of times , often with enough
time and / or energy only to make just such a call . Why didn ' t he
make it ? Because in that state of mind , the last thing in the world
he felt like doing was considering all his projects , including getting tires , and what their next actions were . In those moments he
didn ' t feel like thinking at all . 
What he needed was to have already figured those things
out . If he gets that next-action thinking done , then , when he happens to have fifteen minutes before a meeting , with a phone at
hand , and his energy at about 4 . 2 out of 10 , he can look at the list
of options of things to do and be delighted to see " Call tire store
CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION
for prices " on it .  " That ' s something I can do and complete successfully !  " he ' ll think , and then he ' ll actually be
motivated to make the call , just to experience the " win " 
of completing something useful in the time and energy
window he ' s in . In this context he ' d be incapable of
starting a large proposal draft for a client , but he has
sufficient resources for punching phone numbers and
getting simple information quickly . It ' s highly probable
that at some point soon he ' ll look at the new set of tires
on his car and feel on top of the world . 
Defining what real doing looks like , on the most
basic level , and organizing placeholder reminders
that we can trust , are master keys to productivity
enhancement . 
These are learnable techniques , and ones that we can continue to get better at . 
Often even the simplest things are stuck because we haven ' t
made a final decision yet about the next action . People in my
seminars often have things on their lists like " Get a tune-up for
the car .  " Is " Get a tune-up " a next action ? Not unless you ' re walking out with wrench in hand , dressed for grease .  
 " So , what ' s the next action ?  "  
 " Uh , I need to take the car to the garage . Oh , yeah , I need to
find out if the garage can take it . I guess I need to call the garage
and make the appointment .  "  
 " Do you have the number ?  "  
 " Darn , no .  .  . I don ' t have the number for the garage . Fred
recommended that garage to me , and I don ' t have
the number . I knew something was missing in the
equation .  " 
And that ' s often what happens with so many
things for so many people . We glance at the project , 
and some part of us thinks ,  " I don ' t quite have all the
pieces between here and there .  " We know something is
missing , but we ' re not sure what it is exactly , so we quit . 
239
The secret of
getting ahead is
getting started . 
The secret of
getting started is
breaking your
complex
overwhelm ing
tasks into small
manageable tasks , 
and then starting
on the first one . 
—Mark Twain
Without a next
action , there
remains a
potentially infinite
gap between current
reality and what you
need to do . 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES | PART THREE 
 " So , what ' s the next action ?  "  
 " I need to get the number . I guess I could get it from Fred .  "  
 " Do you have Fred ' s number ?  "  
 " I have Fred ' s number !  " 
So the next action really is " Call Fred for the number of the
garage .  " 
Did you notice how many steps had to be tracked back
before we actually got to the real next action on this project ? 
That ' s typical . Most people have many things just like that on
their lists . 
Why Bright People Procrastinate the Most
It ' s really the smartest people who have the highest number of
undecided things in their lives and on their lists . Why is that ? 
Think of how our bodies respond to the images we hold in our
minds . It appears that the nervous system can ' t tell the difference
between a well-imagined thought and reality . 
To prove this to yourself , picture yourself walking into a
supermarket and going over to the brightly lit fruit-and-vegetable
section . Are you there ? OK , now go to the citrus bins—oranges , 
grapefruits , lemons . Now see the big pile of yellow lemons . 
There ' s a cutting board and a knife next to them . Take one of
those big yellow lemons and cut it in half . Smell that citrus smell ! 
It ' s really juicy , and there ' s lemon juice trickling onto
the board . Now take a half lemon and cut that in half , 
so you have a quarter lemon wedge in your hands . 
OK , now—remember how you did this as a kid ? —
put that quarter of a lemon in your mouth and bite
into it ! Scrunch ! 
If you played along with me , you probably
noticed that the saliva content in your mouth
increased at least a bit . Your body was actually trying to process
citric acid ! And it was just in your mind . 
240
Bright people have
the capability of
freaking out faster
and more
dramatically than
anyone else . 
CHAPTER 12 I THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION
If your body responds to the pictures you give it , how are you
likely to feel physically when you think about , say , doing your
taxes ? Are you sending yourself " easy ,  "  " let ' s go ,  " completion , success , and " I ' m a winner !  " pictures ? Probably not . For just that reason , what kinds of people would logically be the most resistant to
being reminded about a project like that—that is , who would procrastinate the most ? Of course , it would be the most creative , 
sensitive , and intelligent people ! Because their sensitivity gives them the capability of producing in their
minds lurid nightmare scenarios about what might
be involved in doing the project , and all the negative
consequences that might occur if it weren ' t done perfectly ! They just freak out in an instant and quit ! 
Who doesn ' t procrastinate ? Often it ' s the insensitive oafs who just take something and start plodding forward , unaware of all the things that could go
wrong . Everyone else tends to get hung up about all
kinds of things . 
Do my taxes ? Oh , no ! It ' s not going to be that easy . It ' s going
to be different this year , I ' m sure . I saw the forms—they look different . There are probably new rules I ' m going to have to figure
out . I might have to read all that damn material . Long form , short
form , medium form ? File together , file separate ? We ' ll probably
want to claim deductions , but if we do we ' ll have to back them up , 
and that means we ' ll need all the receipts . Oh , my God—I don ' t
know if we really have all the receipts we ' d need and what if we
didn ' t have all the receipts but we claimed the deductions anyway
and we got audited ? Audited ? Oh , no—the IRS—JAIL !  ! 
And so a lot of people put themselves in jail , just glancing at
their 1040 tax forms . Because they ' re so smart , sensitive , and creative . In my many years of coaching individuals , this pattern has
been borne out more times than I can count—usually it ' s the
brightest and most sophisticated folks who have the most stuck
piles , in their offices , homes , and heads . Most of the executives I
work with have at least several big , complex , and amorphous
241
I am an old man
and have known a
great many
troubles , but most
of them never
happened . 
—Mark
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
projects stacked either on a credenza or on a mental shelf . There
always seem to be hobgoblin thoughts lurking inside them— 
 " If
we don ' t look at or think about the projects , maybe
they ' ll stay quiet !  " 
So what ' s the solution ? There ' s always having a
drink . Numb it out . Dumb it down . Notice what
happens to many people when they get a little alcohol on the brain . It should drop their energy immediately , because it ' s a depressant ; often , though , the energy lifts , at
least initially . Why ? The alcohol is depressing something—it ' s
shutting down the negative self-talk and uncomfortable visions
that are going on in these folks ' minds . Of course my energy will
increase if I stop depressing myself with overwhelming pictures of
not handling something successfully . But the numb-out solutions
are temporary at best . The " stuff " doesn ' t go away . And unfortunately , when we numb ourselves out , we can ' t do it selectively—
the source of inspiration and enthusiasm and personal energy also
seems to get numbed . 
Intelligent Dumbing Down
There is another solution : intelligently dumbing down your brain
by figuring out the next action . You ' ll invariably feel a relieving of
pressure about anything you have a commitment to change or do , 
when you decide on the very next physical action required to
move it forward . Nothing , essentially , will change in
the world . But shifting your focus to something that
your mind perceives as a doable , completeable task
will create a real increase in positive energy , direction , 
and motivation . If you truly captured all the things
that have your attention during the mind-sweep , go
through the list again now and decide on the single
very next action to take on every one of them . Notice
what happens to your energy . 
You are either attracted or repelled by the things
on your lists ; there isn ' t any neutral territory . You are
242
Ceasing negative
imaging will always
cause your energy
to increase . 
No matter how big
and tough a
problem may be , 
get rid of confusion
by taking one little
step toward
solution . Do
something . 
—George
F . 
CHAPTER 12 I THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION
either positively drawn toward completing the action or reluctant
to think about what it is and resistant to getting involved in it . 
Often it ' s simply the next-action decision that makes the difference between the two extremes . 
In following up with people who have taken my
seminars or been coached by my colleagues or me , 
I ' ve discovered that one of the subtler ways many of
them fall off the wagon is in letting their action lists
grow back into lists of tasks or subprojects instead of
discrete next actions . They ' re still ahead of most people because they ' re actually writing things down , but
they often find themselves stuck , and procrastinating , because they ' ve allowed their action lists to harbor items like :  
 " Meeting with the banquet committee "  
 " Johnny ' s birthday "  
 " Receptionist "  
 " Slide presentation " 
In other words , things have morphed back into " stuff-ness
instead of staying at the action level . There are no clear next
actions here , and anyone keeping a list filled with items like this
would send his or her brain into overload every time he / she
looked at it . 
Is this extra work ? Is figuring out the next
action on your commitments additional effort to
expend that you don ' t need to ? No , of course not . If
you need to get your car tuned , for instance , you ' re
going to have to figure out that next action at some
point anyway . The problem is that most people wait to do it until
the next action is " Call the Auto Club for tow truck !  !  " 
So when do you think most people really make a lot of their
next-action decisions about their stuff-—when it shows up , or
when it blows up ? And do you think there might be a difference
243
Everything on your
lists and in your
stacks is either
attractive or
repulsive to you—
there ' s no neutral
ground when it
comes to your stuff . 
You can only cure
retail but you can
prevent wholesale . 
—Brock Chisolm
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
in the quality of their lives if they handled this knowledge work
on the front end instead of the back ? Which do you think is the
more efficient way to move through life—deciding
next actions on your projects as soon as they appear
on your radar screen and then efficiently grouping
them into categories of actions that you get done in
certain uniform contexts , or avoiding thinking about
what exactly needs to be done until it has to be done , 
then nickel-and-diming your activities as you try to
catch up and put out the fires ? 
That may sound exaggerated , but when I ask groups of people to estimate when most of the action decisions are made in
their companies , with few exceptions they say ,  " When things
blow up .  " One global corporate client surveyed its population
about sources of stress in its culture , and the number one complaint was the last-minute crisis work consistently promoted by
team leaders who failed to make appropriate decisions on the
front end . 
244
The Value of a Next-Action
Decision-Making Standard
I have had several sophisticated senior executives tell me that
installing " What ' s the next action ?  " as an operational standard in
their organizations was transformative in terms of measurable
performance output . It changed their culture permanently and
significantly for the better . 
Why ? Because the question forces clarity , accountability , 
productivity , and empowerment . 
Clarity
Too many discussions end with only a vague sense that people
know what they have decided and are going to do . But without
a clear conclusion that there is a next action , much less what it is
Avoiding action
decisions until the
pressure of the last
minute creates huge
inefficiencies and
unnecessary stress . 
CHAPTER 12 | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION
or who ' s got it , more often than not a lot of " stuff " gets left up in
the air . 
I am frequently asked to facilitate meetings . I ' ve learned the
hard way that no matter where we are in the conversation , twenty
minutes before the agreed end-time of the discussion I must force
the question :  " So what ' s the next action here ?  " In my experience , 
there is usually twenty minutes ' worth of clarifying ( and sometimes tough decisions ) still required to come up with an answer . 
This is radical common sense—radical because it often
compels discussion at deeper levels than people are comfortable with .  
 " Are we serious about this ?  "  " Do we really know what we ' re doing
here ?  "  " Are we really ready to allocate precious time and resources
to this ?  " It ' s very easy to avoid these more relevant levels of thinking . What prevents those issues from slipping away into amorphous " stuff " is forcing the decision about the next action . Some
further conversation , exploration , deliberation , and negotiation
are often needed to put the topic to rest . The world is too unpredictable these days to permit assumptions about outcomes : we need to take responsibility for moving
things to clarity . 
You have to have some experience of this to
really know what I mean here . If you do , you ' re
probably saying to yourself ,  " Yes !  " If you ' re not sure
what I ' m talking about , I suggest that in your next meeting with
anyone , you end the conversation with the question ,  " So what ' s
the next action here ?  " Then notice what happens . 
Accountability
The dark side of " collaborative cultures " is the allergy they foster
to holding anyone responsible for having the ball .  " Mine or
yours ?  " is unfortunately not in the common vocabulary of many
such organizations . There is a sense that that would be impolite .  
 " We ' re all in this together " is a worthy sentiment , but seldom a
reality in the hard-nosed day-to-day world of work . Too many meetings end with a vague feeling among the players that something
245
Talk does not cook
rice . 
—Chinese
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
ought to happen , and the hope that it ' s not their personal job to
make it so . 
The way I see it , what ' s truly impolite is allowing people to
walk away from discussions unclear . Real " togetherness " of a
group is reflected by the responsibility that all take for defining
the real things to do and the specific people assigned to do them , 
so everyone is freed of the angst of still-undecided actions . 
Again , if you ' ve been there , you ' ll know what I ' m talking
about . If you haven ' t , test it out—take a small risk and ask " So
what ' s the next action on this ?  " at the end of each discussion point
in your next staff meeting , or in your next " family conversation " 
around the dinner table . 
Productivity
Organizations naturally become more productive when they
model and train front-end next-action decision-making . For all
the reasons mentioned above , determining the required physical
allocation of resources necessary to make something
happen as soon as the outcome has been clarified will
produce more results sooner , and with less effort . 
Learning to break through the barriers of the
sophisticated creative thinking that can freeze
activity—that is , the entangled psychic webs we
spin—is a superior skill .  " Productivity " has been
touted for decades as a desirable thing to improve in
organizations . Anything that can help maximize
output will do that . But in the world of knowledge
work , all the computers and telecom improvements
and leadership seminars on the planet will make no
difference in this regard unless the individuals involved increase
their operational responsiveness . And that requires thinking
about something that lands in your world before you have to . 
One of the biggest productivity leaks I have seen in some
organizations is the lack of next actions determined for " longterm " projects .  " Long-term " does not mean " Someday / Maybe .  " 
246
There are risks and
costs to a program
of action , but they
are far less than
the long-range ' 
risks and costs of
comfortable
inaction . 
—John
F . 
CHAPTER 12 I THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION
Those projects with distant goal lines are still to be
done as soon as possible ;  " long-term " simply means ,  
 " more action steps until it ' s done ,  " not " no need to
decide next actions because the day of reckoning is so
far away .  " When every project and open loop in an
organization is being monitored , it ' s a whole new ball
game . 
Empowerment
Perhaps the greatest benefit of adopting the nextaction approach is that it dramatically increases your
ability to make things happen , with a concomitant rise in your
self-esteem and constructive outlook . 
People are constantly doing things , but usually only when
they have to , under fire from themselves or others . They get no
sense of winning , or of being in control , or of cooperating among
themselves and with their world . People are starving for those
experiences . 
The daily behaviors that define the things that are incomplete and the moves that are needed to complete them must
change . Getting things going of your own accord , before you ' re
forced to by external pressure and internal stress , builds a firm
foundation of self-worth that will spread into every aspect of your
life . You are the captain of your own ship ; the more you act from
that perspective , the better things will go for you . 
Asking " What ' s the next action ?  " undermines the victim
mentality . It presupposes that there is a possibility of change , and
that there is something you can do to make it happen . That is the
assumed affirmation in the behavior . And these kinds of " assumed
affirmations " often work more fundamentally to build a positive
self-image than can repeating " I am a powerful , effective person , 
making things happen in my life !  " a thousand times . 
Is there too much complaining in your culture ? The next
time someone moans about something , try asking ,  " So what ' s the
next action ?  " People will complain only about something that
247
Productivity will
improve only when
individuals increase
their operational
responsiveness . 
And in knowledge
work , that means
clarifying actions on
the front end
instead of the back . 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES | PART THREE
they assume could be better than it currently is . The action question forces the issue . If it can be changed , there ' s some action that
will change it . If it can ' t , it must be considered part of
the landscape to be incorporated in strategy and tactics . Complaining is a sign that someone isn ' t willing
to risk moving on a changeable situation , or won ' t
consider the immutable circumstance in his or her
plans . This is a temporary and hollow form of selfvalidation . 
Although my colleagues and I rarely promote
our work in this way , I notice people really empowering themselves every day as we coach them in applying the next-action technique . The light in their eyes
and the lightness in their step increase , and a positive
spark shows up in their thinking and demeanor . We
are all already powerful , but deciding on and effectively managing the physical actions required to
move things forward seems to exercise that power in
ways that call forward the more positive aspects of
our nature . 
When you start to make things happen , you really begin to
believe that you can make things happen . And that makes things
happen . 
248
People are always
blaming their
circumstances for
what they are . I
don ' t believe in
circumstances . The
people who get on
in this world are
the people who get
up and look for the
circumstances they
want , and , if they
can ' t find them , 
- make them . 
—George Bernard
Shaw
The Power of Outcome Focusing
THE POWER OF directing our mental and imaginative processes to
create change has been studied and promoted in thousands of
contexts—from the early " positive thinking " books to recent discoveries in advanced neurophysiology . 
My own interest has been in applying of the principle in
terms of practical reality : Does it help get things done ? And if so , 
how do we best utilize it in managing the work of our lives ? Can
we really use this information in ways that allow us to produce
what we want to have happen with less effort ? The answer has
been a resounding yes . 
Focus and the Fast Track
Over the years I have seen the application of the method presented in this book create profound results for people in their dayto-day worlds . As you begin to use it habitually as your primary
means of addressing all situations—from processing e-mails , to
buying a house or a company , to structuring meetings or having
conversations with your kids—your personal productivity can go
through the roof . 
Many of the professionals I have worked with who integrated this method now find themselves experiencing enhanced
or even new jobs and careers . These processes really work in the
arena of the ordinary things we must deal with daily—the stuff
of
249
250
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES | PART THREE
our work . When you demonstrate to yourself and to others an
increasing ability to get things done " in the trenches ,  " you probably won ' t stay in the same trench for very long .  * It ' s been inspiring
for me to learn and coach others how to deal with the immediate
realities down where the rubber hits the road—and how to tie in
the power of positive imagery to practical experiences in all our
daily lives . 
The " fast track " alluded to in the section heading above is a
bit of misnomer . For some , slowing down , getting out of the squirrel cage , and taking care of themselves may be the major change
precipitated by this methodology . The bottom line is it makes you
more conscious , more focused , and more capable of implementing
the changes and results you want , whatever they are .  
 " Create a way to regularly spend more time with my daughter " is as specific a project as any , and equally demanding of a next
action to be determined . Having the vague , gnawing sense that
you " should " do something about your relationship with your
daughter , and not actually doing anything , can be a killer . I often
work with clients who are willing to acknowledge the real things
of their lives at this level as " incompletes " —to write them down , 
define real projects about them , and ensure that next actions are
decided on—until the finish line is crossed . That is real productivity , perhaps in its most awesome manifestation . 
The Significance of Applied Outcome Thinking
What I want to emphasize now is how learning to process the
details of our work and lives with this clear and consistent system 
* Of course , the people who are most attracted to implementing Getting Things
Done are usually already on a self-development track and don ' t assume that
they ' ll be doing the same thing a year from now that they ' re doing now , anyway . But they love the fact that this method gets them there faster and more
easily . 
CHAPTER 13 I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING
can affect others and ourselves in significant ways we may not
expect . 
As I ' ve said , employing next-action decisionmaking results in clarity , productivity , accountability , 
and empowerment . Exactly the same results happen
when you hold yourself to the discipline of identifying the real results you want and , more specifically , 
the projects you need to define in order to produce
them . 
It ' s all connected . You can ' t really define the
right action until you know the outcome , and your outcome is disconnected from reality if you ' re not clear about what you need to
do physically to make it happen . You can get at it from either
direction , and you must , to get things done . 
As an expert in whole-brain learning and good friend of
mine , Steven Snyder , put it ,  " There are only two problems in life :  
( 1 ) you know what you want , and you don ' t know how to get it ; 
and / or ( 2 ) you don ' t know what you want .  " If that ' s true ( and I
think it is ) then there are only two solutions : 
• Make it up . 
• Make it happen . 
This can be construed from the models of
yin / yang , right brain / left brain , creator / destroyer—
or whatever equivalent works best for you . The
truth is , our energy as human beings seems to have a
dualistic and teleological reality—we create and identify with
things that aren ' t real yet on all the levels we experience ; and
when we do , we recognize how to restructure our current world
to morph it into the new one , and experience an impetus to make
it so . 
Things that have your attention need your intention
engaged .  " What does this mean to me ?  "  " Why is it here ?  "  " What
do I want to have be true about this ?  "  (  " What ' s the successful
251
Defining specific
projects and next
actions that address
real quality-oflife issues is
productivity at
its best . 
We are constantly
creating and
fulfilling . 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
outcome ?  "  ) Everything you experience as incomplete
must have a reference point for " complete .  " 
Once you ' ve decide that there is something
to be changed and a mold to fill , you ask yourself ,  
 " How do I now make this happen ?  " and / or " What
resources do I need to allocate to make it happen ?  "  
(  " What ' s the next action ?  "  )  . 
Your life and work are made up of outcomes and
actions . When your operational behavior is grooved
to organize everything that comes your way , at all
levels , based upon those dynamics , a deep alignment occurs , and wondrous things emerge . You become highly productive . You make things up , and you make them
happen . 
252
The Magic of Mastering the Mundane
My clients often wonder how I can sit with them in their offices , 
often for hours on end , as they empty the drawers of their desks
and painstakingly go through the minutiae of stuff that they have
let accumulate in their minds and their physical space . Aside from
the common embarrassment they feel about the volume of their
irresponsibly dealt-with details , they assume I should be bored to
tears . Quite the contrary . Much to my own surprise , I find it to be
some of the most engaging work I do with -people . I know the
release and relief and freedom that sit on the other side of dealing
with these things . I know that we all need practice and support
and a strong , clear focus to get through them , until we have the
built-in standards and behaviors we need to engage with them as
they demand . I know how significant a change these people may
experience in their relationships with their bosses , their partners , 
their spouses , their kids , and themselves over the next few hours
and ( we hope ) days and years . 
It ' s not boring . It ' s some of the best work we do . 
Life affords no
higher pleasure
than that of
surmounting
difficulties , passing
from one step of
success to another , 
forming new
wishes and seeing
them gratified . 
—Dr . 
Samuel
CHAPTER 13 I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING
I ' m in the focus business . As a consultant and coach , 
I ask simple questions that often elicit very creative
and intelligent responses from others ( and even
myself !  )  , which can in turn add value to the situation
and work at hand . People aren ' t any smarter after
they work with me than they were before—they just
direct and utilize their intelligence more productively . 
What ' s unique about the practical focus of Getting Things
Done is the combination of effectiveness and efficiency that these
methods can bring to every level of your reality . There are lots of
inspirational sources for the high-level " purpose , values , vision " 
kind of thinking , and many more mundane tools for getting hold
of smaller details such as phone numbers and appointments and
grocery lists . The world has been rather barren , however , of practices that relate equally to both levels , and tie them together .  
 " What does this mean to me ?  "  " What do I want
to have be true about it ?  "  " What ' s the next step
required to make that happen ?  " These are the cornerstone questions we must answer , at some point , about
everything . This thinking , and the tools that support
it , will serve you in ways you may not yet imagine . 
The Power of Natural Planning
The value of all this natural project planning is that it
provides an integrated , flexible , aligned way to think
through any situation . 
Being comfortable with challenging the purpose of anything you may be doing is healthy and mature . Being
able to " make up " visions and images of success , before the methods are clear , is a phenomenal trait to strengthen . Being willing to
253
Multilevel Outcome Management The
challenge is to marry high-level
idealistic focus to
the mundane
activity of life . In the
end they require the
same thinking . 
An idealist believes
that the short run
doesn ' t count . A
cynic believes the
long run doesn ' t
matter . A realist
believes that what
is done or left
undone in the short
run determines the
long run . 
—Sidney ]  . 
254
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
have ideas , good or bad , and to express and capture all of them
without judgments is critical for fully accessing creative intelligence . Honing multiple ideas and types of information into components , sequences , and priorities aimed toward a specific
outcome is a necessary mental discipline . And deciding on and
taking real next actions—actually moving on something in the
physical world—are the essence of productivity . 
Being able to bring all these ingredients together , with
appropriate timing and balance , is perhaps the major component
of professional competence for this new millennium . But it ' s not
yet the norm in professional behavior ; far from it . It ' s still a daunting task to apply this awareness to all the aspects of personal and
professional life . But even when only portions of the model are
inserted , tremendous benefit ensues . 
The feedback I have gotten over the years in my consulting , 
teaching , and coaching with this model has continued to validate
that even the slightest increase in the use of natural planning can
bring significant improvement . To see brainstorming about
almost every aspect of their lives becoming a standard tool for
many people is terrific . To hear from executives who have used the
model as a way to frame key meetings and discussions , and have
gotten great value from doing that , is gratifying . It all just affirms
that the way our minds naturally work is the way that we should
focus to make anything happen in the physical world . 
The model is simply the basic principle of determining outcomes and actions for everything we consider to be our work . 
When those two key focus points become the norm in our dayto-day lives , the baseline for productivity moves to another level . 
The addition of brainstorming—the most creative means of
expressing and capturing ideas , perspectives , and details about
projects—makes for an elegant set of behaviors for staying relaxed
and getting things done . 
CHAPTER 13 | THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING
Shifting to a Positive Organizational Culture
It doesn ' t take a big change to increase the productivity standards
of a group . I continually get feedback indicating that with a little
implementation , this method immediately makes things happen
more quickly and more easily . 
The constructive evaluation of activities , asset allocations , 
communications , policies , and procedures against purposes and
intended outcomes has become increasingly critical for every
organization I know of . The challenges to our companies continue to mount , with pressures coming these days from globalization , competition , technology , shifting markets , and raised
standards of performance and production .  
 " What do we want to have happen in this meeting ?  "  " What
is the purpose of this form ?  "  " What would the ideal person for
this job be able to do ?  "  " What do we want to accomplish with this
software ?  " These and a multitude of other , similar questions are
still sorely lacking in many quarters . There ' s plenty of talk in the
Big Meetings that sounds good , but learning to ask " Why are we
doing this ?  " and " What will it look like when it ' s done successfully ?  " and to apply the answers at the day-to-day operational
level—that is what will create profound results . 
Empowerment naturally ensues for individuals as they move
from complaining and victim modalities into outcomes and
actions defined for direction . When that becomes the standard in a
group , it creates significant improvement in the atmosphere as well
as the output . There are enough other problems to be concerned
with ; negativity and passive resistance need to continually give way
to a focus on the desired results at the appropriate horizons . 
The microcosm of how people deal with their in-baskets , 
e-mail , and conversations with others will be reflected in the
macro-reality of their culture and organization . If balls are
dropped , if decisions about what to do are resisted on the front
end , if not all the open loops are managed responsibly , that will be
255
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE
A vision without
a task is but a
dream , a task
without a vision is
drudgery , a vision
and a task is the
hope of the world . 
—From a church
in
Sussex , England , 
ca . 1730
magnified in the group , and the culture will sustain a
stressful fire-and-crisis siege mentality . If , in contrast , individuals are implementing the principles of
Getting Things Done , the culture will expect and
experience a new standard of high performance . 
Problems and conflicts will not go away—they
remain inherent as you attempt to change ( or maintain ) anything in this world . The operational behaviors of this book , however , will provide the focus and
framework for addressing them in the most productive way . 
256
Conclusion
I HOPE THIS book has been useful—that you have started to reap the
rewards of getting more done with less effort and stress . And I
really hope you have tasted the freedom of a " mind like water " and
the release of your creative energies that can come with the application of these techniques . Those who begin to implement these
methods always discover there ' s more here than meets the eye , 
and you may have begun to experience your own version of that . 
I ' ll bet Getting Things Done has validated much of what you
already know and have been doing to some degree all along . Perhaps , though , it will make it much easier for you to apply that
common sense more systematically in a world that seems to
increasingly confound us with its intensity and complexity . 
My intent is not to add more to the plethora of modern
theories and models about how to be successful . I have tried , 
on the contrary , to define the core methods that don ' t change with
the times , and which , when applied , always work . Like gravity , 
when you understand the principle , you can operate a lot more
effectively , no matter what you ' re doing . Perhaps this is the Leading Edge of Back to Basics ! 
Getting Things Done is a road map to achieve the positive , 
relaxed focus that characterizes your most productive state . I
invite you to use it , like a road map , as a reference tool to get back
there whenever you need to . 
To consistently stay on course , you ' ll have to do some things
257
258
CONCLUSION
that may not be habits yet : keep everything out of your head ; 
decide actions and outcomes when things first emerge on your
radar , instead of later ; and regularly review and update the complete inventory of open loops of your life and work . I hope by now
you at least have established a reference point for the value these
behaviors create . Don ' t be surprised , though , if it takes a little
while to make them automatic . Be patient , and enjoy the process . 
Here are some final tips for moving forward : 
• Get your personal physical organization hardware set up . Get
your workstation organized . Get in-baskets . Create a personal
filing system—for work and home . Get a good listmanagement organizer that you are inspired to play with . I also
suggest that you give yourself permission to make any changes
that you have been contemplating for enhancing your work
environments . Hang pictures , buy pens , toss stuff , rearrange
your work space . Support your fresh start . 
• Set aside some time when you can tackle one whole area of
your office , and then each part of your house . Gather
everything into your system , and work through the Getting
Things Done process . 
• Share anything of value you ' ve gleaned from this with someone
else .  ( It ' s the fastest way to learn .  ) 
• Review Getting Things Done again in three to six months . 
You ' ll notice things you might have missed the first time
through , and I guarantee it will seem like a whole new book . 
• Stay in touch with people who are broadcasting and reflecting
these behaviors and standards .  ( We ' re available . Visit 
anytime for tons of free support
material , conversations about these best practices , current
CONCLUSION
information about supportive products and services , and access
to our global network of people sharing the best practices in
productivity . For anything , contact us at The David Allen
Company at info @ davidco . com or 805-646-8432 .  ) 
Have a great rest of your life ! 