Internet Business—The Opportunity of Our Lifetime
Communicating with customers and other businesses has changed dramatically over the past century. It started with print, then radio, television, phone,
and fax, and now all of us are operating in the fastest medium yet—the Internet. The future is bright for businesses that utilize the Net as a primary medium
of communication and sales.
The number of Internet users and the amount of business done online around
the world is growing at a staggering rate. The world’s population currently
holds well over 1 billion Internet users, and the majority of these web-savvy
humans have online access at home. They research, study, e-mail, chat, download podcasts, and shop online.
Why question the amazing rate at which the average business is moving
onto the Net? It makes too much sense to deny the obvious answer. Having a
business online is the opportunity of our lifetime. Besides the greatly expanded
market reach afforded by the Net, there is also the reduced cost of doing business online. Look at all the time, money, trees, and travel costs that are spared
from the average business’s operating budget due to this new medium. The
collective business world realizes the bounty of opportunity to be seized in
cyberspace.
All businesses that have a Web presence are seeing the advantages of selling
online. They are committing more and more of their marketing dollars to online activities, where they are seeing a greater return on investment.
Expansion of the Internet into all business and personal communications is
inevitable. What was once considered a trend is becoming the norm. Overall
familiarity and trust in online transactions and consumer relationships improve
each month as new security-based technologies are developed. New media support groups hasten the learning curve of the average Internet user, a factor that
earlier had hindered the speed at which consumers feel confident enough in
their own understanding of the Web to make money-related decisions based on
their own online research. The time is now for everyone to get online. In our
lifetime, “newbies” will cease to exist.
101 Int Biz Intro.pmd 12 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Introduction xiii
The future is really bright, so put on your shades and a thinking cap! Hot
items are software, music, books, electronics, and travel. Broadening the gamut
of goods sold online will happen quickly.
The opportunity is there for you to create a dynamite business online if you
do it right. It’s not a matter of throwing a Web site together, putting it online,
and having the world beat a path to your door. You have to choose the right
business, develop the right Web site for your target market, and build substantial traffic to your Web site. The online customer is extremely demanding, with
expectations that exceed those of the offline buyer in many ways. Online buyers want what they want, how they want it, when they want it, at the right
price. The product and service must be exactly what they ordered, delivered
immediately to the correct place and for the lowest price they can find. Competition is fierce, so you have to create a professional and secure online presence
for your business, target the demographic of Internet users with an affinity for
your product or service, and work diligently to attract traffic. Serious marketing research is required to successfully access and captivate these eyeballs.
It’s a challenge, but the opportunity is substantial. Many who have gone
before you are reaping the benefits today. This book will provide you with a
myriad of online business ideas for your consideration.
Defining What’s Important to You
“What are the benefits of this new age?” you ask. Today and in the future,
personal lifestyle plays a significant part in career choice. Perhaps you have no
inclination to commute in traffic each working day. Maybe you want more
time with your family. If your dream is to be self-employed, this is your era!
Run a successful global business from an island in the Caribbean or from
the comfort of your living room. Hours are flexible, and the business is operational 24 hours a day, all year round. No matter how small your business is, if
you set it up correctly, you can compete with the big boys.
Before embarking on an e-business venture, it is very important that you
very clearly define your objectives. Take your time—brainstorm with family
and friends. Find out what’s really important to you, and then find a business
that you can build that will help you achieve those objectives. Starting a business, online or offline, is serious business. Without adequate preparation in
defining your objectives, researching for the best business for you, and then
developing an adequate business plan, you are asking for problems.
When you are defining your objectives, you will have to ask yourself a
series of pertinent questions. What type of time commitment do you foresee?
101 Int Biz Intro.pmd 13 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
xiv 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Do you want this to be a full-time or a part-time endeavor? The options are
wide open. Many online businesses are ideal for extra income to leverage your
regular salary and make the budget of daily life easier to manage. The beauty of
working online is that it’s sustainable without having to quit your regular job if
you don’t want to. The point is that you should allocate in your business plan
how much time you are willing to spend on the venture, and then you can
decide which online businesses fit with the time you are willing to invest.
Would you prefer to work out of your home or have an outside office?
Where you work is important too. For many, a major benefit of having an
online business is the luxury of working from home. Another advantage is to
work while you travel or from remote areas. Not all online businesses guarantee complete mobility and staying home, but you can decide on these critical
lifestyle options before choosing which specific online avenue to pursue. It’s all
up to you—for a change.
If you already have a physical “bricks-and-mortar” business location, do
you want to use the Web as a marketing outlet? There are many ways to run a
successful online business. Traditional storefronts and catalogues can be mirrored on the Web site, which expands the sales capacity significantly, but you
must make sure that there is enough inventory and internal organization to
accept, fill, and deliver incoming orders. The other option if you have an existing bricks-and-mortar setup is to use the Web site as a responsive marketing
force and information source for your business. The design and content should
urge customers to come to your location and return to your site.
What kind of start-up costs are you considering? Budget is everything. Research the investment you will have to put into the Web site. Ask around to see
how much people are spending on their online presence, and remember that
you can grow gradually as funds and profits permit with an online business.
There is no rule saying you have to spend everything you’ve got in the beginning to succeed in the long term.
Would you like to develop an idea and sell it, or sustain the management
and grow the business in the future?
Want to run your business from home but not have to be there 24/7 to
answer the phone? No problem! For every challenge there is an opportunity.
There are companies that will answer and screen your calls based on scripts
you provide, provide information to your callers, take your orders and messages, and offer a whole myriad of professional and personal services; they can
even screen and respond to your e-mail and fax messages, do research for you,
and provide a ton of administrative services. One such company that I am affiliated with is PatLive. I have arranged a special deal for any of my readers
who are interested in this service—go to http://www.patlive.com/signup/ssc for
this special offer if this is something you might be interested in.
101 Int Biz Intro.pmd 14 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Introduction xv
What is your risk comfort level? Trying anything new is slightly nervy. Just
remember that if you embark on the online journey now, you share a common
technology learning curve with those who remember what it was like before the
Internet existed. Soon this group will be extinct, so this is the time to go for it!
What are your revenue and profit expectations? (Fun question, isn’t it?)
How rich do you want to be? Seriously, there is huge potential for major profit
in online business. While picking the right virtual business for you, make sure
to factor in the start-up costs and continuing operating costs. Begin with a
modest revenue projection (to stay on the safe side), and if the result pleases
you, stick with it.
Do you want employees, or are you looking for a business you can start and
maintain on your own? If you are planning to have a staff to run your business,
how many are you comfortable with? Employees are an added responsibility. If
the online business you choose to enter requires employees, make sure you are
prepared. What do you know? What are you comfortable with? What do you
enjoy? If you are going to be spending lots of hours in your new e-business, it
might as well be doing something you enjoy.
Once these questions have been answered and you have done a lot of soulsearching with regard to defining your objectives, it is time to take a closer look
at all the e-business opportunities that are available to you. The next chapter
offers this closer look.
101 Int Biz Intro.pmd 15 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 1
1
Part 1
Doing Business Online
The term e-business means different things to different people. To some,
e-business is simply having a Web site and e-mail capability through which
customers can place an order, request a quote, or make a reservation. For other
people, e-business is having a Web site that enables customers to order and
submit their credit card information online, even though their orders may then
be processed manually just like a fax or telephone order. For others still,
e-business means being able to place a secure online order, having immediate
credit card verification, and having fully integrated back-end systems that are
dynamically updated and inform the customer of the latest prices and whether
or not an item is in stock. The point is, the appropriate e-business solution for
you will depend on the type of business you operate, the products and services
you intend to sell, your budget, your target market, what your competition is
doing, and so on.
For instance, a software development company that sells a downloadable
software application (i.e., has no physical boxed version) has no inventory per
se. Therefore, they would not require a back-end inventory database to be integrated with their e-business system. All they might need is an e-business system
that includes payment processing capability. On the other hand, if you have an
online business that intends to sell books and you want to become the next
Amazon.com, you will require a full-blown, full-featured e-business system to
compete with the Amazon.coms of the world. Otherwise, potential customers
will shop at Amazon.com because their e-business system is more convenient
and easier to use. In this chapter we discuss the features of e-business sites,
Part 1.pmd 1 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
2 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
online storefront options, taking online payments, and selecting the right
e-business model for your online business.
Getting the Point Across
The consumer is king. This statement is especially true in the e-business realm.
For instance, if you were to visit an offline bookstore to do your holiday shopping, you might browse through the aisles for a few hours, pick out a few books
you wanted to buy, and take them to the cashier to pay for them. If you asked
the cashier whether the bookstore offered gift-wrapping or shipping services,
the response from the vendor would probably be “no, we don’t provide those
services.” You would be satisfied with this and make the purchase anyway. You
would then take the gifts home, wrap them, and ship them to their various
destinations.
If you are making the same gift purchases in an online bookstore, you expect to be able to have them gift-wrapped and delivered to any address you
desire. It defeats the purpose somewhat if you have to pay to have the books
delivered to your address, only to turn around and pay to ship them someplace
else. If you are purchasing the books as gifts, you want to have them gift-wrapped.
Again, it defeats the purpose if you have to have the books sent to your address
so that you can gift-wrap them and then reship.
Online it’s a whole different world. Consumers have higher expectations.
Often they shop online for the convenience and expect the online merchant to
meet all their needs. Consumers expect the online merchant to deliver what
they want, when they want it, and how they want it. If you don’t provide what
they want the way they want it, another vendor is just a click away.
Not all possible features of an e-business site are applicable to every business, but if you intend to be competitive online, you must give your consumers
what they are looking for. You might have something they want, but if they
cannot conduct transactions easily on your site and competitors offer more
point-of-sale service, people will leave your site and shop at another site that is
easier to buy from. This section focuses on some possible e-business features
that you might want to include on your site. Decide which features are most
applicable to your business and implement them into your e-business system.
Storefront Development Options
Depending on your online objectives, your products and services, and your
budget, you might have to develop an electronic storefront for your business.
Part 1.pmd 2 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 3
An electronic storefront is the interface that a customer sees when purchasing
goods on a Web site. The need for an electronic storefront varies with the level
of e-business that your company chooses to implement. The various levels of
e-business are discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
When developing a storefront for your business, you have three options
available. You can
• Use the ASP (Application Service Provider) model
• Purchase storefront development software
• Program and develop your own storefront.
Each option has its strengths and weaknesses, and some are more appropriate than others, depending on your business’s budget and online marketing
objectives. In determining how to develop an electronic storefront for your
business, you should evaluate the following options and select the one that is
most appropriate for your business.
ASP Storefront Model
ASP stands for Application Service Provider. The ASP owns the storefront software and operates its own e-commerce server. An ASP licenses out the use of its
software and e-commerce hosting services to clients that desire to sell products
and services online. The software is hosted on the ASP’s server, and as the client
you pay the ASP to use its software and server. This option is often much cheaper
than purchasing your own storefront software package.
When using the ASP’s storefront solution, a client can be quite confident in
the fact that the system will always be up to date. The ASP’s server handles all
system updates, back-ups, and technical support on a regular basis. There is no
need for a business to purchase any extra on-site equipment or software, and
the installation process is fast, straightforward, and affordable.
The ASP’s storefront solution can be integrated with your existing Web site.
The portion of the storefront that is hosted on the ASP’s server can be customized to duplicate the appearance of your site. This adds to the level of professionalism and maintains a sense of consistency across all pages of your site and
the purchase process.
The ASP’s storefront model is known for its high reliability, as well as an
unfailing online selling security system. A great benefit of using an ASP’s server
is that business owners are able to access their data from any place, at any time.
The only equipment needed is an Internet connection as well as your ASP server
ID and password.
Part 1.pmd 3 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
4 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Each client is given a unique user name and password to allow for easy
management of its account. The information hosted on the ASP’s server can be
modified at any time—you can add or remove products at your convenience,
alter the layout, and so on.
This solution is ideal for those businesses that are looking to maintain their
own site but do not want to be responsible for configuring and maintaining the
technical aspects of the e-commerce system. The ASP model is easy to configure
for those individuals with limited HTML knowledge and can be set up and
running in a very short timeframe. For more information on a few great examples of ASP storefront applications, go to the Internet Marketing Resources
section of my site at http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
Storefront Software Packages
There are a variety of storefront software development packages available that
enable you to develop your online storefront for your business. If you choose
to use this approach, more technical knowledge of computers will be required
and you will have to find an Internet service provider to host your electronic
storefront.
Storefront software is commonly installed on the same server as your site.
This can be a more involved process, and in some cases it may be necessary to
hire a person with the appropriate technical knowledge to set up and maintain
your storefront. Many medium-sized to large businesses have their own inhouse team to manage their e-business operations, so this is not an issue for
them. Do some research on features needed and select the storefront option
that best fits your business requirements.
Program and Develop Your Own Storefront
If you have a broad product line, a complex system with different prices for
different customers, or volume discount levels, or if you want a high level of
integration with your accounting, inventory, and sales systems, you may want
to consider developing your own storefront. This requires in-depth technical
knowledge and programming capabilities. If you don’t have the technical capability in-house, you can outsource this activity to a firm capable of developing
such a program for your business or hire an employee or team to handle the
storefront development.
If you decide to develop your own storefront software, you should ensure
that everything is running smoothly before you launch the storefront into cyberspace. Every aspect of the storefront selection and purchasing procedure
Part 1.pmd 4 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 5
should be tested and retested to ensure that there are no bugs, miscalculations,
or errors in the process. Once you are sure that everything is working correctly
and smoothly, you then have to find a place to host the storefront, whether it be
on your own server or on an ISP’s server. From that point on, your only recurring expense is that of hosting your storefront and payment processing and
authorization charges from a payment processing company.
Storefront Features
There are many different features available with different electronic storefronts.
Features vary depending on the storefront option that you have selected. Typically, higher-end software has more advanced features than that of a template
service; however, some of these features may not be essential to running your
particular online business. The following is a list of features that you should
consider when selecting your storefront development option for your online
business:
• Shopping cart
• Purchase notification
• Inventory management integration
• Client database management
• Integrated mail list
• Searchable product database
• Thumbnail image capability
• Customer e-mail notification
• Unlimited autoresponders
• Shipping and delivery options
• Coupons, discounts, and special offers
• Technical support
Part 1.pmd 5 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
6 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Affiliate programs.
Shopping Cart
An electronic shopping cart is an excellent feature for sites selling multiple products or services. The online shopping cart system operates much like an actual
shopping cart. Buyers can add items to their cart as they please, and they can
remove items just as easily. As the customers add and subtract items from their
shopping cart, a running total of their purchase choices is dynamically updated.
This is a great feature that shouldn’t be overlooked when you choose your
storefront software.
Purchase Notification
This software feature enables merchants to be notified via e-mail whenever a
purchase is made on their Web site. The e-mail typically states the product
purchased, the purchaser’s contact information, and the credit card information. This feature is terrific if you use offline methods (e.g., the telephone) to
authorize credit card purchases. You can simply pull up the e-mail message on
your screen and call in to receive an authorization number.
Inventory Management Integration
Does the software enable you to integrate the storefront with your back-end
system? Back-end systems refer to the company’s internal accounting, inventory, contact management, customer service, and other supporting software
systems. This is a fantastic feature for companies selling multiple products online. By integrating the back end with your storefront, you can track inventory
levels to (1) ensure that you don’t run out of a certain product or (2) notify
customers that you are out of stock before they make a purchase. More information on integrating your back-end systems with your storefront is explained
later in this chapter.
Client Database Management
A client database is essential to any business that would like to keep track of the
people utilizing its site. This includes all users who interact in some way with
Part 1.pmd 6 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 7
your site, either by filling out one of your forms, becoming an affiliate of yours,
or purchasing something through the shopping cart. All users will have a record
of their actions in your client database. You can find out information such as
who bought a particular product, who is subscribed to a particular newsletter,
the time a client has been added to your database, and so on. Once a search is
conducted, you will get a list of all clients and their online actions on your site.
With this list, you are able to create a customized mailing list.
Integrated Mail List
Many ASP storefront solutions integrate private mail list software with their
application. It just makes sense that when someone makes a purchase, they
might like to give permission for you to send them your e-zine or newsletter,
your e-specials, or coupons. The mail list application should be able to be fully
integrated with your Web site and should provide good tracking and management reports. Today it is essential that mail list software have an integrated
spam checker so that your mail can have the best chance of getting through to
the intended recipients.
Searchable Product Database
Practically a necessity for companies selling hundreds of products online, this
feature enables a consumer to visit your site and search through your database
of product listings. Normally consumers will know what they want when they
visit your site, so offering this feature will enable them to go directly to the
product SKU (stock keeping unit) they want, rather than searching through
multiple pages trying to find the product. An SKU is similar to the ISBN number you find on the back of books—it is a numerical value that identifies an
individual product.
Thumbnail Image Capability
Your storefront software should enable you to place small thumbnail images of
the products next to their listing. The user can then click on the image to enlarge it and see a better view of the product. This enhances the overall listing
for each of your products in your storefront. Thumbnails also assist in optimizing your site’s download time. It takes much less time to download several
thumbnail 2K images as opposed to several full-sized 50K images.
Part 1.pmd 7 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
8 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Customer E-mail Notification
This feature enables you to automatically send your clients an e-mail directly
after they purchase an item on your Web site. The message will confirm that
you have received their order, and you can also take the time to thank them for
doing business with your company. This is a great way to provide quality customer service to your clients.
Unlimited Autoresponders
An autoresponder is a customized e-mail notification with a few added features. Autoresponders can be used for different purposes, and you can send an
unlimited number of sequential messages. For example, you might have one
general autoresponder for all your customers and a few more-detailed
autoresponders for customers who purchase a particular product. This way
you can ensure a great follow-up for future repeat sales. By using this method
you can offer classes with the lessons delivered by autoresponder e-mails once
per week, as well as train your affiliates on up-and-coming news with your
business. An autoresponder can be set to go out over a period of time and be
composed of one or more messages. Autoresponders are becoming a very powerful Internet marketing tool.
Shipping and Delivery Options
Another way to provide excellent customer service is by offering different shipment options to your clients. This feature enables your customers to select a
shipping option that best suits their needs during the checkout period, when
they are finalizing their order on your Web site. Some people like to receive
their purchases in the mail sooner than others. By offering a variety of shipping
and delivery options, you have an opportunity to up-sell, utilizing different
price points for different delivery periods. You could set a specific price point
for each of your delivery options, which may include “next day,” “two or three
days,” “surface, one to two weeks,” and so on. In addition, some customers
may prefer to send individual items to separate locations—perhaps they are
doing their Christmas shopping. Giving the user the option to send each item to
a different location is a great feature to include.
Part 1.pmd 8 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 9
Coupons, Discounts, and Special Offers
Many storefront solutions provide the ability to offer discounts, accept coupons, and provide for special deals to generate urgency to drive up your sales.
Technical Support
Above all, whether you purchase storefront development software or choose to
use a template service, you should always ensure that the service provider has
excellent customer support. If you have any problems with your storefront, you
should be able to call and receive immediate assistance to remedy your problem. Downtime or malfunctions in your storefront can hinder your business’s
professionalism, so you should have the best technical support available to help
you solve any problem you may encounter.
Affiliate Programs
A major challenge for new Internet businesses is how to drive traffic to their site.
Some possible shoppers come to your site; they look around and really like what
they are seeing. On your Web site you have a “Join Our Affiliates Program” link.
They click on it, fill out a quick form, and choose a user name and password.
They then will receive an e-mail with instructions and access to referral URLs.
Once they have the URLs, they must send their prospects to your site either through
outbound e-mail or via links from their own Web site. Along the way, your new
site viewers will get tagged as having been referred by the affiliate. If they become
customers and make a purchase, the affiliate will be credited with the sale. Both
you and your affiliate can see this in the order record, using a login page with a
full history of all their commissions. Affiliates are wonderful because they send
traffic your way, and you pay them only for paid customers.
Payment Processing Methods
One of the key components of doing business online is the ability to take payment for goods and services online. Essentially, taking payment online involves
Part 1.pmd 9 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
10 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
the ability to successfully transfer payment from the buyer to your bank account. There are a number of factors you need to be aware of before venturing
out and developing your online business. The main form of payment online is
the credit card, which is the focus of this section. Currently 95 percent of all
purchases online are made using credit cards.
The Advantages of Taking Online Payments
The ability to take payment for goods and services online presents several significant advantages to you as a business owner. Many Internet users expect
speed and convenience. They want what they want, when they want it. By
offering Internet shoppers the ability to make a purchase and pay for it online,
you’re helping to facilitate their needs and desires. You’re enabling them to
make their purchase at any time of day or night. Basically, your online storefront is open for business 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year. By
allowing users to purchase goods and services online, you’re allowing them to
pay for items on their own terms as well. Independence and freedom play a
role. Users are able to make purchases on their own without any reliance on
another individual. They do not need to wait for the assistance of a sales associate to make their purchase, they do not need to wait an extensive period of
time for approval of their purchase because everything is automated, and they
do not need to write down a phone number or other information to contact
someone to make their purchase. It’s on their terms, and they like that.
Automated online payment processing can benefit your business in the form
of reduced costs. You do not need to pay someone to process your transactions,
and you do not need to pay to produce paper invoices and statements. Think of
the additional time automated online payment processing can save you as well.
You or an employee will not have to spend time processing payments yourself.
Your time will be free to be better used on more important business matters.
Having your site set up to take online payments portrays a professional
image and boosts the credibility of your operation in the eyes of the consumer.
It shows that you have taken the time and have invested the money to develop
a well-run operation.
You may experience increased sales. Why? Many of the purchases made
online are impulse buys. Living up to consumer expectations is key to your
success!
Acquire an Internet Merchant Account
 Before you can accept credit card payments online, you need to acquire an
appropriate Internet merchant account. (Your other option is to utilize that of
Part 1.pmd 10 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 11
third parties, which we discuss later.) A merchant account allows you to accept
payment for goods and services. You may be saying to yourself, “I already have
a merchant account” if you currently operate a business; however, you will
need a merchant account that allows you to take payment over the Internet,
and you will need a merchant account for each credit card you plan to accept.
To get an Internet merchant account or to change your merchant account to the
correct type, you must contact your financial institution or bank.
When you approach your financial institution for a merchant account,
you will have to prove to them that you deserve it and that you are a safe
investment. They will want to know a significant amount of detail about your
online business, but the most important issue is your credit history. Your type
of business (products and services you offer), the length of time you have
been in business, and your existing relationship with the financial institution
will influence their decision on whether or not to issue you an Internet merchant account. They will likely also want to know how you plan to process
transactions, what your payment processing company of choice is, and so on.
They may ask you to provide details of how an actual transaction on your
Web site will work.
Doing business on the Internet is significantly different from doing business
at a traditional bricks-and-mortar storefront location because the credit card
and the cardholder are not present at the point of sale. Some banks have no
problems issuing an Internet merchant account because as far as they are concerned, it’s just like any other sale where the transaction does not take place at
the point of sale (e.g., a mail-order catalogue). On the other hand, some banks
are a little uneasy when it comes to doing business online and will be hesitant to
issue you a merchant account for such transactions. In fact, they may not be
willing to work with you at all, in which case you will have to approach another financial institution for assistance.
Because there is a higher perceived risk with doing business over the Internet, the issuing financial institution may present you with a higher discount
rate. Feel free to talk to other banks and find out their feelings on online business—you may be able to get a lower discount rate. Those banks that are accepting of home and mail-order businesses generally tend to be more accepting
of online businesses and will likely offer a better discount rate. A discount rate
is simply a percentage fee of each transaction charged to the merchant, based
on the perceived risk. The higher the risk, the higher the discount rate.
In addition to the discount rate, you will be responsible for various other
fees. There may be an account application or setup fee, a per-transaction fee, a
monthly fee, a statement fee, support fees, and possibly other related fees. Make
sure you cover these details with your financial institution! One financial institution may require a security deposit of up to 20 percent of annual sales before
it is willing to issue you an Internet merchant account; another may have you
set up and operational in 24 hours.
Part 1.pmd 11 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
12 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
You can opt to use a third-party alternative, also known as an Internet
payment service. One such company is PayPal (http://www.paypal.com). PayPal
is a quick alternative to having your own merchant account. The main advantage of using another company’s Internet merchant account is that you avoid a
lot of the hassle of getting and setting up your own Internet merchant account.
The third party will let you use theirs for a fee. Like the bank, there will be
various fees such as setup fees and transaction fees. These fees are sometimes
more than those of having your own merchant account because you’re paying
for the privilege of using someone else’s account. The choice is yours as to
whether you use a third-party company or acquire your own Internet merchant
account, but base your decision on your needs and objectives.
What Level of E-business Is Appropriate for You?
E-business involves having the right e-business model, the right Web site, and
the right volume of targeted traffic to your site. When developing your e-business
strategy, you have to take into account your online objectives, your budget or
financial position, and the size and type of operation you run. The extent of
your e-business strategy relates directly to these criteria. For some businesses it
is not necessary to develop a fully integrated e-business strategy because it is
not required in day-to-day business. Nonetheless, it is important to understand
your e-business needs before you implement your e-business strategy. Additional costs not discussed within each level of e-business include the design and
hosting of your Web site as well as any costs associated with the promotion of
your products or services.
E-business Level 1—Interactive Order Taking
The introductory level is the most basic form of conducting e-business. It consists of the ability to take orders or reservations through e-mail or via an online
form on your Web site. You will find this level of e-business used by newcomers
to the online business realm who have a low budget and little to worry about
with respect to inventory, as well as by businesses that cannot put a specific
price on a product or service. For example, an engineering or marketing firm
often cannot put a standard price on their services, as this is decided on a caseby-case situation, but they do encourage the site visitor to request a proposal or
to contact the firm about their services. These businesses must communicate
extensively with their target market about their needs and objectives in order to
Part 1.pmd 12 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 13
determine the extent of work required before agreeing to do a project for a
certain value.
The primary advantage of this level of e-business is that it allows the
business to conduct business online with minimal effort. The business does
not need to worry about selecting and setting up an e-commerce software
package, finding and paying to use a payment-processing company, or ensuring that all of its online and offline systems are integrated and working properly. A bed-and-breakfast operation may choose to provide a reservation
form on its Web site to encourage bookings. An online form certainly makes
booking a room simple for site visitors and allows them to take care of it
while they’re online without having to write down information in order to
make a reservation at a later time. You’re providing visitors with the convenience they look for.
If you are a business looking to sell a variety of products with set prices
online, this level of e-business will not be adequate for you. One of the other
levels described here will fit your online strategy more appropriately.
E-business Level 2—Taking Electronic Payment
The next level of e-business incorporates the ability to accept payment for goods
and services online. This level of e-business is appropriate if you are selling
products or services with a fixed price and inventory is not an issue.
Your online business consists of two core functional areas—the front end
and the back end. The front end of your online business is essentially everything that your target market interacts with. It is your Web site, your online
storefront. The back end refers to all supporting operations that take place
behind the scenes, such as inventory management, accounting systems, and processing special offers or discounts. This level of e-business does not involve
integrating the front end of your business with back-end operations. Each operates as a separate entity, but in such a way that the business runs efficiently.
Businesses using this level of e-business often do not have the budget to integrate systems or have a business setup that makes integration inappropriate or
unnecessary. Some examples of business types that would follow this strategy
include businesses that sell:
• Downloadable software
• Accommodations where a deposit is required
• Seminar or course registration
Part 1.pmd 13 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
14 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Theme park admittance
• Memberships
• Ski hill lift tickets
• Magazine subscriptions
• Gift certificates
• Products where supply is not a big issue.
You can tackle processing online payment for goods and services two ways
on your site. Some businesses operating at this level of e-business will choose to
process payment information manually. Quite often you will notice that sites
using this type of payment strategy will require the user to fill out some kind of
form that requests the customer’s personal information, purchase information,
and credit card information. When users submit their information through the
form, it is transferred to the site owner’s e-mail account. The site owner then
manually verifies the user’s credit card information and processes the sale. Once
the sale is authorized, the site owner or whoever takes care of ensuring that
sales are processed should notify customers that their transaction was approved
and their item or items are on their way.
Using the services of a payment processing company is the other alternative
to managing credit card transactions on your Web site—we covered this in
depth earlier in this chapter. You must select the most appropriate method for
your business. Processing payment manually may be more time-consuming than
having your transactions processed automatically in real time by a payment
processing company, but it may be more cost-effective for smaller businesses.
Also, if the company is doing low volumes of business, the additional time
required to process transactions may cause no interference in daily operations.
This level of e-business is very simple to implement and is quite affordable.
A good example of a business that would use this level of e-business would be
a software company that allows clients to download the software directly from
its Web site. There is no inventory issue for this type of company. The company
can simply design a generic payment form that takes all contact and payment
information. The form may have a couple of additional fields asking users about
their hardware configuration or marketing research questions, but other than
that the form would be straightforward. This e-business strategy has low cost
and low overhead, and is easy to implement.
Part 1.pmd 14 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 15
E-business Level 3—Storefront Selection and Payment Automation
This level of e-business takes the previous level of e-business up a notch. It is
similar to operating a catalogue sales business, but does so online. Companies
that operate solely online as well as companies that have an offline presence use
this model, but it is more common among online-only businesses. The key is
that inventory does not pose much of a problem in day-to-day operations.
This e-business solution encompasses the use of an online stand-alone storefront, but the back end is not integrated with other systems in the business. A
company could have a number of reasons for not integrating supporting systems. For example, current business systems may not support back-end integration, it may not be necessary for the business to integrate the back end, or the
company may not have the available funds at its disposal to make integration
worthwhile.
There are many storefront options available to the user. More information
on storefront options can be found in the Internet Marketing Resources section
of my Web site at http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html. It is up to the
company, its needs, and what its budget allows for when deciding whether to
develop its own storefront solution or to purchase a package solution.
As with the previous model, you are responsible for setting up your payment processing system and acquiring a merchant account. Once this has been
established, you will receive payment for your products automatically when a
consumer makes a purchase. At this level of e-business, the ability to process
transactions over a secure connection and in real time is extremely important.
Because company systems are not integrated, businesses that choose to use
this e-business strategy have to constantly monitor inventory levels and ensure
there is adequate supply, must remove the out-of-stock items from the site, or
need to see that an appropriate “item temporarily out of stock” message is
displayed to the consumer. The business may consider creating an opt-in mail
list to automatically notify individuals when out-of-stock merchandise is replenished, as this will encourage the potential customer to revisit the site.
E-business Level 4—Total Integration
Total integration is the final and most complex level of e-business. It encompasses all details of the previous e-business levels as well as much, much more.
Total integration is exactly what it sounds like—the integration of your online
business with all or some of your back-end systems. This means that your inventory, accounts receivable, accounting systems, special offers and discounts,
Part 1.pmd 15 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
16 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
consumer database, and so on, are completely integrated with one another,
enabling your business to operate like a well-oiled machine.
Companies that are committed to selling online are common users of this
level of e-business, and you will usually find that the investment required is
fully supported by management. The costs associated with operating a fully
integrated Web site can be significant. Integration costs are higher than most
small businesses can afford, and as such, it is usually medium-size to large businesses that opt to use this level of e-business. Companies that sell large volumes
will also find this model more convenient. Sometimes competition will force
the implementation of this model if you wish to remain competitive and meet
your target market’s needs and expectations. Often the consumer demand requires this level of integration; if you are booking a hotel room and require a
non-smoking room with a king-size bed and an ocean view, the hotel’s storefront or reservation system has to be fully integrated with its inventory system
to be able to book the specific type of room for you.
Integrating your consumer database with your online business provides a
number of significant advantages. For one, it facilitates the consumer. The first
time that users buy from your site they will be required to fill out a personal
profile. Once the profile is filled out, users are assigned a user name and password so that when they return to your site they simply log in using their user
name and password—they do not need to fill out their personal and credit card
information each time they return. Your customers will certainly appreciate
this. Integrating your consumer database facilitates easy referencing of customer information for: Selective ship-to addresses, credit card details, user preferences and personalization features, new-product notification, order history,
order tracking and status.
Knowing a consumer’s personal information and product preferences can
be very important when you are announcing new products that you are offering from your site. If you know that certain customers enjoy a particular product brand, you can use this information to notify them when you carry a new
product from that brand. This retention strategy is a great way to encourage
repeat traffic and repeat sales.
Integrating your inventory management system with the rest of your online
business is terrific for providing optimal customer service. If you’re out of stock
on a particular item, it is good customer service to place a “temporarily out of
stock” message near the product in consideration. If you can provide an estimated-availability message, that’s even better. You could ask users if they would
like to be notified via e-mail when the item does become available. Integrating
your inventory management system and your online storefront allows you to
automatically update your virtual storefront and keep your customers informed.
This frees up your time, and it is of great assistance to the consumer.
Part 1.pmd 16 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
Doing Business Online 17
Integrating your accounting systems with your online business can also be
quite beneficial. This enables you to easily track your accounts receivable and
customer purchase history. Having a fully integrated and automated accounting system can also cut down on the amount of time and effort your staff will
have to allocate to accounting details, since the system will run self-sufficiently.
The most prominent example one can give of an online business that currently uses this level of e-business is Amazon.com (http://www.amazon.com).
Amazon.com’s fully integrated e-business approach enables them to provide
customers with past purchase history, customer discounts, and purchase tracking. Amazon.com also allows customers to set up a user account so that upon
return they simply log in using their user name and password—this makes
using the site more efficient and convenient for the consumer. Each time the
customer logs on to Amazon.com’s Web site, he or she is presented with “recommendations” based on past history and information Amazon.com has acquired. Amazon.com’s inventory management system is tied in with its
storefront software, which automatically updates product listings whenever
inventory is out of stock. Amazon.com also gives the user the option of requesting to order the out-of-stock item and have it shipped automatically once
stock has been replenished. This high level of integration and organization
enables Amazon.com to provide its customers with the ultimate online shopping experience.
Closing E-business Comments
There are a lot of steps to the e-business process and many decisions to be
made. Unless you are a coding genius yourself, you will likely require e-commerce software, a Web development firm, or your ISP to customize an e-business
system that works for your business. The methods used to reach an effective
e-business solution will vary depending on your business, your products and
services, and the expertise of the particular contractor you are working with.
Please keep in mind that customized e-business solutions can be rather expensive to have designed and maintained. If your business is a small start-up
operation, if you develop and manage your own Web site, or if you have a
limited budget for this project, you may want to start small and add e-business
components as your business or your budget grows. Companies such as
Amazon.com (http://www.amazon.com) and CDNow (http://www.cdnow.com)
have had years to design and refine their e-business presence. These enterprises
are also well capitalized and can afford their own in-house e-business team.
However, if you have a product or service that a lot of people want, the e-business
system will pay for itself.
Part 1.pmd 17 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
18 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
18
Part 2
101 Profiles of Top Internet
Business Concepts
1. Ad Network
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Ad networks are among the top methods of online advertising. The “network”
component is organizing the sale of ads and finding high-traffic sites on which
to place the banner ads or hyperlinks for your clients. Ad networks are just like
other ad agencies. They research Web sites that attract the target demographic
of their clients. The revenue comes from the percentage of advertising dollars
that you retain during each campaign.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online advertising techniques is an asset to run this type of business. If you decide to offer banner ad design services, knowledge of graphic
design would benefit your business by eliminating the costs associated with
outsourcing to a graphic designer.
Part 2 betas.pmd 18 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 19
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your Web
site. Computer hardware and software will be the main start-up expense.
You will need a software program that delivers the appropriate ads to the
sites in your network every time it has a visitor. The software should also be
able to provide reports of results for your clients. Estimated cost is a minimum of $3,000 to $10,000 to start. Some of the sophisticated software, if
your clients want extremely targeted banner ad placement, could run you
over $100,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The minimum number of employees needed to start and run this type of business is one dedicated individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. Online advertising is an important part of the marketing strategy for many businesses, in all countries.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
As the advertising campaign needs to be developed with the client and decisions
must be made about where and when the ads will be appropriately placed,
e-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The software you develop or purchase to administer the ad network should
be researched and be suitable to your level of operation. You should be
available by phone for prospective and current clients to contact you. You
should plan what you are going to do with the excess capacity ad space—for
example, you may want to offer last-minute volume discounts. Concentrate
on associating yourself and including in your network those Web sites that
have sustained high traffic levels. Always get paid up front for an advertising campaign.
You will need to address the sophistication levels you want to get into with
the site advertising. Are you offering static ads, or are you going to provide
keyword advertising, geo-targeted advertising, behavioral advertising, and the
like? The level of sophistication will impact the software and the cost of that
software.
Part 2 betas.pmd 19 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
20 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
increase the awareness of your ad network, it would also send referral
business to your site.
• Get linked from online advertising directories.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to online advertising or the industries that your ad network targets.
• Launch your own strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites
frequented by your target market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could generate additional income for your ad network by providing graphic
design services to businesses. You could design banner advertisements for businesses that are not capable of handling this task in-house. This additional service would add value to your online business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
AdForce
http://www.adforce.com
AdForce is an independent centralized ad servicing and management solution
on the Web. Focusing on pay-per-click marketing, they offer expertise in the
management of online advertising.
.Com Marketing
http://www.commarketing.com
Having managed thousands of online operations, .Com Marketing’s strength
has focused on maximizing online media placements. .Com Marketing assesses
Part 2 betas.pmd 20 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 21
each component of our clients’ campaigns prior to, during, and post-launch.
Consideration to detail is what sets .Com Marketing ahead of the rest.
2. Apartment Locator
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Moving to a new city is never easy. Everyone needs a place to live, but not
everybody has the time to look. This is a problem that is being solved by many
businesses in major cities across the world. Many savvy individuals are launching their own apartment locator Web sites and are turning quite a profit from
doing so.
Your main source of income will be referral fees from rental offices of apartments, condominiums, and other real estate structures. You could also charge a
fee for sublets, apartment sharing, and private rental listings. Requests are sent
via e-mail from those seeking an apartment to you, the site administrator, with
a description of the desired apartment location, size, necessities, and so on, that
the individual is looking for. You then take the request and find the best possible location to suit the person’s needs. Once you have found a match, you set
up a time for your client to view the apartment. You collect a referral fee if the
client signs a lease.
Another way to run this type of business would be to set up a searchable
database. Those with apartments to rent or sublet would pay a fee to add their
listing. People looking for an apartment would search based on specific criteria
such as location, maximum rent, number of bedrooms, etc.
SKILLS NEEDED
This business is great for someone with a thorough grasp of the available living
space in the local area and basic Web publishing skills. You should be a clear
communicator via e-mail and phone with your clients and the owners of rental
buildings so they take you seriously.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Costs associated with starting this business range from $1,000 to $5,000. Initially you will have to pay to design and develop your Web site along with all
costs associated with this (e.g., hosting service). If you want to develop the database, there will be additional costs involved—the amount will be determined by
the level of sophistication, the number of fields, and the number of searchable
Part 2 betas.pmd 21 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
22 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
fields. Additional costs associated with opening this business include online advertising costs and any offline promotion that you may implement.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Typically this business can be run by one individual to start and will increase
depending on the volume of referrals.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Although people from other countries may use this service if they are moving to
the country, city, or state that you represent, this business generally has national and regional potential.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be most appropriate for this type of business—level
1 if you are providing hands-on services and level 2 if you want to go the database route and have the site run itself. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Although you want to receive as many referrals as possible, it is important not
to let the apartments that you represent take advantage of your site as a free
advertising opportunity. To avoid this problem, don’t list the specific names or
addresses of the apartment complexes that you represent. You can provide pictures, and general location information. If you give the specific address of the
suggested match, your client may go directly to the apartment without even
using your service. Of course, if you run this Web site as a database, this will
not be an issue as you will be paid up front for all listings.
Collection of referral fees is an important issue. Ensure that you have contracts in place with the apartment owners and safeguard procedures that help
you to keep your incoming fees organized.
Your Web site has to be constantly updated and maintained. When an apartment is rented through you, make sure to show this on your site. When an
apartment is no longer available, remove it immediately from your site.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop links from as many Web sites and meta-indexes as possible
that target your geographic audiences.
• Purchase banner ads on geographically targeted Web sites (e.g., if you
represent apartments in New York, purchase a banner ad on a Web site
about living in New York).
Part 2 betas.pmd 22 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 23
• Participate in sponsored listings with the search engines by bidding on
appropriate keyword phrases.
• List your site in the classified ad section of nearby online newspapers.
• Participate in real estate or geographically specific mailing lists with a
cleverly designed signature file.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You should consider partnering with businesses that could benefit from your
referrals. For example, local moving companies or furniture rental businesses
could benefit from your referrals, since you target the same market. This could
prove to be quite profitable for your business. An alternative to this would be
selling advertising to these businesses on your site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Sami-Apts.com
http://www.sami-apts.com
This is a great student apartment locator service.
AOK Apartment Locators
http://www.aokapartmentlocators.com
A dynamite apartment location service in the Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas, area.
3. Art Supply Store
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Today everyone is buying products and services online, even artists. The number of potential customers for an art supply store is tremendous. Many artists
frequent the Internet to buy supplies such as paint, canvas, brushes, carving
tools, and more. The Internet makes it easy for artists to buy products, especially uncommon supplies that are not carried by your local art supply store.
Part 2 betas.pmd 23 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
24 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Offering uncommon supplies also enables you to practice niche marketing and
can produce high returns for your business.
Here’s how it works. With the click of a button artists can easily browse
through your selection of art products, adding what they like to their shopping
cart. When they are finished they can simply check out, pay for the products
online with a credit card, and wait to receive the products in the mail. It’s as
easy as that.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of different art supplies and techniques is an asset, as you want to
provide the best customer service to your clients. You can’t do that without
understanding their needs.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $2,500 to $5,000.
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site along with your storefront solution and merchant account setup. All
additional costs are associated with promoting your business online and offline, and purchasing and holding inventory.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
To start this operation all you will need is one person. This operation is ideal if
you are looking to start a business part-time.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This online business has strong international potential, as its products are of
interest to artists around the globe.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The site must be kept current. When items are discontinued or out of stock, the
Web site and storefront should be updated. The shipping operation of your
business should be timely. The prices have to be competitive with the same
products available off the Web. Keep in mind that shipping and handling charges
have to be added for products bought in your online store.
Part 2 betas.pmd 24 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 25
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop as many links as possible from art-related Web sites and directories.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to art with a
cleverly designed signature file.
• Host your own art advice column or daily art tips that will feature your
products and current promotions. You could leverage your exposure
through an RSS feed.
• Participate in sponsored listings by bidding on appropriate keywords
with the popular search engines.
• Develop a permission-based mailing list of potential customers and send
weekly e-specials or a newsletter with Art Tips and Resources.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to selling art supplies on your site, you could also help artists sell their
artwork. You could auction other artists’ work from your site and then take a
percentage of the sale for your services. This would be a great way to earn additional income and would also help to generate repeat traffic to your Web site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
MisterArt.com
http://www.misterart.com
MisterArt.com is a large discount art supply store that uses a fully integrated
e-business strategy to provide art supplies to consumers.
Island Blue Art Supplies Catalogue
http://shopping.islandblue.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 25 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
26 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
This is a great site (Figure 2.1) with a huge catalogue of art supplies that can
easily be purchased directly from their site.
4. Association Management
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The number of associations related to different industries and interests is phenomenal. Many of these associations cannot afford to hire (or do not have the
volume to warrant hiring) one or more full-time employees to handle the dayto-day administrative duties involved with running the association. Associations are now outsourcing all of these administrative duties to an association
management firm.
Here’s how it works. The duties that associations want taken care of are
administrative. Common tasks include billing, bookkeeping, and accounting,
taking minutes at meetings, collection of annual dues, association event promotion, Web site maintenance, and distribution of weekly or monthly newsletters.
Since these tasks will be repetitive and not very time-consuming, you are able to
handle the association management for multiple associations, and because the
tasks will remain similar between associations, you will be able to work much
more efficiently.
Figure 2.1. IslandBlue.com offers a wide range of art supplies from its site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 26 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 27
The key to success in this business is organization. Make sure that you are
always on time with your work. If you don’t keep yourself organized or you
take on too much work, you increase the chance that you might not perform up
to the associations’ expectations of your firm. This could result in the termination of a management contract and ultimately will affect the professionalism
and overall appeal of your organization’s services.
SKILLS NEEDED
Excellent organization and communication skills are necessary for starting this
type of business. Other skills that would be an asset include knowledge of accounting, creative writing capabilities, and other basic administrative skills.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Since you are providing a service that has no inventory, your initial costs will be
minimal. The cost to start this type of business ranges from $1,000 to $10,000.
This type of business typically can be run out of your home, which eliminates
overhead costs of setting up an office for your management firm.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One person can run this business part-time to begin. This is a perfect idea for
someone working from home.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business does not have strong international potential due to the nature of
the service provided. Common tasks include taking minutes at weekly or monthly
meetings or attending other functions held by the association. This will require
your business to be located in the surrounding area of the association, so this
business has a more regional appeal. Of course, if this is a national association,
most meetings may be online, with one or two a year being face-to-face with
everyone flying to a common location. If this is the case, the business could
have national or international appeal.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
With all your clients, make sure to have a detailed contract that clearly outlines
all the services and duties you will be providing. The contract should indicate
important dates and contact lists, and someone within the association should
Part 2 betas.pmd 27 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
28 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
be appointed to provide you with all the necessary information and approvals
to run the association efficiently.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your target
audience would be a great way to increase the traffic to your Web site.
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market.
• Develop links from as many Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to your target audience as possible.
• Participating in mail lists and discussion groups related to different industries and associations with a cleverly designed signature file would
be a great way to generate awareness for your services.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to handling the daily administrative tasks for associations, you could
also provide your clients with promotional services. This would help to promote the association’s membership benefits to prospective members and would
also increase the awareness of the association. Providing a newsletter circulated
to association members where you may feature paying advertisers is a chance
for additional income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Maguire/Maguire, Inc.
http://www.maguireinc.com
Maguire/Maguire, Inc. is a dynamite business that provides not-for-profit association management and marketing services.
Smith, Bucklin & Associates, Inc.
http://www.smithbucklin.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 28 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 29
Smith, Bucklin & Associates provides unparalleled association management
and professional services through strong client relationships.
5. Auction Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Online auction sites are one of the fastest growing businesses on the Internet
today. Almost everyone knows at least one person who has either bought or
sold a product through an online auction service such as eBay or Yahoo!
Setting up an auction Web site may seem easy at first glance. However, the
popularity and success of online auctions has led to an explosion of these sites.
This has resulted in stiff competition among auction sites. You must find a
niche market—for example, rare collectibles, baseball cards, celebrity memorabilia, or autographed items—to set yourself apart from the competition.
If you decide to open an online auction site, you will be using a special
computer program that places items up for auction on your Web site. People
interested in the auctioned item place bids. If you are using a good auction
program, then your computer will keep track of these bids and will finally close
the auction and notify the seller and the successful bidder. The bidder and seller
must arrange for the shipping of the item privately. Your sources of income will
be the commission earned from the sale of each item on your site or the fee
charged to submit an article and banner advertising revenue. Some auction sites
also include a membership fee for access to selling on the site.
SKILLS NEEDED
What you’ll need to embark on this opportunity is basic Web publishing and
digital imaging know-how, and an in-depth knowledge of the auction software
program you are going to use. You will also want a robust list of contacts with
items available for auction on your site or knowledge of Internet marketing to
spread the word about your business online.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from as low as $10,000
into the millions for a presence like eBay. The most expensive elements of the
startup will be the auction software and the extensive marketing needed to
launch this type of business. You will also have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your Web site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 29 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
30 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed may change as the business grows. It will
depend on the volume of business you handle and the degree of automation of
your online presence. To start, one competent person can handle operations.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Online auctions have strong international potential. Unless you are a specialty
site, anyone can place anything up for auction. It is the customer’s responsibility to arrange for the transfer of auctioned items. So it is entirely possible for
someone in Zimbabwe to use your site to buy a lock of Elvis’s hair from someone in Greenland.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 is most appropriate for an auction site. You will need some
sophisticated software and online payment processing (if you are going to take
care of the financial arrangements from your site) to be competitive in this
market. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
There is already a saturation of auction sites; some have proven to work and
others have flopped. Getting the buyers to your site will be the biggest challenge, so once you build a somewhat dedicated audience, it’s important to be
responsive to their needs by incorporating a rating system that is regulated by
the users of your auction site. You want to develop a system to ensure that you
are paid your fee or commission if you don’t handle the financial transaction
from your site.
Niche auction sites still provide a great opportunity. Stamp auctions, coin
collector auctions, and similar types of niche auctions provide for easier marketing.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• By asking if your customers would like to be kept updated on any great
deals in their field of interest, permission marketing could be one of
your greatest assets. For example, an Elvis fan might be interested in
knowing when an Elvis-related item comes up for auction.
• Banner exchange and banner advertising on sites that have the same
target market you do can be very effective.
Part 2 betas.pmd 30 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 31
• Consider using viral marketing. This will allow your customers to invite friends to join the auction site. If users see something a friend might
like, they will most likely pass on the information.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keywords
with the popular search engines.
• Develop and implement a comprehensive link strategy.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Banner advertising can generate a substantial income as long as you have a lot
of visitors to your site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
eBay
http://www.ebay.com
eBay is synonymous with online auctions in the same way as Nike is synonymous with sneakers.
uBid
http://www.ubid.com
Another well-designed auction site. Not as omnipresent as eBay, but a welllaid-out site nonetheless.
6. Auto Advice
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Through providing sound advice to visitors wondering how to solve a problem
with their current automobile or whether or not to purchase a certain year or
make of automobile, you have the opportunity to develop a nice little business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 31 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
32 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
If you offer your visitors quality auto advice, they will return to your site again
and again to see how your advice can help them to maintain a better, longerlasting automobile.
Advice Web sites allow you to “data-mine” in targeted markets. Consider
your users as your source of income. The more visitors you have and the more
information you gather from the people you counsel, the better. There are a lot
of permission marketing opportunities available with this type of business. You
can ask your visitors for permission to send them specific types of information
and then you can charge a sponsorship or advertising fee to those suppliers
who have information they want distributed to these opt-in lists.
Your main source of income will be from selling banner advertising on your
site to businesses that share the same target market—automobile retailers, used
car dealers, after-sale product suppliers, and auto parts suppliers. Since this
type of business targets individuals interested in automobiles, you are providing an optimal banner advertising opportunity for all businesses in the auto
industry.
SKILLS NEEDED
This form of business requires that you have expert knowledge in the area of
automobiles. If you don’t offer quality advice, your visitors will notice and will
not return to your site. This could seriously hinder the profitability of your
business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this type of business ranges from approximately $1,000 to
$5,000. Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting
of your Web site. Additional costs associated with starting this type of business
include online and offline advertising costs.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Typically, one part-time person is needed to run this type of business, depending on the volume of requests received from visitors.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has high international potential.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 32 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 33
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
It is important that you offer sound advice on your site. If you offer advice that
is incorrect or inappropriate, it could seriously hinder your business potential.
You should place a disclaimer on your site in case this problem arises. This will
exclude you from any legal action that may result from accidents or damages
resulting from your automotive advice.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Viral marketing with a catchy “Tell a Friend” element would be appropriate for this type of site.
• Make sure there are plenty of areas on your Web site that encourage
users to provide their e-mail address—for example, “Click here if you
would like to be notified when we update our advice column.” You
could also have product-specific mail lists to which visitors could opt
in. Having an RSS feed to let subscribers know when you add new
content is another neat feature to generate targeted traffic.
• Participate in newsgroups, mailing lists, and discussion forums related
to automobiles with a cleverly designed signature file.
• Have your Web site listed and linked from as many auto-related directories, meta-indexes, and Web sites as possible.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop online press releases and have them distributed to as many
automotive-related publications and e-zines as possible.
• Web ring participation can have a significant impact on traffic, as there
are many auto-related Web rings accessible from Webring.org and
Looplink.com.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
Part 2 betas.pmd 33 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
34 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ADDITIONAL INCOME
There are plenty of avenues to create additional income in the advice Web site
business. You can set up mailing lists targeted toward specific car owners and
sell or provide sponsorship opportunities to industry partners that want to reach
that target market. For example, you could have a Volkswagen mailing list, or
for an even more targeted approach you could have a Volkswagen Beetle mailing list. The possibilities are endless. You can ask people if they would like to
receive different auto maintenance advice via e-mail daily. This form of permission marketing enables you to send them an e-mail at their request. Proper use
of these targeted lists could result in a tremendous money-making opportunity
for your business due to the nature of readership.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
AutoAdvice.com
http://www.autoadvice.com
An in-depth site offering auto advice and tips on how to buy a new car.
FreeAutoAdvice.com
http://freeautoadvice.com
This site is operated by a collection of mechanics and technicians who repair
cars.
7. Banner Ad Designer
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
One of the primary forms of advertising on the Internet today is through banner advertisements placed on high-traffic Web sites. Banner ads quite often are
designed by a graphic designer. With the Internet growing at an exponential
rate, more small businesses are going online. Most of these small businesses
can’t afford to have their own in-house graphic designer, so they have to outsource the creation of their ads to outside firms.
As a banner ad developer, you will take requests for banner ads via e-mail.
After consulting with customers via e-mail or phone, you will construct a banner ad that meets their requirements and price. The revenue will come from the
payment for these services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 34 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 35
SKILLS NEEDED
The most important set of skills for creating banner ads lies in superior graphic
design abilities. Familiarity with the standard graphical programs is a must.
More recently, however, animated banner ads have become quite popular. To
create these types of ads, you will need to be familiar with the Java programming language or Macromedia Flash.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Costs can be minimal to begin this business if you have a computer and the
proper software needed to complete the work. Most graphic designers have the
necessary hardware and software and are more than capable of designing and
developing their own Web site.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One part-time person can start this business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential for this business is without limits. If your graphics
are catchy, your ads will be noticed and you no doubt will be contacted for
your services. If a client requests banners in another language, have them provide the text and there should be no problem.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 is appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1. You will be taking requests through e-mail, but since the
customers will desire input into the creative process, you will be in contact with
them over the phone and they can pay you directly.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Online competition could be formidable. For this reason, great design and excellent customer service are very important. The graphical presentation of your
own Web site is of particular importance. Show off your stuff and have an area
for client samples and testimonials viewable to the public.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Establishing links from related
sites such as online marketing e-zines, ad agencies, and newsletters is an
excellent way to bring targeted business to your Web site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 35 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
36 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Circulate a series of dynamite banner ads for your own services.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participate in marketing mail lists, Usenet newsgroups, and forums.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
By increasing your services into related fields such as graphic corporate ID
development, e-book covers, e-brochure development, and Web site development, you could expand your income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Addesigner.com
http://www.addesigner.com
This Web site lets you design your own banner ads in a short time and then
download them if you are a member. The banner ads are of the simplest kind,
but it is a good low-end solution for some businesses.
Mouser Art
http://www.mouserart.com
A typical small entrepreneurial Web site. However, the excellent site design and
layout gives the site a really professional feel.
8. Beauty Products
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Buying beauty products online is very popular with busy female professionals.
They have certain brands they buy regularly, know what they want, and have
very little time for shopping. Sometimes they are looking for special products
that are not carried by regular vendors. Online beauty stores solve this problem
by accommodating the needs of the business professional. Online beauty stores
Part 2 betas.pmd 36 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 37
can sell everything from lipstick and makeup to bath oils and aromatherapy
products. With the increasing product demand for this industry, selling beauty
products online provides an excellent online business opportunity.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of health and beauty products is a must.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $1,000 to $100,000,
depending on how much inventory you plan to carry. Initially, you will have to
pay for the design, development, and hosting of your Web site along with your
storefront solution and merchant account setup. All additional costs are associated with promoting your business online and offline as well as purchasing and
holding inventory.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can easily be started by one individual. This business can also be
started and run as a part-time venture.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This online business has strong international potential as its products are of
interest to consumers across the globe.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 or 4 is most appropriate for this type of business. Level 3 is
appropriate when the business is online only. Level 4 is appropriate if you have
a fairly large operation with many products or where you have an offline location as well, with a Web-compatible inventory system. For more information,
see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You will have to be very price competitive on those products that are generally
available online or locally. Keep in mind that when purchasing from your online store, the customer will have to pay for shipping and handling in addition
to product cost. To the extent that you specialize in niche products or hard-tofind items, this will be less of an issue.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a strategic online banner advertising campaign on health- and
beauty-related Web sites.
Part 2 betas.pmd 37 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
38 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Participate in newsgroups, discussion forums, and mailing lists related
to health and beauty with a cleverly designed signature file.
• Offering health and beauty tips from your site would be a great way to
encourage repeat traffic. Perhaps consider setting up a beauty tip of the
day that you would send via an autoresponder.
• Practice permission marketing by asking visitors if they would like to be
notified via e-mail when you add new products to your Web site.
• Participate in e-zines related to beauty, health, and hair care as well as
those e-zines that have the same target market you do—busy professional women and teens. Your participation could be banner advertising, story or article submission, sponsorship, or providing a prize for
their contests.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to selling beauty products, you can also sell accessories such as
makeup cases, towels, lather-builders, handbags, and so on. By offering these
products, you would not only add value to your online beauty store, you would
also have the opportunity to generate additional income for your business. Gift
certificates and gift baskets may provide an additional source of revenue. You
can also sell banner advertising and sponsorship opportunities to companies
that target the same group that you do.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Just for Redheads Beauty Products
http://www.justforredheads.com
This is a great online beauty store that uses a Yahoo! Storefront template
service to sell its products online. It also has a very unique target market—
redheads!
Life Plus Vitamins
http://www.lifeplusvitamins.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 38 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 39
This is a great online site that sells vitamins, beauty products, and other healthand hygiene-related products.
9. Blog Software/Blog Directory
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
A blog is a Web site or part of a Web site that can be used to post news, thoughts,
and updates as well as interact with others. Many people use blogs and would
be quite happy to use a blog service where they can quickly and easily develop
and maintain their blog on a blog portal. The number of people using your blog
service, the number of people they promote their blog to, as well as the number
of references to publicly promoted blogs (in the case of maintaining a blog
directory) will be the key to many visitors, and then your pages are in turn
worth advertising dollars. Blogs can be as specific or as general as the owner
pleases—some might relate to an individual’s travels so friends and family can
keep up to date with where they are and know that they are safe; others relate
to corporate products and uses; others are used to provide useful information
to customers and potential customers. There are as many uses for blogs as there
are products and services.
Blogs are quite versatile; they offer posting options such as inviting friends
to post, having your blog open to the public to post, or keeping the posting to
yourself. Blogs are making it possible to hold ongoing conversations in public
with thousands of people.
A blog software site or a blog directory has many revenue-generation opportunities. You have banner advertising, sponsorship, and subscription opportunities. You can promote additional products and services that you provide
related to technology products and services.
SKILLS NEEDED
If you have the programming skills to build the blog software, portal, and directory, you will be able to do this yourself. If you don’t, you will have to
outsource or contract these elements out.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You will need a computer and the appropriate blog software. Start-up costs
will also include the design, development, and hosting of your Web site, which
will include the blog software, blog portal and the blog directory. The start-up
Part 2 betas.pmd 39 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
40 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
costs for this type of business will generally run between $4,000 and $30,000,
depending on how much of the programming you have to outsource.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Starting off you need only one employee—not even full-time if that’s not what
you can fit into your schedule.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business’s international potential increases if it’s translated into the major
languages of the globe. English is widely accepted, however.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
Ideally, a blog directory should charge advertisers throughout the year. E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of online business. See Part 1
for more details.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
 In order to utilize your blog software service to its full potential, you will want
to invest in advanced blog tools as they are available. These tools today offer
such things as e-mail notifications when updates are made, sending the blog
content via e-mail to subscribers, and the option of collaborative authors; tomorrow, who knows, as this is a fast changing environment.
You should have a Web traffic analysis package on the server that hosts your
site so that you can show advertisers accurate information about your site traffic.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your target audience would be a great way to increase exposure of your blogs
and the traffic to your Web site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on topic-specific Web
sites would generate targeted exposure for your blog.
• Develop links from as many Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to the topic of your blog as you can.
• Make sure your site is optimized for organic search engine positioning
and also consider participating in pay-per-click campaigns with the more
popular search engines.
Part 2 betas.pmd 40 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 41
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participating in publicly accessible opt-in mail lists related to the topic
of your blog would be a great way to communicate with your target
market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income comes into play by charging a fee if the blog is educational
or is an area of expertise. Also, you may be able to host a blog directory, be it
all the same topic or various types of blogs. You can join the affiliate programs of providers of products or services that your target market may be
interested in.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Free Webs
http://www.freewebs.com
A large online blog software provider. There is a chance to join the affiliate
program and advertise as well on this site.
Globe of Blogs
http://www.globeofblogs.com
An online blog directory. This site is very easy to navigate.
10. Bookstore
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Online bookstores are one of the most widely accepted forms of online businesses. You can start an online bookstore that sells many titles, but for a more
targeted approach you may consider starting a bookstore that specializes in a
particular type of book. This will differentiate you from the larger online bookPart 2 betas.pmd 41 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
42 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
sellers like Amazon.com and BarnesandNoble.com, and will also allow you to
use highly targeted traffic-building techniques.
Setting up a bookstore online gives you some leeway with distributors as
compared to other online business opportunities. Typically, book distributors
grant longer terms of credit than other distributors or wholesalers. This is
great, since books can sit in your inventory for extended periods of time. You
don’t want to have to pay for stock that does not turn a profit for your online
business.
To help enhance your online bookstore, you should try to develop a database of value-added reading for each selection you have listed on your site. This
could be anything from author reviews and biographies to a chapter excerpt or
table of contents. Whatever you decide to use to help enhance the listings on
your online bookstore Web site, you will be adding more value to the products
that you offer, which ultimately could decide whether a consumer will purchase
the product or not.
SKILLS NEEDED
If you decide to launch a specialized online bookstore, you should have knowledge of the particular subject and you should understand what your target
market’s needs are. You will need to learn the retail book business—returns,
remainders, and so on.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Costs to set up this type of business can run anywhere from a low of about
$3,000 for Web site design, development, and hosting (where the business is
basically a member of Amazon or another bookstore’s affiliate program and
provides recommendations and links to specific books), to a setup cost in the
millions for the design, development, and setup of the next Amazon.com. An
online bookstore where you set up your own storefront and carry a small inventory will likely cost you between $3,000 and $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
You can start this business with one person. In the beginning, this type of business could be run on a part-time basis.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has high international potential.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 or 4 is most appropriate for this type of business if you are
operating a storefront or catalogue. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 42 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 43
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
A common issue that most online bookstores face is having an efficient delivery
service. If you tell your clients that your products are available for shipment
within a 24-hour period, you should follow through with it. Nothing displeases
customers more than having a purchase arrive two to three weeks after they
have made a purchase. To offer the best possible shipping methods for your
customers, investigate your local postal carrier for the most effective way to
ship your products.
Keeping inventory information current on your Web site is critical.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
send referral business to your bookstore, it would also increase the overall
awareness of your site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market will send high volumes of traffic to your
Web site. Your banner ads could contain coupons for specific titles.
• You should enable visitors to tell friends about certain book selections
directly from your site via e-mail. This viral marketing technique is a
great way to increase traffic to your Web site.
• A comprehensive link strategy should be developed and implemented.
Links should be developed from cybermalls, meta-indexes, and sites that
relate to your bookstore’s niche.
• You should develop a mail list where you will provide news on new
releases, reviews, and author interviews.
• You could consider developing a loyalty program for frequent shoppers.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to selling books, you might also consider selling other, related products such as bookmarks, book bags, or coffee mugs. Gift wrapping and custom
Part 2 betas.pmd 43 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
44 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
cards could be additional services that you could provide to customers who are
sending books directly to friends as gifts. You could offer gift certificates as
well. These added features would enhance your Web site’s overall appeal.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Amazon.com
http://www.amazon.com
Amazon.com is arguably the world’s most famous online bookstore.
Adventurous Traveler Bookstore
http://atb.away.com/index.html
A great specialty bookstore that targets a particular market segment.
11. Business Opportunity Center
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Developing a business opportunity center is a great resource for your target
market and a good way to bring in some additional income. On this site, people
can post resumes and businesses can post available opportunities. You can earn
money by selling advertising on your site and by allowing businesses to subscribe to your site, whereby they receive information pertinent to their needs,
or you can allow businesses to feature their opportunity (e.g., franchise). In
addition, you could provide resources for people looking for employment as
well as entrepreneurial resources.
SKILLS NEEDED
If you are focusing on business opportunities within a specific sector, such as
the dental industry, then knowledge of the industry is necessary. If you are
going to provide a general business opportunity site, a general knowledge of
computers, the Internet, and Internet marketing is what you need.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
To set up this informational resource, your costs will primarily consist of Web
site design, development, promotion, research, and regular site maintenance.
You will have computer hardware and software costs. You will likely have a
database development cost, as all your opportunities likely will be stored in a
searchable database. Expect costs to fall between $4,000 and $10,000.
Part 2 betas.pmd 44 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 45
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One person can administer this business. Depending on the activity of the site,
it’s possible to do it part-time. You may wish to have an additional person to
assist with site maintenance and visitor inquiries.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business offers very little international potential. In fact, as a small operation you may wish to focus on your local area rather than compete directly with
the countrywide opportunity sites.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. If you want to automate the input process so that anyone can submit an opportunity and have it listed
for a fee, you may want to use a level 3 model. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Make sure you have a plan laid out before you approach this topic—know how
revenue will be generated and who the potential clients are in your area. Be
aware that maintaining up-to-date information requires organization. You might
want to look at a fully automated style for this business.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participate in newsgroups, mailing lists, and discussion forums related
to entrepreneurship or business with a cleverly designed signature file.
• Develop links from as many business-related Web sites, meta-indexes,
and directories as possible.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Establish links to your site from
the classified sections of regional online publications.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participate in business- and entrepreneur-related e-zines. You can do
this by writing articles to be published in the e-zine or by purchasing
advertising in the online publications.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Part 2 betas.pmd 45 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
46 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income would surround the sales of any products and services you
offer that complement the primary function of your business. Perhaps you could
offer resume writing or business plan development services. You may even choose
to sell products relating to your topic, such as books on resume writing or
business development.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Bizopp.com—Business Opportunity Center
http://www.bizopp.com
A nice-looking business opportunity site with plenty of resources.
Business Opportunities Classifieds Online (BOC Online)
http://www.boconline.com
A list of business opportunity classifieds.
12. Business Broker
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The number of people who want to go into business for themselves is increasing every day. There are thousands of potential entrepreneurs and investors
searching for new business opportunities daily. This provides you with the perfect opportunity to capitalize on this entrepreneurship frenzy. There are two
ways that you can approach this type of business. One is very simplistic; the
other is more complex.
The simplistic approach to starting this business is by providing a listing of
potential business opportunities on your Web site. To generate revenue, you
can charge businesses a monthly or annual fee for having their business listed
on your site. You can then offer businesses the opportunity to purchase banner
ads on your site or to enhance their listings with a company logo, e-mail links,
or direct links to their Web site. This is a very simple and easy approach to
launching this type of business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 46 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 47
The more complex approach to starting your own online business brokerage firm is by actively seeking business opportunities for business buyers and
investors to review. This requires a more in-depth knowledge of business fundamentals and excellent sales skills, as you are ultimately negotiating to sell
someone else’s business. Revenue is typically generated on a percentage-of-sales
basis when you operate at this level. You typically list the businesses that you
are selling directly on your Web site at no charge. You do this to expose the
business opportunities to potential buyers.
SKILLS NEEDED
The skills necessary to launch this type of business vary depending on which
approach you take. If you go with the more simplistic approach, experience
with marketing online would be a definite asset, as you are going to want to
actively promote your Web site and generate substantial traffic. If you decide to
take the more complex approach, knowledge of business valuations would be
an asset. There are also several designations available for business brokers. If
you were to obtain one of these designations, you would add tremendous credibility to your business brokerage firm.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Since you are providing a service that has no tangible inventory, your initial
costs will be minimal. You will need a computer and appropriate software, of
course. Initial costs will also include the design, development, and hosting of
your Web site. The cost to start this type of business ranges from $3,000 to
$10,000. If you take the simplistic approach, you are going to face more extensive costs associated with the development of your site in that a database will
need to be designed and developed to list the businesses for sale. You will also
need a strategy to develop considerable Web site traffic, as people are not going
to pay to have their site listed on a site that receives no traffic. If you take the
more complex approach, you will face different costs: You will have to develop
professional marketing collateral and invest more in research and business promotion to find businesses that are looking to sell.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business will depend on
which approach you take. The simpler approach can be started by one person part-time. The more complex business should have a full-time person
ready and available to communicate with clients and meet with them at their
convenience.
Part 2 betas.pmd 47 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
48 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential, as business investments are of
interest to people all over the world. Using the Internet as a medium to promote
this type of business makes the potential for international investment even greater.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
If you decide to use a more simplistic approach to this type of business, you
should do whatever you can to develop traffic to your Web site. People are not
going to want to purchase advertising or a listing on your site if you are not
receiving any Web site traffic.
If you are taking a more complex approach to this business, you should
monitor the quality of businesses that you are trying to sell. It can take months,
even years, to close a business sale, so you want to ensure that you are not
wasting any time on a business that will not provide you with a return on your
investment. This is especially important because you are typically receiving payment based on sales commissions.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your target
audience would be a great way to increase the traffic to your Web site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on business- and
investment-related Web sites would generate targeted exposure for your
business.
• Develop links from as many Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to business and investments as possible.
• Participating in mail lists and discussion groups related to business and
investments would be a great way to communicate with your target
market.
• Purchasing advertising in or contributing articles to e-zines related to
your target market would help generate exposure and would enhance
the professionalism of your brokerage firm.
Part 2 betas.pmd 48 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 49
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to providing brokerage services, you may also want to offer consulting services for struggling businesses. This would be a great way to earn
additional income and would also add credibility to your brokerage services.
You can provide business valuation services to businesses interested in selling, and you can help procure financing for those interested in purchasing a
business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Business Brokers Network
http://www.bbn-net.com
America’s largest business brokerage Web site, BBN-Net is the Net’s largest
database of quality businesses for sale.
International Business Brokers Association
http://www.ibba.org
IBBA is the largest international not-for-profit association operating exclusively
for the benefit of people and firms engaged in the various aspects of business
brokerage, and mergers and acquisitions.
13. Business Plan Writing Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
There are an abundance of budding entrepreneurs out there with great ideas
but who lack the writing and organizational skills to produce a professional
business plan. The Internet is the ideal medium to provide this service, so why
not create a business plan writing service online?
Start-up businesses pay thousands of dollars to have business plans developed when they are trying to get a loan or receive funding for new projects. A
poorly written business plan can seriously hinder the chances of receiving money
Part 2 betas.pmd 49 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
50 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
from anyone, which is why most businesses choose to have their business plans
written professionally. Since this market refreshes itself, there is a tremendous
opportunity to make a lot of money with this business.
SKILLS NEEDED
Expert writing skills and knowledge of regular business practices are a minimum requirement for operating this type of business. The ability to develop
financial projections can be developed through your business, may be outsourced,
or would be provided by the client. Knowledge of how to work with bank
officers and lenders is also an asset.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The costs associated with starting this type of business range from $3,000 to
$4,500. This covers the cost to design, build, and host your Web site as well as
the necessary investment in computer hardware and software. Additional costs
may result from promoting your services online and offline, as well as overhead
costs such as office supplies and telecommunications bills.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One full-time capable writer is needed to run this form of business. It can initially be started as a part-time endeavor.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has some international potential. Not only will people in your
country be interested in this service, internationals looking to invest in your
country may also need a professional business plan prepared.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
A common problem with start-up operations is that banks and other lenders
are unwilling to invest in the business idea. When this happens, entrepreneurs
often abandon the business idea along with any commitments they have made
while trying to start the business. This could seriously affect your business, so
to avoid this problem you should ask for a 30 to 50 percent deposit up front.
You can collect the remainder of the fee when the business plan has been
completed.
Part 2 betas.pmd 50 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 51
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Establish links from as many
business- and entrepreneur-related Web sites, meta-indexes, and directories as possible.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to online business, entrepreneurship, or business financing.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Launch a small-business advice column on your site to draw repeat
traffic from entrepreneurs. Ask site visitors if they’d like to be notified
when it is updated or if they’d like to receive a copy via e-mail. You
could provide your advice column or articles to appropriate e-zines or
opt-in mail lists as long as they provide you and your Web site with
exposure.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to writing business plans, you could also develop a referral service
to other business service providers such as bookkeepers and tax preparers. You
can receive a referral fee for every company that you refer to these businesses,
and they could do the same for you. This is a great way for your business to
receive some additional income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
New Century Marketing Concepts
http://www.insmkt.com/plan.htm
A great business that offers business plan writing services.
GrowThink.com
http://www.growthink.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 51 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
52 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
A dynamite business that offers business plan writing and venture development
services.
14. Cartoon/Joke Writer
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
There are many options available to you online if you have a knack for humor
or cartoon sketching. A common trend found across humor sites is the inclusion of an opt-in mail list—a joke of the day, quote of the week, or the like.
Many sites make their money by allowing other companies to sponsor their
mail list or newsletter based on a CPM (cost per thousand) basis. These sites
also often sell banner advertising opportunities as well. Some of these sites will
allow reproduction of the cartoons or jokes they develop for a fee.
As a freelance artist, you have the option of doing custom work for other
companies that they could then include in their media. Depending on your objectives, you may wish to expand your services to include Web icon design,
gifts, cards, advertising, and apparel.
SKILLS NEEDED
Well-developed artistic or written skills, combined with a knack for humor.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Web development and promotion costs will play a role in your start-up costs.
Investment in equipment to develop the creative side of the business will also
have to be incurred if you do not already own items such as a scanner or graphic
editing software. Expect costs to run between $3,000 and $6,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This is a one-person business. This business can start as a part-time endeavor.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
International potential exists, but only if the foreign culture is similar to your
own. What you may find funny, others may not. Also, if you’re focusing on
current happenings, these happenings may not be of great interest to foreign
countries.
Part 2 betas.pmd 52 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 53
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Copyright issues need to be addressed. If you are charging for the use of your
cartoons, ensure that your contracts are very clear in the usage rights you are
granting. Make it very clear whether the client has the exclusive rights, unlimited usage, or single usage rights.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Partner with popular e-zines to include your businesses jokes with their
online e-zine distribution, identifying you as the source and providing a
link to your Web site.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to online advertising or the industries that your ad network targets.
• Online press release distribution and regular contributions to periodicals and publications will be a great asset when promoting your
business.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate phrases
with the popular search engines.
• Develop links from as many comedy- or joke-related Web sites, metaindexes, and directories as possible.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can earn additional income by developing your own line of merchandise
that depicts your comedic material and then selling it online or offline at local
events, fairs, flea markets, and so on.
Part 2 betas.pmd 53 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
54 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Funnyjokes.com
http://www.funnyjokes.com
A site containing clean humor, dirty jokes, tasteless cartoons, comic strips, greeting cards, free downloads, and a large daily mailing list.
Joke-of-the-Day.com
http://www.joke-of-the-day.com
All kinds of humor can be found here, including a few large mail lists. Their
Joke-of-the-Day mail list has over a million subscribers.
15. Classified Ads
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Building an online classified ads business is proving to be a very successful
concept. While people generally expect to be able to post text-based ads for
free, you can generate income by allowing people to post enhanced advertisements (e.g., ads with pictures) or classified ads with hypertext links to a Web
site. Additional revenue would come from direct advertising sales (e.g., banner
ads). An option you may wish to consider is setting up an e-mail system for
your users, where they can register for a free e-mail account. You could then
send them advertisements based on their opt-in preferences.
Coupons, auctions, real estate information, and so on, are all related topics
that would be appropriate for your site.
SKILLS NEEDED
All you need is the drive to succeed, basic computer skills, and a knowledge of
Internet marketing.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Most of your costs will be attributed to Web design, development, and the
initial promotion for your site. You will likely incur database development costs
as well, because your site should include a searchable database of the various
classified ads. Initial costs will likely run between $4,000 and $12,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One employee is needed to run this business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 54 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 55
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is lots of international potential for this type of business.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Organization is your biggest concern. A lot of confusion can come about from
having a site with users posting classified ads. Clearly state the guidelines for
posting and maintaining ads. You also have to be on the watch for inappropriate postings.
It will require a greater investment, but you might want to have a fully
automated site developed where, upon paying a fee, the client has access to a
form to enter the text and any graphics to be included in his or her ad.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop as many links as possible from related Web sites, meta-indexes,
and directories.
• You should consider having your site listed with various cybermalls
that are frequented by your target market.
• Participate in newsgroups, mailing lists, and discussion forums where
you could easily promote your business with a cleverly designed signature file.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can generate additional revenue by selling sponsorship opportunities for
your mail list. Your mail list should encourage participation from your Web site
by asking if the visitor would like to be notified when you update your classifieds
or when a particular type of item is posted.
You can generate banner advertising revenue from your site. If you have
high traffic volumes, your classified advertisers will be happy and your banner
advertisers will generate higher revenue for you.
Part 2 betas.pmd 55 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
56 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Buy & Sell Online Classifieds
http://www.buysell.com
A Canadian buy-and-sell classified ads site.
The Ad Net!
http://www.theadnet.com
Internet classified advertising.
16. Collector Store—Rare Books and Records Finder
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
There are many people online who collect rare books, memorabilia, and antique items. A large number of these people head to the Web in search of what
they want. If you’re an enthusiast in this area, what better way to earn some
extra money than using your knowledge of the subject to help others out in
their search? The Internet is one of the first places people go to look for these
types of items these days. You could also set up all or part of your site as an
auction site where people can sell their items on your Web site. You would take
a commission of the final sale or require users to pay an up-front fee (safer) to
list their item.
SKILLS NEEDED
You would need to have an extensive knowledge of rare books, memorabilia,
music, or other collectors’ items, and would need to know their value and where
to find them.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The costs to start this business will include a computer, scanner, appropriate
business software, Web design, development, and hosting, as well as storefront
software. Total cost for the aforementioned could be $3,000 to $10,000. Other
costs may include purchasing product for resale, and these costs are all dependent on what you carry and how much you carry as inventory. You might also
want to consider purchasing a digital camera to capture graphics of the items
you have available for sale.
Part 2 betas.pmd 56 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 57
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
This is a business you will likely run as a one-person operation; it can even be
run on a part-time basis.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is lots of international potential in this business.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The level of e-business is dependent on what products and services you offer and
how they are offered. If you provide a finder service, then level 1 is appropriate.
If you offer only a few products for sale, then level 2 or 3 is appropriate. If a
storefront is appropriate given the number of products you are selling, then level
3 is the appropriate model. If you are running an auction as well, you will want
specialized software that you will likely want to be integrated with your backend systems. For this you will want level 4. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
If your site follows the auction format and you plan to charge a commission on
sales, be sure you have a secure system in place to ensure that you get paid.
Know how you will track sales and how you will receive payment. If you are
going to provide a search service, be sure you have the right connections and
are able to quickly access items your clients are looking for.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Music sites, book sites, rarity
sites, collectibles sites, and so on, are all appropriate locations to get
yourself linked. Don’t ignore relevant meta-indexes either.
• Participate in newsgroups, discussion forums, and mailing lists related
to collectors, rare books and coins, memorabilia, and music with a cleverly designed signature file.
• Practice permission marketing by asking visitors if they would like to be
notified via e-mail when you offer new products of the type they are
interested in.
• Develop a mail list with news on new products and articles of interest to
collectors. Prominently display your Subscribe button throughout your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 57 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
58 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Provide a “Tell a Friend” program that would allow visitors to send an
e-mail regarding any of your products to their friends.
• Links from cybermalls that focus on collectibles would be very appropriate for this type of business and could lead to significant traffic.
• Web ring participation should also be considered. There are all kinds of
Web rings that focus on these types of products.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Think of all the items that go along with the territory. You can sell artwork
reproductions or antique audio equipment, and maybe even perform restoration services if you have the necessary skills. Consider launching your own
online publication too!
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Record Finders
http://www.recordfinders.com
A publication, but they also sell paraphernalia for out-of-print vinyl records
and the music industry.
Bibliofind
http://www.bibliofind.com
They have a huge selection of old and rare books.
17. Commercial Cleaning
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
This type of business would operate offline, but would use the Web as a communication and promotional medium with its target market. Your Web site
would promote your services, and you might decide to include a free-quote
Part 2 betas.pmd 58 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 59
option or the ability to set up corporate accounts online. A few of the services
you could include are:
• Carpet cleaning
• Furniture cleaning
• Wall washing
• Floor cleaning
• Draperies cleaning
• Water, smoke, and fire damage restoration
• Air-quality testing.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of cleaning supplies and what works best in certain situations would
be a valuable asset. You may need to acquire certification to do some tasks,
such as air-quality testing or specific types of cleaning.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The development of your Web site and promotional materials will factor into
your start-up costs. Any cleaning supplies needed and certification courses you
are required to take will also factor in. Expect start-up costs to be between
$1,000 and $3,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This depends on how much business you plan to take on. You can get started
with yourself, and as business picks up you can slowly expand your work force.
This type of operation can be started as a part-time business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is very little international potential. Most of your business will be derived for your immediate area or surrounding communities.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 59 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
60 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Do your research. This is a very popular business idea, so you will want to
understand who your competition is. You do not want to get involved in a
business area that is overly saturated.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to commercial
cleaning.
• Develop links from as many Web sites, meta-indexes, and directories
related to commercial cleaning as possible. You should also have your
site listed in as many online business directories as possible. You will
want to focus on those that target your geographic area.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• To increase repeat traffic, you might want to develop a newsletter offering helpful cleaning tips. This will encourage people to visit your site
and find out more about your products and services.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
If you are considering expanding your business into other product or service
areas, you could generate additional income by selling cleaning products and
supplies. If you want to expand the business itself, then you might consider
setting up franchise opportunities.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Regina’s Maids
http://www.reginasmaids.com
A cleaning company located in Hoboken, NJ. They offer residential and corporate cleaning services to the tri-state area.
Part 2 betas.pmd 60 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 61
Capital Cleaning Services, Inc.
http://www.capitalcleaning.com
This is a Chicago-based business cleaning service for office, retail, and manufacturing buildings.
18. Community Events Web Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
This business takes advantage of several of the primary strengths of the Internet—dynamic presentation of information, easy updatability, and quick and
easy accessibility. Community events usually are posted in the newspaper or
occasionally are advertised on television. Finding and attending one of these
events can be quite a hassle, especially for people working in an office all day.
The purpose of a community event Web site is to provide easy, up-to-date access to a complete list of community events. By using the Internet to dynamically present this information, you will gain a significant advantage over
newspapers and television. With the right online marketing strategy, you will
have a lot of traffic. You will make your money primarily through advertising.
SKILLS NEEDED
Your staff must have basic computer skills. An ability to program in HTML
and design graphics would be useful if you don’t want to go through the time
and expense to have a user-friendly database developed. You will want to develop online marketing expertise, as the more traffic you attract to your site,
the greater your revenue will be.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
This is a relatively easy and inexpensive business to start online. You will need
to invest in a computer, appropriate software, Web site design, development,
and hosting. You should also invest in marketing both online and offline to
create exposure and traffic for your site. Start-up costs will range from $3,000
to $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed depends on the skills of your employees. You
will need at least one of each of the following: a Web developer, a graphic
Part 2 betas.pmd 61 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
62 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
designer, and someone to keep your information up to date. A highly skilled
and dedicated individual could perform all three jobs.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential of your business is extremely low. Only tourists
visiting your city and looking for something to do during their stay would be
interested in your site.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. If you choose to
sell tickets for events online as well, then you will need to expand your service
to a minimum of level 3 or level 4. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since you are providing an information service, it is imperative that your information be up to the minute and constantly updated. This should be relatively
easy, however, since your basic service is effectively free advertising for those
interested in exposure for their event. If you choose to allow for online ordering
of tickets, then you will need to arrange a place for your customers to pick the
tickets up or a delivery mechanism.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Asking if your customers would like to be kept updated via e-mail on
events in a specific field of interest is a great way to implement permission marketing.
• Develop coupons and discounts for various events to be used as an incentive. Ask site visitors if they would like to join your mail list to regularly receive these coupons and specials.
• You might also consider using a viral marketing technique like “Tell a
Friend.” This will allow your customers to promote your site to their
friends.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Request links from as many local Web sites as possible by offering them in return access to the updated information for their site visitors from your site.
• Develop a banner advertising campaign targeting local sites that get a
lot of traffic. Having your banner ad prominently displayed on local
Part 2 betas.pmd 62 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 63
newspaper sites generally is effective. Quite often you can trade the
banner placement for a weekly posting of your Calendar of Events in
their newspaper.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
A way to expand your service is to allow for the online ordering of tickets to the
events through your Web site. Depending on how you choose to do this, it
could work one of two ways. You could make the ticket providers pay for the
privilege of offering their tickets through your service. However, unless you are
well known and have a significant volume of Web site traffic, this is unlikely to
work. Usually you will charge a small fee to the purchaser for your efforts. You
could provide Calendar of Events listings for free but charge a fee if they want
a hypertext link to their site or enhanced graphics.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
The Maine Events Scheduler
http://maineevents.com
A list of events in the state of Maine.
Toronto.com
http://www.toronto.com
A beautiful site that covers most things you would want to do in the Toronto
area. Plus it provides information on the events themselves.
19. Concierge Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
As the number of jet-set traveling business-people rises, a serious demand develops for concierge services that originate online and then turn into a hightouch service once the client is within your geographic area. Today’s online
concierge service has many advantages over what the word previously meant.
The client finds and interacts with you through your Web site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 63 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
64 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Here’s how it works: Clients can e-mail you their schedule, tell you what
they would like for a grocery list and where they might like to make dinner
reservations, tell you what they need copied and couriered, tell you what transportation needs they have, and so on. You provide all the services that an assistant, housekeeper, and personal planner would, and you charge for your services
based on the added value of having all these services done by one business or
capable individual. It saves tons of time for a business traveler, and it’s becoming popular.
SKILLS NEEDED
To operate this business, you need a personable manner and an organized method
of doing things. Your clients will look to you for advice on how to best get
along in the new city they have come to work in. Having knowledge of the area
and knowing how to make a business traveler comfortable will ensure that you
succeed in this business. You will need basic Web publishing skills to update
your Web site and proper writing skills so your communication with clients is
concise and professional.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this business will include a computer, appropriate software,
and a printer. You will also incur costs related to the design, development, and
marketing of your Web site. Suggested costs for these expenses is $3,000 to
$7,000. There are no inventory or overhead costs that come out of pocket
before your client pays for your services, so this business is perfect for someone
looking to start from scratch.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
To begin, you will need only one capable and organized part-time person. If
you become busy, however, you will have to hire more help in order to continue
to deliver high-touch personalized service.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is international potential for this business. Foreign visitors may be particularly in need of your services.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is ideal for concierge services. There is no need for online
payment processing because the client pays you directly. For more information,
see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 64 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 65
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
In this business you want to be a careful money monitor. You may want to
get a retainer upon signing the contract for out-of-pocket expenses. The client will be asking you to complete services that require paying up front, such
as photocopying, dry cleaning, and buying groceries. You should have a budget for all the expenses and make sure you are not losing any profit due to
poor bookkeeping. Remember that the service you are providing should be
tailored to the individual. It’s your job to make their days run as smoothly as
possible. If you master this, many more jobs could come your way. It’s a
great business for referrals. You want to have your responsibilities and your
client’s budget and expectations for specific expenses clearly laid out in a
contract.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate links with descriptive
text describing your services on the main business services sites in your
area—for example, the local chamber of commerce Web site. Get listed
and linked from the regional online directories and publications that
have content geared for the business traveler.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Gather client testimonials and publish these on your Web site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income could certainly come from tipping, which is widely practiced in this business. Other ways to increase your income are broadening your
services to include more sophisticated skills such as taking notes at meetings
and becoming more of an administrative assistant than a concierge. Once you
have a working relationship with each client, providing all the services humanly possible for them will be the source of additional income. It all depends
on how flexible you are.
Part 2 betas.pmd 65 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
66 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE EXAMPLE
Worldwide Assistance
http://www.worldwideassistance.com/concierge.htm
Virtual assistant and concierge services provided internationally.
Theconciergeforyou.com (Figure 2.2).
20. Cookbooks and Recipes
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The popularity of online cooking and recipe Web sites is growing constantly.
Similar to purchasing a traditional offline cookbook at a bookstore, many people
are now turning to the Web to find their latest recipes and purchase their cookbooks online.
There are a few ways that you can generate revenue with this type of business. Since your site will receive highly targeted traffic, you will provide an
Figure 2.2. An excellent example of an online concierge service.
Part 2 betas.pmd 66 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 67
excellent advertising opportunity for cooking, food, or kitchen-related businesses. You can sell cookbooks and other cooking-related publications directly
from your site. You can also charge a membership fee for this type of business
whereby only members would be able to access certain sections of the site by
way of a user ID and password.
This type of business also gives you a tremendous opportunity to practice
permission marketing. You can ask people if they would like to be notified
when you make updates to your Web site or if they would like to receive daily
recipes via e-mail. This will encourage people to return to your site often and
will also provide you with another advertising opportunity to offer cooking,
food, or kitchen-related businesses. If you send out a daily or weekly newsletter, you could sell advertising space in your newsletter to cooking-related businesses. You may choose to develop a niche for yourself in this area. You could
develop a heart smart cooking site, a low-cal cooking site, or a macrobiotic
diet site.
SKILLS NEEDED
Since you will be offering your visitors cooking advice and recipes, knowledge
of different foods and cooking techniques would be an asset. This will enable
you to answer any questions your visitors may ask. The more you know about
cooking, the more professional your business will appear.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design and hosting of your Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner (to scan your cookbook covers),
and a printer. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up
costs will be considerably lower. If you plan on setting up a comprehensive
mailing list system, you will also have to purchase mailing list software to help
you organize and maintain your mail lists. Other costs that you will incur are
related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $5,000 to $10,000
to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One dedicated individual can run this type of business. You can start this venture while keeping your regular full-time job until your business’s revenue surpasses your current income.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. New recipes and cooking techniques are of interest to people all over the world.
Part 2 betas.pmd 67 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
68 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
Since you will be selling traditional offline cookbooks directly from your site,
e-business level 2 or 3 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information on this, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You should ensure that the recipes that you publish on your site and in your
cookbooks are original and have not been copied directly from another source.
This is an issue that many cooking sites have faced in the past. To avoid copyright issues, always get permission in writing and cite where you have received
the recipe from. This will avoid any future conflicts that you may face with
competing businesses or copyrighted cooking publications.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to cooking
would be a great way to generate traffic to your Web site. Always make
a valuable contribution, and always include your signature file with a
great tagline.
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could include cooking sites, foodrelated sites, and kitchen accessory sites.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Send This Recipe
to a Friend” via your site. This will spread the word about your site.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for a free
cookbook. You could ask people if they would like to be notified of the
winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage them to return to your
site to reenter your contest, thus re-exposing them to your site.
• Develop a discussion board on your site where visitors can interact with
one another about cooking, great recipes, and past food experiences.
This is a great way to encourage people to return to your site, as they
will love to participate in your virtual cooking community. You can
even participate in the discussion, which enables you to interact with
your potential customers.
• You could choose to have a Visiting Chefs section on your site where
you could profile a celebrity chef and provide some of his or her secret
Part 2 betas.pmd 68 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 69
recipes. You might choose to post in advance the celebrity chef calendar
and ask people if they’d like to be notified when you update the calendar. If you wanted to incorporate some higher-end technology, you could
have a live webcast or downloadable video accessible from your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could generate additional income for your cookbook and recipe site by
selling a database of your favorite recipes on CD-ROM. This would be similar
to your cookbooks. However, the low costs of developing this product would
dramatically increase the overall revenue for your business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
The Kitchen Link
http://www.kitchenlink.com
This is a large recipe site that uses several online marketing techniques to keep
traffic coming to its site, including a newsletter, a mailing list, discussion boards,
and a cooking advice column.
RecipeCenter.com
http://www.recipecenter.com
A dynamite recipe Web site with thousands of great recipes for visitors to read.
A great feature about this site is that they have a “Tell a Friend” option, which
enables them to practice viral marketing. Visitors can e-mail up to five friends
at once to tell them about RecipeCenter.com, and if they do, their name is
entered in a drawing for a free cookbook. This is a great strategy!
21. Copy Writing
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Today advertisers are realizing that cleverly written copy can seriously affect
the responsiveness to their ads and marketing collateral. Online and offline
content has to be designed in a cleverly written manner to induce the reader to
Part 2 betas.pmd 69 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
70 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
purchase the business’s products or services, or otherwise do what the advertiser wants them to do. If you have excellent writing skills and have advertising
copy-writing experience, this could be the ideal business venture for you.
SKILLS NEEDED
Excellent writing skills and past experience with writing creative advertising
copy are essential to operating this type of business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Since you are providing a service that has no inventory, your initial costs will be
minimal. You will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site. You will have to invest in an appropriate computer, software, a scanner, and a printer. Other costs that you will incur are associated with promoting
your copy-writing service online and offline. The cost to start this type of business will generally range from $4,000 to $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One full-time employee is needed to run this type of business. If your business
requests exceed what you’re capable of handling, you might consider hiring an
additional employee.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
It is important to remember that if you are writing copy for a company from
another culture, you should understand the culture for which you are writing
the copy. In many instances advertising firms have designed and implemented a
marketing campaign before understanding what the culture was all about. This
has resulted in offending millions of individuals with advertisements that offend the home country’s culture. If you decide to take on any international
projects, make sure you do your research first before you write your advertising
copy. One bad experience could seriously hinder the future of your copy-writing business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 70 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 71
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to marketing
and advertising with a cleverly designed signature file.
• Participating in advertising and marketing-related mailing lists would
enable you to display your expertise while directing traffic to your
Web site.
• Develop links from as many advertising, marketing, and business-service-related Web sites, meta-indexes, and directories as possible.
• Participate in marketing related e-zines through contribution of appropriate articles that feature your expertise and knowledge of your craft.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
To earn additional income, you might want to consider offering graphic design services to your clients. Since this would complement your copy-writing
service, you would be able to develop extensive promotional pieces for your
clients.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
2Hot Designs
http://www.2hotdesigns.com
2Hot Designs is an image creation firm that specializes in Web design, graphic
design, and creative copy-writing services.
Nick Usborne
http://www.nickusborne.com
Nick Usborne is a copy-writing business specializing in a strategic approach to
copy writing online. They write and edit content to ensure that the message is
concise, effective, and effortless.
Part 2 betas.pmd 71 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
72 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
22. Coupon Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Everyone loves to save money. That is why we are witnessing the emergence of
coupon networks online, where consumers can easily visit the site, view coupons, print them, and use them in a traditional offline store. Coupon networks
can be targeted at both national and regional audiences, depending on your
online objectives and marketing budget.
How does it work? It’s simple. You charge businesses to advertise their
coupons on your site. You then promote your site to the area that you are
targeting (whether it be national or regional) and encourage your visitors to use
the coupons available on your Web site. It’s as easy as that!
SKILLS NEEDED
Strong online marketing skills would be an asset to run this type of business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $4,000 to $50,000.
Start-up costs include computer hardware and software, a scanner, and a printer.
Initially you will also have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of
your Web site. You may want to develop a fully automated system where customers can have password-controlled access to forms online to input their coupons and pay for coupon placement. The development costs for the program
would vary depending on the complexity. All additional costs are associated
with promoting your business online and offline.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can be started with one person. However, to attract lots of
visitors to your site and encourage them to come back often, you will want
lots of coupons on your site. This is not easily accomplished by only one
person.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Since different countries have different pricing strategies and currencies, this
type of business does not have strong international potential. It is better suited
for a national or regional market.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business initially. If you
go for the fully automated system, you will want to progress to level 2. For
more information on this, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 72 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 73
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Many of your coupon advertisers will provide repeat business for your coupon
network if they get a good response; therefore, it is important to develop strong
relationships with these advertisers and make sure a lot of their coupons are
responded to. It is important to provide guidelines and tips on what makes an
effective coupon. Don’t do anything that may jeopardize your relationship with
these advertisers as it may hinder the chances of their doing repeat business with
your organization. One bad experience can turn multiple advertisers away from
doing business with your coupon network. To ensure that you avoid this problem, you should consider implementing a strategic customer relationship management system.
Many of the people accessing the site will be home users and may have dialup access. Large graphic files will take longer to download. The longer the
download time, the more likely it is that the visitor will click away before the
Web page is viewed. With coupons being graphic intensive, it is important that
you have restrictions on acceptable file sizes to ensure quick and easy access to
all pages of your site.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate links from as many
related topic-specific Web sites, local Web sites with high traffic, appropriate directories, and meta-indexes as possible.
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could include geographically targeted
Web sites or industry-specific sites.
• Develop your own personal mailing list to communicate with your site
visitors. You could ask people if they would like to be notified when
you update the coupons offered on your site. This is a great permission
marketing technique to increase the repeat traffic to your Web site.
• Develop a banner advertising campaign where your banners are the
actual coupons from your site. These banners would be strategically
placed on appropriate sites.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Send This Coupon
to a Friend” via your site. This will help to spread the word about your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 73 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
74 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You might consider developing a coupon book that would be printed and sold
offline. These are popular with fund raisers and would be a natural add-on for
this type of business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
CouponNetwork.ca
http://www.couponnetwork.ca
This is a dynamite coupon site for consumers in Nova Scotia, Canada.
CoolSavings.com
http://www.coolsavings.com
CoolSavings.com is a very popular U.S. coupon site offering a wide range of
coupons to its consumers.
23. Craft Store
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Online craft sites became popular as soon as the Internet became a household
reality. One of the greatest benefits of the craft industry is the variety of items
and the fact that they can be made at home. Much like the art market, customers will buy a craft based on their own preferences. They will tend to look at
many sites before finding one that they like.
The content on the site should make each craft seem unique in every way,
and there should be contests and interactive features throughout the Web site
that keep the users coming back and entertained.
At start-up your craft store will most likely include only the products you
produce yourself. However, if you know other people who produce crafts, you
can ask if they would be interested in having their products sold online. Since
your main source of income will be from selling crafts through your Web site, it
Part 2 betas.pmd 74 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 75
is in your interest to work out a deal with your colleagues where you get paid a
commission if and when their products are sold.
SKILLS NEEDED
The homemade craft industry operates in a unique and insular fashion. A broad
familiarity with people in the homemade craft industry as well as a fairly comprehensive knowledge of the products will be required to gain the respect of the
people involved and should be considered basic skills for this project. You will
need Web publishing and digital imaging skills. You will have to manage the
online store, process payments, and interact with customers regarding their
orders and shipping details.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $3,000 to $7,000.
Your initial setup costs will include a personal computer, a scanner or digital
camera, and the appropriate software to process the images and publish them
on the Web site. You will also need to have your own Web site designed, developed, and hosted. Additional costs associated with opening your own business
are the promoting of your business online and offline. If you have your own
computer, then you can reduce your expenses accordingly.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This type of business can easily be started as a one-person part-time venture
from the comfort of your home.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Crafts are already an international industry. In fact, you should be prepared to
have people all over the world showing interest and purchasing your crafts,
depending on their size and the cost of shipping.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The value of crafts is a disputed topic. The prices should be reasonable and
competitive with other craft sites on the Web. Make sure to align yourself
with crafters who produce quality goods that do not get damaged easily during shipment.
Part 2 betas.pmd 75 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
76 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Start an affiliate program where others can recommend and provide a
link to your site. You will have to pay a referral fee for every order that
comes to you via your associates’ links.
• Joining or operating a Web ring related to crafts will likely generate
substantial traffic to your site. The average person will tend to look
through a few craft sites looking for something they like.
• Use a viral marketing approach by allowing your customers to send
e-mails or screen shots to their friends of items of interest. These Tell a
Friend programs are growing in popularity.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Use permission marketing. Ask if your customers would like to be notified when the new crafts for the season are up for sale—Christmas,
Thanksgiving, and Valentine’s Day, for example.
• Approach the operators of e-mail reminder services and get them to
suggest your site as a good place to look for an affordable gift for their
clients’ loved ones.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can sell banner advertising from your site or provide sponsorship opportunities in your mail list.
24. Custom-Made Calendars
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Today, with access to the Internet, people have come to expect a certain level of
personal choice. Many people enjoy having their own personal calendar set for
personal use or as a gift for friends and relatives.
Part 2 betas.pmd 76 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 77
Custom calendars are a wonderful choice for a simple gift idea or a great way
to spruce up the office. These are wonderful gifts for parents or grandparents, as
each month or each day can have an interesting picture of the children or grandchildren. They are also great corporate gifts, where each location or each product
can be presented on each page. The custom applications are endless.
Now, with the extensive set of specialty publication software and the power of
personal computers, it can be moderately easy to set up a small publication firm.
SKILLS NEEDED
The most important set of skills needed for creating custom calendars is superior graphic design capabilities. Familiarity with the various graphics programs
available to you, particularly products like Adobe Photoshop, is a must.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $2,000 to $7,000.
Your initial setup costs include a personal computer, a photo-quality printer,
and the appropriate software. You will also need to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your Web site, and possibly your storefront solution and
merchant account setup. All additional costs are associated with promoting
your business online and offline, and purchasing and holding a limited amount
of inventory.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
This business can easily be started with one part-time individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Your market size will be large, and most English-speaking international markets will provide an opportunity. Be aware that there will be markets that are
closed to you due to language barriers.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You may be faced with significant online competition. This business has a low
cost of entry. For this reason, you many want to target your calendars toward
one particular niche of online customers. You might decide to specialize in pet
calendars or corporate calendars. Also consider what volume of calendars you
will be producing. If you turn out only a few a month, then you may wish to use
a high-quality desktop or industrial printer. However, as your volume increases,
you may need to utilize the services of a professional printing service, which
may prove costly with little room for errors.
Part 2 betas.pmd 77 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
78 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generating links from other,
related sites is an excellent way to bring targeted businesses to your
Web site. You will want to be linked from sites that cater to your target
market. You might establish links from appropriate cybermalls, giftsuggestion sites, and other appropriate directories.
• Generate a few samples to display on your Web site. Perhaps you could
include a few great testimonials on that page of your site as well.
• You might also consider using a viral marketing technique like Tell a
Friend. This will allow your customers to bring their friends to your
Web site. If they enjoy your product, they’re guaranteed to pass the
information to a friend.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You might want to participate in Web rings related to gifts or unusual
gifts or one-of-a-kind gifts.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could easily expand your product line once your calendars are selling.
With e-cards popping up everywhere on the Internet, this too could be a logical
next step for your site. You could consider custom engraving, custom e-books,
custom screen printing, custom mousepads, or other products that require the
skill sets and the technology in your organization.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Custom Made Calendars
http://www.custommadecalendars.com
This site is a good example of a custom calendar site. They have used the addition of private photos to establish a niche for themselves.
Part 2 betas.pmd 78 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 79
AmerICan Calendars
http://calendarco.com
Specialty calendars may be more appropriate than custom calendars. This is an
example of a high-volume printing operation.
25. Custom-Printed Products
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Promoting your Web site or business these days is a fully integrated process of
traditional and progressive marketing techniques. A popular way to do this is
to have the logo, URL, or business name printed on various items that we see
and touch each day—things that are kept around a computer so that your Internet address is front and center when your potential client is only a click away
from your Web site. Custom-printed products like coffee mugs, mouse pads,
sticky notes, pens, and pencils are ideal promotional items to be used as giveaways at a trade show. Many businesses are promoting their Web addresses
even more visibly on building signage, vehicle signage, or window awnings.
The Web is a perfect place to showcase and provide this service. Graphic
files with corporate logos can be zipped and sent to you via e-mail. You can
electronically send these files to all the production businesses that you hire to
fulfill each order if you choose to outsource this activity. Clients probably should
pay online for their order, but it’s not absolutely necessary.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need experience and contacts within the custom-printing business and
a firm grasp of graphic design techniques. If you decide to do the design yourself, you could save more money than if you outsourced this work.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Your initial setup costs include a personal computer and the appropriate software. You will also need to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, and possibly your storefront solution and merchant account setup. All
additional costs are associated with promoting your business online and offline.
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $3,000 to $15,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can easily be started with one part-time individual.
Part 2 betas.pmd 79 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
80 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is international potential for this type of business. You can reach businesses everywhere online, and many will be interested in this type of promotional product if it is marketed properly.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business levels 2 and 3 are most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
This business has a low cost of entry. For this reason, you may want to target
your printed products toward one particular niche of online customers. You
might decide to specialize in customized items for the workplace that promote
the company’s URL. You might decide to provide unique products for the software industry. Choose a niche that promotes heavily, has a substantial budget
for marketing, or participates in trade shows where giveaways are popular.
Make sure to keep yourself up to date on the best deals for the products you
print on, and try to arrange a preferred customer or volume discount with the
printing house you use so you can increase profits. As custom products have no
market value to anyone else, you might want to get a deposit with the orders or
have them prepaid.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate links from appropriate cybermalls, trade show supplier directories, and business product
directories.
• Generate some great samples to display on your Web site. Perhaps you
could include a few great testimonials on that page of your site as well.
• You might develop a mail list so that visitors can request notification
whenever you add new products to your product line.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop an associate/affiliate program whereby other sites can recommend your service, provide a link to your site, and receive a commission or referral fee every time a customer links through and makes
a purchase.
Part 2 betas.pmd 80 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 81
• Develop a banner advertising campaign targeted at trade show sites and
business product sites.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could easily expand your product line once your customized items are
selling. Remain open to customer suggestions and new ideas for customizing.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Mousepads.com
http://www.mousepads.com
Mousepads.com develops custom mousepads for businesses.
Giftmugs.com
http://www.giftmugs.com
Giftmugs.com prints business cards, corporate logos, and other pertinent information on mugs.
26. Cybermall Owner/Operator
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Cybermalls are Internet shopping centers and are popular online businesses. A
cybermall is basically a Web site that contains different categories of online
stores that people can visit to purchase goods and services that they are interested in. There are typically four types of cybermalls: (1) geographically specific
cybermalls (e.g., New England Craft Mall), (2) product- or service-specific
cybermalls (e.g., Outdoor Adventure Mall), (3) industry-specific cybermalls (e.g.,
Financial Services Mall), or (4) demographic-specific cybermalls (Seniors Mall).
The type of cybermall that you will start depends on your online objectives,
your target market, and the types of products and services that you sell.
Cybermalls usually offer businesses two options: (1) The business can have
its site listed in the cybermall with a link out to its Web site, or (2) the business
can have a storefront developed within the cybermall.
Part 2 betas.pmd 81 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
82 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
There are several ways that you can generate revenue with this type of
business. Typically, businesses pay the cybermall an initial setup fee for having
their site listed in the cybermall, and then they pay a monthly listing fee or a
percentage of all sales made from the referral. You can also sell advertising in
the different categories of your cybermall. This advertising is usually very appealing to online businesses as the exposure is highly targeted.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online advertising techniques is an asset to run this type of business. If you decide to launch a cybermall, you are going to have to ensure that
you are generating as much traffic as possible to your site to make it appealing
to possible vendors. To do this, you are going to have to dedicate a lot of time
implementing various Internet marketing techniques to create a constant flow
of traffic to your site. Knowledge about electronic storefronts, shopping carts,
and electronic commerce would also be an asset.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design and hosting of your Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer. If you currently
have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower.
You should expect the cost for Web hosting to be considerably larger than that
for a typical online business due to the high volumes of traffic that your site is
going to receive and the space needed to set up vendors on your storefront.
Either you will have to purchase storefront software, equipped with electronic
shopping cart features, or you will be responsible for developing this in-house.
If you plan on setting up a mailing list, you will also have to purchase mailing
list software to help you organize and maintain your mail lists. It would probably be in your best interest to purchase comprehensive Web traffic analysis
software to track where your Web site visitors are coming from. This information can be great for future marketing opportunities. Other costs that you will
incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $10,000
to $30,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one full-time
individual and potentially one part-time employee. Initially you are going to be
responsible for the mass promotion of your cybermall through various online
mediums. This is going to be a very time-consuming task as a high volume of
traffic is imperative for the success of a cybermall.
Part 2 betas.pmd 82 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 83
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. Since you are representing
businesses that are selling their goods or services online, your cybermall would
appeal to everyone.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You should ensure that your home page has an attractive interface with easy
navigation throughout your site. Just like in a traditional retail outlet, visitors
will not stay on your site if the environment is not appealing. Also, if some of
your vendors choose to simply be listed on your site with a link out to their site,
you should develop the interface so that the visitor doesn’t actually leave your
site. What you can do is have your vendor’s site appear within a frame on your
site. This enables the visitor to continue to navigate throughout your site without having to click back in his or her browser.
To keep your cybermall fresh, you should try to update your site on a regular basis. Consider having a What’s New page on your site. You could ask
visitors if they would like to be notified via e-mail when new items or affiliates
are added to your cybermall. This would be a great way to generate repeat
traffic from your site.
If you are going to provide vendors with merchant account and paymentprocessing services, you should ensure that none of your vendors engage in fraudulent activities. Since they are going to be using your merchant information, you
should ask for credit references before allowing your vendors to do this.
Vendors are going to want to be listed in your cybermall for one reason—
increased exposure. To ensure that this happens, you are going to have to do
whatever you can to promote your business online and offline.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could relate to the specific products,
industry, or geographic location that your cybermall represents.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy whereby people can “Tell a Friend about
This Product” via your site. This will spread the word about your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 83 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
84 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for a free
product offered by one of your vendors. The vendor donating the product could be your Featured Vendor. You could ask people if they would
like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage
them to return to your site to reenter your contest, thus re-exposing
them to your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. These sites should relate to the
specific products, industry, or geographic location that your cybermall
represents.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
As a cybermall operator, you can also offer additional services to vendors such
as secure online ordering and payment processing, product search capabilities,
and electronic shopping cart features. You can also provide vendors with a
standard storefront development model, which enables them to easily set up
their virtual presence in your cybermall. All of these features are available to
potential vendors at a price, which means that there are many different ways
for your cybermall to generate additional income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
The Travel Mall
http://www.oztravel.com.au
Everything you need to plan your trip down under.
247Malls.com
http://247malls.com
The place to buy anything online.
Hsn.com
http://www.hsn.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 84 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 85
A beautiful craft site, well laid out with fully integrated e-commerce. It also has
an enormous selection of products divided neatly into categories.
Inspirational Images
http://www.inspirationalphotoimages.com
A well-done site dedicated to inspirational art photography.
27. Desktop Imagery
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Are you a graphic designer? Do you have a large gallery of desktop images that
you randomly display on your computer? If so, why not turn your talent into a
profitable business? Many graphic designers are now making money for using
their natural talents. Desktop imagery is something that everyone likes to use to
help brighten up his or her computer. So why not cash in on this opportunity?
You can set up a desktop imagery Web site where people can pay a monthly
or annual membership to be able to enter a secure section of your site and
download your hottest desktop images. You don’t even have to design all of the
images yourself. You can partner with other graphic designers and sell their
images on your site. You can give them a percentage of the revenue generated
from your site memberships in accordance with the number of their images that
have been downloaded. It’s as easy as that!
SKILLS NEEDED
Excellent graphic design skills are essential to run this type of business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Your talent is free, but if you plan to attract people to your site, you are going
to have to design a dynamite Web site. Since you will be hosting rather large
images on your site, you will take up more storage space on the server you’re
hosting your site on; thus, you can expect the costs of hosting your site to be
higher than those for a typical Web site. To start this business you will need a
computer, appropriate software, a printer, and a scanner. You will also incur
costs associated with the design, development, and hosting of your Web site.
The costs to start this type of business will range from $3,000 to $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One full- or part-time employee is needed to run this type of business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 85 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
86 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Very high! As explained earlier, everyone loves desktop imagery!
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You want to ensure that you continuously add quality artwork to your site. If
you begin to lower your standards with what you place on your site, you will
decrease the chances that someone will renew their membership with your
business. If you find that you cannot publish quality artwork on a continuous
basis, ask a fellow graphic designer if he or she would be interested in joining
your business on a commission basis. You will want to address copyright and
usage issues where you have artwork provided by others. You may want to
provide several downloads for free on a trial basis to get people using your
service.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate links from as many
desktop-imagery-related Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes as
possible.
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market.
• Develop your own personal mailing list to communicate with your site
visitors. You could ask people if they would like to be notified when
you update the imagery offered on your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your site for a free
membership to your desktop imagery Web site. You could ask people if
they would like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This will encourage them to return to your site to reenter your contest.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Part 2 betas.pmd 86 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 87
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to offering downloadable desktop imagery from your Web site, you
could also sell CD-ROM compilations filled with past desktop favorites. This
would be a great way to generate revenue for your business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
DigitalBlasphemy.com
http://www.digitalblasphemy.com
This is a great site that has a terrific selection of popular desktop imagery available to its members.
Themes.Org
http://www.themes.org
Although they don’t charge a membership fee, this exciting Web site offers the
most comprehensive collection of UNIX window manager themes anywhere. Instead of charging a membership fee, this site makes money through advertising.
28. Dining Guide
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
This one is super easy to start and run for someone who loves the art of critiquing cuisine and sharing it with an audience. This business, although online, is
regionally based because one should go to the restaurant and eat the meals to
write the review. The content should remain current, and revenue can be generated primarily from advertising by local restaurants and eateries that want to
be featured within the guide.
Your dining guide could be a simple searchable database of dining establishments in your local area or a comprehensive site with full menus updated on a
regular basis, links to the restaurants’ Web sites, and even reservation-taking
capability. Alternatively, your site could be an independent restaurant review site.
SKILLS NEEDED
To run the Web site single-handedly, you should have basic Web publishing and
digital imaging skills. If you choose to run a restaurant review site, you should
Part 2 betas.pmd 87 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
88 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
have a knack for writing about food, presentation, and service. It would be
advantageous to have prior experience in the restaurant or culinary-preparation industry.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The approximate cost to start this business is $2,000 to $5,000. To start this
business you will need to design, develop, and host your Web site. Ongoing
costs will include the time you commit to writing and publishing the guide.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Only one! But eventually you may want to expand the guide regionally, and
being online, this should be easy to do. You could establish a sales force to
generate listings for inclusion, or for the food review site you could invite food
critics at large to contribute their articles and increase the advertising potential
of the site.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is not very much international potential to this online business because it
is based on actual restaurants that you can go to rather than recipes, but there
is potential for international action.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The e-business model suitable for the restaurant review site is level 1. The more
comprehensive restaurant guide could be developed to be fully automated, where
the restaurant owners could update their menus and specials through password-protected access. If you progress to this stage, you could use the level 3
e-business model as described in Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The dining guide should have images to capture the visitor’s interest and provide richly detailed reviews of the chosen dishes, with proper credit given to all
the restaurants included together with links to their Web sites and so on. The
content should encourage browsers to interact with the guide. There should be
a facility for visitors to submit their own reviews and to win a free meal, for
example.
The information on your site should always be current so that the menus
you mention are available when a reader decides to go to a restaurant mentioned on your guide. The past reviews should be indexed in an archive and be
accessible at all times.
Part 2 betas.pmd 88 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 89
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• You might also consider using a viral marketing technique like “Tell a
Friend about This Restaurant.” If one of your visitors is planning a
dinner out with friends, this can be very effective. A novel feature like
this might be worthy of developing a press release for distribution to
your local newspaper for added exposure.
• You will want to develop a comprehensive link strategy. You will want
to establish links from local Web sites that have large traffic volumes as
well as links from sites that relate to restaurants.
• You may want to participate in geography-specific cybermalls.
• You may want to consider developing interactive press releases and distributing them to local publications, and also national and international
food-related publications and e-zines.
• Get linked from online advertising directories.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You might want to hold regular contests where the prize is a dinner for
two donated by one of the restaurants on your site. You can add an
element of permission marketing here, asking site visitors if they want
to be notified when you have a new contest.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra revenue potential is available if you add an e-commerce component to
the site. For example, your guide could begin storing popular recipes in a virtual database and you could act as a reseller. Clients could purchase recipes and
download them directly from the site. There is plenty of potential for advertising and paid feature articles in the dining guide.
Part 2 betas.pmd 89 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
90 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
You could participate in the affiliate or associate programs of sites that sell
gourmet or food-related items. You could recommend specific recipe books
from Amazon.com or other online stores that have affiliate programs. You can
sell banner advertising or sponsorship space to restaurants for added exposure.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Dineaid.com
www.dineaid.com
You can view over 4,300 restaurant listings in Atlantic Canada, as well as menus,
coupons, specials, and more (Figure 2.3).
RestaurantRow.com
http://www.restaurantrow.com
One of the world’s largest online dining guides. View over 170,000 restaurants;
make reservations, as well as look at menus.
29. Direct Marketing/Direct Mail
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The Internet is the mecca for direct-marketing services. A virtual database is the
most flexible and useful way to store and access the contacts needed to operate
Figure 2.3. Dineaid.com is a very popular dining guide for the Atlantic Canada region.
Part 2 betas.pmd 90 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 91
this business, and the Web is a perfect place to showcase your direct-marketing
materials and skills. Most of the clientele will likely be other businesses, and the
revenue will come from the payment for marketing services and access to targeted mail and e-mail lists.
SKILLS NEEDED
You should be organized, with experience in direct-marketing methods, and
be sensitive to the different socioeconomic demographics encountered in
global marketing pursuits. You should have computer skills and be familiar
with design. You can provide the services yourself or perhaps contract out
some of the components of each campaign, depending on your expertise
and resources.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to get this business up and running will include the computer hardware and software costs, and the costs related to the design, development,
and hosting of the Web site, and it is suggested that the lists of contacts be
stored in a virtual database. The approximate cost to begin operation is $4,000
to $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The direct-marketing business can be started with one person, but for many
projects undertaken, part-time help may be needed to complete the job. Portions of various contracts can also be outsourced.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential of this business depends entirely on which clients
you are involved with and what their target markets are.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The e-business model suitable for this business during the first stage of development is level 1 or 2. For more information, refer to Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Issues to be addressed here are the cautions that come with any direct-marketing initiative, which are simply the responsible use of direct contact information and a strict policy that protects the privacy of the individuals within your
database. You will want to have a double opt-in policy in place for the collection of contact information. You will need to clean your database often to eliminate stale or outdated addresses. Direct marketing is called such because it is
designed to be targeted and high-touch in nature.
Part 2 betas.pmd 91 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
92 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Organic search engine optimization as well as participating in a payper-click campaign with the major search engines
• Links from media partners and clients who are known to use your services as well as from appropriate directories related to direct-mail services and appropriate cybermalls
• Testimonials from successful campaigns circulated in timely newsletters
to your clientele
• Articles in online direct-marketing industry publications or e-zines about
your unique approaches and strategies.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra income comes into play once you have proven the effectiveness of your
marketing techniques and the responsiveness of the contact lists you possess
in your database. Consulting on various progressive direct-marketing strategies holds potential for additional income. Additional services could include
list brokering, mailing list rentals, mailing list label production, and order
fulfillment.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Postmaster Direct
www.postmasterdirect.com
Postmaster Direct is the granddaddy of online e-mail rental list companies.
Alphamedia Direct Marketing
http://www.Alphamedia.co.uk
This site offers one-stop direct-mail shop list brokering and management, database design and management, label production and printing, fulfillment house,
and full computer bureau services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 92 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 93
30. Do-It-Yourself Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
This business is a fun online pursuit because you can utilize your own interests
and knowledge for the benefit of others. Enthusiasts all over the world use the
Web to locate information and tips on how to tackle household projects by
themselves. Another advantage to this business is the wide variety of topics you
may consult on—everything from how to install three-prong electric sockets to
gardening tips. Revenue can come from advertisers who are looking to target
the do-it-yourselfers, such as Home Depot, Lowe’s, and Canadian Tire.
SKILLS NEEDED
Obviously, being handy is a must for the operator of this business. Competent
writing skills, Web publishing know-how, and basic digital imaging will be necessary to run the Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The start-up cost of this business is minimal. A ballpark range is $2,000 to
$5,000. You will need a Web site, hosting, and a solid business plan.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
To begin, only one employee is needed. If the demand for more tips and areas of
interest increases, then you may want to hire a part-time do-it-yourself assistant to help in updating the Web site and continuing to market the site online
and to potential advertisers.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential is immediate and is probably governed by household type and climate. If the tips are translated into other major languages,
your international potential increases. There are online translators who charge
by the word to assist you, should you decide to try it.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
To begin, the revenue will probably come from advertisers that want to target your
niche market. The budget-sensitive consumer is savvy on the Internet and knows
how to find a deal. Contacting the suppliers with the lowest prices overall is a good
idea. Stay away from the higher end. E-business level 1 is the most appropriate
level for the do-it-yourself Web site. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 93 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
94 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
An important thing to note in this business is that your site will have to balance
the look and feel between professional and amateur because the browsers will
want to feel as though you are doing the projects yourself. Therefore, you have
to remain sensitive to budget, the tools you use, and so on. You must make sure
not to alienate your target market, which will be looking to save money. This
market may include a large number of women.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Organic search engine placement.
• Reciprocal linking with related do-it-yourself Web sites and other related-content Web sites.
• Get linked from online do-it-yourself directories.
• Provide articles for publishing in e-zines that focus on homemaking and
hobbies.
• Develop an opt-in mail list to provide a regular newsletter filled with
do-it-yourself tips.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income could possibly come from participation in affiliate programs
of suppliers that sell products to the do-it-yourself market. You can sell sponsorship and banner advertising opportunities on your mail list.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
DoItYourself.com
http://www.doityourself.com
Obviously one of the major do-it-yourself sites on the Web. However, it is only
home repair, with no other do-it-yourself options offered.
Remodeling Online
http://www.remodelonline.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 94 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 95
A similar but much more diverse site than DoItYourself.com. They cover gardening as well as decorating and other things a homeowner may care about.
31. E-Books
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
E-books are gaining popularity. A popular example of a fiction e-book potential is Stephen King’s success in publishing his latest horror novel in e-reader
format on the Amazon Web site. The multitude of users attempting to download the book crashed the server! Obviously there is a demand. E-books can be
written on a multitude of subjects, from Internet marketing to how to get through
the teenage years to building a sailboat—the subjects are endless.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need to be knowledgeable on your topic and be able to write well.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to begin this business depends on which approach you take. If you
want to develop your own e-books and have them purchased and downloaded
from your site, the cost will be negligible. If you decide to become a reseller or
an online marketing outlet for e-books, the cost is significantly lower to begin.
You will incur start-up costs related to design, development, and hosting of
your Web site as well as expenses related to any storefront and payment-processing capability. Expect a ballpark price of $3,000 to $5,000 to begin.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can be started by one person who is organized and possesses an
avid interest in reading and the supporting technology needed for e-books to be
distributed. Eventually you may want to get technical support if you decide to
have the e-books downloaded and purchased directly from your site.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential is immediate and depends heavily on online marketing strategy. Depending on the language of the e-books you feature, the
market is international from the onset.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The e-business model suitable for this business during the first stage of development is level 1, but if you should decide to accept payment and allow download
Part 2 betas.pmd 95 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
96 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
of the e-books from your site, level 3 is more appropriate. For more information, refer to Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
To operate an e-business that sells and markets e-books, you have two basic
options: to become a reseller affiliate for larger sites that already have the books
loaded on their server, or to set up your site so that the e-books are purchased
and downloaded from your own Web site.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
To market e-books online, you should consider the target audience and your
niche. We suggest the following:
• Spend time researching where the niche of e-book buyers are surfing
and work to become linked or advertised on the top sites you find in
this research.
• Consider organic search engine optimization and participating in search
engine pay per click campaigns.
• Establishing a viral marketing campaign like “Tell a Friend about This
Book” might be very effective.
• Developing a targeted banner advertising campaign where readers of
specific titles are visiting could generate significant traffic.
• Develop a mail list where visitors could opt in to receive notification as new
titles are available. This could also be made available through an RSS feed.
• Get linked from online e-book directories.
• Links should be established from book-related cybermalls and e-bookrelated Web rings.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income could come from advertising if the traffic reaches a sustained and healthy level. You may provide a service for new authors who want
to publish in e-book format only, and this would give the content of your site an
Part 2 betas.pmd 96 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 97
original edge, because people cannot obtain it anywhere else. You could provide an e-book development service for others.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
eBooks
http://www.ebooks.com
A site that holds assorted novels for download.
Adobe
http://www.adobe.com/epager/ebooks/main.htm.
Adobe’s site deals with e-books being released in PDF format. There are links
to many sites.
32. Educational Products
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The sale and promotion of educational products online is a popular and growing business. Already there are online schools and courses that are accessible at
any time from anywhere in the world. Downloadable educational software holds
major possibilities in the future of learning. Niche-marketing opportunities can
be exploited by choosing a particular set of subjects or age groups to cater to.
Becoming the benchmark for a particular field of study would be wise considering that there are and will continue to be many Web sites offering educational
materials via download.
SKILLS NEEDED
It is a good idea to have a background in the education market and some awareness of product availability in this market. You should have basic Web publishing skills and proper writing capabilities.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start the ball rolling with your educational products online business
consists of developing the Web site. Depending on how extensive the site is, and
assuming that you will want to sell the products online, the estimated cost to
start up is $3,000 to $7,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
During the onset of this online business, one experienced individual should be
capable of running things.
Part 2 betas.pmd 97 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
98 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
If the products are suitable for all languages, the global potential is huge. The
subject areas of the educational products you provide will determine how international the market is.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
We recommend e-business level 3 for this online business. Refer to Part 1 for
more information.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The first thing to do when setting up this business is establish a product base
and define relationships with suppliers of these products. One must make sure
that the wares that are provided are respected educational tools and materials
within the subjects you concentrate on. The prices have to be competitive, and
the content on your site should be geared to attract the buyer of the products,
not necessarily the end user.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
Your site should be simple and user-friendly, not to mention easily found on the
Internet’s search engines and on education-related Web sites. We recommend
the following techniques for marketing your business online:
• Organic search engine optimization as well as developing a sponsored
listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword phrases with the popular search engines.
• Developing a comprehensive links strategy. Links should be established
with affiliated learning sites and suppliers of educational products.
• Real reviews and testimonials from users of the products available for
sale on your site should be published on the site as well as in appropriate e-zines and newsletters.
• Viral marketing strategies like Tell a Friend should be employed.
• Permission marketing techniques should be employed. Ask visitors if
they would like to be notified via e-mail when you add new educational
products to your product offering. The updates could also be provided
by RSS feed.
• You could have regular contests where the prize is one of your educational products or, alternatively, you could find other contest sites and
Part 2 betas.pmd 98 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 99
offer one of your educational products as a prize with exposure for
your site and a link to it.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Educational products and downloads are among the most widely distributed
items on the Internet. As the market expands, quality will decrease. There is
value in a rating system or guide that helps users make the right choice. Turning
a portion of your site into a product review message board would be a wise
idea. The traffic generated from this could lead to advertising opportunities.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
NASA
http://spacelink.nasa.gov/Instructional.Materials/NASA.Educational.Products/
.index.html
The NASA Web site is a good example of how to market educational products.
Teachernet
http://www.teachernet.com
This is an excellent Web site that deals with many educational products but also
includes ideas for teachers and a discussion area for exchanging ideas and such.
American Educational Products
http://www.amep.com
This is a single corporation selling its products online. This is basically an Internet advertisement for its products.
33. Electronics Store
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
What better place to sell technological gadgets! The following are necessary to
ensure success in this type of business: a reliable and robust supplier with a
shipping system in place, and an up-to-date e-store with detailed descriptions,
images, and reviews of products. This site would sell electronics directly to
Part 2 betas.pmd 99 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
100 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
customers with payment processing happening online. (There’s too much competition already to start at a lower level of operation.)
SKILLS NEEDED
The operator of this business should have experience dealing within the electronics industry and a proper gauge on value and product shelf life. He or she
should have a firm grasp of Web publishing, writing promotional copy for products, and operating an online store.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The budget to begin this endeavor is in the area of $3,000 to $10,000. Your
initial setup costs include a personal computer and the appropriate software.
You will also need to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your Web
site, your storefront solution, and your merchant account setup. All additional
costs are associated with promoting your business online and offline.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
Depending on how many products you are selling and where the inventory is
stored, you might need two dedicated individuals to operate the business efficiently.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The global reach of selling electronics online is almost guaranteed. Electronic
devices are not restricted by regional or cultural boundaries such as language or
lack of power sources. If the descriptions in the online store are available in
several of the world’s languages and the payment area has a tool to convert
currency, there should be fantastic international opportunity.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The e-business model suggested for this type of operation is level 3, which includes an e-store and payment processing online. Refer to Part 1 for more information.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Selling electronics requires a high-tech, user-friendly site. The information on
the site must be absolutely current, and you have to watch inventory as mass
orders could come in at any time. The content and policy should encourage
repeat business and provide support with upgrades and troubleshooting. The
customer service department of your business should be highly responsive and
be in touch with the shipping segment of the business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 100 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 101
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
Your major target market will be high-tech gadget-prone online buyers, so you
want to conduct a thorough market research project to determine where they
are surfing. Once you have found these sites, establish relationships with them
and exchange links. Here are some basic tips to get you started:
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
send referral business to your electronics store, it would also increase
the overall awareness of your site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market will send high volumes of traffic to
your Web site. Your banner ads could contain coupons for specific
products.
• You should enable visitors to tell friends about specific products directly from your site via e-mail. This viral marketing technique is a great
way to increase traffic to your Web site.
• A comprehensive link strategy should be developed and implemented.
Links should be developed from electronics cybermalls, meta-indexes,
and electronics-related sites.
• You should develop a mail list where you will provide news on new
products, product reviews, and specials to those site visitors who choose
to opt in to the mail list.
• You could consider developing a loyalty program for frequent shoppers.
• Real reviews and testimonials from users of the products available for
sale on your site should be published on the site as well as in appropriate e-zines and newsletters.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could have regular contests where the prize is one of your electronics products or, alternatively, you can find other contest sites and offer
one of your electronics products as a prize with exposure for your site
and a link to it.
Part 2 betas.pmd 101 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
102 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
There is an opportunity to generate revenue through sales of banner advertising
space and sponsorship of your mail list. Ads may be permitted in your mail list
for a nominal fee.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
VoltexPC.com
http://www.voltexcomputers.com
This site offers an attractive presentation of hot items up for sale, is easy to
navigate, and can easily be found in the search engines.
Cambridge Sound Works
http://www.cambridgesoundworks.com/store/category.cgi?category=0
This site is easily navigated, has a professional design, and offers a wide variety
of products for sale plus articles on how to burn CDs and other technical tips
for the benefit of users.
TigerDirect.com
http://www.tigerdirect.com
Specializing in PC and hardware sales, this company is known for its highquality customer service and fast delivery.
34. E-Mail Reminder Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
As a provider of e-mail reminders, the basic service you would provide is creating a Web site with a software-driven automated e-mail reminder application.
The operator of this business will have to design comprehensive input forms
not only to gather the important dates and occasions from all the clients and
enough other information to be able to send them the reminder, but also to
make appropriate gift suggestions.
Part 2 betas.pmd 102 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 103
For example, a client may want to be reminded of all of his or her nieces’ or
nephews’ birthdays. In addition to gathering the birthdates, you would also
want to gather the child’s name, age, sex, and toy preferences. By doing this you
can customize the reminder e-mail to read something like this:
Dear Susan,
Your niece Mykhala’s birthday is coming up in 10 days. Mykhala
will be 9 years old, and she likes Barbie dolls, Gamecube games,
and Nancy Drew books. Click here to find links to some of these
gifts should you want to take care of her birthday gift today.
Regards,
Sarah
These links would be from your site to retailers online where you belong to
their affiliate program and will receive a referral fee for any sales that come
from your site.
Dates such as birthdays, anniversaries, graduations, Valentine’s Day, Secretary’s
Day, special days (Mother’s Day and Father’s Day), and corporate special occasions are what you will usually be reminding clients of. However, where your
service includes recommendations, you may find clients including dates like Christmas, Easter, Hanukkah, and various cultural and religious holidays.
The trick to this operation is providing the service for free and having a
high number of clients, because your income will be generated, for the most
part, from banner advertising and affiliate program revenue. You will want to
have this service fully automated, either by developing a program or by purchasing software that can perform this function. High traffic caused by repeat
users will attract various online advertisers, resellers, alliances, and affiliates.
SKILLS NEEDED
The e-mail reminder service is perfect for someone who is punctual, organized,
and a clear communicator via e-mail.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this business will include the cost of designing, developing,
and hosting your Web site. You will need a computer, appropriate software, a
printer, and an Internet connection. The e-mail reminder service software should
Part 2 betas.pmd 103 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
104 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
be flexible and should match or exceed what the competition is using. We estimate the start-up costs for this business to run between $5,000 and $20,000.
The advantage to this type of business is that there is no inventory.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can easily be started with one part-time individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The global potential of this business is governed solely by language barriers.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. You will collect
payment offline, and your income will come from affiliate commissions and
banner advertising revenues. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The advertising opportunities must be seized or the business will not make a
profit, since the actual reminder service is free. Utilizing the timely e-mail contact you have with clients is the key to success. Gather personalized information from your users so that when an announcement comes along, you are able
to suggest what gifts to purchase for their family, loved ones, bosses, co-workers, and friends. Join affiliate programs for popular e-stores and market their
wares in your e-mails. You’ll make profits off the click-through and sales commissions.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generating links from other,
related sites is an excellent way to bring targeted businesses to your
Web site. You will want to be linked from sites that cater to your target
market (busy professionals with tight schedules). You might establish
links from gift suggestion sites, e-stores, calendar and event management software sites, and other, related directories.
• Include testimonials from clients who have used your service in the past.
• You might include a viral marketing technique like Tell a Friend on
your Web site. This will allow your customers to tell their friends about
your service directly from your Web site.
• Get linked from online gift site directories.
Part 2 betas.pmd 104 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 105
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Launch a banner advertising campaign or, better yet, join an ad network that can pinpoint the niche markets for your service and place
your banners in the best locations.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income could come from other services rendered through e-mail
such as wish lists, wedding gift list e-mail updates, and reminders of this nature.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Candor
http://www.candor.com/reminder/default.asp
This service is free.
P C Reminder
http://www.pcreminder.com
Choose from reminding yourself, reminding another person, or having someone remind you.
35. Employment Agency
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Unemployed people and employed people looking for a change in employment
all over the world search for work each day and are using the Internet to do it.
Businesses are searching for new employees on the Web as well, but the process
is hit or miss. Online employment agencies can simplify this process. An online
employment agency bridges the gap between the prospective work force and
the employers who need access to it.
The primary service of this business is providing an outlet for people to
send in their resumes or portfolios and simultaneously matching them with
Part 2 betas.pmd 105 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
106 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
prospective employers that are seeking people with similar credentials. There
are many online employment sites on the Web now, but the selection has to be
more refined and organized by employment type and location. Your site should
include resources for job seekers. The employment agency’s role is to understand the needs of its primary client—the employer.
Revenue can be generated in a number of ways from this type of site. You
could charge individuals to submit their resumes. You could charge employers
to post their employment opportunities. You could choose to allow posting of
resumes and opportunities for free and generate revenue through banner advertising or selling ancillary services to employers or applicants. You could also
run this business as an executive recruitment or placement service, where you
publicize positions available and actually interview and recommend individuals to the employer.
SKILLS NEEDED
To run this business you need basic Web publishing skills. It would help significantly if you have a history working with an employment agency and have
experience with resume writing, interviewing, and the development of employment opportunity descriptions.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
To start this business you need appropriate computer hardware, software,
and a printer. You will incur design, development, and hosting costs related to
your Web site. You will want to have a searchable database as part of your
Web site and perhaps an automated, password-controlled, input area for job
and resume postings. This will add to the development costs of your Web site.
The costs to start this type of business online will range between $5,000 and
$50,000 depending on the level of automation and the sophistication of your
database.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
To start this business you will need one or more experienced people, depending
on the volume, the services you offer, and the level of automation.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is limited international potential in this type of business.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The recommended e-business level depends on how you choose to run your
business. If you charge for the posting of resumes or job descriptions, you will
want level 2. If you do not charge for the postings but generate your revenue
Part 2 betas.pmd 106 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 107
through advertising or other services, level 1 would be more appropriate. See
Part 1 for more details.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Have a solid business plan that clearly defines the service you will provide for
your clients. If you provide recruitment and recommendation services, you will
want to develop contracts or agreements that clearly spell out your fees, the
services you will provide, and a payment schedule. Make sure to include plenty
of useful resources and information on your site for job seekers (resume tips,
links to resume sites, etc.).
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
Marketing this business on the Web should prove to be somewhat easy because
employment sites are sought after quite aggressively by job seekers. You are marketing to two separate groups, job seekers and prospective employers. The following
steps should be taken to properly address your online marketing strategy:
• Ensure that your site is search engine friendly by including appropriate
page titles, keyword meta-tags, description meta-tags, and so on, and
then register with the major search engines and directories.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. The more links there are to your
site, the more traffic you will see. You should generate links from related sites such as employment-related meta-indexes, resume writing
services, business services, and secondary education sites.
• Submit articles to e-zines that promote and give examples of the success
rate of your services, and be sure to include testimonials from both
employers and job seekers.
• Develop a targeted banner advertising campaign. Have your ads appear
on sites that job seekers and employers frequent.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
There are all kinds of opportunities for additional income with banner advertising, sponsorship, and the expansion of your services. If you decide to focus
Part 2 betas.pmd 107 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
108 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
on one field of work, training and retraining could be added to your services.
You could establish a weekly newsletter to all your job seekers with ad links to
sites that want to market themselves to your target group. You could include
resume writing and job description writing services to your offering. You could
provide membership opportunities for employers, giving them an unlimited or
a specific number of job postings.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
ADECCO—The employment people
http://www.adeccous.com
This is a small but very nice job agency that has both an employer and an
employee section.
PHDS LTD
http://www.phds-jobs.co.uk
This site specializes in engineering recruitment in the United Kingdom.
Monsterboard.com
http://www.monsterboard.com
This is a dynamite employment site.
36. Event and Meeting Planning
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Planning a meeting or an event can be a time-consuming task for most people,
and a well-done event usually requires a professional’s touch. Since most events
are special occasions, the customers are usually more flexible regarding pricing
but are still seeking the best deal possible.
Web-based event planners make their money using basically the same method
as their real-world counterparts. You research your client’s objectives, needs,
and requirements. You then develop a plan and program for the meeting or
event, have it approved by the clients, and then make all the necessary arrangements and carry out the plan, taking care of all the details.
Meeting and event planners are paid a fee for their services or earn a commission from the suppliers of the services and products for the event or meeting. Often an event planner will be asked to arrange and be responsible for all
the minute details for an event. In this case, you must be ready for that degree
of involvement and be willing to shoulder the responsibility.
Part 2 betas.pmd 108 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 109
SKILLS NEEDED
Good organizational and communication skills are an absolute must. Unless
you are fortunate enough to be operating in your local area, you will be required to arrange all the details long distance.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to set up and run this type of business will range from $1,000 to
$20,000. Initially you will have to pay to develop your Web site along with all
costs associated with this (e.g., hosting service). Additional costs associated
with opening this business include online and offline advertising costs, and any
offline promotion that you may implement.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
This type of business can be started with one person. It can start off as a parttime venture.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This online business has strong international potential, since you will provide
services that are universally beneficial.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
Since you will be taking requests and dealing directly with the customer,
e-business level 1 or 2 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Unless your customer or the meeting is in your immediate area, you will need to
acquire a list of suppliers in the area where the event or meeting is taking place.
An excellent source for this kind of information is event publications. One other
major point to be aware of is that often event planners are called upon to set up
the entire event. This requires a great deal of commitment and organization,
especially at long distances.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Request links from sites related
to meeting and event planning, appropriate directories and meta-indexes,
and targeted cybermalls.
• Developing a strategic online banner advertising campaign could greatly
increase targeted traffic to your site. You can outsource this activity to an
advertising agency or ad network, or you can develop your advertising
Part 2 betas.pmd 109 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
110 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
campaign in-house. Regardless of your approach, by placing a banner ad
on a Web site or search engine that is frequented by your target market,
you can develop a significant amount of traffic to your Web site.
• Participate in targeted mail lists, Usenet newsgroups, and discussion
forums where participants are looking for advice on meeting planning,
speakers, and venues. Always make a valuable contribution and attach
your signature file.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participate in e-zines and online publications that are read by your target market. You can contribute appropriate articles that display your
area of expertise.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to providing your organizational expertise, you could also start
your own affiliate program with your suppliers. That way, even if your customers choose not to use your services directly but use your Web site to locate a
specific supplier, you will earn a referral fee from the business that you helped
your supplier get.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
All Time Favorites
http://www.alltimefavorites.com
Listed on their main page (Figure 2.4) are the types of events they specialize in.
They also have a searchable database that allows users to find event resources
in their local area.
Eventplanner.com
http://eventplanner.com
This site is dedicated to helping event planners themselves by making the tools
they need readily accessible. Also, the site includes a directory of event planners
and attempts to build an online community for event planners.
Part 2 betas.pmd 110 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 111
37. E-Zines (Online Magazines)
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
E-zines are online publications or online magazines. The content draws eyeballs and then your pages are worth advertising dollars. E-zines can be as specific or as general as the writers please, but the wise idea is to focus on a particular
interest group that is active on the Web today and approach advertisers who
are targeting that particular group for a source of profit.
There are Web-based e-zines where the visitor views the e-zine at the e-zine
Web site and travels though the e-zine by clicking through the pages of the site.
These types of e-zines have the look and feel of traditional magazines as far as
page layout and graphics go.
There are also e-mail-based e-zines where a subscriber receives a copy of
the e-zine on a regular basis via e-mail. These types of e-zines are generally
short on graphics and heavy on content. They are generally very topic-focused
and include three or four text-based articles on the subject matter.
Both types of e-zines have banner advertising, sponsorship, and subscription opportunities.
SKILLS NEEDED
An e-zine is a great idea for someone who loves to write passionately and concisely about any given topic of shared interest. The ability to use an HTML
publishing program is a must. Web-based e-zines need images, so you should be
Figure 2.4. All Time Favorites has a database for local users.
Part 2 betas.pmd 111 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
112 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
able to process images optimized for the Web either through scanning or via
digital photography.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You are creating content that comes from your own mind, so the biggest investment is your time. You will need a computer and the appropriate software
along with a scanner and printer. You may want to invest in a digital camera for
those pursuing Web-based e-zines. Start-up costs will also include the design,
development, and hosting of your Web site. The start-up costs for this type of
business will generally run between $3,000 and $20,000. Ongoing costs will be
your time and occasionally paying guest or staff writers for their stories.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Starting off, you need only one employee, not even full-time if that’s not what you
can fit into your schedule. For more content, you may want to take on some
other writers who contribute, and for this you can usually pay them per story.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business’s international potential increases if it’s translated into the major
languages of the globe. English is widely accepted, however.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
Ideally, an e-zine should charge advertisers quarterly throughout the year. There
is no real need for online payment processing. E-business level 1 is appropriate
for this type of online business. See Part 1 for more details.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
E-zines are pretty straightforward. Be careful to write in a clear and precise
manner and remember the audience the whole time you are composing articles;
make sure you continue to appeal to the same niche of readers; and watch for
other sites encroaching on your content. It happens all the time.
Have a detailed Web traffic analysis package on the server on which your
site is hosted so that you can show advertisers accurate information about your
site traffic.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your target audience would be a great way to increase exposure of your e-zine
and traffic to your Web site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on topic-specific Web
sites would generate targeted exposure for your e-zine.
Part 2 betas.pmd 112 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 113
• Develop links from as many Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to the topic of your e-zine as possible.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participating in publicly accessible opt-in mail lists related to the topic
of your e-zine would be a great way to communicate with your target
market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income comes into play by selling your stories to other e-zines and
being hired to write articles. Also, if you are talented in publishing HTML
articles, other writers may hire you to produce their content in Web format.
You can join the affiliate programs of providers of products or services that
your target market may be interested in. For example, if your e-zine is about
Internet marketing, you could join Amazon’s affiliate program and recommend
great books like 101 Ways to Promote Your Web Site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
eWire Riding and Music E-Zine
http://www.ewirezine.com
eWire is an e-zine that is devoted to BMX riding and music.
Any Swing Goes
http://www.anyswinggoes.com
This is a full e-zine covering everything related to swing music.
38. Fund Raiser
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Online fund raising has serious potential for success because of how affordable
the Internet is as a marketing medium, communication tool, and place to present
information. There are many choices available if you want to provide fund-raisPart 2 betas.pmd 113 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
114 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ing services. The number of potential customers for this type of business is significant—charitable organizations, schools, hospitals, not-for-profit associations, and
so on. Most organizations do not have the personnel to run fund-raising campaigns in-house and are quite happy to use an outside service. Fund-raising campaigns for each organization are usually run at a specific time of year, so the trick
will be to have clients who run their campaigns at different times.
SKILLS NEEDED
This business is perfect for someone who has experience in philanthropy and
telemarketing. You have to be organized and have a great telephone manner.
Basic Web publishing skills and familiarity with managing a contact database
are needed.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
To start this business you will need a computer, appropriate software, and a
printer. You will incur costs related to the design, development, and hosting of
your Web site. You may need to purchase direct mail lists as well if your clients
don’t provide them. The approximate cost to start this business is between
$3,000 and $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One dedicated and knowledgeable person can start this business from home
and part-time to begin.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The potential of this business is mainly national. International telephone rates
and foreign languages are drawbacks to international delivery of this type of
service.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
It is important to consider how your revenues are generated. One option is to
collect a fee or percentage of the money you raise for any given charity or
group. The other is by selling a product to be used in a fund-raiser. Obviously
you will gain a profit through the sale of such items. The best way to increase
revenues is to provide both services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 114 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 115
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. If you do not provide products
for fund raisers, link to sites that do and vice versa. Also develop links
from appropriate directories, meta-indexes, and Web rings.
• Register your site throughout the major search engines and optimize
your site for organic search engine placement with effective keyword
phrases such as fund-raising services. You can also consider participating in a pay-per-click strategy with the popular search engines.
• Arrange reciprocal links with a wide variety of philanthropic sites.
• Participate in news and discussion groups for fund raisers to share their
techniques and successes.
• Participate in mail lists that your target market participates in relative
to fund raising.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Avenues for additional income are banner and hyperlink advertising on your
Web site if the traffic levels are high. Other ways to gain more revenue from
your fund-raiser Web site would be to expand your services and offer to coach
others for a fee on how to begin a fund-raising project. You can also provide
products that can be used in fund raising.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
JustGiving.com
http://www.justgiving.com
This is an online fund raiser dedicated to both donating and raising money.
Charity Mania
http://www.charitymania.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 115 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
116 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Based in California, this organization provides inexpensive ways for schools,
churches, sports teams, and the like to sell raffle tickets.
39. Genealogy Research
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Running an online genealogy research business is a great part-time venture. If
you have an interest or expertise in human history, family trees, or a particular
region or community, this could be the venture for you. The way it works is
simple. You research incoming genealogical requests for a fee. The Internet is
the perfect place to conduct many stages of your research, market your services, and communicate with clients. Revenue comes from the fees for researching genealogy information and advertising for related businesses, such as software
for building family trees.
SKILLS NEEDED
The operator of this business should have a very real interest in genealogy,
researching skills, and Web publishing skills. It is important to communicate
clearly via e-mail with clients. Extensive knowledge of a certain community or
family will help to differentiate your services from the competition.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
To begin this business you will need a computer, appropriate software, and a
printer. You will also incur the costs of designing, developing, and hosting your
Web site. The cost to start this business will be between $3,000 and $5,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One part-time skilled individual can start this business from home.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential of this business is both highly possible and hard to
predict. Depending on your field of expertise in the genealogy department, you
could be receiving requests from anywhere in the world. You never know where
someone’s relatives or descendants have moved. The further away they are, the
more likely they are to seek your help.
Part 2 betas.pmd 116 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 117
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The genealogy research Web site requires e-business level 1. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The genealogy research business is founded on documentation. Clients will want
proof of your research results. You will want to charge by the hour for your
time on each project, so be sure to work out a solid business plan where you
indicate your rates for different services. Have these clearly posted on your
Web site and make sure that they are competitive with other genealogical Web
sites’ rates.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
Your online marketing strategy for this business should include the following
key elements:
• A comprehensive link strategy that will get you links from as many
genealogy-related sites as possible, as well as appropriate directories,
meta-indexes, and Web rings.
• Banner advertising on high-traffic resource sites that target your niche
market. For example, if you specialize in Irish genealogy, then you should
advertise on sites that appeal to this crowd.
• Participation in publicly accessible mail lists related to the discussion of
genealogy. Provide valuable contribution to show your area of expertise.
• Participation in online chats, discussions, and forums about your field,
including a descriptive signature file.
• Building a mail list of clients and perspective clients who would like to
receive your regular newsletters with the latest discoveries you have
made and related family-tree-type news.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
Part 2 betas.pmd 117 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
118 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ADDITIONAL INCOME
A couple of additional ways to earn income from your genealogy research site
include:
• Joining affiliate e-stores that sell products of interest to your target group.
• Offering consulting services over the phone or via live chat on how to
properly research your family tree.
As requests come in, you will begin to see where potential for extra income
exists depending on your skills, time, and resources.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
A+ Genealogy Research Service, LLC
http://www.genealogy-research.com
Allows you to research your family history and can answer numerous genealogical questions you may have.
Genealogy Pro
http://genealogypro.com
Genealogy Pro is the directory with the largest choice of independent genealogy
related services and products including: professional genealogists, adoption and
missing people researchers, translators, military and historical researchers, heraldry specialists, heir and estate researchers, photographers, and more!
40. Gift Baskets
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Online gift basket stores are becoming as popular as their traditional offline
counterparts. These stores make it easy for consumers to go online, purchase a
gift basket, and have it shipped to a family or friend as a gift. The level of
customization provided by some of these online retailers is amazing. You can
do everything from picking out a customized gift basket to choosing what type
of wrapping paper and gift card you want to dress the gift with.
There are several ways to earn income from this type of business. Of course,
you’re going to generate revenue from the sale of gift baskets and other giftrelated items; however, like any business, you can generate significant revenue
Part 2 betas.pmd 118 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 119
from value-added services—things such as gift wrapping, personalized gift cards,
special shipping options, or unique customizable products (e.g., engraved gift
boxes). You can also generate revenue from selling online advertising to
noncompeting Web sites that target the same audience. Since you are targeting
the same audience, you can provide potential advertisers with a dynamite opportunity for exposing their products or services.
SKILLS NEEDED
First and foremost, knowledge of the products that you are representing is a
must. This enables you to answer any questions that your clients or potential
clients might have about your products. Knowledge of online advertising techniques is also an asset to run this type of business. If you decide to launch a gift
basket Web site, you are going to have to ensure that you are generating as
much traffic as possible to your site to develop your client base. To do this, you
are going to have to dedicate a lot of time implementing various Internet marketing techniques to create a constant flow of traffic to your site. Knowledge
about electronic storefronts, shopping carts, and electronic commerce would
also be an asset.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a printer, and a
digital camera so that you can take photos of your gift baskets. If you currently
have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower.
In order to set up your storefront, you will have to purchase storefront software equipped with electronic shopping cart features, use an application service provider, or be responsible for developing this in-house. If you plan to set
up a mailing list, you will also have to purchase mailing list software to help
you organize and maintain your mail lists. You should also purchase comprehensive Web traffic analysis software to track where your Web site visitors are
coming from. This information can be great for future marketing opportunities. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web
site and the purchase of inventory. Minimum estimated cost to start is $10,000
to $20,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
You can start this type of business with one person. If you do your online marketing well and generate significant visitors and customers, you will quickly
expand. Approximately one to three full-time employees will be needed in full
operation for this type of business. At least one staff member will be responsible for the daily online promotion of your site, while the others will handle all
Part 2 betas.pmd 119 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
120 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
administrative, accounting, shipping, and inventory tasks required to run the
business smoothly.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. People from all over the world
will be able to visit your Web site and order your gift baskets to send to their
loved ones. However, before you offer your products to foreign countries, you
should ensure that your parcels would easily pass through customs. Some countries may have regulations as to what types of products can enter their country
or may have significant duties and taxes that may be levied.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 or 4 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since you are promoting your products to an online audience, it is extremely
important for you to generate as much traffic as possible to your site. There are
multiple ways for you to do this; however, it is essential that you allocate a
significant amount of time to the daily online promotion of the site.
You should also remember never to offer a product on your site that is not
in stock. Stock-outs can seriously hinder the success and reputation of any online retailer. Nothing would be more disappointing than searching through your
storefront, finding a dynamite gift basket to purchase, ordering it, and then
finding out that you don’t have it in stock. This could discourage visitors from
ever returning to your site to make a future purchase. To avoid this problem, it
is suggested that you monitor your inventory levels closely and have the capability to remove items easily from your online catalogue.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
increase the awareness of your gift basket site, it would also send referral business to your site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites on which you could place banner ads include
noncompeting gift sites, holiday-specific Web sites (e.g., Mother’s Day
sites, Valentine’s Day sites, etc.), and other Web sites that would be of
interest to your target market.
Part 2 betas.pmd 120 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 121
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your site for a free gift
basket. You could ask people if they would like to be notified of the
winner via e-mail. This would encourage them to return to your site
and re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing them to your products.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, metaindexes, and Web rings frequented by your target market.
• You could develop a Featured Gift Basket page on your site. You could
change this product every week. People will continue to return to your
site to see what the featured gift basket is. You could even ask people if
they would like to be notified of your featured gift basket via e-mail.
This would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to selling gift baskets from your site, you could also sell complementary items. Things such as preserves, candles, soaps, ornaments, and other
novelty items that you could sell in a gift basket you can also sell individually.
These products would not only complement your gift basket product, but would
also expand your product line. You can offer several levels of gift wrapping at
various price points.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
PEI Preserve Company
http://www.preservecompany.com
This is a terrific online business (Figure 2.5) that sells homemade preserves to
people all over the world. They use several effective Internet marketing techniques to increase the traffic to their site, including a mailing list that enables
them to communicate with their clients.
GiftBaskets.com
http://www.giftbaskets.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 121 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
122 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
This is a dynamite site that offers a wide range of gift basket products to its
clients.
41. Gift Registry (Online Wish List)
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Many people today use gift registries to help their family and friends with gift
purchases for weddings or other special occasions. In the traditional model, gift
registries are often limited to one store. Now on the Internet, under the guise of
wish lists, the idea of the gift registry has come into its own.
An online wish list is a service that can be connected to many online stores.
When people are having a special occasion, such as a wedding, they simply
register on the wish list site and list the items they would like to receive that can
be purchased anywhere online. Their family and friends then go online to the
wish list and can choose items of interest to the couple as well as ensure that
they are not getting the same item as someone else.
An online wish list service participates in the affiliate programs of many
online stores. Whenever someone using your service buys a product from an
affiliated site, you receive a small percentage of the sale (usually anywhere from
Figure 2.5. PEI Preserve Company sells homemade preserves to people all over the world.
Part 2 betas.pmd 122 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 123
5 to 25 percent). If your wish list is particularly well designed and is popular,
then you can also collect a membership fee from your member businesses or sell
them preferred space or banner advertising.
SKILLS NEEDED
Some familiarity with marketing online is necessary. In addition, this sort of
business deals with a number of advanced concepts and components of the
Internet, so you will need to have a firm grasp of the way affiliate programs
work before pursuing this concept. Finally, you will need a computer programmer to write and maintain your wish list software.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up your gift registry/online wish list will range from
$8,000 to $30,000. These costs include a high-end computer, appropriate software, and a printer, as well as the costs related to the design, development, and
hosting of your Web site. Other initial costs you will incur include the development of your wish list software as well as the marketing and advertising of your
Web site.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The maintenance of your Web site and creation of your wish list software will
require a lot of work. You will also need to launch a massive promotional
campaign. It is possible that one or two dedicated people could start up this
business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Your service does not actually perform any shipping or other functions that
sometimes restrict an online business. There are no barriers, with the exception
of language, preventing you from capitalizing on the global market.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
A large part of the setup of an online gift registry is related to successfully
linking up with online retail stores and their affiliate programs. You will have
to develop a dynamite Web site and specialized software related to the gift
registry. You will also have to develop a comprehensive Internet marketing strategy to generate significant traffic to your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 123 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
124 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• When people visit your Web site to register or to purchase a gift for a
friend who is registered with your site, you have a perfect opportunity
to encourage the use of viral marketing techniques like Tell a Friend. If
they found your site and service useful, then they will pass that information on to their friends.
• You should develop and implement a targeted banner advertising strategy. You will want to place banner ads on appropriate wedding-related
and other special-occasion Web sites.
• Develop and implement a comprehensive link strategy. You should be
linked from as many gift-related Web sites, directories, meta-indexes,
and Web rings as possible.
• Participate in publicly accessible mail lists related to wedding planning.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participate in newsgroups, discussion forums, and chats related to wedding and other special-occasion planning.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can add e-cards or a reminder service to your product offering. You can
sell banner advertising to Web sites that are targeting the same demographic
that you are.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Wishlist.com
http://www.wishlist.com
One of the major online gift registries. It also has a few special features.
Giftregistry21.com
http://www.giftregistry21.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 124 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 125
A good site, but you have to register before you can use most of its services,
though it does provide good confidentiality.
42. Graphic Designer
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
If you do graphic design work, there is a huge market for your services throughout the world. You can generate revenue from the design of everything from signs
and brochures to Web sites and corporate ads. The possibilities are endless. To
promote your services, you could simply design a dynamite Web site that contains a portfolio of your work for visitors to see. This should contain your best
work, because this is what your clients will judge your talent and professionalism
against. Your Web site will basically be your online resume for potential business
opportunities, so make sure you do a good job on the site design and layout!
How does it work? You simply have to develop a request form on your site.
Here visitors can easily fill out their contact information and a brief description
of the type of design work they would like to have you provide to them. You
can then follow up on their service request via e-mail or telephone. This is a
very easy way to run this type of business.
SKILLS NEEDED
Excellent graphic design skills are essential to run this type of business. Knowledge of various graphic design software programs would also be a must.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development and hosting of your Web site,
computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a printer, and possibly a
digital camera for your graphic design work. Since you can handle the graphic
design work for your Web site, you can work closely with a Web site designer
during the development stage of your site if you are not capable of writing
code. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will
be considerably lower. If you plan to set up a mailing list, you will also have to
purchase mailing list software to help you organize and maintain your mail
lists. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web
site. Estimated cost is $10,000 to 25,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One dedicated individual is required to operate this type of business. In the
beginning you may be able to work at this business part-time while keeping
Part 2 betas.pmd 125 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
126 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
your regular job; however, as requests increase, you will be able to make this
business a full-time venture. You might also have to hire an extra employee to
handle all administrative tasks associated with running this business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This type of business has high international potential due to the high demand
for graphic design services.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
When dealing with graphic design work, you should insist on a deposit before
you undertake each project. Graphic designers have been known to deliver the
digital format of their work to their client for review and then never hear from
the client again. To avoid this, it is suggested that you collect a 30 to 50 percent
deposit up front, and then collect the remainder after you complete the project.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to get as many links
as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to your target market. There are thousands of graphic designrelated Web sites on the Internet that would provide a great linking
opportunity for your site. You should also attempt to develop links from
business service link sites and directories. These sites will provide highly
targeted traffic to your site.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to graphic design or business services. Remember to use a cleverly designed signature
file with a catchy tagline and hypertext link that will send readers to
your site.
• Providing valuable contributions to graphic design-related mail lists
would be a great way to create exposure for your business. Again, a
cleverly designed signature file with a catchy tagline would be a great
way to send traffic to your site.
• Show before-and-after examples of any work where you are updating
logos, corporate IDs, or the “look and feel” of Web sites.
Part 2 betas.pmd 126 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 127
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Hosting your own graphic design advice column for up-and-coming
graphic designers would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic to
your site. You could offer advice related to using specific software programs or about different design techniques. You can ask people if they
would like to be notified via e-mail whenever you update your advice
column. This will encourage people to return to your site to view your
latest advice.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
To complement your graphic design talents, you could offer Web design and
development services. Since these two services complement each other, you would
be adding tremendous value to your graphic design business while earning additional income from Web development projects.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Jeff Gutterud Publishing
http://www.jgpublish.com
This is a graphic design firm that offers some Web-based publishing as well as
professional logo design.
JBF Designs
http://www.jbfdesigns.com
This one-person operation offers both graphic design and Web site design services.
43. Health Guide
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Health and fitness are becoming important to everyone these days. People are
eating better, exercising more, and trying to live a healthier lifestyle. The probPart 2 betas.pmd 127 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
128 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
lem is that many people are not as educated as they would like to be on how to
accomplish these tasks. This online business can provide people with this information. You can offer your site’s visitors healthy recipes, new exercise techniques, and information about the health industry. You’ll be surprised how
many people will continuously visit your site to learn more about how to improve their quality of life.
This type of site can recommend and provide links to health-related products that can be purchased online. Income can be generated through affiliate
program revenue from these sites.
This type of site can also generate revenue from selling targeted online
advertising to businesses related to health and fitness. Since your Web site’s
visitors are obviously coming to your site to view information about health
and fitness, you will be able to provide businesses with a highly targeted advertising opportunity. You will want to have a link directly on your home
page that says something like “Advertise with Us.” This link will lead the
visitor to a page where he or she can view Web site traffic statistics and a
listing of benefits of advertising on your site. Testimonials from past advertisers would also be an asset. This would easily encourage businesses to advertise on your site.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of health and fitness is essential if you’re operating this type of
business. Strong research techniques would also be an asset, as you are constantly going to be searching for new health-related information to provide to
your visitors. Knowledge of effective online advertising techniques would also
be an asset, as this type of business requires a high number of Web site visitors.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of
your Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a printer,
and possibly a digital camera so that you can take photos of various foods or
exercise techniques. If you currently have some of these items, your initial
start-up costs will be considerably lower. If you plan to set up a mailing list
to communicate with your Web site visitors, you will have to purchase mailing list software to help you organize and maintain your mail lists. You will
also have to purchase comprehensive Web traffic analysis software to track
where your Web site visitors are coming from. You can use this information
to help sell advertising on your Web site. Other costs that you will incur are
related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $5,000 to $10,000
to start.
Part 2 betas.pmd 128 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 129
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Approximately one to three full-time employees will be needed to operate this
type of business. At least one staff member will be responsible for the daily
online promotion of your site, while the others will handle all administrative,
accounting, and sales activities associated with running the daily business operations.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential as health consciousness has
increased across the globe. Everyone will be interested in your health and fitness news and advice.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since you are promoting health and fitness advice online, it is extremely important for you to generate as much traffic as possible to your site. There are
multiple ways for you to do this; however, it is essential that you allocate a
significant amount of time to the daily online promotion of the site.
Since you will be viewed as a professional in your field, it is very important
that you not offer any health or fitness advice that might inflict injury or sickness on one of your visitors. If you suggest that a particular diet or exercise is
effective, make sure that (1) people can’t hurt themselves following your advice, and (2) there are no side effects that will harm your visitors sometime
down the road. If you don’t do this, it could prove detrimental to the success of
your online health and fitness guide business.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include
noncompeting health sites, exercise sites, and food and cooking Web
sites (for those interested in following a healthy diet).
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your site for free healthrelated merchandise. Perhaps an exercise tape or a treadmill could be
the prize, depending on your business model and the availability of
Part 2 betas.pmd 129 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
130 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
sponsors to donate the prize. You could ask people if they would like
to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This would encourage them to
return to your site and re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing them to
your Web site.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes frequented by your target market. There are thousands of healthand fitness-related Web sites online. These are the sites that your target
market will visit if they are looking for information about health and
fitness.
• You could develop an Ask the Experts section on your site where visitors
could ask you questions about health and fitness. This would be a great
way for you to interact with your visitors. You could provide an RSS feed
for those who want to be notified when you update this feature.
• You could contribute articles to health-related e-zines. Make sure you
are credited with the article and ensure that there is a link provided
back to your Web site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Developing a mail list would be a great way to stay in touch with your
visitors. You could have a Health Tips newsletter that could go out
monthly, weekly, or even daily to all of your subscribers. This is a great
way to encourage visitors to return to your site and will also help enhance the professionalism of your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to selling online advertising on your Web site, you might also consider selling health-related products. You could sell vitamins, nutrition supplements, fitness books, videos, or clothing. This would be a great way to make
additional income for your business; however, you will have to purchase the
appropriate storefront software to operate at this level of e-business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 130 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 131
ONLINE EXAMPLES
24 Hour Fitness
http://www.24hourfitness.com
This is a dynamite Web site (Figure 2.6) offering health and fitness advice to its
visitors. They also have an Ask the Experts section where visitors can ask the
professionals at 24 Hour Fitness questions. This is a great way for the site to
enhance its professionalism.
Health World Online
http://www.healthy.net
This site has multiple interactive features to promote personal well-being and a
healthy lifestyle.
44. Hobby Store
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
We all have hobbies. Even though we may not perceive our recreational activities as “hobbies,” they are. Playing video games is a present-day hobby, and so
Figure 2.6. Anyone can get free online fitness advice at 24 Hour Fitness.
Part 2 betas.pmd 131 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
132 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
is collecting a video library of all the best flicks. Collecting is a traditional
hobby. Huge hobby markets you might want to consider are model building,
sports, coin and stamp collecting, antiques, and crafts.
The advantages of creating a hobby site begin with the guarantee that people
will always look for these products in their spare time and they will often use
the Net to do it.
Most hobby sites focus on a particular age group or gender. This is a good
idea because you will want browsers to stick around on your site. You must
provide a significant amount of information and interactivity that suits their
hobby preference in order to make this happen.
Revenue will come from online sales of hobby products that you showcase
on your site and also through affiliate relationships with manufacturers and
distributors of the hobby paraphernalia that pertains to your target niche.
SKILLS NEEDED
Familiarity with online marketing techniques is a definite plus. Understanding
the hobby industry will help you to design a site that stands up to other hobby
sites on the Web that target your niche group. Focusing on a hobby you enjoy
personally would be beneficial, since you may need to answer related questions. Basic Web publishing skills are needed to update your Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up your hobby store will range from $5,000 to $10,000.
These costs include a computer, administrative and e-commerce software to sell
the hobby products in your online store, a printer, a scanner, and a digital camera. In the start-up phase, you may wish to join affiliate programs and recommend specific products from your site. This will reduce start-up costs because
you will not need to purchase inventory or the software for the online store.
You will also incur the cost of having your Web site designed, developed, and
hosted. Other initial costs to consider include your inventory and the advertising of your Web site.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
After the initial setup, this business requires so little time that it is ideal for
those who decide to keep their full-time jobs. The number of employees required is dependent on the volume of business you will be handling. You can
easily start this business with one employee if your order volume is low.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Doing business on the Internet gives you international reach. People all over the
world share hobbies, and they don’t even know it. Hobby Web sites are a perPart 2 betas.pmd 132 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 133
fect way for hobby enthusiasts to meet each other and discuss their hobby. The
only foreseeable barriers are language, tariffs, and shipping costs.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 is most appropriate for this type of business if you want
to begin by taking the affiliate program approach. If you want to have your
own online storefront, carry inventory, and sell products on your site, then
level 3 is recommended. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The pertinent issues in the hobby business revolve around your target market.
While planning out your business strategy, make sure to carefully research all
the interests and traits of the individuals who most likely will be interested in
the hobbies you promote on your site.
People love to talk about their hobbies because it’s a source of joy for them,
so make sure to have plenty of outlets on your site for the users to communicate
with each other. Message boards, chat rooms, polls, mail lists, and allowing
featured hobbyists to be introduced on the site are ways to do this. Make sure
to have plenty of links to resources and create strategic alliances with noncompetitive partners so that you can provide a full set of services for your users.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate as many links as possible from targeted Web sites, cybermalls, directories, meta-indexes, and
Web rings that relate to your hobby niche.
• Participate in publicly accessible opt-in mail lists that talk about your
hobby. Provide a valuable contribution to the discussion, and attach
your signature file with a catchy tagline to all correspondence.
• Participate in e-zines that relate to your hobby niche. You can submit
articles, send press releases, sponsor a section of their Web site or outgoing promotion, or do banner advertising.
• Participate in appropriate newsgroups, discussion groups, and forums
that talk about your hobby niche. Again, always include your signature
file with a catchy tagline with all correspondence.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
Part 2 betas.pmd 133 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
134 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Run contests on your site with the prize being a product of interest to
your target market. Ask people if they’d like to be notified as you have
new contests and new prizes.
• Have a viral marketing element included in your site where visitors can
“Tell a Friend” about your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can be generated through banner advertising revenue generated
from advertisers that are interested in reaching the same target market that you do.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
eHobbies
http://www.ehobbies.com/Home.do
This site has a huge selection of anything you can think of as a hobby.
Hobbyshop.com
http://www.hobbyshop.com
This hobby Web site is built using Vstore.com’s storefront templates. It sells the
usual assortment of hobby items; however, it lacks any craft-related items.
45. Hotel Guide
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The entire travel industry has been making a rapid transition to online service.
A lot of people travel frequently, and they need to arrange their accommodations long before they get to where they’re going. Hotel guides make it much
easier for tourists and business travelers to do this, and they are in high demand
all over the world.
The way this business works is by building a database of hotels in the area
you choose. You may choose to build your database from a specific town or
city, a specific state, or a specific country. Your site should be set up so that
Part 2 betas.pmd 134 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 135
hotels can add their listing at your Web site and you can build the database
from your end. The information on each hotel should include details such as
what type of accommodations they have, address, parking, wheelchair access,
amenities, number of rooms, nearby restaurants and attractions, and if they
have a pool or hot tubs—all the details.
Basic listings are free for hotels, and the revenue can be made by charging a
monthly, biannual, or annual fee for a hypertext link from the database listing
to the hotel’s Web site. Revenue is generated through the enhanced listings and
banner advertising.
Your site should have a robust content area such as an e-zine that includes
articles about all the fun things to do in the immediate area and pertinent information for business travelers (such as where to get dry cleaning and fax, e-mail,
and printing services). Your site should feature a different hotel each week, and
you should run contests for free accommodations and related things to attract
repeat visits and keep your “stickiness” factor high.
SKILLS NEEDED
A broad familiarity with the travel industry in your area is needed. However,
you will expand this knowledge as your hotel database progresses. The hotel
database and the Web site will require a high level of maintenance, which will
include constant updating and editing. Therefore, you will need experience in
operating a database and in Web publishing skills.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up your hotel guide will range from $25,000 to over
$50,000. These costs include a high-end computer and database software such
as ColdFusion, Oracle, or SQL. You will need to have a Web site designed,
developed, and hosted. Some other costs you will incur are the monthly advertising costs for your Web site.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
If you outsource the database development, this business can be started and run
by one individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Information businesses face none of the usual hindrances common to the online
retail models. Without shipping costs and import restrictions to contend with,
there is nothing preventing your business from succeeding on an international
level. Your only restriction to complete international penetration is language
barriers. For this reason, you may wish to include on your Web site several
language options.
Part 2 betas.pmd 135 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
136 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
There are thousands of hotels worldwide, so the database you construct can be
huge. To ensure customer satisfaction, your database will have to be as efficient
as possible. Unfortunately, efficiency is what drives the cost of databases up.
Keeping in touch with all the hotel operators is important. Create a form on
your site where hotels can go to update information if anything should change
in their details.
Make sure you have a solid invoicing strategy linked into the database so
that hotels can pay with a credit card for their hypertext link or enhanced
listing.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate as many links as possible to your site from appropriate travel-related Web sites, directories,
meta-indexes, Web rings, and travel-related cybermalls.
• Develop a contest that will be run on a regular basis. The prize can be
provided by companies in your database. Ask visitors if they’d like to
be reminded when you run a new contest. This will get your name in
front of your target customers on a regular basis.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could be a contributing editor of a syndicated “Featured Hotel”
article for travel related e-zines.
• A mail list or newsletter can also be used to advertise your deals and
keep consumers interested in your services.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
Part 2 betas.pmd 136 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 137
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can generate additional revenue through the sale of banner advertising
throughout your site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
USAHotelGuide.com
http://www.usahotelguide.com
A beautiful and well laid out Web site that not only lets you reserve hotel rooms
but also lets you set up a car rental and book a flight.
Hotelguide.com
http://www.hotelguide.com
This site has a huge directory of hotels for every conceivable location, including
Timbuktu! It also has incorporated wireless technology into its Web site. You
can now arrange a hotel in Timbuktu from a cell phone.
46. Hunting and Fishing Supplies
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Hunting and fishing are two of the oldest outdoor sports. The number of potential customers online with an interest in these sports is huge. The specialty
equipment that is available for these two sports is amazing. There is so much
special equipment that it would be almost impossible for any store to carry the
full range—especially in a small populated region. The Internet is the serious
huntsman’s or fisherman’s dream come true. Any product or piece of equipment is available with the click of a few buttons online.
You will want to have an online storefront to provide pictures of the products you sell as well as textual information about the product. Make sure that
the storefront option you choose is very user-friendly.
Make sure you carry a broad enough range of products so that your target
customers will consider your site a one-stop shop for all their needs. You may
also choose to have a section of your storefront where you can advertise products that you can get if the enthusiast is willing to wait a little longer, granting
access to even the rarest items for the part-time enthusiast.
Part 2 betas.pmd 137 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
138 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
You will make your money primarily by selling hunting and fishing equipment through your Web site. The huge variety of equipment for these two sports
will necessitate a huge online catalogue unless you limit yourself initially. It
may be a good idea to focus on a niche to start.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need to have some familiarity with hunting and fishing products and
the laws regarding their sale and use. Knowing something about marketing on
the Internet would also be a very useful skill.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Costs will range from $10,000 to $250,000. This includes the purchase of a
computer, appropriate software, a printer, a scanner, and a digital camera. You
will need to purchase your initial inventory. You will also need to have your Web
site designed, developed, and hosted. The start-up cost for this business will be
higher than most other businesses due to the higher cost of your inventory items.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can be started fairly easily with only one employee. Once the Web
site is set up, most of your effort will be concentrated on updating your Web
site, advertising your Web site, and shipping your product.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential of this business is relatively high. There are hunters
and fishermen in most countries, and some of the products and specialty equipment may not be readily available in their local stores. Some items used for hunting are of a quasi-legal nature, especially firearms. In many countries these are
controlled items with special import laws. It is important that you find out the
import laws for the countries that you think you will be doing business with.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 is most appropriate for this type of business. If you have an
offline store as well, you may want to look at level 4. For more information, see
Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Several legal issues arise from selling hunting and fishing products internationally. Firearms are the most obvious restricted item; however, importing certain
knives may be illegal as well.
Part 2 betas.pmd 138 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 139
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
increase the awareness of your hunting and fishing supplies site, it would
also send referral business to your site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include
noncompeting hunting and fishing sites, and other Web sites that would
be of interest to your target market.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your site for a free gift.
You could ask people if they would like to be notified of the winner via
e-mail. This would encourage them to return to your site and re-enter
your contest, thus re-exposing them to your products.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, metaindexes, and Web rings frequented by your target market.
• You could develop a Featured Product page on your site. You could
change this product every week. People will continue to return to your
site to see what the featured hunting- or fishing-related product is. You
could even ask people if they would like to be notified of new featured
products via e-mail. This would be a great way to encourage repeat
traffic.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Online coupons and discounts can be used as an incentive to have visitors return to your site. You can ask if your visitors would like to be
part of your preferred customers program, where they are notified weekly
of specials and provided with coupons for online purchases.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
Part 2 betas.pmd 139 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
140 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ADDITIONAL INCOME
To generate additional income, you could expand your Web site to include
equipment for other outdoor adventure sports. Several adventure sports can be
categorized with hunting and fishing—including camping, hiking, gliding, and
boating. You should be able to add any of these sports without compromising
the feel of your Web site too much.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Cabela’s
http://www.cabelas.com
The site includes hunting, fishing, camping, and boating. It also has several
useful features for the outdoors person. (See Figure 2.7)
Order Outdoors
http://www.orderoutdoors.com
This is mostly a fishing Web site. However, it does cover firearm laws and has
some hunting equipment.
Figure 2.7. If you like the great outdoors, visit Cabela’s Web site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 140 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 141
47. Image Consultant
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
This business is ideal for someone with knowledge of the importance of first
impressions and how to present yourself in various settings, primarily the corporate or professional world and in the media. The way this business works is
that you provide one-on-one image consulting to clients and possibly group
seminars about image-related issues such as wardrobe, appropriate colors, cosmetic application, posture, and self-confidence. Clients can pay by the hour for
your services, or you may choose to have a contract at a set amount for specific
services—it’s up to you. The Web site is the perfect place to showcase your
services and your clients’ success stories, and to market your business.
SKILLS NEEDED
To successfully operate this business, you will need experience in beauty, cosmetics, and fashion consulting. The Web site maintenance will require basic
Web publishing skills, and you will need clear communication skills via e-mail,
phone, and in person. To inspire confidence and style in your clients, you need
to walk the walk as well.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this business will include the design, development, and hosting
of your Web site, as well as a computer, appropriate software, a printer, a scanner, and a digital camera. You can start this venture from home and on a parttime basis. The approximate start-up cost ranges between $3,000 and $4,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
One experienced and competent individual can start this business singlehandedly.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential for this business depends on the way you choose to
communicate with your clients. If you would like to have customers send in
images of themselves and communicate via e-mail to conduct consulting, then
the global potential will be restricted only by language. Most image consultants
operate face to face with clients, however, and this is preferred throughout the
industry.
Part 2 betas.pmd 141 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
142 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The e-business model suggested for the image consulting business is level 1.
Clients will pay you directly for your services, so there is no need for online
payment processing or a database. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The image consulting business is highly personalized and everchanging due to
today’s rapid and progressive styles. Your advice should be tailored to the particular careers of your clients. Make sure your prices are competitive and your
Web site clearly defines your capabilities and clientele.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to generate as many
links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, Web rings,
and meta-indexes related to your target market. There are many sites
related to business services that would be appropriate link sites. Ensure
that you get listed in sites that target your local area as well as your area
of expertise.
• Participate in local newsgroups, mail lists, chat rooms, and discussion
forums related to style, beauty, and image issues such as weight loss and
makeup application in efforts to create awareness of your services and
to attract new clients.
• Organize a reciprocal linking arrangement with regional beauty salons,
fashion boutiques, stores, and publications in order to make your business apparent to the professional women who frequent them.
• Get testimonials from clients whom you’ve helped already and post them
on your Web site—maybe even include before and after pictures.
• Develop and send articles about the benefits of using an image consultant to e-zines that focus on related topics.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a colleague
about this service” via your site. This will spread the word about your site.
• Ensure that you submit your site to the search engines and directories.
Part 2 betas.pmd 142 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 143
• Promotion through related mail lists and newsletters is important. You
could even develop your own newsletter or mail list to stay close with
your target market.
• Participation in cybermalls related to business services in your geographic
area would be very appropriate.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra income can come from reselling and advertising beauty products and
fashions for preferred distributors. You can generate additional revenue from
banner advertising and sponsorship by companies that are interested in reaching your target market.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Your Best Image
http://www.yourbestimagepid.com
This site offers image consulting services to women in the professional world.
Victoria Brink-Guillot—International Image Consultant
http://www.guillotinternational.com
Victoria does on-site image consulting for brides and professionals. Her site
features before and after images that are extremely effective in attracting new
clients.
48. Information Broker
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The information brokerage business is extremely popular these days, and need
for the service will only increase as the value of information becomes more
critical. The Internet is information, so if you have a talent for researching and
Part 2 betas.pmd 143 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
144 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
accessing public and some private records, databases, and other forms of data
warehousing, this is the business for you.
What types of information are clients looking for? Information requests can
take many forms. Lawyers may be looking for specific information to strengthen
their case. Corporations need market research to support their marketing plans.
Businesses may be looking for competitive analysis or information.
How does it work? Clients request information on a certain subject, and
you do the research, provide the client with your findings, and get paid for your
effort. This operation has fantastic international potential but also has serious
legal issues surrounding it, so make sure to have a firm grasp of your liability
before embarking on this venture. There is good news: Information brokering
can help a lot of people, so your job can be very rewarding and it’s easy to get
referrals.
SKILLS NEEDED
To successfully operate this business, you will need expertise in researching and
accessing public, and in some cases private, information over the Internet and
through traditional sources such as libraries, microfiche archives, and so on. To
update your Web site, you will need basic Web publishing skills. Your communication skills should be concise and descriptive.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this business will include the design, development, and hosting
of your Web site as well as a computer, appropriate software, and a printer. The
approximate start-up cost ranges between $3,000 and $7,500.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
One experienced and competent individual with superior online researching
skills and resources can start this business single-handedly.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential for this business is unlimited. There is no telling
where a client may reside. If you have access to the information they seek, it’s
most likely that you can e-mail it to them, and this makes the borders of your
business purely virtual and governed solely by language.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The e-business level suggested for the information brokerage business is level 1
or 2. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 144 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 145
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The information brokerage business sometimes infringes on the privacy of others, and whenever this happens there are legal ramifications. Before entering
the business, you should research your liability and risk factor.
Sometimes in this business you will be under tight deadlines. Ensure that you
have additional resources you can call upon to provide a professional service.
The pricing should be clearly outlined on your site for various services that
are defined by the nature of information the client is searching for. The costs
should be competitive and reflective of the amount of time it takes to conduct
each search.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. It is important to be linked from
as many business service Web sites as possible, as well as related directories, business service cybermalls, Web rings, and meta-indexes.
• Develop extensive registration in all of the major search engines with
focus on the information brokerage business and on sites where those
searching for private or inaccessible information would most likely go.
You can also develop a pay-per-click strategy with the popular search
engines.
• Organizing a reciprocal linking arrangement with private investigators,
public records organizations, libraries, and security sites will make your
business apparent to your target demographic.
• Participating in market research and other business services-related mail
lists and newsgroups may be an effective way to reach your target market online.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra income can come from conducting extensive searches and aiding private
investigators and security specialists by doing online research that they cannot
Part 2 betas.pmd 145 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
146 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
conduct. You may also advertise and recommend the services of private investigators, genealogists, and security specialists.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Sterling Information Broker
http://www.sterlingcommerce.com
Sterling Information Broker provides delivery of business-critical documents
with end-to-end audits and controls.
Information Broker Ireland
http://indigo.ie/~findinfo
This company finds and extracts any information in the public domain in Ireland and forwards it to you for a fee.
49. Interior Design
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
This business has a lot of online potential. The design of living and office space
is becoming more important to us each time we realize how much our environment influences our mood and productivity at work. If you are an interior
designer or work in a related field, this business could create an opportunity for
self-employment and extra income.
Here’s how it works: Clients find your site and learn of your services. You
consult with the clients via e-mail and in person to determine their particular
design needs. You provide the required design services and deliver the final
product or services. These services may be billed on an hourly basis or be provided on a contract fee basis. Your advice should be budget-conscious so that
the client can implement your realistic suggestions.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need interior design skills, credentials, and experience. Basic Web publishing skills would be a bonus. Sometimes you will be communicating with
your clients via e-mail to describe suggestions and perhaps using Adobe
Photoshop or other image-editing software to convey your ideas for decorating
and remodeling. You may want to use CAD (Computer Aided Design) softPart 2 betas.pmd 146 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 147
ware. You should be able to clearly define and explain interior design principles
and be receptive to your clients’ desires.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this business will include the design, development, and hosting of your Web site as well as a computer, appropriate software, a printer, a
scanner, and a digital camera. You can start this venture from home and on a
part-time basis. The approximate start-up cost ranges between $5,000 and
$10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One experienced and competent individual can start this business singlehandedly.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential for this business depends on the way you communicate with your clients. If you would like to have customers send in images of
their homes and communicate via e-mail to conduct consulting, then the global
potential will be restricted to language barriers only. Most interior designers,
however, make several house calls and operate face to face with clients, and this
is preferred throughout the industry.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The e-business level suggested for online interior design is level 1. In the beginning clients will pay you directly for your services, so there is no need for online
payment processing or a database. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Interior design is an ever-changing and competitive business. To offer your clients quality service, your Web site should have a rich resource area where users
can surf the Web for ideas, tips, and tools to help them decide what they would
like to have done to their home or office.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program with fellow industry partners such as wall and floor covering manufacturers and distributors would increase the awareness of your interior design services
and send referral business back and forth.
Part 2 betas.pmd 147 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
148 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Develop extensive registration in all of the major search engines that
focus on the region in which you reside and on sites where people in the
mood to redecorate would most likely go.
• Participate in local mail lists, chat rooms, and discussion forums related
to interior design, remodeling, and decorating in efforts to create awareness of your services and to attract new clients.
• Organize a reciprocal linking arrangement and advertise with regional
distributors of decorating and construction supply stores in order to
make your business apparent to the folks who frequent them.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You might want to include a testimonial section on your Web site or a
before-and-after section displaying some of your more successful projects.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra income in the interior design business can come from many avenues
because of the wide variety of manufacturers and distributors you can recommend, resell for, and advertise for without threatening your own business.
When you are in the position to consult, it’s easy to recommend certain products and services. Everything from plumbing and electrical work to dry wall
installation can be suggested by you, and it’s highly possible to have an advertising and referral commission arrangement with local service and sales industry partners.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Decorating Studio
http://www.decoratingstudio.com
An entire online interior design service site. You can hire consultants, get color
schemes, and much more.
Part 2 betas.pmd 148 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 149
Huber Décor Inc.
http://www.huberdecor.com
Private interior design firm specializing in commercial, office, and mall interior
design.
50. Mail List Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The key to running a successful mail list service is attaining and growing a
number of targeted mail lists that you can make available to clients to increase
the value and responsiveness of each direct e-mail campaign.
You gather income from the renting of the list based on how targeted and
how big it is. You have choices in this business as to how involved you are in
your clients’ marketing campaigns. You can rent the list and let them provide
you with the communication they want sent out, or you can work with the
client to develop the marketing message, deliver the personalized messages to
the list, and provide tracking reports on the results. You can work with longterm clients to do A/B and other testing to increase the effectiveness of the
campaigns. It depends on how much time you would like to commit to the
business.
You can also develop a mail list online related to a particular topic. With
this mail list you should not rent the list but certainly could accept advertising
or sponsorship dollars. With opt-in mail lists, people join because they are interested in the topic of the mail list and are interested in receiving information
related to that topic. Many of these opt-in mail lists are quite comprehensive—
many have over 500,000 names on their list.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online advertising techniques and e-mail capture is an asset to
run this type of business. You will need experience in sorting, cleansing, and
building lists using a database of some kind. You will need basic Web publishing skills to update your Web site and competent organizational skills.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your Web site.
If you do not own a computer, this obviously will have to be purchased. The
database software to manage your lists, whether it is stored on a server or on
Part 2 betas.pmd 149 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
150 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
your desktop, will be a necessary start-up expense. Estimated cost is $3,500 to
$5,500 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one dedicated
individual, and you can start this venture from home while keeping your regular full-time job.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential, since targeted mailing is an
important part of the marketing strategy for many businesses in all countries.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business in the
beginning. Once you develop an extensive group of lists that can be viewed (yet
not copied) and ordered online and distributed via download, you may want to
upgrade to level 3. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The database and administration software you purchase to administer the mail
lists should be researched and suitable to your level of operation. You should be
available by phone for prospective and current clients to contact you. Concentrate on associating yourself with online marketing resource Web sites and remain current within your market when it comes to the effectiveness of your lists
and pricing. The mail list services business is competitive.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Get links to your site from appropriate Web sites, Web rings, directories, and related cybermalls.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to online advertising or the industries that your mail lists target.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Consider providing a reduction in fee when you include your clickable
logo at the bottom of each of your clients’ outbound messages.
Part 2 betas.pmd 150 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 151
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could generate additional income for your mail list by providing datamining reports and effectiveness tests on your lists and others. This additional
service would add value to your online business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
D&B Sales and Marketing Solutions (see Figure 2.8)
http://www.zapdata.com/HomePage.do
This site makes lists available for a fee. They are downloadable from the site
once you define criteria and pay a fee.
Women in Agriculture
http://www.wia.usda.gov/listserv.htm
This is an example of a targeted mail list available on the Net.
Figure 2.8. A great example of an online mail list service.
Part 2 betas.pmd 151 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
152 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
51. Map and Tourist Information
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Tourism is definitely one of the industries that has the greatest opportunity
online today. Travelers are avid Web surfers because they know the information they seek is plentiful and quickly accessible online. There are many tourism-related sites on the Net today, but there is still a need for sites that cater
to niche markets. The possibilities are endless for map and travel content.
Maps can be provided digitally from your site and be available for download by the site visitor. There are many map sites popping up throughout the
Internet with access available at no fee. These are provided to generate traffic
and to complement travel-related sites.
At this stage the best route for any start-up online home business involving travel is targeting a very specific type of traveler, travel experience, or
location and making your site the mecca of travel information for the niche
you choose. For example, you could create a site for honeymooners who want
to find a location for their honeymoon. The content should have maps, links
to romantic travel operations that cater to honeymooners, and stories written
by actual honeymooners who enjoyed these destinations and experiences in
the past.
Your site must be very user-friendly. It must have all the information people
in your niche market would look for when planning their trip. You’ll need
information on car rentals, accommodations, resorts, cruises, bicycle rentals,
hot air balloon rides, beaches, tourist attractions, and other things of interest to
your target market.
Revenue can be generated through the sale of advertising on your site, map
digitizing services, referral fees from tourism-related sites promoted on your
site, and selling travel-related products from your site.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of tourism content writing is an asset to run this type of business.
Basic Web publishing and digital-imaging skills are needed to update the Web
site. You will have to have clear communication skills via e-mail to service your
clients.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You will need a computer, software, a printer, and Internet access. You will
have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your Web site. Estimated cost is $3,000 to $7,500 to start.
Part 2 betas.pmd 152 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 153
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one talented,
travel-savvy person, and you can start this venture while keeping your regular
full-time job.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The global potential of the online maps and tourist information business is obvious and guaranteed. The only limitation is language, but translation services exist
that are affordable and well worth the cost to ensure the success of your venture.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The primary source of revenue will come from advertising, providing content,
and perhaps booking commissions depending on how involved you intend to
get in the travel planning side of the business. To begin with, it is suggested that
e-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business. If you
plan to have an online storefront to sell travel-related products, you will want
the e-business level 3 model. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The travel business is fiercely competitive, so make sure that when you construct your business plan you research carefully and pick a niche demographic
of travelers that is not covered heavily by another site already dominating in
the search engines.
Keep your site updated and archive the old stories in a library. Remember, a
travel story is never outdated; there are so many readers on the Net that the
content is new to some browsers even though the content has been there for
quite some time.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate as many links as possible to your site from appropriate Web sites, travel-related cybermalls,
directories, and meta-indexes.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines. Make sure your site is designed to be search engine friendly for organic search placement.
• Participate in e-zines that your target market is reading. Make sure to
provide your contact information and a link to your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 153 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
154 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Develop and provide downloadable podcasts on various destinations
from your Web site.
• Incorporate viral marketing techniques like “Tell a Friend” throughout
your Web site.
• Participate in newsgroups, mail lists, and discussion forums about travel
in the area in which your site specializes.
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra income in the online map and tourism information Web site business can
come from several avenues. If you are an avid travel writer, there are opportunities to get paid by travel operators to test out their accommodations, tours, or
travel services and write a promotional story about them. There are many affiliate sales programs on the Net for travel content providers to join. You can
sell travel-related products like travel insurance and long distance phone cards.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Mapquest
http://www.mapquest.com
The largest and most popular map resource site in the world, and it’s free!
Maps.com
http://www.maps.com
Provides maps and travel resources.
Virtual Tourist
http://www.virtualtourist.com
A huge travel site that encourages tourists to share experiences and communicate with other travelers. Included are searchable maps, archives of travel stories, and much more.
Part 2 betas.pmd 154 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 155
52. Market Research
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
In today’s competitive marketing world, careful research is a must if you want
to put advertising dollars into the right places. The Internet is now the fastest
and most bountiful marketing research environment our world has ever seen. If
you have experience in marketing data-collection methods and producing reports to prove specific theories, this is the business for you. The business would
gain revenue from payment for research analysis reports and related industry
reports for clients it attracts.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online research methods is a must for this operation to run successfully. Creating professional reports of your research data and theories is
also needed. You will need basic Web publishing skills to manage your Web site
and client and partner mailing lists.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your Web site.
If you do not own a computer, this obviously will have to be purchased along
with the requisite software and printer. You will also need Internet access to do
the research. The estimated cost is $3,500 to $5,500 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one dedicated
individual, and you can start this venture from home while keeping your regular job. Remember that you will need connections in the market analysis community so that you can access accurate information in reasonable time.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. The global nature of the Internet creates a need for specific or niche online interest groups. The international
potential for this business will depend on how much marketing you do and the
languages in which you are capable of developing your reports.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business in the
beginning. Clients can pay you directly by check, money order, and so on. Once
you develop an extensive group of clients or sell your reports via download
Part 2 betas.pmd 155 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
156 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
from your site (big chance for money here!), you may want to upgrade to level
3. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Being accurate and providing data reports that make sense is the only way to
get ahead in this business. Make sure that your prices are competitive and that
the reports you develop are based on studied information. Selling your completed reports via download from your site is a great way to garnish income.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Make sure you are linked from
as many market research and business service Web sites as possible, as
well as appropriate directories, cybermalls, and meta-indexes.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to online market analysis, advertising, or the industries that your clients are targeting.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target markets.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
More income can come from banner advertising and sponsorship of your mail
list from companies that are targeting the same market as you are.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
OutLink
http://www.outlink.com
This company publishes the Firewall (Web security) report and also does standard market research.
Part 2 betas.pmd 156 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 157
Survey.com
http://www.survey.com
In their own words, this company is “the first e-research company.” Many,
many bells and whistles.
53. Monogramming
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The monogramming business has great potential on the Internet. Customers
can view all your services and products with clear images that they can enlarge.
They can order from anywhere in the world and pay online. If you have experience in the custom embroidery and printing business, this venture has your
name all over it.
Here’s how it works: The entire catalogue displaying your monogramming
services and products is put on your Web site so that browsers can view your
wares and place orders. Your online storefront will make it easy for your customers to put many items in their shopping cart and identify the monogramming
they want on each item. You will have to provide an opportunity for your
corporate clients to send you their logo in digital format for their online purchases. The opportunity for repeat business is great in this industry.
SKILLS NEEDED
Experience in the monogramming industry and the ability to find quality products such as sweaters and T-shirts on which to embroider is required. You will
need to have basic Web publishing and computer skills. Your products will be
for sale in an online store, so familiarity with merchant software and secure
payment processing methods is necessary.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this business will include the design, development, and hosting
of your Web site as well as a computer, appropriate software, a printer, a digital
camera, and a scanner. An online storefront, payment processing software, and
a merchant account are required to make this operation work. You will also
need to have the embroidery equipment and a small inventory to perform these
services. You can start this venture from home and on a part-time basis. The
approximate start-up cost ranges between $4,000 and $25,000.
Part 2 betas.pmd 157 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
158 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
One experienced and competent individual can start this business singlehandedly.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international potential of the online monogramming business is promising.
Most products that you can embroider on are cloth, so they can be shipped
anywhere.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The suggested e-business level recommended for this operation is 2 or 3. To
maximize the potential sales of your monogramming business, customers should
be able to order and pay online and include extensive details about their personalized monogramming needs. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Maintaining a strict budget while producing each order is what will ensure the
profit of this business. The orders are unique and personal, so your online store
should have many options and areas for the customer to include special notes
and details such as the thread count of the cotton T-shirt and where the design
is to be printed or embroidered.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic to your
site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include noncompeting gift
sites, direct-marketing sites, trade show promotion sites, and other Web
sites that would be of interest to your target market.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, metaindexes, and Web rings frequented by your target market.
• You could develop a Featured Product page on your site. You could
change this product every week. People will continue to return to your
site to see what the featured product is. You could even ask people if
they would like to be notified of your featured product via e-mail. This
would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic to your site. You can
also provide access to the updates via RSS.
Part 2 betas.pmd 158 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 159
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program will increase
the awareness of your monogramming business and generate referral
business.
• Register in all the major search engines after making sure your site has
been optimized for search engine friendliness. You can also consider
participating in pay-per-click programs with the popular search engines.
• Create a mailing list of all your clients and have a section on your Web
site where potential customers may join the list to find out about upcoming promotions and so on.
• Organize a reciprocal linking arrangement with marketing agencies,
publications, and corporations with obvious branding.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can expand your business by providing services such as gift registry for
weddings, christenings, showers, and other special events. You can offer several
levels of gift wrapping, which will help to generate additional income for this
business.
You can sell banner advertising to Web sites that are noncompeting but sell
to the same target market.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Ashton Whyte
http://www.ashtonwhyte.com
Nice Web site, but apparently this is only an advertisement for their real-world
store. They do mention that they are willing to help customers over the phone.
Thread Heads
http://www.threadheads.com
I list this only for resource value. This site is a directory of most of the
monogramming sites on the Web.
Part 2 betas.pmd 159 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
160 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Image Builders
http://www.imagebuilders.com
You call the shop, discuss what you want, and they will make it and then ship it
for you.
54. Movie Review Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
If you’re a huge movie fan and enjoy discussing the latest movies, then this
opportunity may be for you. You could develop a movie review site. You can
provide your site’s visitors with information on upcoming movie releases, reviews of currently released movies, and listings of recently released movies. You
can also provide visitors with the latest information on the movie industry or
entertainment industry.
There are several ways for this type of site to generate revenue. You can sell
advertising space to entertainment-related businesses promoting movies, television, or other related products. You could also sell movie paraphernalia such as
T-shirts, toys, stickers, posters, sound tracks, DVDs, and other merchandise
related to the entertainment industry.
SKILLS NEEDED
Since you will be reviewing movies, excellent analytical skills are required. You
need to be able to convey your message to your target market clearly and effectively, so excellent writing skills will also be necessary. Since the success of your
movie review site depends largely on the number of visitors that your site receives, knowledge of online marketing techniques would be an asset.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer. It
would probably be in your best interest to purchase comprehensive Web traffic
analysis software to track where your Web site visitors are coming from. This
information can be great for future marketing opportunities and will also enable you to report traffic statistics to potential advertisers. If you decide to sell
movie merchandise on your site, you will have to purchase storefront software
equipped with an electronic shopping cart feature or be responsible for developing this in-house. If you plan to set up a mailing list, you will also have to
purchase mailing list software to help you organize and maintain your mail
Part 2 betas.pmd 160 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 161
lists. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web
site. Estimated cost is $5,000 to $10,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can be started as a one-person operation on a part-time basis. To
grow the business, you will require one or two full-time employees. Since this
site requires that you develop an enormous number of site visitors, one employee’s
time should be focused on implementing Web site traffic-building techniques.
The other employee(s) can be responsible for writing the movie reviews and
handling all administrative, accounting, and sales associated with operating
this type of business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is very little international potential for this type of business. Movies available in your geographic area may not be playing in other parts of the world due
to cultural conflicts, release dates, or lack of interest.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Advertisers are going to want to advertise on your movie review site for one
reason—increased exposure. To ensure that this happens, you are going to have
to do whatever you can to promote your business online and offline. It is also
important to integrate all of your online and offline promotions. All colors,
images, and themes should be consistent between your online and offline promotional efforts.
Be sure to display your contact information in a prominent location on
your site. You want potential advertisers to be able to contact you easily. You
could even have a section of your site dedicated to potential advertisers. An
Advertising Information button could be linked to a page where potential advertisers could review traffic statistics, site reviews, and other information that
would convince them to advertise on your site. This would be a dynamite way
to encourage people to advertise on your site.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could relate to movies, television, or
other topics related to the entertainment industry.
Part 2 betas.pmd 161 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
162 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Review” via your site. People will be able send a movie review to
their friend if they are trying to decide which movie to see. This will
spread the word about your site.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for free
movie merchandise offered by one of your advertisers. This merchandise could include free passes to a movie premiere, T-shirts, a copy of
the movie sound track, or other promotional merchandise. You could
ask people if they would like to be notified of the winner via e-mail.
This e-mail will encourage them to return to your site to re-enter your
contest, thus re-exposing them to your site.
• Develop as many links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes related to your target market. These sites should
relate to movies, television, or the entertainment industry.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You should develop a What’s New or a New Releases page for your
site. This will encourage people to return to your site on a regular basis
to see which movies were released. You could ask people if they would
like to be notified via e-mail whenever you make updates to your site.
This will encourage them to return to your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to providing movie reviews from your site, you could also partner
with a newspaper or entertainment publication to have your movie reviews
published on a regular basis. This would not only generate exposure for your
movie review site, it would also generate additional revenue for your business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Cinephiles—Movie Reviews and Analysis
http://www.cinephiles.net
Objective film reviews of new releases, user forums, and an online store.
Part 2 betas.pmd 162 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 163
CinemaReview.com
http://www.cinemareview.com
Tons of movie-related information. The site encourages the user to subscribe
for additional membership benefits.
55. Music Center
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Music has enjoyed phenomenal success online. Due to the file type called
MP3, a myriad of Web sites such as CDNow, Napster, and Kazaa have proved
there is no question that music on the Internet is an award-winning combination. Selling of musical items online has the advantage of providing users
with a huge selection that spans a wide diversity throughout the music industry. This leaves plenty of space for businesses to avoid competing with
each other.
You will make money with your online business by selling musical items
online. What you sell can vary from store to store, but the inventory often
includes CDs, musical instruments, related paraphernalia, and sheet music.
You will have an easy-to-use online storefront and include many features
on your Web site to encourage repeat visitors, encourage your visitors to stay
awhile, and encourage visitors to tell their friends about your site.
SKILLS NEEDED
A music center is not just about selling music items and instruments online, but
also about providing a wealth of useful information to your customers. To provide the level of information your customers will expect, you will need to be
familiar with the types of music and instruments that your music center sells
and services.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up your music center will range from $5,000 to $20,000.
These costs include a computer, administrative and e-commerce software, a
printer, a scanner, and a digital camera. Your Web site will need to be designed,
developed, and hosted. Other initial costs (not included in the amount above)
to consider include your inventory and the advertising of your Web site.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Depending on the way you begin the venture, this can be a great part-time
start-up business for one individual. If you wish to provide a more comprehenPart 2 betas.pmd 163 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
164 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
sive service or begin to sell high volume, you would have to increase your staff
size accordingly.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Using the Internet, you have access to the global market. However, high shipping costs and the different musical tastes between continental markets may
limit you to your home continent.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business model level 3 is most appropriate for this type of business. If you
have an offline store as well, you might want to consider a level 4 model. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You will have to be competitive with your pricing as your customers will be
looking for the best price online. Be aware of sites like Amazon.com and
CDNow.com that offer generous discounts.
Sites like MP3.com, where music can be downloaded to a local computer
and then burned to a CD, will have an impact on CD sales online.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
increase the awareness of your music center site, it would also send
referral business to your site.
• You could run a daily or weekly contest on your site for a free music
product. You could ask people if they would like to be notified of the
winner via e-mail. This would encourage them to return to your site
and re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing them to your products.
• Develop as many links as possible from appropriate music-related Web
sites, directories, meta-indexes, and Web rings frequented by your target market.
• You could develop a Featured Product page on your site. You could
change this product every week. People will continue to return to your
site to see what the featured music product is. You could even ask people
if they would like to be notified of your featured product via e-mail.
This would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic.
Part 2 betas.pmd 164 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 165
• Developing and distributing a great music newsletter or being the moderator for a music-related discussion group will build up a sense of community with your users. This will help create an affinity for your Web
site in the hearts of your hardcore music fans. In other words, it is a
great way to generate repeat customers.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include
noncompeting music sites and other Web sites that would be of interest
to your target market.
• You can develop a discount center or offer coupons giving customers a
deal, thus enticing them to return. Both discounts and coupons also
allow your customers to join your permission-marketing campaign.
• Host live chats with local talents and store live audio recordings on the
Web site of jam sessions, concerts, and so on.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can expand your product line. If you are selling just CDs or just musical
instruments, you could expand your service to include the other one. The music
industry is renowned for product endorsements, so you can capitalize on this
by selling musical paraphernalia such as T-shirts, hats, or other items with
band logos.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
iMusic.com (Figure 2.9)
http://www.imusic.com
Great site with featured artists, latest news, contests, downloads, and much
more for the music enthusiast.
Haight Ashbury Music Center
http://www.haight-ashbury-music.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 165 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
166 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
A very nicely laid out music center. This site has a wide selection of instruments
and music available.
56. Newsletter Developer
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Newsletters are a compelling way to create brand awareness and awareness
about a company’s products and services. There are all different kinds of newsletters being circulated on the Internet. Some are sent out daily; others are sent
weekly or monthly. The higher the frequency of circulation, the more work is
required to manage the development and circulation of the newsletter. Most
newsletters are free, so the revenue comes from advertising, sponsorship, and
mail list management.
In many cases, traditional businesses want to integrate the e-mail newsletter into their marketing strategy and would prefer to hire someone to manage
this task for a fee. It would be possible to develop and circulate newsletters for
several businesses and make a profit.
Figure 2.9. iMusic.com features everything for the music enthusiast.
Part 2 betas.pmd 166 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 167
SKILLS NEEDED
To operate this online business, you will need experience in developing copy for
public viewing, which demands a catchy and terse writing style to get the message across clearly and in few words. Basic Web publishing skills are needed to
update the Web site where you market your services as a newsletter developer.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You will need a computer, appropriate software, a printer, and an Internet account. The main expense will be the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site. The estimated cost is $3,000 to $7,500 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one dedicated
individual, and you can start this venture while keeping your regular full-time job.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential if the newsletters are translated
into several languages and the content appeals to a demographic that spans
across the globe. E-mail can go anywhere, so the possibilities of having a global
business are high.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
Some newsletters are free, and the revenue is earned by the development, distribution services, and advertising. In the case of the free newsletter e-business,
level 1 or 2 would be appropriate. If the newsletters you manage contain information that people are willing to pay for, then e-business level 2 may be suitable in the long run. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The development and management of newsletters and the mailing lists that
they are associated with is becoming a more valuable business as the traditional
print version of the newsletter becomes obsolete. Make sure the pricing of your
services is competitive with other newsletter developers, and carefully plan how
much time you will spend on each circulation.
You must be aware of e-mail courtesy and privacy guidelines so you do not
spam your subscribers or send them viruses.
Payment for your services should be half the total fee when you accept the
job and half when each campaign is complete. In every case possible, try to get
clients to sign a six-month to one-year contract, allowing you to manage their
newsletters for a prolonged amount of time.
Part 2 betas.pmd 167 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
168 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop your own newsletter and send it out to prospective clients outlining your services and the benefits of having theirs developed remotely
by you.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Get listed and linked from directories and meta-indexes related to mail
lists, newsletters, and Internet marketing services.
• Include your clickable logo at the bottom of all newsletters you develop
for clients, if possible.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to online advertising or the industries to which your newsletter services would appeal.
• Organize a strategic reciprocal linking and advertising strategy between
your site and all the businesses that currently use your services.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can come from creating a newsletter development business
that broadens the scope of services by integrating the newsletter with other
online marketing techniques that cooperate with ad networks, marketing research groups, and mail list buyers.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
The Lisa Company
http://www.thelisaco.com/newsletters.html
The Lisa Company provides writing, editing, and research services for newsletters and e-newsletters.
The Newsletter Factory
http://www.nlf.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 168 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 169
The Newsletter Factory provides a full range of services—proofreading, editing, writing, newsletter design, custom newsletters, magazines, brochures, Web
sites, and e-mail newsletter design.
57. Online Coach
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Traditional coaching can now happen online. If you have experience or expertise in consulting or coaching, this could be the business for you. Currently
there are many industry experts and professionals offering online coaching services. This doesn’t mean that competition is fierce, however. The number of
potential clients for this service is enormous, as everyone needs some form of
coaching. Whether you offer spiritual coaching, business coaching, family coaching, and so on, there will be a market for your services.
How does it work? You simply design a Web site to effectively promote
your coaching services, market it all over the Web, and business should come
your way. Your coaching services can be delivered as personal consultation,
over the telephone, or via e-mail.
SKILLS NEEDED
You should have in-depth knowledge in your area of expertise, together with
the skill to motivate others and give fair, constructive feedback. You will need
to be available through e-mail, instant messenger service, and perhaps telephone in some cases. You should possess basic Web publishing skills to update
and administer your Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Since you are providing a service that has no inventory, your initial costs will be
minimal. You will have to pay for the design, hosting, and marketing of your
Web site. Estimated cost to start up is $1,000 to $5,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
You can start this business single-handedly from your home office.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. Depending on the type of
coaching you offer and the languages you speak, the global opportunity is
abundant.
Part 2 betas.pmd 169 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
170 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You will have to carefully plan how to charge for your services. There are options. You can charge a monthly retainer for a decided number of hours, or you
can charge by the hour. How you communicate with your clients is also an issue
to be considered. Make sure your budget includes telecommunications expenses
and try to cut back on these as much as possible by using other online communication methods such as e-mail, live voice chat, online meeting facilities, and MSN.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a coaching tips and tools archive and feature lead-ins to it in an
online newsletter or e-zine.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to coaching
and consulting or in your area of expertise.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Write articles or be a contributing editor to e-zines that focus on your
area of expertise.
• Develop a few podcasts available from your site that profile your expertise.
• Get testimonials from clients whom you’ve helped already and send
articles about the benefits of online coaching to e-zines that focus on
such topics.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could generate additional income for your online coaching business by
providing ad space on your site for associated products that your client base
Part 2 betas.pmd 170 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 171
might be interested in buying. Another idea is creating and selling e-books that
outline your coaching strategies within your field of expertise.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Cool Running
http://www.coolrunning.com
This site offers online coaching that allows a real-life coach to interact with
athletes via the Internet and electronic mail.
Your Natural Edge
http://www.yournaturaledge.com
This site facilitates enduring, positive change within organizations using simple
strategies that focus on individuals’ specific needs rather than on corporate
systems.
58. Online Flower Store
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Who doesn’t like to be sent flowers? This business is as much about helping
people stay connected as it is about selling flowers. You will often be marketing
your flowers to busy executives whose work schedule doesn’t allow them to
shop in a more conventional store. It is very important that the service you
provide is easy to use and reliable.
There are several methods of selling flowers online, and you must decide
which one you wish to use. The easiest method is to affiliate with a major
supplier like FTD. Your Web site will market and sell the flowers, but when
customers make a purchase you send the order to FTD and they take care of the
order fulfillment and delivery. You make your revenue by generating a small
commission on all sales you send to FTD. A second and more complex method
of selling flowers online is to handle the fulfillment yourself through your own
store or through your affiliate network. This type of business is usually restricted to larger stores with an offline as well as an online store. When people
purchase from you online, you send their order directly (if they are in your
geographic order) or forward the order to an offline store in the location where
the order is to be delivered. This can be done through FTD or by setting up
your own affiliate network.
Part 2 betas.pmd 171 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
172 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need to set up your online storefront and handle the order distribution. If you are also providing the order fulfillment, then you will need to
become familiar with that aspect of the business as well as being part of a
national and international network for handling orders outside your geographic area.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
To start this business you need a computer, the appropriate software, and a
printer. You will also need a dynamite Web site designed, developed, and hosted,
as you have a lot of competition online. Your Web site will include an online
storefront. You will need to become part of the FTD or some other flower
distribution network. The setup will cost between $4,000 and $20,000.
If you have an offline presence to handle order fulfillment, you will have to
consider the costs of physical space, inventory, furniture, and equipment, as
well as staff-related costs.
In addition to these expenses, you will need to allow for online and offline
advertising, cybermall participation, or paid directory listings. These costs depend on your budget and your aggressiveness. At a minimum you should allow
another $5,000 to $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This type of business can be started as a one-person part-time venture if you are
using FTD or are affiliated with real-world stores and are doing none of the
order fulfillment yourself. However, if you are handling the order fulfillment
side of things as well, your staffing requirements will depend on your hours of
operation, the size of your store, and the volume of business you handle.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This type of business has significant international potential as long as you belong to a network to handle the order fulfillment outside your geographic area.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
It is important to belong to an international network for order fulfillment.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Join a number of cybermalls that target the same customers you do.
Part 2 betas.pmd 172 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 173
• Include on your Web site a spot asking if your customers would like to
be notified when a certain service or type of flower arrangement gets
updated or changed.
• You may want to have an area to advertise deals and discounts. These
should change on a regular basis. Ask your visitors if they would like to
be notified via e-mail of specials.
• Develop a reminder service as part of your Web site where people can register and be reminded of special occasions (e.g., anniversaries, birthdays,
Valentine’s Day, Secretary’s Day, etc.) when flowers may be appropriate.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy, getting linked from appropriate
cybermalls, directories, meta-indexes, and gift sites.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
To generate additional income, you could include additional products on your
Web site that your customers might find interesting:
• Small gifts or gift baskets to be sent with or in lieu of fresh flowers.
• Silk plants and flower arrangements.
• Special-occasion balloons, cookies, or other products.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
FTD.com
http://www.ftd.com
One of the most famous online flower stores, FTD.com redefined the way flowers are sold online.
Flower.com
http://www.flower.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 173 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
174 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
A good example of an average site (Figure 2.10) that uses many different methods to sell its flowers.
59. Online Modeling Agency
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
This is a business that is easy to start, requires little capital investment, and has
no inventory, but has the potential for a high profit margin. This business would
be perfect for someone with experience in the modeling industry. It would help
greatly if you had contacts in the photography and marketing industries as well.
The basic business is finding models to represent, putting their portfolios
on the Web site, and using this medium to promote their services. Revenue can
come from commissions made from the jobs that the models on your Web site
get and from the fee for putting their portfolio online.
SKILLS NEEDED
To run this business, you will need basic Web publishing skills to update and
maintain your Web site. You should have an eye for talent. To get referrals and
grow your business, a personable manner with clients in person and over the
phone is a must. Your customers will include fashion designers, trade shows,
Figure 2.10. Buying flowers online is an easy and convenient solution for the busy
person.
Part 2 betas.pmd 174 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 175
event organizers, exhibitions, local stores, and malls. You will have to communicate with them in the traditional ways—face to face, direct mail, and telephone—as well as over the Web.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to start this business will include the design, development, and hosting
of your Web site as well as a computer, appropriate software, a printer, a digital
camera, and a scanner. You can start this venture from home and on a part-time
basis. The approximate start-up cost ranges between $3,000 and $4,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
One experienced and competent individual can start this business singlehandedly, but remember that you will need a collection of models to be featured on your site to get any business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is some international potential of this business, but for the most part the
market will be local and national.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. The models
featured in your virtual modeling agency will likely be in touch personally when
you put their portfolios online, and they can pay you in person when this happens. The clients who find your models over the Web will also likely be in direct
contact with you and the models, so they can pay you directly for each job. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The important issues to be addressed are the proper representation of the models and making sure that the clients understand the parameters of what the
models are comfortable with. Perhaps they are comfortable with fashion photo
shoots but not with trade shows, where dialogue with show visitors is involved.
Payment for the model’s services and your commission should be clearly
stated in a contract that you, the client, and the model all sign to ensure that
there is no confusion when the revenues come in for each job.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Register with all the major search engines, focusing on the region in which
you and the models reside and on the marketing/modeling industry.
Part 2 betas.pmd 175 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
176 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Participate in local chat rooms and discussion forums related to marketing and modeling to create awareness of your current models and
attract new ones.
• Get linked from online modeling directories and meta-indexes.
• Contribute articles to modeling-related e-zines. Make sure you provide
your contact information and a link to your Web site.
• Organize a reciprocal linking arrangement with regional ad agencies,
publications, and marketing businesses to align your business with their
client base.
• Send press releases to online e-zines and offline magazines that relate to
fashion, local general interest, and trade.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can be made in this business in several ways. You could be a
talent scout for various acting and talent agencies. It’s possible to be the photographer for online portfolios if you are able to master the art of digital photography, and you could be the Web master for other modeling agencies that have
operated solely in print and video but now wish to mirror their business online.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
New Faces Models and Talent
http://www.newfaces.com
This site (Figure 2.11) is a good example of an online modeling agency. They
focus on both modeling and acting. You can contact the models directly from
the site via e-mail.
Paradise Models
http://www.paradisemodels.com
This site features fitness and glamour models who live in the North Carolina
area. It is an example of a niche modeling site. Clients can book the models
online using a credit card.
Part 2 betas.pmd 176 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 177
60. Online Promotion Company
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
An online promotion company organizes online promotional efforts for outsourcing businesses. Different forms of online promotions include banner advertising, direct e-mail campaigns, search engine submissions, contests, games,
live interactive chat sessions, message boards, live Web cams, real audio, newsgroup marketing, link strategy promotion, and mobile marketing; and the list
goes on. The idea is to promote something or someone on the Internet. The
number of businesses willing to outsource their online promotional activities
is enormous. This high demand provides you with an excellent business opportunity.
How can you generate revenue for your online promotion company? Initially you will have to perfect various online marketing techniques to ensure that
you are an online marketing expert. You can do this during the initial promotion
of your online promotion company. Once you have gained exposure, potential
clients will visit your site to find out more about your services. You can then
charge your clients based on each promotional activity that you fulfill for their
business (e.g., banner ad campaign, e-mail campaign, etc.). Since you can’t withdraw your services once they have been completed, it is important to always
have a signed contract with your clients before implementing a promotional
campaign. This will ensure that you receive payment for your efforts.
Figure 2.11. New Faces is a very popular online modeling agency.
Part 2 betas.pmd 177 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
178 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online advertising and promotion techniques is necessary to run
this type of business. If you decide to offer banner ad design services, knowledge of graphic design would benefit your business and eliminate the costs associated with outsourcing to a graphic designer. You will need Web publishing
skills to update your Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design and hosting of your Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer. If you currently
have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower.
If you plan to set up a mailing list, you will have ongoing fees to your ASP or
Application Service Provider of choice for the use of the mailing list software to
help you organize and maintain your mail lists. You should also purchase comprehensive Web traffic analysis and Web metrics software to track the results of
your online marketing efforts. This information can be great for future marketing opportunities. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion
of your Web site. Estimated cost is $10,000 to $40,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one dedicated
individual, and you can start this venture while keeping your regular job.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. More and more businesses
around the globe are recognizing the need to use the Internet as a communication and promotional medium with their target market.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You should ensure that your prices are competitive and that the promotional
campaigns that your business develops for your clients are targeted to their
correct target market segment. If you target the wrong audience, your campaign will prove to be useless. Situations like this will hinder the professionalism of your business. To gain a competitive advantage, you should not only
offer promotional services similar to those of your competition, you should
also differentiate your business by offering unique services. For example, you
might consider offering geographically targeted e-mail campaigns. This would
Part 2 betas.pmd 178 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 179
not only differentiate your services from those offering general e-mail marketing campaigns, it would also enhance the professionalism of your business.
Since you can’t withdraw the effects of a promotional campaign once it has
been implemented, it is very important that you take the time to plan all of your
campaigns to avoid possible mishaps. Negative or unprofessional exposure for
your client’s business not only affects that business, it also affects the professionalism of your own business. On the same note, it is also important that you
have a signed contract with your client before you launch a promotional campaign for their business. This will ensure that you will receive payment for your
services. You might also consider collecting a 30 to 50 percent deposit for your
services before the campaign is launched. This will provide a cushion for your
business in case clients default on their payment.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
increase the awareness of your promotions and traffic-generation strategies, it would also send referral business to your site.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to online advertising or the industries that your clients are targeting.
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target markets. Web sites that would be appropriate include
sites concentrating on online advertising or the industries that you are
targeting.
• Participating in mailing lists related to online advertising would be a
great way to generate exposure for your online promotion business.
Remember to use a cleverly designed signature file including a catchy
tagline in all messages that you send to the mail lists. Your signature file
will act as an advertisement for your online promotion business. A possible tagline for your signature file is “Ask Us about Our Online Promotion Services,” or some variation of this phrase. This will be a great
way to encourage traffic to your Web site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Get listed and linked from the Internet marketing services directories
and meta-indexes.
Part 2 betas.pmd 179 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
180 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Contribute articles that profile your expertise in e-zines related to marketing online. Make sure to include your complete contact information
and a link to your Web site.
• Do some free promotions for charity organizations and the like.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could generate additional income for your online promotion business by
selling products on your site related to online advertising—things such as online advertising educational materials and online promotional training kits. You
could even become a reseller for another business and sell various promotional
software tools (e.g., search engine submission software, mailing list software,
etc.). This would be a great way to generate revenue for your business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
VERB Interactive
http://www.verbinteractive.com
VERB provides a complete range of Web development, Internet marketing consulting, and campaign execution.
Grantastic Designs
http://www.grantasticdesigns.com/marketing.html
This print graphic design firm includes Web site design and online promotion,
logo design, illustration, presentation design, and Web image design utilizing
traditional and electronic art production methods.
61. Online Resort Directory
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
If vacationers know where they want to go or what they want to do, the best
way for them to get information to plan their trip is through a resort directory.
Part 2 betas.pmd 180 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 181
As the entire travel vacation industry makes its rapid transition to online service, so too are resort directories. A resort directory is a collection of Web sites
and information about various resorts in a given region or by type of vacation.
For example, if you wanted to go to Florida you would look for a Florida resort
directory. However, if you wanted to go hiking in the Rockies you would look
for a Rocky Mountain or a hiking resort guide.
Your Web site will generate income through banner advertisements, through
affiliate program revenue, by taking a small percentage of online reservations,
or by making hotels pay to be members. An affiliate program pays you money
whenever someone uses your Web site and then visits one of the resorts affiliated with you.
SKILLS NEEDED
A broad familiarity with the resort industry by region or by type would be of
benefit. However, you could pick up this knowledge as your business progresses.
Since your Web site will need to be updated fairly frequently, you will need
someone who can take care of this function.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up your resort directory will range from $10,000 to
over $50,000. These costs include a high-end computer, appropriate software,
a printer, a scanner, and a digital camera. You will need to have a Web site
designed, developed, and hosted. You will also want a special searchable database researched, designed, and integrated into your Web site. However, you
could use a much less sophisticated Web site to start if you wish.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Your business will require one or more part-time employees. These include one
part-time computer programmer to write and maintain your Web site and the
database. You will also need someone to contact all the resorts in the directory
and plug your services. Then, depending on how your site will generate money,
you must try to gain advertisements, affiliate with the resort, arrange an online
reservation system, or get resorts to join your site.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
You can easily access the international market by contacting foreign resorts
that fit your theme and integrating them into your Web site. Obviously, if you
are advertising resorts in California, then you couldn’t really exploit this, but if
your directory was a beach resort directory, then you could include resorts
from all over the world. Your only restriction is the language barrier.
Part 2 betas.pmd 181 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
182 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
Your e-business model depends on how you are set up. If you generate income
through advertising, then you need use only e-business level 1. However, if you
are offering online reservations, you will need to use level 4 for complete integration. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You must carefully select what type of resorts or which niche your directory
will cover. Review your competition online before you start to ensure that there
is an opportunity.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include
noncompeting travel and resort sites, and other Web sites that would be
of interest to your target market.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your site for a free weekend at a resort, which would be provided by your clients. You could ask
people if they would like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This
would encourage them to return to your site and re-enter your contest,
thus re-exposing them to your site.
• Develop as many links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, meta-indexes, and Web rings frequented by your target market.
• You could develop a Featured Resort page on your site. You could change
this every week. People will continue to return to your site to see what
the featured resort is. You could even ask people if they would like to be
notified of updates to your Featured Resort section via e-mail. This would
be a great way to encourage repeat traffic.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• A mail list or newsletter can also be used to advertise your deals and
keep consumers interested in your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 182 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 183
• Develop articles for travel-related e-zines. Perhaps be a contributing editor with a featured resort for e-zines and magazines related to travel and
tourism. Make sure to provide your Web address in the resources box.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can be generated by using more than one of these methods
for setting up your resort directory. You could also sell equipment related to the
vacation type you represent. If your directory is for scuba resorts, for example,
you could sell scuba gear.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Colorado Resort Net
http://www.toski.com
A listing of resorts and lodgings in Colorado for ski vacations.
RSN.com
http://www.rsn.com
A nice Web site that offers information on several skiing resorts. It also offers
complete ski vacation planning, though you can’t order online.
62. Party Planning and Supplies
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Planning and finding supplies for a large party is a lot of work. Often the hosts
cannot find the time to organize or track down the supplies they will need.
More and more corporations are turning to party planners to organize their
annual parties and events. With the advent of the Internet, you can now offer
party planning services and party supplies online.
You will make your money through consulting fees for the party planning
as well as through selling party products online. Often, when you do the party
Part 2 betas.pmd 183 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
184 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
planning, you will be responsible for choosing the supplies for the party as well.
These party products include balloons, confetti, musical instruments, paper
products, decorations, food, drinks, and so on.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need to have a great imagination. When people use a party planner
they expect something out of the ordinary. You will also need to have some
familiarity with Web site maintenance, as you will need to update your Web site
periodically.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Costs will range from $3,000 to over $10,000. This includes the purchase of a
computer, appropriate software, a printer, a scanner, and a digital camera. You
will need your initial inventory. You will also need to have your Web site designed, developed, and hosted. The business’s initial costs can be quite high because some party supplies are very expensive and they often are bought in bulk.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can fairly easily be started with only one employee.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Selling on an international level can become quite difficult. Since you will be
shipping a large number of party items to your customers, overseas shipping
costs will have a major impact on your international viability. If the overseas
shipping costs are too great, then it would be much more cost effective for your
customer to shop locally.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 or 3 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
It is important to discuss and have a contract relative to the services you are to
perform in the party planning. It is also important that your contract itemize
the party supplies, entertainment, food and drink, and so on, that your client
wants and that you have agreed to supply. Once the party is over, you don’t
want any surprises! You should collect up front the budgeted amount for the
expenses and then provide your client with an itemized account of your allocation of those funds.
Part 2 betas.pmd 184 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 185
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, meta-indexes, and Web rings frequented
by your target market.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include
noncompeting party planning sites, business service sites, party product
directories, and other Web sites that would be of interest to your target
market.
• You could post client testimonials on your Web site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could have a gallery of pictures of parties you have planned as long
as you have the client’s permission. If you can include photos of some
great theme parties along with the client’s testimonial, it could go a long
way to building your reputation and credibility online.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
If you are ambitious, you could expand your services to include event planning.
(See the entry about event planning earlier in this book.) Otherwise, you could
offer your customers photographic services or offer hosting for their parties.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
iParty
http://www.iparty.com
A huge party supplies Web site with something for just about every type of
party—and they ship worldwide.
Part 2 betas.pmd 185 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
186 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Vieco Balloons
http://viecoballoons.com
A Web site that provides specialty balloons. They ship anywhere in the world.
63. Photo Display Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
There are a number of approaches you can take to setting up an online photo
display site. You can focus on artists, photographers, or the general public. If
you focus on artists, you would generate revenue by charging them a fee to
have their work displayed on your site. This would assist them in selling their
original pieces of work.
Alternatively, if you focus on photographers, you can earn revenue on a
commission basis or by a flat fee. You could allow photographers to submit
images to your site. In turn, you would sell access to your site to the consumer
market. People would pay for the license rights to the image and in turn you
would pay the photographer and retain a percentage.
The third option is to open a photo display site to the general public where
people could create their own folders and upload their own images for free.
Revenue would come from complementary products and services.
Photopoint.com is one such example. They sell cameras, printers, postcards,
photo prints, and so on.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online advertising techniques is an asset to run this type of business. If you decide to launch a photo display site, you are going to have to
ensure that you are generating as much traffic as possible to your site to make
it appealing to photographers or artists looking to use your site as a sales vehicle. Likewise, you will need a large amount of traffic to increase your opportunity to achieve success with a consumer photo gallery. To do this, you are
going to have to dedicate a lot of time implementing various Internet marketing
techniques to create a constant flow of traffic to your site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer. If
you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of
Part 2 betas.pmd 186 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 187
your Web site. Photographic images can take up a lot of storage space and you
will also need a lot of bandwidth to ensure that your site loads quickly—this
can be relatively expensive. Estimated cost is $5,000 to $15,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can be started by one individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has significant international potential. Artists and photographers
from around the world will be interested in using your site as a sales or promotional vehicle. In addition, if you approach the photo display site from the
general consumer’s angle, the concept has mass appeal.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business if you are
following the artist and photographer photo display sites. If you take the more
general approach and sell related merchandise, then e-business level 3 will be
more appropriate. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
There is a lot of competition for the general consumer category, some of which
is backed by large corporations. You will need to be able to differentiate yourself from the pack.
You will want to have high bandwidth to ensure that visitors to your site do
not experience delays with downloads.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Site” via a link on your site. This will spread the word about your
site and encourage others to visit.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You will want to generate as
many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to your target market. There are many relevant sites pertaining to photographic pieces and original artwork that would be appropriate. Likewise, there are many sites that would appeal to the general
consumer.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
Part 2 betas.pmd 187 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
188 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Promotion through appropriate mail lists, e-zines, and newsletters is
important. You could even develop your own newsletter or mail list to
stay close to your target market.
• You should consider developing an affiliate program. This can increase
your sales force dramatically if you sell products, such as cameras, relating to your site content.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional advertising can be earned by selling advertising spots on your site. If
you have your own newsletter, you can earn additional revenue by allowing
companies to sponsor it.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
World Photo Gallery
http://www.worldphotogallery.com
This is a site where photographers from around the world gather to exhibit
their work. If you require a photographer or would just like to know how to
contact one for an assignment or to purchase their work, you can go to the
photographers’ directory to see some of their work and profiles.
The Stock Solution
http://www.tssphoto.com/tssphoto.html
The Stock Solution (TSS) is a stock photo agency, representing the images of
approximately 100 photographers. Their copyrighted images can be licensed
for a variety of uses including brochures, newsletters, magazines, multimedia,
display, and Web pages.
64. Podcasts and Podcast Directory
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
A Podcast is an audio broadcast saved as an MP3 file. The MP3 file can be
downloaded to a computer and then to an iPod or any other type of MP3
player. There are all kinds of music-related podcasts available online already.
Part 2 betas.pmd 188 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 189
There is always an opportunity for more as long as you focus on a niche or do
a great job of marketing to get your name out there. There are lots of opportunities for educational podcasts as people like to learn about things of interest at
their convenience—why not listen to an hour on Search Engine Optimization
while working out on the treadmill!
There are podcasts where the visitor can listen to the broadcast live, or
download it into an MP3 player such as an iPod, or even a cell phone, and
listen to it at a later time. Usually a podcast will feature one type of broadcast,
or “show,” and will add new episodes daily, weekly, or monthly.
A podcast is receivable to anyone at any time. It is much more intimate and
interactive than a traditional blog.
You can offer your podcasts through your own site or podcast directories.
You can also consider developing a podcast directory to provide access to a
broad range of podcasts. With this you could charge a fee to host the podcast,
or include it for free with a view to making your money with affiliate programs,
banner advertising, sponsorship, and subscription opportunities.
SKILLS NEEDED
A podcast is a great idea for someone who loves to write and speak passionately about any given topic of shared interest. If you have a great voice, you can
provide podcasting services for various industries.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
You will need a computer. Most computers these days come complete with all
the appropriate software you will need. Start-up costs will also include the
design, development, and hosting of your Web site. The start-up costs for this
type of business will generally run between $1,000 and $5,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Starting off, you need only one employee, not even full-time if that’s not what
you can fit into your schedule.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business’s international potential increases if it’s translated into the major
languages of the globe. English is widely accepted, however.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
If you are going to charge for the podcast downloads, you will want to use
e-business level 2. See Part 1 for more details.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Podcasts are pretty simple. Make sure to keep your broadcasts clear and remember the audience the whole time you are composing podcasts; make sure
Part 2 betas.pmd 189 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
190 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
you continue to appeal to the same niche of listeners; and watch for other sites
encroaching on your content. It happens all the time.
Have a detailed Web traffic analysis package on the server on which your
site is hosted so that you can show advertisers accurate information about your
site traffic.
If you are providing educational content in your podcast, there is opportunity to charge a fee. For example if I developed podcasts of different Internet
marketing techniques, I would charge a fee for people to download the podcasts.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your target audience would be a great way to increase exposure of your podcast
and the traffic to your Web site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on topic-specific Web
sites would generate targeted exposure for your podcast.
• Develop as many links as possible from potential Web sites, directories,
and meta-indexes related to the topic of your podcast, or podcast directory.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participating in publicly accessible opt-in mail lists related to the topic
of your podcast would be a great way to communicate with your target
market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Podcast.net
http://www.podcast.net
A large online podcast directory with many different topics from which to choose.
Urban Coffee
http://www.urbancoffee.net
Poscast focused on current events, political discussions and technology.
Part 2 betas.pmd 190 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 191
65. Photography
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
If you enjoy taking pictures and exercising your creativity, then setting up your
own photography business may be for you. You could offer your services on a
contract basis. Some areas of concentration to consider include weddings, architecture, portraits, and commercial, underwater, and graduation photography. You
would bill for your services accordingly. Final work could be provided to clients
digitally on disk or CD, regular photographic prints, or framed pictures. You could
earn additional money for framing the pictures or placing the images on a CD.
SKILLS NEEDED
Photography skills are a must. Your clients will be looking for highly professional photography. Some knowledge of digital imaging to make enhancements
to pictures, add customized phrases, and so on, would also be an asset.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a CD burner, photographic equipment (e.g., a digital camera), and a printer. You will also need
to purchase relevant packaging materials, blank CDs, and a variety of picture
frames. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will
be considerably lower. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $6,000 to $8,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can be started by one individual and can be started as a part-time
endeavor.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business will focus mainly on your immediate geographic region, as you will
need to be able to travel to the appropriate locations to perform your services.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be appropriate for this type of business. You could
have an online form so that people can request pricing and inquire about your
availability. See Part 1 for more information.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Your biggest challenge is making yourself visible to your target market. You
will need to ensure that you implement and monitor appropriate online marPart 2 betas.pmd 191 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
192 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
keting techniques. If your area has relevant local sites, such as a coupon site,
then you should consider participating. Although this discounts your services,
it is an excellent way to attract business.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Include a Photo Gallery or a Virtual Postcard section on your site. Allow people to send sample images or virtual postcards to friends. The
images used would be from your own work and would act to build
credibility for your talent as well as to increase traffic to your site.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Site” via a link on your site. This will spread the word about your
site and encourage others to visit.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to generate as many
links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, Web rings, and
meta-indexes related to your target market. Ensure that you get listed in
sites that target your local area as well as your area of expertise.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Ensure that you submit your site to the search engines and directories.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Other services you can offer to earn additional income include digital imaging,
photo manipulation, and selling your own stock work on your site via CD, as
screen savers, or as postcards. This can attract the large tourism market if your
images pertain to historic sites or sites of interest in your area. You can provide
custom framing services from your site as well. Gift certificates always provide
an additional revenue source.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
World Photo Gallery
http://www.webshots.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 192 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 193
The Webshots site is a place where photographers from around the world gather
to exhibit their work, share their passion for photography, and learn from one
another.
Colleen Dagnall Photography
http://www.shooterbug.com
A corporate, wedding, lifestyle, and promotional photographer. Also offered is
Web page design and photo manipulation.
66. Press Release Developer
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
A press release is a statement or article about a particular company, its products
and services, or a significant event involving that company that is considered
newsworthy. It provides the press with the background information needed to
develop a formal story. Positive coverage by the press is like free advertising. In
fact, it can be more effective than advertising because press coverage is seen as
unbiased by consumers.
Many companies do not have the internal capability or personnel capacity
to develop appropriate press releases on a regular basis and look to outside
firms or individuals to develop them. If you have an interest in writing and
earning extra money from home, then this may be the ideal job for you. You
can gather all necessary information from the client company to write a press
release for them. You would earn your revenue by charging a fee per press
release. A common fee falls between $200 and $250.
SKILLS NEEDED
Press releases have a standard format. Experience in developing press releases
according to this format is essential. Press release distribution experience would
be an asset. Prior journalism knowledge or experience would also be an asset.
Some knowledge of HTML would be of benefit to you. Companies may want
their press release to be designed as an interactive press release that they can
include on their site with active hypertext links—this could give you a competitive edge over those press release developers without this skill set.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer. If
you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be rePart 2 betas.pmd 193 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
194 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
duced accordingly. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion
of your Web site. Estimated cost is $3,000 to $5,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
When starting a business of this nature, you would not need to hire additional
employees. You could very easily operate this business on your own.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business offers some international potential. However, a majority of your
clients will be based in your immediate area or within the same country.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business, depending on whether or not you want to directly accept payment for your services
online. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Presentation is very important, so you must follow standard press release formatting procedures. Also, the timeliness and newsworthiness of the information being presented is important. To write an effective press release, you must
understand the product or company you are writing about.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Colleague
about This Service” via a link on your site. This will spread the word
about your site.
• Develop as many links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, Web rings, and meta-indexes related to your target market.
There are many business services-related sites that would be appropriate link sites.
• Ensure that you submit your site to the search engines and directories.
Companies looking to have press releases developed will often refer to
the search engines to find the sites that provide the services they’re
looking for.
• Promotion through related mail lists and newsletters is important. You
could even develop your own newsletter or mail list to stay close to
your target market.
Part 2 betas.pmd 194 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 195
• Participation in cybermalls related to business services in your geographic
area would be very appropriate.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to your press release writing service, the next logical step to extend
your range of services and to earn additional income would be to submit the
press releases you write for your client to the appropriate media.
An additional way to generate revenue is to offer clipping and monitoring
services. These services help companies keep track of what the online and offline press is saying about their company—valuable information for any company to have.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Press-Release-Writing.com
http://www.press-release-writing.com/options-writing.htm
This company offers press release writing services as well as distribution services.
Xpress Press
http://www.xpresspress.com/Writing_Service.html
This company offers press release writing, information on how to write a news
release, and public relations resources.
67. Press Release Distribution Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Distributing press releases to the right media contacts poses a significant challenge for many companies. They often do not have the expertise within their
organization to perform this function. This service is very important to ensure
that their press releases reach the appropriate media and have the best chance
of getting attention.
Setting up an online press release distribution service, also known as a wire
service, is an excellent opportunity to earn additional income from home. Wire
Part 2 betas.pmd 195 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
196 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
services use electronic means such as the Web, e-mail, and fax to distribute
press releases to journalists, publications, and related media contacts. You can
focus on industry-specific press releases in an area in which you have extensive
knowledge, or you can focus on broad press release distribution. Companies
would pay you to oversee their press release distribution.
You will need to develop a comprehensive list of media contacts or subscribe to one of the online services like Media Map or Press Access. If you
develop your own media list, it is imperative that you keep it up to date, as
there is much movement in this industry.
SKILLS NEEDED
Experience with press release distribution is important. Knowledge of the Internet and how to navigate it is vital. Also, you should have some journalism
experience and should understand the industry lingo and how the industry works
in order to effectively distribute press releases.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a fax machine,
and a printer. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of
your Web site. You will incur additional costs in the form of media contact
databases, editorial calendars, media research, and related studies as well as
services. You need to keep this information up to date. Trying to locate all of
the appropriate media contacts and maintaining accuracy on your own would
be very time-consuming. This information can run upwards of $11,000. Your
start-up costs will be in the range of $5,000 if you develop your own media
database to $25,000 if you use a media contact service.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can be started by one individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Some international potential exists. Companies may be interested in outsourcing a company to distribute press releases to contacts outside of their immediate target area as a form of test marketing or because they cannot handle the
distribution efficiently in-house. However, most business will come from companies in your immediate area and across your country.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business. See Part
1 for additional details.
Part 2 betas.pmd 196 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 197
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The accuracy of your media contact information is a big issue. Members of the
media tend to move around a lot, so you will want to ensure that you always
have the latest contact information to keep your press releases from being disregarded. Another issue to consider is that you must be able to select and send
your press releases to appropriate media contacts, depending on the information contained within the press release. You do not want to risk annoying the
recipients of your press release distributions to the point that they disregard
everything you send.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Colleague
about This Service” via a link within your site. This will spread the
word about your site.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to generate as many
links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes related to your target market. There are many press release resource sites and business services sites that would be appropriate for
this type of business.
• Ensure that you submit your site to the search engines and directories.
Companies looking to have press releases distributed will often refer to
the search engines to find the information and service providers they’re
looking for.
• Promotion through related mail lists, e-zines, and newsletters is important. This could include your own press release distribution, article contributions, or advertising sponsorships. You could even develop your
own newsletter or mail list to stay close to your target market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
The most logical extension of your service offerings would be to offer to develop and track press releases, and to provide feedback to your clients. This
information would be useful to them in planning future campaigns and to meaPart 2 betas.pmd 197 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
198 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
sure the success of recent campaigns. You could charge an additional fee to
monitor this information for your clients.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Send 2 Press
http://www.send2press.com/PRservices/press_release.shtml
This company offers target press release distribution services.
Press Flash
http://www.pressflash.com
Press Flash is a press release distribution company that focuses on the Internet
and areas related to high tech.
68. Printing Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Every business at some time or another will need printing services. These services include business cards, letterhead, envelopes, mail-outs, posters, flyers,
and occasionally huge banners for use at trade shows or special events. Your
online printing service business will provide these services, but your customers
will have the added benefit of being able to order their products online and
receive an instant quote for your services. With the huge growth in home-based
businesses, there is an increasing need for printing suppliers for this market.
You will be generating your income through printing orders you receive
through your Web site. You will create the printed products to your customers’
exact specifications, and then you will ship the products to your customer wherever they may be. Many customers will allow a reasonable lead time, but you
should be aware that occasionally you will need to be able to complete a job in
24 or 48 hours or less.
SKILLS NEEDED
You must have graphic design skills as well as a familiarity with a broad range
of layout software such as Adobe Acrobat, Quark, and PageMaker. You will
also need to know how to operate industrial printing equipment.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up your printing service will range from $20,000 to
$100,000. These costs include a high-end computer, appropriate administraPart 2 betas.pmd 198 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 199
tive software, a printer, a scanner, a digital camera, and the specialized software
you will need. You will also need to buy special industrial printing equipment.
This equipment will account for approximately half of your initial expense if
not more. Finally, you will have to have your Web site designed, developed, and
hosted. Other initial costs to consider include your inventory of printing supplies and some advertising for your Web site.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
It is possible to run this business with one person. However, due to the nature
of industrial print jobs, you will find it much more efficient to have at least two
full-time employees.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The Internet opens up your business to the international market; however, shipping large print jobs overseas will eliminate any competitive pricing edge, making it much more likely that those customers will order from a local store.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The high cost of printing equipment means you’ll have to be as cost-conscious
as possible. You need to generate as much repeat business as possible. This is
done through both high quality and high customer service.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to get as many links
as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to your target market. There are thousands of business-related
Web sites on the Internet that would provide a great linking opportunity for your site. You should also attempt to develop links from business service Web sites and directories. These sites will provide highly
targeted traffic to your site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include
noncompeting business service sites, business-related cybermalls, local
high-traffic sites, and other Web sites that would be of interest to your
target market.
Part 2 betas.pmd 199 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
200 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your site for a free print
job with a maximum dollar value. You could ask people if they would
like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This would encourage them
to return to your site and re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing them
to your products and services.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to business
services. Remember to use a cleverly designed signature file with a catchy
tagline and hypertext link that will send readers to your site.
• Providing valuable contributions to business services-related mail lists
would be a great way to create exposure for your business. Again, a
cleverly designed signature file with a catchy tagline would be a great
way to send traffic to your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
To generate additional income, you can include graphic design or Web development services. You might also consider providing personalized promotional
printed products like corporate calendars.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Anchor Imaging
http://www.anchorimaging.com
A solid Internet-based print job company. They take jobs online and files through
e-mail and FTP, plus they have a two-day turnaround time.
Miranza.com
http://www.miranza.com
With their array of specialty printing equipment, they can handle even exotic
print jobs.
Part 2 betas.pmd 200 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 201
69. Private Investigator/People Finder
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
As people age over the years, they meet many people, make many friends, and
in turn grow apart from other friends. Sometimes friends grow so far apart that
they no longer know what each friend is doing or where each friend lives. Quite
often, friends want to reunite with other friends from school or their childhood, parents want to reunite with their children or another family member, or
people need to locate individuals for criminal or monetary reasons. This provides you with an excellent opportunity to launch a private investigator/people
finder business. Since the Internet connects the world internationally, you can
easily promote your private investigator/people finder services to people all
over the world.
How does this type of business generate revenue? Private investigator/people
finder businesses make money from locating information about the whereabouts
of an individual or by specifically locating an individual for a client. Clients can
range from families to businesses (insurance companies often use private investigators to locate individuals who don’t fulfill financial responsibilities) to missing-people organizations. If you promote your business appropriately and you
have a good reputation as a private investigator, you should be able to earn a
significant amount of revenue. Offering your services via the Internet also gives
you a wide geographic reach. The Internet will enable people who are located
out of your native region to contact you to perform a job in your region. This
greatly expands your customer base.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need to be a licensed private investigator. Being bonded and insured
would be an additional benefit. There are several other certificates that private
investigators can hold to prove their credibility. An example of this would be
the fraudulent claim investigator certificate, which proves that you are well
versed in solving fraudulent claims.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, a computer, computer software, and possibly a printer. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably
lower. You will also have to pay to be certified as a private investigator. You
may also want to earn additional certificates to enhance your career as a priPart 2 betas.pmd 201 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
202 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
vate investigator. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of
your Web site. Estimated cost is $10,000 to 20,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Approximately one or two employees will be needed to operate this type of
business. One employee will be responsible for fulfilling service requests (i.e.,
finding people, information, etc.), while the other employee will be responsible for all administrative tasks involved with running day-to-day business
operations.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. People from all over the world
may be looking for someone in your geographic area; thus they would be able
to hire your business to fulfill their need. Also, people may hire you to travel to
another country to locate individuals. This gives this business opportunity strong
international potential.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
To prove your credibility, you will have to take several courses and get yourself
licensed as a private investigator. Once you have achieved this goal, there are
several other certifications you could try to obtain to enhance your career as a
private investigator. Although it will take quite a bit of time to obtain these
certifications, they will add credibility to your business. The more credibility
your organization has, the better the chances are that clients will turn to your
business when they desire private investigation/people locator services.
As a private investigator, it is important that you do not violate any laws
or regulations that would invade an individual’s right to privacy. Since your
job typically entails “snooping” around, you should be aware of the legal
limits to your job. This is especially true when dealing in an international
environment. If a client hires you to locate an individual in another country,
you should review all legal policies that may affect how you conduct your
investigation. If at any time you invade a person’s legal rights and a charge is
brought against your business, you could seriously damage the professional
image of your business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 202 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 203
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to missing
people, investigation work, locator services, and other topics related to
your target market.
• Participating in mailing lists related to missing people/children or locator services would be a great way to generate exposure for your business. Remember to use a cleverly designed signature file including a
catchy tagline in all messages that you send to the mail lists. Your signature file will act as an advertisement for your business. A possible tagline
for your signature file is “Find a Missing Loved One Today! Click Here!”
or some variation of this phrase. This is a great way to encourage traffic
to your Web site.
• Do some free promotions for charity organizations related to missing
children or missing people. This would be a great way to generate exposure for your private investigation/people finder business.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to missing people, private investigators, and locator services. These links will send highly targeted traffic to your Web site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to earning revenue from your private investigator/people finder
business, you could earn additional income by investigating computer-related
crimes. Internet crimes happen daily. Computer-related crimes range from credit
card fraud to child pornography, so there is plenty of business in investigating
such crimes. This would be an excellent way to earn additional income for your
business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 203 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
204 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Kale Investigation
http://www.kaleinvestigation.com
A small private investigation firm making good use of the Internet to generate
additional contracts.
Digdirt.com
http://www.digdirt.com
A huge international group of private investigators. Their operations span seven
countries, and they will handle any job.
70. Professional Organizer
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Organization comes naturally to few and not at all to the rest of us. Today’s
average homes and offices are in dire need of order. Our time is precious, and it
too needs to be planned out. If you are a gifted organizer and enjoy helping
others enjoy ordered existence, this is the operation for you.
A professional organizer can provide ideas, information, structure, solutions, and systems that could increase productivity, reduce stress, and lead to
more control over time, space, and activities. The Internet is an ideal place to
market and communicate with clients in this business.
The revenue is made from charging your clients for professional consulting
services. You may charge by the hour and guage the hourly rate by specifying
the value of your advice. For example, helping to organize someone’s closet is
not as valuable as coaching a client to operate a desktop organizer software
program. Rates for specific services should be reflected in your hourly billing.
You may alternatively elect to charge on a contract fee basis where you set the
price for the project.
SKILLS NEEDED
To operate the professional organizer business, you must of course be very organized in your own life. This form of consulting involves a lot of specifics and
troubleshooting. You will need creative and practical solutions to complicated
issues in order to provide quality advice to your clients, who will always seem to
Part 2 betas.pmd 204 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 205
be in a chaotic state. You will need basic Web publishing skills and computer
skills to update your Web site, communicate with clients, and teach them how to
integrate the computer into their lives to save time and create order.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Since you are providing a service that has no inventory, your initial costs will be
minimal. The cost to start this type of business will include a computer, appropriate software, and a printer as well as the costs involved with developing and
hosting your Web site. Start-up costs range from $2,000 to $5,000. This type of
business can be run out of your home, which eliminates the overhead costs of
setting up an office for your professional organizing business.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One highly organized person can run this business part-time in the beginning
stages. This is a perfect idea for someone working from home.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business does not have strong international potential due to the nature of
the service provided. Common tasks include on-site consulting. This will require your business to be located near your clients, so this business has a more
local or regional appeal.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. You will be
accepting orders and payment directly from your clients. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Your services are often needed only once by a client. After you have organized
their life, your job is done. Not so fast! Try to operate your business in such a
way that you continue relationships with your clients and create repeat business. For example, establish a pro-organizer “report card” and have them fill it
out each month after your consultation is over to see the effectiveness of your
strategy. Stay in touch with clients to get referrals and recommendations. Make
sure to get paid up front for your services, and carefully research the pricing of
other professional organizers so you remain competitive and aware of what is
expected within your industry. In this business, your time equals money, so
plan out the time you spend on each job and make sure you spend more time on
the higher-priced services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 205 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
206 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participate in online chats, message boards, and Web rings that target
individuals who are seeking more organization in their lives. This will
draw an audience and increase the traffic to your Web site.
• Establish a reciprocal linking program with Web sites frequented by
your target market. Some suggestions are online organizational software sites, organizing tips sites, and so on.
• Become a solid part of the online community in your regional area by
putting links to your site in the professional directories.
• Design your site to be search engine friendly. Consider participating in
pay-per-click sponsored listings programs with the popular search engines.
• Participating in mail lists and discussion groups related to organizational methods and techniques with a cleverly designed signature file
would be a great way to generate awareness for your services.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra income in the professional organizing business can come from various
special services that you can provide to clients with certain needs. You will be
helping people organize their lives. This means that they will look to you for
assistance in many daily tasks—finding a dog walker, for example. Your willingness, resources, and capabilities in helping them solve a variety of life’s glitches
will strengthen your value and increase the amount of time you dedicate and,
therefore, your income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
The Zen of Organization—Professional Organizer
http://home.earthlink.net/~ecarleton/gallery.html
This business provides all types of organizing services including management
consulting, Web site design, space and time organization, and so on.
Part 2 betas.pmd 206 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 207
Chaos Cancelled
http://www.chaoscancelled.com
This site describes the benefits of hiring a professional organizer and is also a
marketing tool for the book Chaos Cancelled.
71. Public Relations Specialist
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Many small and medium-sized companies do not have an internal public relations department and cannot handle their own online public relations activities.
Other companies choose not to because they feel their time is better served
doing what they’re good at and that other activities should be outsourced to
specialized companies.
As an online public relations specialist, you would help companies that
want to promote their company and their Web site online. Your goal is to build
or maintain a positive image of your clients in the eyes of their target market.
This would be done through various search engines and Web media such as
e-zines, e-mail, newsletters, blogs, online radio stations, streaming video sites,
and mail lists. Additionally, you would use familiar traditional media and electronic media.
As a public relations specialist, you may be required to take on additional
duties such as responding to media queries, developing media events and promotions, arranging interviews, and arranging press conferences.
Payment would be based on your services and would be either on a contractual or an hourly basis.
SKILLS NEEDED
Your business is based on your ability to successfully communicate your message, and as such, excellent oral and written skills are necessary. A background
in traditional public relations strategies as well as Netiquette is a great asset to
have. Imagination and creativity will help you in this business. A bachelor’s
degree in a relevant field, such as public relations, marketing, advertising, journalism, or communications, is required.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a fax machine,
Part 2 betas.pmd 207 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
208 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
and a printer. If you plan to do any image editing work, then you will need to
purchase some image editing software (e.g., Adobe PhotoShop, Jasc Paint Shop
Pro). If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will
be considerably lower. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $3,500 to $6,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
When starting a business of this nature, you would not need to hire additional
employees. You would operate this business on your own.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has some international potential. A majority of your clients will
be based in your immediate geographic area or within your country; however,
some companies outside of your country may contact you to handle public
relations-related activities in your area or culture.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be appropriate for this type of business. The needs of
the client would be discussed and a proposal for your services would be based
on this. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Do not take on more work than you can handle. You do not want to have to
explain to your clients that you are a couple of weeks behind because you took
on too much. Limit yourself to what you can comfortably handle. Another
major issue is that there is a perception that this is an easy business to get into.
As a result, individuals and companies that are the most qualified will face
competition from those who are inexperienced.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to generate as many
links as possible from Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes related
to your target market. Many marketing and promotional-related sites
are ideal for promoting this type of business.
• Promotion through related mail lists and newsletters is important. You
could even develop your own newsletter or mail list to stay close to
your target market.
Part 2 betas.pmd 208 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 209
• Ensure that you submit your site to the search engines and directories.
Before you submit, make sure your site has been optimized for search
engine friendliness. You might also consider participating in the payper-click campaigns of some of the more popular search engines.
• Because many of your clients will likely be regional, be sure to get yourself listed in any regional online business directories that your target
market may frequent.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Colleague
about This Service” via your site. This will spread the word about
your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can be earned by cross-promoting your existing services to
clients. If you implemented an e-mail marketing campaign for a client, then
the next logical step would be to try to sell the client on a related service.
Many businesses now realize that maximizing the dollar amount captured from
an existing customer can significantly boost revenue. Additional services you
could offer include annual report development, customer surveys, and product evaluations.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Abel Associates, Inc.
http://abelpr.com
This full-service marketing and communications firm specializes in public relations, media relations, and marketing communications both offline and online.
Technopolis
http://www.technopolis.com
This company provides public relations, marketing communications, and marketing services to computer hardware and software companies, Internet-based
companies, and so on.
Part 2 betas.pmd 209 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
210 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
72. Real Estate Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
The Internet has revolutionized the way real estate agents are doing business.
Traditionally, real estate agents would publish their listings in home buyer publications, on television, and in monthly newsletters that they may distribute
throughout the area that they represent. Now real estate agents can easily post
their listings online to attract a more global audience. Having an online real
estate Web site can benefit you in two ways: (1) increased exposure for your
real estate listing, and (2) increased exposure for your services.
There are two ways that you can approach this type of business. If you are
a real estate agent, you can launch your site to target potential clients in a
specific geographic location. This is the most common approach taken by many
real estate agents. Your second option is to offer your services to a larger geographic location such as the United States or North America. As a real estate
agent, you cannot possibly represent the interests of homebuyers on a national
level, but you can provide other real estate agents with the opportunity to publish their real estate listings on your site. You can then earn a commission from
each sale that resulted from a referral from your site. This is an easy way to
earn additional income from your real estate business.
SKILLS NEEDED
Similar to an offline real estate agent, in order to sell real estate online you will
have to be licensed to do so by the area that you represent. Knowledge of various online advertising techniques would also be an asset.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a printer, a scanner, and a
digital camera. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up
costs will be considerably lower. A major cost that you will incur is associated
with the development of the database that will contain your real estate listings.
If you are going to include only your own listings, this will not be that expensive; however, if you are planning to offer your services to agents across a wide
geographic span, it will cost significantly more. You will also have to design
some sort of tracking system to track your referrals to the agents that you
represent. You might consider purchasing comprehensive Web traffic analysis
software, which will enable you to track where your Web site visitors are coming from. This information can be quite beneficial for future marketing purposes. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web
site. Estimated cost is $10,000 to $60,000 to start.
Part 2 betas.pmd 210 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 211
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The approach you take to operating this business determines how many employees will be needed. If you are going to represent only your own real estate
listings online, you will need one employee—yourself. If you are targeting a
wide geographic span, one to three employees will be needed. They will handle
the offline and online promotion, fulfill service requests, and take care of all
administrative tasks involved with running the day-to-day business operation.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This type of business has very high international potential, as people planning
to relocate to the area(s) that you represent may be interested in your real estate
listings.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
A hybrid of e-business 4 would be appropriate for this type of business. Since
you will not be taking any payments online, there is no need for online payment
processing capabilities; however, if you are enabling real estate agents to update their listings on your site, you will need a fully integrated database of real
estate listings. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
There are several business issues to be addressed when operating this type of
business. Like a traditional offline real estate listing, you should ensure that all
listings you place on your Web site are accurate and are not misleading. If
anything changes with the listing (e.g., the price changes, features change, it is
no longer for sale or is sold), you should update your site immediately with the
new information. For example, if you sell a house but don’t update your listing
with this new information, potential buyers may contact you. When you tell
them that the sale has been made, they may be discouraged from ever visiting
your site again.
If you enable real estate agents to post their listings on your site, you are
going to have to develop a system to track and monitor who is posting what on
your site. First, you should make sure that you don’t allow people to post listings on your site if they are not licensed real estate agents. Since agents will be
able to update their listings on your site with images and text, you are going to
have to set up a password-protected area where they will be able to enter your
database to manipulate information. To easily track your clients, you might
consider using their real estate license number as their unique ID. This would
make it easy for you to reference them when searching through your database.
Each listing on your site should have a unique listing number. If visitors are
interested in a listing on your site, they can choose to have a real estate agent
contact them about the listing by filling out a simple form that will integrate
Part 2 betas.pmd 211 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
212 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
with their selection to include the listing number. Once you receive the request,
it is your responsibility to contact the agent to inform him or her of the interest
in their listing. This will be an easy way to keep track of your referrals.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could include relocation and moving
sites, real estate sites, home buyer sites, and sites targeted toward particular geographic locations. These are the types of Web sites that will
be viewed by your target market.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to moving, real estate, and home buying. You should
also try to develop links from sites targeted to the geographic locations
that you represent.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to real estate
or the geographic area that you represent would be quite effective.
Through providing valuable contributions, you will be able to exercise
your professionalism and capture the attention of your target audience.
Make sure you include a cleverly designed signature file in all of your
postings. This will act as an advertisement for your services.
• Participating in mailing lists related to your target market would be a
great way to encourage people to visit your site. Make sure you provide
a valuable contribution and include your signature file.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Listing” via your site. This will spread the word about your site.
• You could have a featured real estate listing on your site. If you represent multiple locations, you could have a featured listing for each location. People will return to your site repeatedly to view the featured listing.
You could ask people if they would like to be notified via e-mail whenever you update your featured listing. This would be a great way to
encourage visitors to return to your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 212 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 213
• You could ask new homebuyers if they would like to be notified via
e-mail whenever a new listing is posted to your site for a specific town
or city that you represent. For example, if a couple were interested in
buying a home in Houston, Texas, you could notify them via e-mail
whenever a new listing is added for the Houston area. This would be a
great way to stay in touch with your target market.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to displaying real estate listings on your site, you could also sell
advertising space to noncompeting businesses that target the same audience.
This is a great way to earn additional income for your site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Realtor.com
http://www.realtor.com
This is a dynamite site that targets a North American audience. They have a
huge integrated database of real estate listings, which is easily traced using
individual number IDs for each listing.
HomeSeekers.com
http://www.homeseekers.com
This is a great site that has listings for residential and commercial real estate.
They host a contest for a vacation getaway directly on their site. This is a great
way to encourage repeat traffic to their Web site.
73. Resume Writing Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The key to catching the attention of a potential employer and securing an interview for a job is to have a well-written and well-designed resume. Although this
may not seem that complicated, many people don’t know how to effectively
Part 2 betas.pmd 213 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
214 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
write a resume, a cover letter, or a thank you letter. If you have good writing
skills and know how to write effective resumes and business letters, this business opportunity could be perfect for you.
How do you operate this type of business? You can easily accept service
requests via the Internet. In order for you to write a resume for a client, you will
have to have accurate information regarding past education, work experience,
and interests. You could obtain this information via e-mail, telephone, or a
personal interview. You could develop a generic questionnaire that you send to
your clients, asking them to provide you with all of the information that you
need. It’s as easy as that.
To speed up the process, you could develop a database of resume design
templates that you could easily complete with your client’s information. Similarly, you could develop a database of templates for cover letters and thank you
letters. This would enable you to customize and complete a project for your
client within hours.
SKILLS NEEDED
Excellent writing skills and knowledge of effective resume writing techniques
are necessary assets for operating this type of business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer. If
you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be adjusted accordingly. You will also have to purchase quality resume paper to print
your finished product. Although this cost is not significant, it will be more than
traditional overhead. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $3,000 to $5,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one part-time
employee. You can work at this business in your spare time while working at
your current job.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. People from all over the world
would be interested in your resume-writing services, with the exception of countries that communicate using a different language than you do.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 214 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 215
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
When you accept a service request from a client and you complete a project, it
is recommended that you receive payment at the time you deliver the finished
product. If you provide digital copies, you might want to receive payment before delivery is made electronically.
If you are shipping your completed resume product to your clients, you
should ensure that the resumes are packaged appropriately. Postal carriers are
not always cautious with their packages, and having a resume with wrinkled
paper would not be effective, no matter how well it is written. To ensure that
your resumes and cover letters are not damaged during the shipping process, it
is recommended that you package them in a file folder or a protective device of
some kind.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to generate as many
links as possible from Web sites, directories, Web rings, and meta-indexes
related to your target market. These sites should relate to employment
opportunities, job seeking, and business/consumer services. It would also
be effective to have your services listed on college and university Web
sites, as graduating students could benefit from your services.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to employment, job seeking, or business/consumer services would be a great way
to generate traffic to your Web site. Make sure you use a cleverly designed signature file with a catchy tagline. A potential tagline could be
“Learn more about our resume writing services. Click Here!” You would
be surprised how many people will do what they are told.
• You could have your services listed in cybermalls related to your target
market. Many cybermalls have a section dedicated to employment opportunities, or business/consumer services. Having your site listed in a
popular cybermall would provide targeted exposure for your service.
• You could develop a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites
frequented by college or university graduates and job seekers. These are
the people who would be interested in your services, so a strategic banner advertising campaign would provide your business with targeted
exposure.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
Part 2 betas.pmd 215 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
216 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• You could launch a job advice column where you could provide visitors
with advice on everything from body language with potential employers to how to conduct yourself during the interview process. You could
also ask visitors if they would like to be notified via e-mail when you
update your advice column. This would be a great way to encourage
repeat traffic to your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could develop additional income for your resume writing business by selling
advertising to employers on your site. You could have an employment opportunities section on your site where businesses could pay a fee to have their employment listings posted. This would be a great way to generate additional income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Resume.com
http://www.resume.com
Resume.com guarantees that their resumes will get their clients an interview
within 30 days or they’ll rewrite it for free! Resume.com makes their resumes
stand above the rest by providing clients with the edge that they need to compete in today’s job market.
A+ Career & Resume Design
http://www.successfulresumes.com
A+ Career & Resume Design (Figure 2.12) is a dynamite business that offers
career assessment, skills development, career planning and implementation,
resume writing, and interview assistance services.
74. Rubber Stamp Business
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Self-inking stamps have been used for business and personal use for years, and
the demand is still strong today. If you currently have the equipment and skills
Part 2 betas.pmd 216 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 217
necessary to operate this type of business, you can dramatically increase your
business via the Internet. The Internet provides you with a unique and efficient
way to take orders for rubber stamps.
So how does it work? You can display the various styles and sizes of rubber
stamps that you offer directly on your Web site. Visitors should be able to view
your entire catalogue of stamps, allowing them to select the ones that they are
interested in. Once they have selected a particular stamp, they should be
prompted to personalize the stamp to suit their needs via a template form,
which will be available for each style of stamp. The form will ask for information such as the name (business or personal), address, tagline, and other pertinent information. Once visitors are happy with the rubber stamp design, they
will be prompted to place an order that will provide you with all necessary
contact and credit card information to complete the purchase. Once the order
has been submitted, you receive the request and design the stamp to the user’s
specifications. This type of business runs very smoothly and can generate maximum exposure for your offline rubber stamp business.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of how to develop, design, and produce self-inking rubber stamps
would be an asset when operating this type of business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer. If
Figure 2.12. SuccessfulResumes.com is a dynamite professional resume writing
business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 217 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
218 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be reduced accordingly. If you don’t have any of the equipment needed to produce
rubber stamps, you will have to purchase it. Either you will have to purchase
storefront software, equipped with electronic shopping cart features, or you
will be responsible for developing this in-house. You will also have to pay for
the design and development of the rubber stamp template system. This is a
more advanced Web site feature; therefore, it may be more costly. Other costs
that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated
cost is $10,000 to $60,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one full-time
individual and potentially one part-time employee depending on the number of
product requests that your business receives.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has limited international potential due to the cost of shipping
your products overseas. It may be more economical for international clients to
purchase rubber stamps from businesses in their local area due to the added
costs of shipping, duties, and tariffs.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
It is important that you don’t offer a specific rubber stamp design on your Web
site that you don’t have in stock. If a client purchases a specific stamp and you
can’t provide them with what they want in a timely fashion, you could damage
the reputation of your business. In order to avoid this, it is suggested that you
monitor your inventory closely and update your online catalogue accordingly.
When a customer designs a stamp on your site, you should do whatever you
can to ensure that they are completely satisfied with the design before you produce the end product. To avoid displeasing your customer, you should have a
two-stage review process before any order is submitted—one before the order
processing takes place and then another before the order is finalized. You should
also place a disclaimer on your site that states that customers understand and
take full responsibility for the design of the stamp. This will protect you if you
design a stamp to user specifications and they say that that is not what they
ordered. It is in your best interest to go through this process to avoid producing
multiple stamps for customers.
Part 2 betas.pmd 218 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 219
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. These sites should be related to
business products, stationery, or rubber stamps. It would surprise you
how many rubber stamp-related sites there are on the Internet. Many
people collect self-inking rubber stamps.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to business
products, rubber stamps, and just business in general would be a great
way to generate traffic to your Web site. Make sure you use a cleverly
designed signature file with a catchy tagline. A potential tagline could
be “Check Out Our Rubber Stamps Today!” You would be surprised
how many people will do what they are told.
• You could have your services listed in cybermalls related to your target
market. Many cybermalls have categories related to business products,
office supplies, and stamps. Having your site listed in a popular cybermall
would provide targeted exposure for your service.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Stamp Design” via a link on your site. This will spread the word
about your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for a free
rubber stamp. You could ask people if they would like to be notified of
the winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage them to return to your
site to reenter your contest, thus reexposing them to your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to designing stamps, you could also produce stationery and embossers, and offer engraving services. These services would complement your rubber
stamp business and could generate additional revenue for your business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 219 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
220 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Riverside Rubber Stamp & Engraving
http://www.rrse.com
Riverside Rubber Stamp & Engraving is a rubber stamp manufacturer located
in California. They also sell embossers and daters, which complement their
rubber stamp business.
JLS Rubber Stamp Co., Inc.
http://www.jlsrubberstamp.com
JLS Rubber Stamp Co. is a rubber stamp manufacturer offering complete marking device services including engraving, pre-inked stamps, self-inked stamps,
and personalized engraved gifts.
75. Search Engine Optimization Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Getting their site to appear in the top ten results is worth big bucks to any
company marketing online. If you know how to optimize sites to get top search
engine ranking, your services will be very valuable and of great interest to many
online companies.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will have to be very knowledgeable about search engines, their ranking
algorithms, and the keyword phrase selection and allocation process.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
If you decide to launch this type of business, you will have to pay for the design,
development, and hosting of your Web site, a high-speed Internet connection,
computer hardware, computer software, and a printer. Other costs that you
will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $5,000
to $10,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
At first you may be able to work at this type of business part-time, but as your
service requests increase, you might have to work with this business venture
full-time.
Part 2 betas.pmd 220 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 221
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Since businesses from around the world are all competing for the number one
position in the search engines, this type of business has strong international
potential.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The search engine ranking criteria, their weighting, and elements included in
their algorithms change on a regular basis. It will be extremely important to
stay current. You’re only as good as your last search engine optimization job!
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Optimize your own site to appear at the top of the results when someone does a search on “search engine optimization services.” You may
also want to participate in the pay-to-play sponsored listings programs
with the popular search engines.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. There are thousands of Internet
marketing and business service-related sites on the Internet that would
provide a great linking opportunity for your site. These sites can provide highly targeted traffic to your site.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to Internet
marketing and online business. Remember to use a cleverly designed
signature file with a catchy tagline and hypertext link that will send
newsgroup readers to your site.
• Providing valuable contributions to Internet marketing and online business-related mail lists and e-zines would be a great way to create exposure for your business. This will allow you to display your professionalism
and generate awareness for your services.
• Launching a monthly Search Engine Submission Tips newsletter or
e-zine would be a great way for you to stay in touch with your current
clients and potential customers. You can also offer this via e-mail or
Part 2 betas.pmd 221 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
222 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
RSS. Offering sound advice is a great way to enhance your corporate
image. When your newsletter readers implement your suggested submission techniques, they will want to check their results. This provides
you with an opportunity to offer your search engine submission reporter
services.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
One way to earn additional income for your business is by offering a search
engine submission service. This service would complement your current business
practice. Because link popularity is becoming such a strong element in the ranking criteria of a number of the search engines, you might also consider providing
an online marketing service that includes generating links to the client’s site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
VerbInteractive.com
http://www.verbinteractive.com
This is a company in which I am a partner. Check out the term “tourism Internet marketing” to see how we fare.
Elixir Systems
http://www.elixirsystems.com
Elixir Systems provides search engine optimization services as well as other
Internet marketing services.
76. Search Engine Submission and Monitoring Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Marketing research has revealed that when researching online, approximately
85 percent of Internet users find what they are looking for through search engines. It is also a well-known fact that users rarely go beyond the first three
screens of search results. Because of this, it is highly important that businesses
Part 2 betas.pmd 222 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 223
have their Web sites appropriately submitted to the major search engines. There
currently are hundreds of search engine submission services online that promise results, but many never come through on their end of the bargain. They
typically do one mass submission of a business’s URL to the search engines
using a submission tool and choose to ignore proper submission techniques.
This provides you with an opportunity to offer services that surpass those of
many of the competition.
Since this business’s sole purpose is to submit a client’s URL to the search
engines and directories, this will be the main source of revenue. You have to
know the various search engines’ ranking criteria and ensure that your client’s
site is conducive to high ranking before you submit. A Web site has to have
appropriate keywords in its meta-tags, Alt-tags, and page titles, and throughout the text on its site, as well as having a significant number of links to its site.
As an additional service, you could develop these for your clients as a valueadded service (see Search Engine Optimization Service). This will not only generate additional revenue and add to the overall professionalism of your business,
it will also increase the chances that your clients will receive high search engine
rankings.
SKILLS NEEDED
You should know how to submit appropriately to the various search engines
and directories. You should be knowledgeable about the Web site ranking criteria of the major search engines.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
If you decide to launch this type of business, you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your Web site, a high-speed Internet connection, computer hardware, computer software, and a printer. If you currently
have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower.
Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site.
Estimated cost is $10,000 to 20,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
At first you may need to work at this type of business part-time, but as your
service requests increase, you might have to work with this business venture
full-time.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Since businesses from around the world are outsourcing this activity to professionals, this business venture has strong international potential.
Part 2 betas.pmd 223 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
224 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since search engines change their ranking criteria constantly, it is very important that you stay up-to-date on the latest advancements in search engine technology. Not knowing what a search engine is using to rank the sites in its index
could seriously hinder the success of your search engine submission service.
Being knowledgeable about the latest advancements in search engine technology will not only enhance the professionalism of your business, but will also
increase the chances that you will receive repeat business from your clients as
you will develop a strong, trusting relationship.
You should inform your clients that many things factor into receiving high
search engine rankings—things such as an effective Web site design, proper
meta-tags, keyword prominence throughout the site, page titles, Alt-tags, and,
most important, link popularity. Many of the major search engines are now
using link popularity—that is, the amount of incoming links to your site—as
one of their ranking criteria. If your clients are unwilling to outsource the development of these to your business, it is essential that you inform them how
important they are to receiving high rankings. Once you submit their URL to
the search engines, if your clients don’t receive high rankings, you can again
inform them that it was because they didn’t comply with all of the requirements
of the search engines’ ranking criteria. This will save the professionalism of
your organization and will ultimately result in the sale of your additional search
engine optimization services.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to Internet
marketing and online business. Remember to use a cleverly designed
signature file with a catchy tagline and hypertext link that will send
newsgroup readers to your site. Potential taglines could include “Ask
Us about Our Search Engine Submission Services” or some variation of
this phrase.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. There are thousands of Internet
marketing- and business services-related sites on the Internet that would
provide a great linking opportunity for your site. These sites will provide highly targeted traffic to your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 224 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 225
• Providing valuable contributions to Internet marketing and online business-related mail lists and e-zines would be a great way to create exposure for your business. This will allow you to display your professionalism
and generate awareness for your services.
• Launching a monthly search engine news newsletter or e-zine would be
a great way for you to stay in touch with your current clients and potential customers. This could be offered via e-mail or an RSS feed. Offering
sound advice is a great way to enhance your corporate image. When
your newsletter readers implement your suggested submission techniques,
they will want to check their results. This provides you with an opportunity to offer your search engine submission optimization services.
• You could have your search engine submission services listed in
cybermalls related to your target market. You could list your site in
industry-specific cybermalls related to technology or doing business
online, or you could simply have your site listed in categories related to
business services.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
One way to earn additional income for your business is by offering a search
engine reporting service. Many people regularly submit their URL to the search
engines but never take the time to actually know where their Web site is ranking. This service would complement your current submission service and would
be a great way to earn additional income for your business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Hand Submit
http://www.handsubmit.com
Hand Submit provides manual search engine submission services.
Surf Promote
http://www.manual-search-engine-submission.co.uk
Surf Promote (see Figure 2.13) provides manual search engine submission
services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 225 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
226 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
77. Seminars Online
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
If you are an educator, public speaker, industry specialist, or software salesperson, this could be your winning ticket!
Online seminars are becoming very common, with many online training
sites now available. They are a perfect way to deliver a multimedia message
that holds the user’s full attention until the points are clearly communicated.
The monitor screen is a cold and inhuman medium, but with the new online
seminar software and associated technology, we can deliver a human voice accompanied by moving images and presentation slides, thus delivering an engaging educational experience that is available to users 24/7. Some software available
today requires a relatively small download in order to receive the message, and
some is directly available through the browser interface.
Many meeting and event planners are turning to the Internet to research
and book a speaker or trainer for their next event. For many speakers’ Web
sites, it’s a great idea to have an online demo for event coordinators to sample.
This lessens the associated costs and time consumed by sending out videos and
brochures.
The online seminar Web site should host a comprehensive amount of information pertaining to the topics discussed in the seminars, as well as feature bios
Figure 2.13. Surf Promote offers a great search engine submission service.
Part 2 betas.pmd 226 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 227
about the speakers or educators and technical support FAQ files for users to
refer to if they have any questions about the associated technologies being used.
There should be a clear schedule of past and upcoming seminars posted on the
site. All the past seminars should be available via download for a fee to maximize revenue potential for this business.
The online seminar provides a perfect opportunity to upsell books, training
kits, and in-person speaking engagements or classes, providing you with an
excellent opportunity to generate additional income for your business.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need working knowledge of the software programs and hardware used
to create the online seminar files and store them on servers, making them available for download via the Web. You will need Web publishing skills and must
be able to manage the automated online payment processing function that takes
place when users download a seminar.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a printer, and a digital video
camera. You will have to pay for the online seminar software. If you currently
have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower.
If you are selling books or related training materials and are considering taking
online payments, you will have to pay for the development of your storefront
or purchase storefront software. You will also incur all costs associated with
setting up your merchant account, which enables you to take online payments.
Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site.
Estimated cost is $3,000 to $10,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
Only one employee is needed to run this operation. If your service requests
exceed what you can handle, you may have to hire an additional employee to
handle all administrative duties associated with the daily operations of the
business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The software that was created to make online seminars possible was designed
with global potential in mind. It bridges the gap between experts and the people
who want to learn from these experts but cannot meet them in person. Therefore, the only barrier is language, and this can be overcome with professional
translation services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 227 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
228 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 or 3 would be appropriate for this type of business. You will
be providing an automated payment processing function associated with the
download of seminars from your site and possibly selling related products such
as books, training kits, and bookings in your e-store. For more information, see
Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The technology involved is new and still being perfected, so be careful when
you choose the seminar software and hardware. Make sure you research the
file types, streaming techniques, browser compatibility, and user-friendliness of
the options available. In addition, keep on top of the breaking multimedia technology and change with it as it improves to maintain the long-term viability of
your business. Keep your prices competitive and offer some samples for free.
There already are many free seminars available on the Web today. Your pricing
should reflect the nature and value of the seminars you provide.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could relate to the specific industry
or educational subject that your seminars target, or be targeted toward
universities or meeting and event planners. These are the Web sites that
your target market will visit on a regular basis.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. These sites should relate to the
industry that you target, such as student resource sites, meeting and event
planning sites, or sites dedicated to professional speakers and trainers.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your area
of expertise would be quite effective. Provide valuable demonstrations
of the power of online seminars by inviting chat room acquaintances to
visit your site and test it out for free.
• Make sure you include a cleverly designed signature file in all of your
postings. This will act as an advertisement for your services.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
Part 2 betas.pmd 228 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 229
• Participating in mailing lists related to online seminars or your area of
expertise is a useful way of encouraging people to visit your site.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for products in your e-store. This creates loyalty, spurs viral marketing, and
ensures repeat traffic generation.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
If your primary focus is selling your online seminars via download or online
seminar publishing services, you could earn additional income from banner
advertising because chances are you will have a tremendous “stickiness” factor
to your site, and this allows for significant banner exposure time. You could
also be a useful reseller for the online seminar software product you choose and
earn a commission for all the packages you sell.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Susan Sweeney
http://www.susansweeney.com/tele_seminars.html
On my site I offer a full range of Internet marketing online seminars. These can
be taken live with a question and answer at the end of each session; they can be
purchased as a CD; or they can be taken immediately as a prerecorded training
program.
Seybold Seminars
http://www.key3media.com/seyboldseminars
This site provides comprehensive, in-depth online seminars directed toward
cutting-edge notions within the publishing industry.
Virtual Seminars for Teaching Literature
http://info.ox.ac.uk/jtap/tutorials
This site has online tutorials (seminars) about poetry, history, and other topics
with fantastic user-friendliness in the tech support department, and it explains
exactly how to benefit from the tutorials by doing background reading and
other preparatory activities. The software used on this site works in Netscape.
Part 2 betas.pmd 229 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
230 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
78. Senior Services
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The number of seniors who are online is increasing every day. Many retired
seniors spend hours on the Internet daily—learning, doing research, purchasing
products, and planning the rest of their retirement. This provides you with an
excellent opportunity to capitalize on this trend. You can launch a senior services Web site where senior citizens can learn about health, eating, fitness, travel,
literature, money, entertainment, and many other things that are of interest to
senior citizens.
How does this business generate revenue? You can generate revenue from
selling online advertising. The senior citizen market is quite appealing to many
businesses; this can provide a key advertising opportunity for businesses whose
products and services would be of interest to seniors. You could sell advertisements for different vitamins and health products, or you could sell advertisements promoting senior trips to Las Vegas. There are many advertising
opportunities for this type of site. You could also generate revenue by participating in the affiliate programs of companies providing goods and services of
interest to seniors.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online advertising techniques would be a benefit if you are operating this type of business. You can’t promote to a specific market segment
unless you understand that segment; therefore, you should have knowledge of
different interests of senior citizens.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of
your Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, and a printer.
If you plan to set up a mailing list, you will also have to purchase mailing list
software to help you organize and maintain it. It would probably be in your
best interest to purchase comprehensive Web traffic analysis software to track
where your Web site visitors are coming from. This information can be great
for future marketing opportunities. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $4,000 to $10,000
to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business could be started by one individual on a part-time basis. To take
this to the next level, you will want one or two full-time employees. One person
Part 2 betas.pmd 230 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 231
will be responsible for the daily promotion of your Web site online. The other
employee will handle advertising sales, accounting, and all administrative tasks
associated with operating the business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. Your services will be of interest to senior citizens all over the world.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since your main source of revenue is going to be generated from the sale of
online advertising, it is very important that you ensure that the server hosting
your site has high-speed access. You don’t want to have a slow-loading site,
because this won’t be attractive to advertisers. If it takes a long time to download a page of your site, both visitors and advertisers will be dissatisfied.
You should ensure that your Web site has an attractive interface with consistent navigation throughout your site. Since your advertisers will be posting
their ads on your site linking out to their site, you should develop the interface
so that the visitor doesn’t actually leave your site. What you can do is have your
advertiser’s site appear in a pop-up window. This enables the visitor to continue
to navigate throughout your site without having to click back in his or her
browser.
Since your target market is senior citizens, you should remember not to
make your Web site design too complex. You should use fonts that are larger
than your typical font size. You should also ensure that navigating throughout
your site is easy. Any complications may cause a senior citizen to leave your site
due to confusion.
You should update your Web site constantly. Perhaps you could have a
What’s New page that is continuously updated with recent site additions or
information that would be of interest to seniors. You could ask visitors if they
would like to be notified via e-mail of any updates that you make to your
What’s New page. This would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic, and
seniors would definitely appreciate hearing from you.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where seniors can “Tell a Friend about
This Site” via your site. This will spread the word about your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 231 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
232 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Develop as many links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, Web rings, and meta-indexes related to your target market. These
sites could relate to travel, health and fitness, money, entertainment,
growing older, or anything related to senior citizens.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for a free
product offered by one of your advertisers. You could ask people if they
would like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage them to return to your site to re-enter your contest, thus reexposing them to your site.
• Have a What’s New page where visitors can view recent changes to your
site and new things that would be of interest to seniors. You could ask
people if they would like to be notified of additions to your What’s New
page via e-mail. This would encourage them to return to your Web site.
• Participating in mailing lists related to the interests of senior citizens
would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic to your Web site. Remember to include a signature file in all of your messages. This will be
your online advertisement for your senior services site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could purchase banner advertising on Web sites that are frequented
by your target market. Sites related to health and fitness or travel, or
sites that target senior citizens, would generate targeted exposure for
your business.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can generate additional revenue by participating in affiliate programs of
suppliers of products and services that are of interest to seniors. You can have
sponsors of appropriate sections of your Web site or your mail list.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Seniors.com
http://www.seniors.com
Part 2 betas.pmd 232 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 233
Seniors.com is a great site (Figure 2.14) that provides senior citizens with multitudes of information on health, news, family, fitness, travel, finance, Medicare, and more.
ThirdAge!
http://www.thirdage.com
This is a dynamite site that offers health, money, fitness, and travel advice to
mature adults.
79. Sign-Making Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
A sign-making service is a great way to earn additional income from home. You
can design and manufacture signs for companies that reflect their corporate
image, or you can develop custom signs for other clientele. How involved you
get during the design process is up to you. You may choose to operate only on
the production end of things. Some opportunities for you to consider are:
• Carved signs
• Banners
Figure 2.14. Seniors.com is a great place for seniors to find information about health,
investments, news, and much more!
Part 2 betas.pmd 233 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
234 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Neon or electronic signs
• Slate signs
• Truck and trailer lettering
• Magnetic signs
• Site signs
• Decorative pinstriping
• Real estate signs.
SKILLS NEEDED
Graphic design and computer skills as well as additional technical skills are
important; however, no postsecondary education is necessary. Other skills will
reflect the path you take. If you are going to make carved signs, then woodworking knowledge would be a valuable asset. If you are going to paint signs
on vehicles, then past experience with airbrushes and vinyl/hand lettering would
be important.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, sign-making computer software, a scanner, photographic equipment (e.g., a digital camera), sign-making machinery, and a printer.
If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be
considerably lower. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion
of your Web site. Estimated cost is $18,000 to $20,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One additional employee may be needed to run this business. You may choose
to focus on the sign design aspect of the business and have an additional employee handle the fabrication and installation.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business will focus on your immediate geographic region, as you will need
to be able to travel to the appropriate locations to deliver and install your signage
cost effectively. On the other hand, you may get some business requests from
outside of your area. In these cases, you would courier the end product to the
customer.
Part 2 betas.pmd 234 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 235
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be appropriate for this type of business. You could
have a form so that people can request price estimates and inquire about your
services. See Part 1 for more information.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Your biggest challenge is making yourself visible to your target market. You
will need to ensure that you implement and monitor appropriate online marketing techniques. If your area has relevant local sites, such as a coupon site,
then you should consider participating. Although this discounts your services,
it is an excellent way to attract business.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop as many links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes related to your target market. Ensure that you
get listed in sites that target your local area as well as your area of
expertise.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Site” via a link on your site. This will spread the word about your
site and will encourage others to visit.
• Advertising in business-related e-zines will encourage people to visit
your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop a section of your site to display your more impressive signs.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extending your product line is an excellent opportunity to earn additional income. For example, you could take up actual logo design or develop your own
bumper stickers. Both are natural extensions that flow from your existing capabilities. You may also want to consider sign-restoration services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 235 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
236 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE EXAMPLES
A Sign 4 U
http://www.asign4u.com
A company that makes a wide range of graphical business products.
SignMaker1.com
http://www.signmaker1.com
A sign company offering custom design, fabrication, and installation of all types
of advertising signage.
80. Small Business Resource Center
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
This type of business can be established to assist entrepreneurs who are interested in starting a business or to help existing businesses enhance their current
business operation. You can provide entrepreneurs with information on how to
register a business, different tax issues that need to be addressed when running
a business, and other information that can help them set up and run their business. This information will be easy for you to provide to your visitors, as it will
be accessible from your local government offices. These government offices
will also be able to supply you with any forms, brochures, or pamphlets that
you will want to make available to your visitors. This will help you cut down
on high overhead costs.
You can also provide current business operators with resources that will
help them run their businesses more efficiently. You could develop a directory
of various consultants, accountants, financial advisors, office equipment suppliers, and so on, that would be accessible from your Web site. Current business operators could easily reference your site when trying to outsource activities
to a specialized organization or purchase new materials for their business operation. This directory would be a great asset to all business operators.
To generate revenue for your business, you can set up a referral system with
business service providers that target entrepreneurs and business operators. For
example, you could receive a referral fee for every business person you send to
a financial planner, an accountant, or a lawyer in a specific area. You could also
develop an alliance between office equipment suppliers, print houses, and other
businesses that would benefit from receiving business from your Web site’s visitors. After developing these alliances, you would be surprised how much money
Part 2 betas.pmd 236 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 237
you could make from referrals. You can also sell banner advertising to business
service-oriented companies. They would benefit from the targeted advertising
exposure that could be generated from your Web site.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of how to operate a business, business rules and regulations, and
online marketing skills would be an asset when operating this type of business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, and a printer. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably
lower. You will also have to design some sort of tracking system to track your
referrals to the businesses that you are promoting on your site. If you are planning to launch a mailing list, you will have to purchase mailing list software.
This will help you maintain, manage, and distribute your mail list. Other costs
that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated
cost is $10,000 to $30,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Generally, one full-time employee will be needed to run the day-to-day operation of this business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Although people from other countries may use this service if they are moving to
the country, city, or state that you represent, this business generally has national or regional appeal.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since the majority of the information on your site will remain the same (i.e.,
business forms, laws, and regulations), you should continuously update your
site to encourage repeat traffic to your Web site. Ideas you may want to include
on your site are a What’s New page or an Emerging Business page that entrepreneurs can read for inspiration. This would be a great way to encourage
repeat traffic.
Since revenue will be based upon generating referrals to other business service providers, you are going to have to develop a system to track your referPart 2 betas.pmd 237 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
238 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
rals. To do this, you should assign a unique ID to each business that you have
listed on your site. If visitors are interested in a particular business’s service,
they can request that a representative from that business contact them by filling
out a simple form that will integrate with their selection to include the unique
ID number. Once you receive the request, it is your responsibility to contact the
business to inform them about the potential client or customer. This will be an
easy way to keep track of your referrals.
Businesses are going to want to purchase advertising on your site for one
reason—the potential traffic that you will send to their sites. To ensure that this
happens, you are going to have to do whatever you can to promote your business online and offline.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to entrepreneurship, starting a business, or business services. There are hundreds of business services-related Web sites and
meta-indexes online. You should attempt to receive links from as many
of these as possible.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to business,
entrepreneurship, starting a business, or the geographic area that you
represent would be quite effective. Through providing valuable contributions, you will be able to exercise your professionalism and capture
the attention of your target audience. Make sure you include a cleverly
designed signature file in all of your postings. This will act as an advertisement for your services.
• Participating in mailing lists related to your target market would be a
great way to encourage people to visit your site. Make sure you provide
a valuable contribution and include your signature file. This will encourage people to visit your Web site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could have a What’s New section on your site. You could ask people
if they would like to be notified via e-mail whenever you update your
What’s New page. This would be a great way to encourage visitors to
return to your site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 238 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 239
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to generating revenue from business referrals, you could also promote upcoming business-related conferences and seminars on your Web site.
You could promote the event, take online registrations, and earn a commission
for every registration that you take. This would be a great way to earn additional income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
MoreBusiness.com
http://www.morebusiness.com
MoreBusiness.com is a dynamite resource site for entrepreneurs. Their site offers advice on everything from starting a business to building a Web site for that
business.
BusinessCity.com
http://www.businesscity.com
This is a huge business resource site offering all kinds of advice to business
start-ups and already established businesses.
81. Software Download Site
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Everyone loves free shareware. The increase in Web sites offering free software
downloads proves this. These sites allow up-and-coming software designers to
display their programs to the public. They also allow established businesses to
offer trial copies of their software. Usually these trial versions are limited either
in their functionality or by the number of days you can use them. Since these
sites offer free programs, they typically receive high volumes of traffic.
How do you generate revenue with this type of business? Since these sites
receive such high volumes of traffic, you provide businesses with an excellent
online advertising opportunity. You can sell banner advertisements on pages
Part 2 betas.pmd 239 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
240 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
throughout your site. If you decide to launch a mailing list, you can also sell
advertisements in the body of the mailing list message. Since your site will receive so many visitors, you will be able to generate maximum exposure for
your advertisers’ products and services; thus you will be able to generate a
tremendous amount of revenue for your business.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online advertising techniques is an asset to run this type of business. Since you will have to evaluate all of the software that you allow people to
submit to your site, it is recommended that you have some knowledge of software design.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site. You will have to purchase computer hardware, computer software, a
scanner, and a printer. If you currently have some of these items, your initial
start-up costs will be considerably lower. You should expect the cost for Web
hosting to be considerably larger than that for a typical online business due to
the high volumes of traffic that your site is going to receive and the space
needed to store the various programs that your visitors will be able to download. You will also need high bandwidth because of all the files that will be
downloaded. If you plan to set up a mailing list, you will also have to purchase
mailing list software to help you organize and maintain it. It would probably
be in your best interest to purchase comprehensive Web traffic analysis software to track where your Web site visitors are coming from. This information
can be great for future marketing opportunities. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $10,000 to
$50,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one full-time
individual and potentially one part-time employee. Initially you are going to be
responsible for the mass promotion of your software download site through
various online media. This is going to be a very time-consuming task, as a high
volume of traffic is imperative to the success of this business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. Since you are representing software developers from all over the world, your software download site will
appeal to everyone.
Part 2 betas.pmd 240 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 241
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
There are several things that you have to remember when launching a software
download site. It is very important that you ensure that the server that you’re
hosting your site on has high-speed access. If it takes a long time to download
software from your site, visitors will be dissatisfied. This will also turn away
potential advertisers from your Web site. This can be avoided if your host has a
state-of-the-art server with lots of capacity and a high-speed connection.
To keep your software download site fresh, you should try to update your
site on a regular basis. Consider having a What’s New page on your site. You
could ask visitors if they would like to be notified via e-mail when you have
made updates to your site. This would be a great way to generate repeat traffic
to your site.
Advertisers are going to want to purchase ads on your site for one reason—
exposure. This can’t happen unless your site receives high volumes of traffic. To
ensure that this happens, you are going to have to do whatever you can to
promote your business online and offline.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites should relate to software, programming, or technology in general.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for a free
full version of a product offered by one of your regular program providers. The programmer or business donating the product could be your
Featured Designer. You could ask people if they would like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage them to return
to your site to re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing them to your site.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Program” via your site. This will spread the word about your site.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. These sites should relate to software design, development, programming, or technology in general. There
Part 2 betas.pmd 241 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
242 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
are also thousands of “free stuff” sites online. It would be very appropriate for your site to be listed on all of these sites.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You should develop a What’s New page for your site. Here you could
feature the newest software uploaded to your site. You could ask people
if they would like to be notified via e-mail when you update your What’s
New page. This will encourage them to return to your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could develop additional income for your site by selling software from
your site or launching a referral business, where you receive a commission on
all software sales resulting from a referral from your site. This would be a great
way for you to earn additional income from this type of business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
TUCOWS
http://www.tucows.com
One of the first sites of its kind, TUCOWS is a great software download site.
They offer tons of programs on their site including music editors, HTML editors, games, and screen savers.
DOWNLOAD.com
http://www.download.com
This is a great site brought to you by CNET.com. They have a huge database of
various software downloads.
82. Sports Equipment, New and Used
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The sports industry generates billions of dollar a year. With that much interest,
it was inevitable that online sports stores would appear in force. There are an
Part 2 betas.pmd 242 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 243
insane number of sports stores online already; however, because of the diversity
in sports, there is still a lot of room for those with unique interests. If you can
correctly combine the proper sports niche with the global Internet community,
you will still have a huge customer base—this is one of the primary strengths of
the Internet. You can run this business a number of ways:
1. You could provide classified ad space for a fee to those interested in
selling new or used sports equipment.
2. You could be an online storefront and carry an inventory of new and
used sports equipment.
3. You could belong to a number of sports-related stores’ affiliate programs and provide recommendations and links to their sports products.
Your main source of income will depend on the business model you choose.
SKILLS NEEDED
Some familiarity with sports and sports equipment is suggested, as people may
ask you questions about the merchandise. Also, some familiarity with Web site
programming would be an asset, though it is not required.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The expenses to start an online new and used sporting goods store will depend on
the business model you choose. The costs can be separated into several key areas.
Hardware
You will need a computer, appropriate software, a scanner, and a printer. This
will cost around $2,000 to $4,000.
Web Site
You will need to have your Web site designed, developed, and hosted. The cost
to set up your basic Web site is highly variable, and it will range from $3,000 to
$10,000. If you choose the classified ad business model, your Web site development costs will have to allow for the development of a searchable database and
also classified ad input forms and online payment forms. This will add $2,000
to $5,000 to your basic Web site costs. If you choose the online storefront
model, you will have to develop your storefront and all you need for online
payment. This will add $50 to $100 per month to your basic Web site costs. If
you choose the affiliate program model, no additional Web development costs
will be incurred.
Part 2 betas.pmd 243 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
244 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Other
If you choose to have an online storefront and keep inventory, building up your
inventory will be one of your largest expenses. Though highly variable, you
should expect it to start at $5,000, and it could go much higher depending on
your inventory size and the types of items you are selling.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to start depends on the business model you
choose and the volume of business you expect to handle. The degree of automation incorporated into your online presence will also be a factor. Should you
choose the classified ad model or the affiliate program model, you can start
with one employee as a part-time venture. If you choose to use the online store
model, at a minimum you’ll need several people to handle your customer service and shipping.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Sports is a universal pastime, and the market for sports equipment is huge, so
the international potential for this business is excellent. The language barrier
will be the only major hindrance to total international access.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
For the classified ad business model, e-business level 2 is most appropriate. For
the online storefront, you will want to use e-business level 3 or level 4 if you
have an offline presence as well. For the affiliate program business model,
e-business level 1 is appropriate. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
A major issue to be addressed is the competition on the Internet. All the major
sporting goods stores are on the Internet, and they all probably will be able to
sell products cheaper than you. It is important then that you niche your market.
This carries several significant advantages, such as being able to narrow your
target market, and it also keeps down your inventory.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generating links from sports
sites that are related to your products could be a great way of reaching
a targeted market.
Part 2 betas.pmd 244 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 245
• Use permission marketing by asking customers if they would like to be
notified when you update or expand your product line.
• On your site, include a Special of the Week (or Month) section where the
customer will get a discount on big-ticket items. Again, ask visitors if they
would like to be notified via e-mail when you introduce new specials.
• If your site is dedicated to one sort of sport, then you can use publicly
accessible opt-in mailing lists to market your site. The mailing list should
contain key items of information about the sport and maybe a few small
plugs for your store.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You might want to consider a targeted banner advertising campaign.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
To increase your income, you could also include a section of your Web site
dedicated to sports memorabilia. Sports memorabilia items have significant sentimental value attached to them due to a significant past event or a particular
owner. Sports memorabilia is a huge subsection of the sports industry.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Fogdog Sports
http://www.fogdog.com
The largest online sports store. Many other sport sites that sell sporting goods
online are actually using Fogdog’s affiliate program.
Sports.com
http://www.sports.com
One of the largest sports sites on the Web, in five languages, and covering all
the major sports. Its store is divided into European and American divisions.
Part 2 betas.pmd 245 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
246 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
83. Survey Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
In business, it pays to know what your customers are thinking. This allows you
to change your marketing strategy or target a more receptive audience. In a
survey service, businesses pay you to find out what people are thinking. A survey service organizes polls and arranges questionnaires on topics the client
chooses. In fact, the better survey services create questionnaires and polls from
criteria that their clients give them. As an online survey service, most of your
services will be targeted at an online market.
Your business will generate income by attracting clients who need to have
online surveys performed. You will create an online survey, poll, or questionnaire based on criteria that your clients provide you. You will arrange to have
the surveys introduced to the targeted market segment and have people answer
it. You will then correlate the results and provide them to your client, at which
point you collect your fee.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need experience in developing appropriate survey questions and developing a campaign.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up your survey service will range from $7,000 to over
$20,000. These costs include at least one high-end computer, appropriate administrative and Web-enabled survey software, and a printer. You will need to
have your Web site designed, developed, and hosted.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Your business can be started with one knowledgeable employee.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Information services have none of the restrictions that so often apply to Internet retail businesses. There is nothing preventing your services from being used
by anyone online. Your only restrictions are the language barriers. For this
reason, you may wish to include in your Web site several language options.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 246 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 247
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Getting people to fill out your surveys may be difficult, so it might be necessary
to offer some sort of reward or incentive, such as the chance to win a prize.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You should generate as many
links from appropriate business services Web sites, directories, Web rings,
meta-indexes, and business-related cybermalls as possible.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Participate in business services-related opt-in mail lists, discussion groups,
and forums. Be sure to utilize your signature file and have a catchy
tagline.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can be generated by expanding your online marketing services. This is suggested only after you have established yourself. However, there
is a great need for market research services, and marketing advice online at the
present time would be a logical expansion of your business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Surveysite.com
http://www.surveysite.com
The main Web site for a large corporate marketing firm. Several survey sites on
the Internet are actually generated by Surveysite.
HostedSurvey.com
http://www.hostedsurvey.com/home.html
A nicely laid out corporate site (Figure 2.15) that lets you perform rapid online
marketing surveys, feedback forms, and evaluations so that customers can get
the information quickly.
Part 2 betas.pmd 247 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
248 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
84. Tourist Information Center
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
A tourist information center is a Web Site that provides prospective travelers
with information about popular tourist locations. It provides the user with common weather conditions, sites to see, places to go, things to do, or anything else
someone might want to know about their travel destination.
Your site should be designed so that the average user can easily access
accurate information about a travel destination. Accuracy is of the utmost
importance as people will be relying on your information to plan their vacation. It is suggested that you choose a niche, a small area, or a single travel
topic to cover. You will need to cover a lot of information even when covering
a small area.
Your main source of income will be generated by banner ads or commercial
listings with links to Web sites that are related to tourism in the area you cover.
Thus, if you cover the state of New York, for example, you can offer your
service to New York’s bed and breakfasts, amusement parks, restaurants, hotels, RV parks, car rental agencies, and other related sites.
SKILLS NEEDED
Since you are an information service, it is of the utmost importance that the
information you provide be highly accurate since people will be depending on
Figure 2.15. HostedSurvey.com provides extensive online survey services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 248 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 249
you. Another skill that may prove to be helpful is a familiarity with Web site
design and maintenance. If you are not familiar with this, you will need to hire
someone who is, or outsource this activity to someone who can perform changes
to your Web site regularly.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The costs associated with setting up this business have been divided into three
categories: hardware and software purchases, accumulating information for
your business, and setting up your Web site.
You will need a computer, administrative and database software, a printer,
a scanner, a digital camera, and graphics software. You will need to pay to have
your Web site designed, developed, and hosted unless you are capable of doing
this yourself. Most importantly, you will need to do a lot of research and information gathering. The amount of money you spend on this will depend on your
familiarity with the area or travel topics you are covering.
The final cost to set up and run this type of business will range from $5,000
to $40,000 depending on what you believe you need to run it most efficiently.
The Web site and database will usually account for at least half of your initial
expenses. Once you are set up, you should expect additional costs that are
associated with promoting your business online and offline.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to start your tourist center depends on how
much information you will be managing. This type of business can be started
with one person.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Although your site visitors will be international, it is likely that your clientele
will be local or national depending on the niche you choose to develop.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business levels 1 and 2 are most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The key to your success in this business is high-quality information and a well
laid out Web site.
Since you need to provide a lot of detailed information on various travel
destinations, it is necessary that you choose a niche, an area, or a type of travel
to cover. Unless you have a huge staff, you won’t be able to provide enough upto-date, quality information for worldwide or even nationwide coverage. By
Part 2 betas.pmd 249 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
250 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
limiting your information coverage, you also gain the advantage of avoiding
competing with the larger tourist Web sites.
You might consider giving the tourism locations in your database access to
their record for updating purposes. You would provide them with passwordcontrolled access to their record only. This will require additional programming on the front end but will shift some of the maintenance of the records
outside your organization.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
Some of the online marketing techniques that would be most effective for promoting this type of business include:
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Linking to a wide variety of
tourism sites and especially tourism service sites will be a definite benefit for your business. You will also want to generate links to your site
from tourism cybermalls directories, meta-indexes, and Web rings.
• Participate in news and discussion groups related to tourism. Remember to include your signature file and a great tagline.
• Providing a section of your site for coupons and discounts for various
travel services such as car rentals or hotels could also increase repeat
traffic and customer loyalty. You might ask your visitors if they’d like to
receive your coupons and discount information as the site is updated.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Another good idea to increase customer loyalty is to develop an advice
column, travel articles, pictures, or video. High-quality information is
guaranteed to draw customers back to your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
If your Web site is dedicated to a specific type of travel such as adventure tours
or hunting, you could sell items related to that type of tourism. For example,
you could sell mountain gear for adventure tours or hunting gear for hunting
Part 2 betas.pmd 250 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 251
trips. It is important to note that the cost to develop your Web site will increase
slightly since you will need to incorporate an e-commerce service. This will also
change your e-commerce model from level 1 to level 3.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Beachcomber.com
http://www.beachcomber.com
A site that contains tourism and travel information for a wide selection of beaches
worldwide.
Townnet
http://www.townnet.com
A global list of tourist information with a wide selection of towns and cities.
85. Trade Show Directory
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
The trade show industry is a huge business these days. Facilitating the quest for
information and providing up-to-date industry news is a great opportunity for
you to capitalize on and increase your annual income. If you decide to start this
type of business, you can take two approaches. You can tackle the trade show
directory in general, listing trade shows and conferences from various industries; or you can take a more targeted approach, focusing on individuals in a
specific industry.
You can generate revenue for this type of business in more ways than one.
Most important, you can sell advertising on your site for upcoming conferences
or to businesses selling products or services related to the various industries
that your site might represent. You can sell advertising both via banner advertisements and in a weekly or monthly mail list. You can also consider offering
users the ability to register for different trade shows and conferences via your
Web site. As a directory, you can also charge conference organizers a fee to
have their conference or trade show listed on your site. This type of business
provides multiple ways for you to increase your overall revenue.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need top-notch research skills if you plan to keep on top of everything
that’s going on in the industry. If you are targeting a specific section of the
Part 2 betas.pmd 251 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
252 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
industry, such as medical trade shows or travel conferences, then it would be
extremely appropriate to have a background in that field. Knowledge of various online advertising techniques would also be an asset, as this type of business requires a large number of Web site visitors.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
If you decide to launch this type of business, you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your Web site, a high-speed Internet connection, computer hardware, computer software for administration as well as
Web-enabled database software, and a printer. If you currently have some of
these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower.
Since you will be gathering information about different trade shows and
conferences that you will be listing on your site, you can purchase lists of trade
shows per sector (often $100 or more per guide) or you can perform the research yourself online. Depending on how extensive a directory you plan to
develop, your costs can vary significantly. For example, if you plan to accept
online conference registration and provide streaming audio/video Webcasting
samples, you will need some e-commerce capabilities as well as additional Web
storage and bandwidth. If you plan to set up a mailing list offering different
search engine submission techniques, you will have to purchase mailing list
software to help you organize and maintain it. You might also want to purchase comprehensive Web traffic analysis software to track the visitors that are
coming to your Web site. This information can be used to help encourage potential advertisers to buy advertising on your site and for future marketing
purposes. Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your
Web site. Estimated cost is $10,000 to $100,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
You could start this business as a one-person operation.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This type of business has more of a national appeal as opposed to international unless your site encompasses a global listing of upcoming conferences
and trade shows. Although people from other countries may visit the site to
identify upcoming conferences, the site will most likely be of interest to the
national market.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 252 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 253
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
You should ensure that your home page has an attractive interface with consistent navigation throughout your site. Also, if some of your trade show listings
provide a link out to their site, you should develop the interface so that the visitor
doesn’t actually leave your site. What you can do is have your advertiser’s site
appear within a pop-up frame from your site. This enables the visitor to continue
to navigate throughout your site without having to click back in his or her browser.
It is important that you constantly look for upcoming conferences, conventions, and trade shows to be listed on your site. Remember that conferences are
very time sensitive, so people are not going to want to be listed two weeks
before their event. You should try to contact planners six months to a year
before their event. This will allow you to provide them with maximum exposure for their event.
People are going to want to have their event listed on your site for one
reason—exposure for their event. To ensure that this happens, you are going to
have to do whatever you can to promote your business online and offline.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop links from Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes related to
your target market. If you are focusing on a particular industry, you
should develop links from as many sites related to that industry as possible. If you are taking a more general approach, you should still do the
same, but for each industry. You can also develop links from conference, trade show, and convention directories and link sites.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to the industry
(or industries) that you are targeting. You can also participate in
newsgroups and discussion forums related to convention planning and
upcoming event listings. The participants of these newsgroups would
be your potential clients and may be interested in having their event
listed on your site. Remember to use a cleverly designed signature file
with a catchy tagline and a hypertext link that will send newsgroup
readers to your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Launching a monthly newsletter would be a great way for you to stay in
touch with your target market. You could send recipients a listing of
Part 2 betas.pmd 253 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
254 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
upcoming conferences pertaining to a particular industry or geographic
area, or just upcoming conferences in general. You can also encourage
people to visit your site and register for an upcoming trade show. This is
a great way to encourage people to visit your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
To earn additional income for your business, you might consider selling books
and other publications related to particular industries. Since potential registrants will be visiting your site because of their interest in a particular topic,
they will also be interested in books related to that topic. You can list books for
each industry that you are targeting. This would be a great way to earn additional income for your site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Tradeshowweek.com
http://www.tradeshowweek.com
A leading online trade show, conference, and training information resource.
TSNN.com
http://www.tsnn.com
A database for the trade show industry, containing data on more than 15,000
trade shows and conferences. They also have data on more than 30,000 seminars.
86. Training/Speaking
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
The number of professional speakers and trainers developing an online presence is growing rapidly. Many meeting and event planners are turning to the
Internet to research and book a speaker or trainer for their next event. Many
business professionals are also looking for professional coaches and trainers to
teach them specific trades or skills. Therefore, if you are a professional trainer
Part 2 betas.pmd 254 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 255
or speaker, the Internet provides an excellent opportunity for you to generate
more income for your business.
There are multiple ways in which you can generate revenue if you are operating this type of online business. If you are a professional speaker or trainer,
you can easily promote your services and take bookings online. The latest advancements in Webcasting technology enable speakers to convert traditional
videotapings of their offline seminars so that people can easily download and
view them on their desktop—for a fee, of course. This is growing in popularity
among many trainers and speakers, as it provides a self-generating stream of
revenue once the files have been developed and uploaded to your site.
Many speakers and trainers also develop and sell products at their various
speaking engagements. Things such as books, video- and audiotapes, and training kits are typically sold at conferences, training seminars, and conventions.
These same products can also be sold online directly from your Web site. This
provides you with an excellent opportunity to generate additional income for
your business.
SKILLS NEEDED
Excellent training or speaking skills are a must for operating this type of business. Professional designations would also be a benefit, as they would enhance
the professionalism and credibility of your services.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a printer, and a digital camera. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will
be considerably lower. If you are selling books or related training materials
and are considering taking online payments, you will have to pay for the
development of your storefront or purchase storefront software. You will also
incur all costs associated with setting up your merchant account, which enables you to take online payments. If you decide to offer online training seminars, you will have to pay for their development. Other costs that you will
incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $10,000
to $60,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
Approximately one employee is needed to run this operation. If your service
requests exceed what you can handle, you may want to hire an additional employee to handle all administrative duties associated with the day-to-day operation of the business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 255 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
256 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This type of business has very high international potential, as people from all
over the world can hire you to come speak at their event or to their employees.
Also, if you are offering downloadable training sessions, people can easily download them to their computer to learn from the comfort of their home no matter
where they live.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 3 or 4 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since you will be promoting your speaking or training services both offline and
online, you should remember to keep your marketing strategies consistent with
each other. This means that you should use consistent colors, images, logos,
and overall creative strategy when developing all of your marketing pieces.
This will create a consistent visual atmosphere for your business. If people read
one of your offline brochures and later visit your Web site, they will remember
the brochure, and vice versa. This is a great way to keep your business fresh in
the minds of your potential customers.
Since clients will be interested in purchasing your services, you should try
to do whatever you can to assist them with their decision-making process. Provide them with background on your career, including past training or speaking
seminars that you may have delivered, what you currently do, and even a listing
of your upcoming training sessions and seminars. All of this information should
be accompanied with positive testimonials from past sessions. This will encourage your potential clients to book you for their next event.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could relate to the specific industry
that your services target or Web sites targeted toward meeting and event
planners. These are the Web sites that your target market will visit on a
regular basis.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. These sites should relate to the
industry that you target, meeting and event planning sites, or sites dedicated to professional speakers and trainers.
Part 2 betas.pmd 256 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 257
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your area
of expertise would be quite effective. Through providing valuable contributions, you will be able to demonstrate your expertise and capture
the attention of your target audience. Make sure you include a cleverly
designed signature file in all of your postings. This will act as an advertisement for your services.
• Participating in mailing lists related to your target market would be a
great way to encourage people to visit your site. Make sure you provide
a valuable contribution and include your signature file.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for one of
your speaking or training products. You could ask people if they would
like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage
them to return to your site to re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing
them to your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
If your primary focus is selling your speaking and training services, you could
earn additional income from the sale of related products and services. This
could include books, audio- and videotapes, and training kits. You could also
set up a referral business with businesses offering products or services related
to your area of expertise. For example, if you spoke about database management, you could partner with Oracle to promote their database products.
You could then receive a percentage of all sales made as a result of your
referral.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Susan Sweeney
http://www.susansweeney.com
A little shameless self-promotion here.
Part 2 betas.pmd 257 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
258 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Robin Sharma
http://www.robinsharma.com
This is a dynamite site that has many features including audio and video feeds
and online training seminars.
87. Transcript Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Transcripts are in high demand, and they are not always easy to obtain. Did
you ever listen to a talk radio show, TV news, TV talk show, or important
public meeting and notice that at the end they announce that written transcripts of the event are available? Then they tell you how to order. The big
national networks and organizations use national transcript services, but who
transcribes the smaller, yet not less important, local events? In most locales, the
answer is no one!
There is a huge opportunity available here—especially for an Internet transcript service. You could make your services open to local radio and TV stations, and political, educational, business, and not-for-profit organizations that
would offer a written transcript if they had such a service available to them.
Because you are local, you can transcribe these programs and distribute them
quickly and efficiently at a low price.
Most of your partners will provide the transcripts for free or at a very low cost
in return for your service of handling all the requests and organizational duties
associated with making them available—which they are required to do by law.
The cash comes in like this: When orders come in from the Web site, you
simply send a copy of the transcript to the customer, who has already included
payment with the order. You keep a master copy of each transcript on file to fill
future orders. Organizations frequently get calls weeks or months after an event
has occurred to inquire about transcript availability.
You can even advertise and offer Internet e-mail service to speed delivery.
The opportunities within the media industry are limitless if you employ a little
imagination and market your services well to the right market.
SKILLS NEEDED
The transcript service business requires four key ingredients to be successful:
excellent keyboard (typing) skills, a good-quality printer, access to a copy maPart 2 betas.pmd 258 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 259
chine (or Kinko’s or a clone), and a firm connection with organizations that
hold transcripts of speeches, meetings, records, and documents that are of value
to many people.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, necessary software, and a high-quality printer.
You need desk space, a small table for paper handling, a telephone, and a good
filing system. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up
costs will be considerably lower. You will also incur all costs associated with
setting up your merchant account, which enables you to take online payments.
Other costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site.
Estimated cost is $5,000 to $12,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
One employee is needed to run this operation. If your transcript requests exceed what you can handle, you may want to hire an additional employee to
handle all administrative duties associated with the daily operations of the
business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The global potential of the transcript service is somewhat limited because there
are already large databases of national and international public records available, and these are primarily of interest to the international community. There
are chances, however, that people doing research from remote or foreign areas
may have a need for the transcripts you provide. Your online marketing reach
will determine the international scope of your business.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 or 3 would be appropriate for this type of business. You will
be providing an automated payment processing function associated with the
order of transcripts from your site. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The benefits of this business are small start-up and operational cost, you can
work the number of hours and days per week that you choose, there is little
competition, there are no employees needed until growth is beyond your capacity, and the business has easy operation with few of the usual start-up
headaches.
Part 2 betas.pmd 259 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
260 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. These sites should relate to the
industries to which your transcripts pertain.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to the specific issues that are discussed in the transcripts would be quite effective.
• Make sure you include a cleverly designed signature file in all of your
postings. This will act as an advertisement for your services.
• Develop and grow a mailing list of all your clients and send out weekly
newsletters including highlights of the latest events or minutes that are
of interest to them.
• Optimize your site for organic search results. Consider participating in
the pay-per-click programs of the popular search engines.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income could come from offering an e-mail reminder service to clients who need to keep informed about certain information, letting them know
when important events happen or are about to happen. You could also have
banner advertising on your site and offer discounted booklets of transcripts
that are fashioned in a linear format and focus on one issue.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
FNS Transcript Search
http://www.fnsg.com/searchfnsx.html
This site is a search tool with several options divided by governmental department. Users may use this site to search for various transcripts that are available
to the public and can download or receive them via mail or e-mail.
Datalyst
http://www.datalystcorp.com/services.html
You may search this site for the transcripts you choose and have them mailed to
you for a fee.
Part 2 betas.pmd 260 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 261
88. Translation Services
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Are you fluent in two or more languages? Then setting up an online translation business may be appropriate for you. Many people are not fluent in multiple languages, so they have no choice but to outsource their translation
activities to an outside firm. This can provide you with an excellent moneymaking opportunity.
This type of business generates revenue by taking requests for translation
services via the Web and receiving a fee for providing the services. The translation software on the Web today is typically a one-time sale, which can offer a
word-by-word translation but cannot get the meaning across as well as a human translator can. This means your personal translation services will be in
high demand for businesses that want to present themselves professionally and
are not afraid to pay for it. It will not be difficult to stress the added benefits of
having a personal translator to quality clients.
It is said that the Internet language is English, but this is not entirely true.
To globalize any online business, operators must consider the languages of their
target markets and make their site understandable to the whole array to ensure
success. Providing translation services is a promising venture.
SKILLS NEEDED
The capability to effectively communicate orally and in written format in two
or more languages is essential to operate this type of business. You will need
basic Web publishing skills to update and maintain your Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software (including any translation
software that you might need to assist you), and a printer. If you currently have
some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably lower. Other
costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $3,000 to $5,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
Approximately one talented and organized employee is needed to run this operation. If your service requests exceed what you can handle, you may want to
hire an additional translator.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This type of business has very high international potential. In most cases, companies need information translated for international reasons.
Part 2 betas.pmd 261 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
262 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The main issues you need to be concerned with are reinforcing the privacy and
security of materials entrusted to you by your client and how delivery of pretranslated and translated materials will be dealt with. How can you make your
clients comfortable with entrusting sensitive materials with you? Do you want
to transfer materials back and forth electronically by e-mail? By CD? All formats? Or do you want to stick to traditional hardcopy distribution? Whatever
you decide, you should ensure that it is in the best interest of your client’s
privacy.
Since mainly businesses will be interested in your services, you should attempt to have your business listed on as many business services-oriented Web
sites as possible. These are the sites that people are going to visit if they are
interested in your services. There are thousands of service directories online.
You should attempt to develop links from as many of these sites as possible.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Launch a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented
by your target market. These sites could relate to international business
or business services where visitors would be interested in your target
market.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. These sites should relate to international business, business services, or just business in general.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Make sure your site is optimized for organic search engine placement.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to business
would be quite effective. Make sure that any message postings that you
make provide a valuable contribution to the group. To generate traffic
to your site, include a cleverly designed signature file with a catchy tagline
in all of your postings. An “Ask Us about Our Translation Services” tag
line could be quite effective.
Part 2 betas.pmd 262 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 263
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
If your primary focus is providing translation services, then your additional
income could come from the software or related tools you sell. You could also
consider offering bilingual copy-writing services to firms looking to advertise
in foreign countries. This would be a great way to earn additional income.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Click2Translate.com
http://www.click2translate.com
This is a dynamite translation services business. They offer a “translation tips”
section, which is a great repeat traffic builder for their site (Figure 2.16).
The Language Bank, Inc
http://www.language-bank.com
A full-service document translation and interpretation company, they offer full
translation services including basic translations, e-mail translations, Web design, and voiceover translations for audio and video.
Figure 2.16. Click2Translate.com is an online translation service business.
Part 2 betas.pmd 263 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
264 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
89. Travel Consultant
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
The nature of the travel consulting industry is ideally suited to the Internet. In
every country, many people are interested in traveling to foreign destinations.
With the Internet’s widespread reputation for information and international
access, it is only natural that tourists will look first to the Internet for information. Many individuals enjoy working with a travel consultant to plan their
vacation. Also, many travel agencies today are hiring consultants who work
from home to complete research, planning, and reservation tasks via e-mail.
This business has a low cost of entry and a high profit potential.
Online travel consultants provide a wide variety of services for their customers. Usually you will be providing clients with an organized travel plan
including travel arrangements, car rental reservations at the destination, and
accommodation reservations. Occasionally, customers will also want a completely planned itinerary with a list of things to do, tour companies, and popular sites to see in the area. Your reports or itineraries should have competitive
rates for all expenses involved due to the highly competitive environment of the
online travel market. The information should be comprehensive and full of
choices so that your clients understand the value of your service as an online
travel expert. Revenue is usually generated from a commission that comes from
the hotels and car rental agencies you work with, the travel agencies you are
affiliated with, and the tour operators.
SKILLS NEEDED
Familiarity with the travel industry naturally is required to start this business.
You will also need clear communication skills, telephone skills, e-mail skills,
and basic Web publishing skills to update your Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
If you already have a “real-world” travel consultant business, then your main
cost will be to design, develop, and host your Web site. This will cost you
between $2,000 and $10,000 depending on the functions of the site and the
service you want to provide. You will need software programs and a T1 or
cable connection to join the main travel intranets and booking networks. This
will increase the initial cost by $5,000 to $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The online travel consulting business can be operated by one experienced person from home.
Part 2 betas.pmd 264 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 265
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Generating international business is an integral part of this business concept.
International travel has always been a multi-billion-dollar industry. It’s only
natural, given the international marketing potential of the Internet, that the
tourism industry would have a strong online presence. Language and the specialty of your travel knowledge are the only foreseeable barriers.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business; however, if you
are going to be taking online reservations or selling travel merchandise online,
then you will need to use a level 3 or level 4 business model. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Since the Internet is such a natural step for a travel consulting business, competition is fierce. It is very important to have a well-executed set of services and a
robust Web site with plenty of resources, testimonials, and content. Your service should be timely and reliable, with competitive pricing.
Having an expertise in a particular type of travel experience or area is a
good idea at this stage in the online travel business. For example, if you became
an expert on planning outdoor adventures in the highlands of Mexico, you
have targeted a niche and you become more valuable to travel agencies who get
this request and do not have the information or expertise to produce the itinerary that the client desires.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate as many links as possible from appropriate travel-related Web sites, cybermalls, directories,
Web rings, and meta-indexes.
• Develop a contest area of your site where a winner is drawn weekly.
By sending a winner notification e-mail to all contestants, you get
your name in front of their eyes on a regular basis. Companies you
recommend from your site or suppliers you use on a regular basis can
supply the prizes. In the notification e-mail, you can also encourage
visitors to enter this week’s contest. This will bring them back to
your site.
• Reward or loyalty programs could be used to generate repeat customers. This is especially useful for frequent flyers.
Part 2 betas.pmd 265 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
266 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Viral marketing can be an excellent way to draw in a satisfied customer’s
family and friends. Using the “Tell a Friend about This Site” or “This
Contest” or “This Special” techniques all would be effective in having
others spread the word about your site.
• Publish articles about travel experiences that you have planned in travel
e-zines that appeal to your target market, with links to your Web site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Have client testimonials with pictures of their vacation included on your
Web site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Should you wish to augment your income, a travel consulting business offers
many opportunities. Most governments spend a great deal of money on tourism advertising. With a well-executed banner ad campaign, you could draw in
government sponsors.
If your services are targeted toward a type of tourism that requires special
equipment (e.g., scuba diving or mountain climbing), then you could sell the
equipment through your Web site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Onlinetravel.com
http://www.onlinetravel.com
A large travel consultant site that functions in much the same way as its realworld counterparts. The site concentrates on students and young travelers.
InTourNet
http://www.intournet.co.il
Both a travel brochure and a consultant firm for a few Mediterranean countries.
Part 2 betas.pmd 266 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 267
90. T-Shirt Design
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
People are always looking for T-shirts for various events, teams, clubs, and
associations. If you have a knack for graphic design and are into pulling together artistic pieces of work, then this business may be for you. You might
consider doing custom designs, selling designs from a predetermined catalogue,
or allowing people to purchase completed T-shirts.
This type of business can generate significant revenue if you offer quality
products at competitive prices. There is lots of competition for this type of
business; however, if you keep your customers happy, provide something a little
different, underpromise and overdeliver, they will generate repeat business for
your business. For example, if a baseball team has you design shirts for their
team, they will come back to you year after year if you continue to offer them a
quality product at a good price. This type of business is extremely customeroriented, as its growth is highly dependent on customer retention.
SKILLS NEEDED
A strong entrepreneurial background would be a benefit to operating this type
of business. Excellent graphic design skills and knowledge of how to screen
T-shirts would also be an asset.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a printer, and
possibly a digital camera so that you can take photos of your T-shirts on live
models. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs
will be considerably lower. You will also have to purchase T-shirts in bulk and
a T-shirt screening machine for the production of your products. If you have a
catalogue for the offline promotion of your business, you will have to pay for
the design, printing, and distribution of your catalog to potential clients. Other
costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $10,000 to $35,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
Approximately one dedicated full-time employee is needed to operate this type
of business. If requests escalate, you may need to hire an additional employee.
Part 2 betas.pmd 267 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
268 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
There is minimal international potential. The cost to ship T-shirts overseas in
the volumes you would likely prefer would make competition against foreign
companies difficult. If you are simply selling digital image design, there is some
international potential.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
If you decide to print and distribute a catalogue, you should ensure that the
catalogue is designed effectively. You may want to outsource a portion of this
activity to a professional. The catalogue has to be designed with appropriate
layout, colors, contact information, and incentives. You should also ensure that
the contact list of potential clients to whom you are sending your information
is accurate and up-to-date. If you don’t, this could result in the failure of a
direct-marketing campaign.
Since this is such a customer-oriented business, you should do whatever
you can to make your customers happy. This could be anything from meeting
customer demands before they are due to simply calling to thank them for their
business. If you are printing T-shirts for a club or team, you should call them
two or three months before their season opens to see if they would be interested
in having new T-shirts designed. This would be a great way to build loyal relationships with your customers, which in turn will create repeat business for
your T-shirt company.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate links to your site from
appropriate product-related Web sites, directories, Web rings, and
cybermalls.
• Consider a targeted banner advertising campaign on sites that appeal to
your target market.
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your target market would be a great way to generate traffic to your Web site.
These could be association, club, or special-event newsgroups where
participants may be interested in your services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 268 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 269
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Send This
T-Shirt Design to a Friend” via your site. This will spread the word
about your site.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for a free
T-shirt, or a discount on the next purchase of a particular quantity of Tshirts. You could ask people if they would like to be notified of the
winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage them to return to your
site to re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing them to your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You should develop a mail list that features information on your latest
T-shirt designs. This would be a great way to keep in touch with your
potential and current clients. It would also keep your services fresh in
their minds when they decide to have more T-shirts developed.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
If you enjoy graphic design, you could make additional income by doing other
forms of freelance graphic design. You could also sell custom hats, jackets, and
so on. This would be a great way to earn additional income for your business.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Custom Ink
http://www.customink.com/services/online-t-shirt-design.htm
Custom Ink gives you an easy way to design your own T-shirts. The online
design lab makes it easy to visualize exactly what your custom order will
look like.
Djtees.com
http://www.djtees.com/tshop/store/index.asp
A funky full-service site that concentrates on the rock music culture and lets
you design your own shirts online.
Part 2 betas.pmd 269 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
270 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
91. Tutoring Services
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Online tutors are often sought after in today’s high-paced learning environment. If you are a teacher or tutor, taking your services online is an effective
way of making extra income or even creating a full-time position from the
comfort of your home. You can also provide the tutoring services offline but do
your business promotion online.
The Web is a perfect place to showcase and provide this service. Clients can
communicate with you through e-mail, telephone, voice chat, or an instant
messenger service such as MSN. They can also send their projects, essays, and
assignments to you for critique via e-mail attachment, and you can give them
timely response and guidance. Your primary source of revenue will come from
the hourly rate you charge your clients.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need experience in tutoring or an expertise in a subject that traditionally requires a tutor, such as calculus. Having clear and concise communication
skills is very important, and you should be able to update your business Web
site, so basic Web publishing skills are needed.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Your initial setup costs will include a personal computer and the appropriate software programs that students use, a printer, and a fax machine. You
will also need to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your Web
site. The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $2,500 to
$5,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can easily be started with one part-time individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international reach of this service is dependent on language and the subject
you specialize in. For instance, if you tutor world history students, your global
potential is higher than if you specialize in ebonics.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 270 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 271
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
This business has a low cost of entry, and there are a fair number of tutors
operating online already. The good news is that most of the sites offer access to
a staff of tutors but do not specialize in any one subject. This indicates that
there are subjects needing more attention. Before deciding how to diversify
your tutoring services, be sure to investigate which subjects are not being provided in an online venue. To ensure that you generate a dedicated audience or
client base, you may want to target your services toward a specific niche of
people in need of tutelage.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Negotiating and reciprocating
links from other, related sites is an excellent way to bring targeted business to your Web site. You will want to be linked from sites that cater to
your target market. Establish links from educational, university, and
college sites, library sites, and academic research directories.
• Register your site throughout the search engines. Make sure your site is
designed to be search engine friendly before submission.
• Include a few great testimonials on your site from students you have
helped in the past.
• You might also consider using a viral marketing technique like “Tell a
Friend.” This will allow your clients to easily refer your services to their
friends.
• Create a mailing list of all your clients and potential subscribers of your
service, and use it to send out regular newsletters with helpful tips on
studying, essay writing, and various academic practices.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing tips, tools, techniques, and resources, I recommend
the companion book 101 Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find
tons of free resources at http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can come from banner advertising if the traffic levels are
high on your Web site. There is also an opportunity to become a reseller or
Part 2 betas.pmd 271 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
272 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
affiliate site for suppliers of products and services that would interest the students who frequent your site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Tutor.com
http://www.tutor.com
Tutor.com (Figure 2.17) offers the tools you need to train your employees and
students online and employs a staff of tutors to render this service.
Info Math
http://www.infomath.com/html/online-tutor.asp
This business provides one-on-one personalized tutoring services for students
in kindergarten through college, with emphasis on developing students’ problem-solving skills.
92. Used Computer Sales
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Many people who cannot afford to purchase a brand-new computer buy second-hand, so why not take advantage of this opportunity? By starting your
Figure 2.17. Tutor.com is an excellent example of a business offering online tutoring
services.
Part 2 betas.pmd 272 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 273
own online used-computer store, you can tap into this market and make quite a
bit of revenue for your business. You can operate this business in one of two
ways: (1) You can purchase used computers and computer parts and sell the
refurbished computers directly from your site, or (2) you can allow others to
post classified ads on your site. You can decide which business model is most
appropriate for you, depending on your knowledge of computers, your budget,
and your online marketing objectives.
It is important to remember that if you want to sell computer parts on your
site, you are going to have to keep computer components in stock. This means
that you will have higher inventory costs. To avoid this, you should look for deals
on used computer components all the time. You could even offer to purchase
components from consumers directly from your physical location. The better the
deals you get on your inventory, the higher your profit margin will be.
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of computer assembly is a must for operating this type of business.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a printer, and
possibly a digital camera so that you can take photos of your computer products. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be
considerably lower. If you decide to sell computer products, you will have to
keep inventory on hand. If you decide simply to allow others to post ads on
your site, you will eliminate the costs of keeping inventory on hand. Other
costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $5,000 to $50,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
One dedicated full-time employee is needed to operate this type of business.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This online business has strong international potential, as its products are of
interest to consumers across the globe. However, it might not be worth selling
products to consumers in certain countries due to shipping costs, customs regulations, tax regulations, and currency exchange rates.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be most appropriate for this type of business if you are
simply selling online classified ads to others. However, if you are going to be
selling used computers directly from your site, you are going to want to use
e-business level 3 or 4. For more information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 273 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
274 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
When purchasing and selling used computer parts, you should always ensure
that the parts work correctly. Nothing will hurt your image more than if you
sell faulty computer parts to a customer. To avoid this, test all equipment before
you ship it to your customers. Dedicating time to this activity will benefit you
in the long run.
Since computers are fragile pieces of equipment, you should package all of
your products securely before you ship them to your clients. This will ensure
that they are not damaged during the shipping process. If they are, you could be
held responsible. This could not only destroy your corporate image, but also
hurt your bottom line.
Since you may be shipping your computers across country borders, you
should ensure that there are no trade regulations that would make you have to
pay more to export your products to another country. Sometimes it is so costly
that it isn’t beneficial for businesses to offer their products in certain countries.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate as many links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes frequented by your target market. These sites will include all used-computer
and computer sales-related sites online.
• Participating in newsgroups would be a great way to increase the traffic
to your Web site. You can participate in newsgroups related to computers and technology. Make sure to use a cleverly designed signature file
with a catchy tagline. Perhaps it could say “Check Out Our Latest Sales”
or some variation of this phrase.
• Developing a mail list would be a great way to stay in touch with your
visitors. You could have a Computer Tips newsletter that could be distributed monthly to all of your subscribers. This would be a great way
to encourage visitors to return to your site and would also help enhance
the professionalism of your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You could have a Specials page on your site where you list your monthly
computer specials. You could ask people if they would like to be notiPart 2 betas.pmd 274 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 275
fied via e-mail when you make updates to your site. This will encourage
your visitors to come back to your Web site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
In addition to selling computers or computer classifieds on your site, you might
also consider selling software to consumers or setting up a referral business
with software companies. This would allow you to make a percentage from
every referral that these companies receive from your Web site.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
123Compute.com
http://www.123compute.com
This is a dynamite site that sells used computers and notebooks to consumers in
Canada and the United States.
Comprenew.com
http://www.comprenew.com
Comprenew.com is a company that specializes in selling used computer parts
and systems.
93. Virtual Assistant
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Hiring a “virtual assistant” is becoming extremely popular in today’s workplace environment. Many companies will seek the use of a virtual assistant
service when they cannot afford or do not have the workload to sustain a
full-time in-house staff member. Other companies look for suppliers of this
type of service during the summer, when many people are out on vacation, in
order to take care of the workload. Other companies simply have too much
work to be done by existing staff from time to time and need the assistance
of an off-site assistant to handle some of the workload. As more and more
Part 2 betas.pmd 275 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
276 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
home-based businesses are springing up, the need for this type of service is
going to increase.
This is an ideal niche market to penetrate as an online business. There is a
huge demand for online virtual assistant services. You will charge for your services by the hour, by contract for the job, or on a monthly retainer basis. This is
one of the easiest and least expensive businesses to start online.
SKILLS NEEDED
Excellent keyboarding skills are an invaluable asset. Oral and written communications skills are also very important as your clients will demand quality work,
and you will be communicating with your clients on a regular basis. In addition, an understanding of today’s widely used business applications is a must.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the design, development, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner, a fax machine,
and a printer. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up
costs will be reduced accordingly. Other costs that you will incur are related to
the promotion of your business. Estimated cost is $3,000 to $5,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One person can easily start this business on a part-time basis.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has little international potential. A majority of your clients will
be based in your immediate geographic area.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business, depending on whether or not you want to directly accept payment for your services
online. For more information, see Part 1. Your client will likely want a report of
the work you have actually completed for him or her prior to submitting payment, making level 1 the more appropriate choice, as payment would be negotiated prior to, and delivered after completion of, the work.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
One important issue you need to address is compatibility with the software
your client uses. You do not want to put your effort into developing an electronic report only to find out your client cannot open it. Find out what software your client prefers beforehand.
Part 2 betas.pmd 276 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 277
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You will want to generate as
many links as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, Web
rings, and meta-indexes related to your target market. Find all the business service sites for your local market and get linked from as many as
possible.
• Promotion through related mail lists and newsletters is important. You
may even develop your own newsletter or mail list to stay close to your
target market.
• Ensure that you submit your site to the search engines and directories.
Because many of your clients will likely be regional, be sure to get yourself listed in any regional online business directories that your target
market may frequent.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Colleague
about This Service” via your site. This will spread the word about
your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could earn extra money by performing value-added services such as scanning services or printing services. You could charge a per-page fee for either
service. You could provide desktop publishing services, newsletter content development and distribution services, bookkeeping services, telephone answering services, and any other administrative services needed by home-based
businesses.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Virtual Assistant
http://www.virtualofficeassistant.com
A number of services are offered including word processing, data processing,
publishing, scheduling, and mailings.
Part 2 betas.pmd 277 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
278 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Office To-Go
http://www.officeto-go.com
A secretarial, transcription, and office support service. Some of their services
include desktop publishing, proofreading, resumes, and fax services.
94. Virtual Makeover
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
This business is ideal for someone with an interest in cosmetics, beauty consulting, and fashion. Today’s digital-imaging software and hardware (affordable
digital cameras and scanners) allow for exciting makeover previews. Currently
some virtual makeover sites are charging a fee for the makeover, whereas others
are offering to do the makeover for free if the user sends in a picture via e-mail
or a photograph in the mail. There is also a software program made by Cosmopolitan that users can download and try for themselves.
The opportunity for selling your products and beauty services exists once
the user has engaged in a dialogue with you through the Web site. While giving
thoughtful beauty and fashion advice to your users, you have the perfect opportunity to up-sell the services and the products you advertise on your site. Additional revenue will be generated through banner advertising, sponsorship, and
affiliate program revenue.
SKILLS NEEDED
To run this business, you will need computer skills. You should know how to use
a digital camera, a scanner, imaging software such as Adobe Photoshop, and the
virtual makeover software, which is cutting edge and available now. You will
need concise writing skills and experience in beauty and fashion consulting.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The start-up cost of this online venture will include a computer, a scanner, a
digital camera, and appropriate software to produce the virtual makeovers.
Initial costs will also include the cost of the design, development, and hosting of
your Web site. It is projected that the start-up costs will be between $4,500 and
$12,000. If you already have a computer and related hardware, then deduct
from this price estimate accordingly.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
One talented beauty- and fashion-oriented person can start this business on a
part-time basis from home.
Part 2 betas.pmd 278 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 279
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The global potential is high for this venture. You can market your site to the
entire Web, and your users can interact with you and buy your products from
anywhere in the world.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
The initial e-business level recommended for the virtual makeover site is level 1
because it’s likely that you will be offering beauty consulting and showcasing products from suppliers that you are affiliated with. For more information, see Part 1.
There is significant opportunity for earning commissions from the purchases that
your users make once they click off your site onto a beauty or fashion e-store
because of the sophisticated affiliate tracking software on the Web today.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The beauty and fashion business is competitive, but there is good news. Women
represent 50 percent of overall browsers on the Internet, and reports indicate
that not nearly enough satisfying content exists for this demographic. Also,
clothing shopping is gaining popularity quickly, especially around Christmas.
There is a void to be filled. Your site should be highly interactive and tastefully
designed, with many useful resources regarding beauty and fashion issues. You
should join the affiliate programs of suppliers of the products you recommend
on your site. This will increase the revenue generated from your site.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
To market this business online, you should research your target audience carefully. You will want to access women with an interest in getting a makeover and
who have purchasing power. There are various ways to do this, and here are
some suggestions:
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your Web site for a free
product offered by one of your vendors. The vendor donating the product could be your Featured Vendor. You could ask people if they would
like to be notified of the winner via e-mail. This e-mail will encourage
them to return to your site to re-enter next month’s contest, thus reexposing them to your site.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where users can “Tell Your Friends
about This Site” via a link on your site. This will spread the word about
your virtual makeover site.
• Design your site to be search engine friendly. Consider participating in
pay-per-click programs with the popular search engines.
Part 2 betas.pmd 279 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
280 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Develop articles for distribution in fashion and women’s e-zines. Be sure
to provide full contact information and a link to your site.
• Register your site throughout the major search engines and focus on
directory sites that have content and links to sites that are of particular
interest to 20- to 50-year-old women and teens.
• Negotiate as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and
meta-indexes related to your target market. These sites should relate to
the specific products and interests of teens and beauty- and fashionconscious women.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can come from advertising if your virtual makeover site
has high traffic and interactivity. If you are interested in providing actual
hands-on beauty and fashion consulting services to potential clients within
your immediate area, you can initiate your contact with them over the Web
by providing the free virtual makeover and consultation, and then offer your
personalized services.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Makeover Solutions
http://www.makeoversolutions.com/makeover/virtualMakeover.jsp
You send in a head shot of yourself in JPEG form or you can use a head shot of
one of their models, and they will show you various looks to help you decide on
a new do.
Beautyriot.com
http://www.beautyriot.com/instant_makeover.php
This site is designed to give you a chance to see what you would look like with
one of your favorite celebrity’s hairstyles.
Part 2 betas.pmd 280 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 281
95. Web Design
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Web designers are considered modern artists, and they are becoming a necessity
for the survival of small businesses and large corporations alike. Web designers
are the original designers of a Web site.
Web designers are different from Web masters in several important ways.
The designer has a creative graphical sense that allows him or her to design an
entity that is attractive, useful, and representative of a specific product, service,
topic, or idea. The designer is not usually involved in the marketing aspect or
traffic generation of a site the way a Web master is.
There are several ways that Web designers create business relationships with
clients. They may charge by the hour and price the work by the level of difficulty, they may charge a contract price for specific work, or they may work fulltime for one client on a contract basis.
SKILLS NEEDED
Web designers need to know HTML language and how to access virtual servers
in order to update clients’ Web sites. Graphic design capabilities and knowledge of other multimedia programming languages such as Macromedia Flash
and Java are a must in today’s designing world. Knowing other programming
languages such as Perl, CGI, and database management would greatly increase
your value as a Web designer. The truth is that knowing all these languages is
extremely time-consuming, and the best idea is to work on building a certain
set of skills and keeping on top of the developing technologies within that scope
so that you can claim an expertise.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Because you are a Web designer, you shouldn’t need to outsource the development and design of your Web site. You will need to pay for the hosting. Software
will be the main start-up expense. Programs like Dreamweaver, Front Page, Adobe
Photoshop, and so on, are needed. Estimated cost is $3,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one dedicated
Web designer, and you can start this venture while keeping your regular job.
Part 2 betas.pmd 281 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
282 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. Often clients prefer to know
their Web designer because there is an element of trust involved when you give
out the FTP passwords to your Web site. It’s highly possible to work while you
travel, however, and meet with your clients from time to time.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business. In the
starting phases, it’s likely that you will receive payment from your clients in the
form of a check, cash, or money order. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The Web design industry is very competitive. Web designers are chosen based
on talent. You should ensure that you have a great portfolio. You should provide links out to sites you have designed and developed, allowing site visitors to
judge for themselves the quality of your work.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Include a portfolio on your site with all your past projects that show
your accomplishments and awards as a Web designer.
• Include testimonials from your clients on your site.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. You want to get as many links
as possible from appropriate Web sites, directories, and meta-indexes
related to your target market. There are thousands of Web site development-related sites on the Internet that would provide a great linking
opportunity for your site. You should also attempt to develop links from
business service sites and directories. These sites will provide highly
targeted traffic to your site.
• Participate in newsgroups and discussion forums related to Web development and business services. Remember to use a cleverly designed signature
file, a catchy tagline and hypertext link that will send readers to your site.
• Providing valuable contributions to Web design-related mail lists and
e-zines would be a great way to create exposure for your business. Again,
a cleverly designed signature file with a catchy tagline would be a great
way to send traffic to your site.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
Part 2 betas.pmd 282 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 283
• Hosting your own Web design advice column for up-and-coming Web
designers would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic to your
site. You could offer advice related to using specific software programs
or about different design techniques. You could ask people if they would
like to be notified via e-mail whenever you update your advice column. This will encourage people to return to your site to view your
latest advice.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Web designers can get into many online pursuits because they create the entities
on the Web. There are many avenues for additional income, such as graphic
design, project management, and getting hired by a design house.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Verb Interactive
http://www.verbinteractive.com
A full-service Web development and Internet marketing company.
Compucast Web Design
http://compucast.com
A large design house.
Blue Cat Web Design
http://www.bluecatdesign.com
A funky and small design company.
96. Web Master
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Web masters are becoming a necessity for the survival of small businesses and
large corporations alike. Web masters are sometimes the original designers of
the sites they maintain, but the term Web master throughout the new media
industry also means a person who has the ability to edit and manage several
Web sites.
Part 2 betas.pmd 283 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
284 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Web masters may be responsible for updating and maintaining a site, or
they may be responsible for running specific elements of a Web site such as the
affiliate program. Web masters may take a contract to provide Internet marketing services for a particular client to promote its Web site through newsgroups
and mail lists. For another client, they may choose to help them achieve higher
placement in the search engines.
There are several ways that Web masters define business relationships with
clients. You can have a specific contract to provide services for a set fee, you may
charge by the hour and price the work by the level of difficulty, or you may be
working full-time for one client. The ways in which Web masters operate are still
being defined in the industry, but it seems we will see more and more Web masters.
SKILLS NEEDED
Web masters definitely need to know the HTML programming language and how
to access virtual servers in order to update clients’ Web sites as a benchmark.
Graphic design capabilities and knowledge of other multimedia programming languages such as Macromedia Flash, Java, Perl, CGI, and others will increase your
value as a Web master. Knowledge of Internet marketing techniques is a must.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Because you are a Web master, you shouldn’t need to outsource the development and design of your Web site. You will need to pay for the hosting. Software will be one of the main start-up expenses. Programs like Dreamweaver,
Front Page, Adobe Photoshop, and so on, are needed. You will need a computer, a printer, a scanner, and a digital camera. High-speed Internet access is a
must. Estimated cost is $3,000 to $15,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
The number of employees needed to run this type of business is one organized
Web master, and you can start off working part-time from home.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential. Most clients prefer to know
their Web master because there is an element of trust involved when you work
with FTP access to their Web site. It’s highly possible to work while you travel,
however, and meet with your clients from time to time.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 would be appropriate for this type of business. For more
information, see Part 1.
Part 2 betas.pmd 284 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 285
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
In the Web master business world, contracts are the top priority within the
scope of business issues. The industry is quite competitive because the entrylevel skills such as HTML are easy to learn and there are many people calling
themselves Web masters who will work for very little.
Make sure you carefully define your responsibilities and pricing with your
clients, and be aware of their learning curve while explaining to them the value
of your services and the importance of hiring a Web master who delivers quality work for fair prices.
Passwords are the only security a Web site has, so make sure you respect
this during and even after your contract is completed.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Include a portfolio on your site with all your past projects and include
testimonials about your service from your clients.
• Enter your work into design contests online and post any awards you
may receive on an awards page.
• Optimize your site for organic search placement. Consider participating in the major search engine pay-per-click campaigns.
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Generate as many links to your
site from appropriate Web sites, directories, business service cybermalls,
and meta-indexes as possible.
• Join online communities and networking groups of other Web masters.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You could generate additional income by expanding your skill set to include
graphic design and online marketing techniques. This would increase your value
as a Web master, and if your service is professional and fairly priced, you will
enjoy longer contracts with your clients.
Part 2 betas.pmd 285 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
286 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Metasphere
http://www.metasphere.net
Offers competitive Web master services.
Clocktower Media
http://www.clocktowermedia.com/webmaster.cfm
Offers a range of expertise in order to satisfy all of your online business needs.
97. Web Radio
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
More and more people are listening to real-time audio streams broadcast over
the Internet while they’re working or relaxing. This is known as Web radio.
Web radio has seen growth due to the falling costs of technology, the wide
acceptance of the Internet, and the increase in high-speed access.
Many radio stations now broadcast their signal over the Internet for all to
listen to. They combine the power of today’s technology, their Web site, and
their traditional programming to optimize operations. This increases their geographic reach from a local perspective to worldwide. Web-only radio stations
are now becoming extremely popular as well.
Web radio is interactive and global, and it creates a superior, engaging experience allowing heightened communication with users and listeners. Advertising in this case can be extremely effective because it allows oratory discourse
and online banner ads as well as content to be presented simultaneously. A
majority of your income will come through advertising opportunities on your
site and audio broadcast.
SKILLS NEEDED
You will need experience in radio and the technological requirements associated with various media communications. Having clear and concise oral and
written communication skills is important, and you should be able to update
the Web site, so basic Web publishing skills are needed.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Your initial setup costs will include a personal computer and hardware to broadcast the show on the air and over the Web. Investigate the appropriate software
Part 2 betas.pmd 286 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 287
programs that Web radio disk jockeys currently use. You will also need to pay for
the design, development, and hosting of your Web site. Remember, sending quality streaming audio over the Internet requires a significant amount of bandwidth.
The cost to set up and run this type of business ranges from $3,500 to $20,000. If
you already have a computer, then deduct from the amount accordingly.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can easily be started with one part-time individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international reach of this business is dependent on language and the genre
of music or popular discussion featured on your radio station. People all over
the world will be able to hear you in real-time audio, and how broad your
audience is globally will be dictated by the international appeal of your content. Always remember that content is king on the Internet.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 is most appropriate for this type of business. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Web radio is heavily dependent on advancements in audio file transfer and
compression technology.
While constructing your business plan, make sure to consider the evolution
of your Web radio station by programming and designing the site so that you
can adapt to changes in the future that could optimize your business. For example, you could implement banner ads that are programmed to relate to the
song currently playing or advertisement prompts. Your primary source of revenue is advertising, so make sure that your site delivers a superior and engaging
marketing opportunity that integrates visual, content, and audio penetration
for each advertiser.
Interact with listeners in real time through chat and e-mail so that they
appreciate the tangible quality of the Web radio combined medium.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Negotiating and reciprocating
links from other, related sites is an excellent way to bring targeted business to your Web site. You will want to be linked from sites that cater to
your target market. Establish links from Web radio directories and metaindexes as well as music and entertainment sites.
Part 2 betas.pmd 287 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
288 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You might also consider using a viral marketing technique like “Tell a
Friend about This Web Radio Site.” This will allow your listeners to
refer your site to their friends.
• Have constant promotional activities happening, like contests, raffles,
and games.
• Get your site mentioned in e-zines and online publications that are likely
to be frequented by your target market. There are many online entertainment magazines.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods I recommend the companion book 101 Ways
to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at http://
www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can come from profiling new artists and their music. You
could publish an associated e-zine in which you include articles about the specific genre of music and related news. There is also opportunity to become a
reseller or affiliate site for suppliers of products and services that would interest
the listeners who frequent your Web radio site. For example, while playing a
particular artist’s song, you could have your site display their CD with the
option to “Click here to buy now.”
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Web Talk Radio Show
http://www.webtalkradio.com
Listen to the Web talk guys, formerly on CNET Radio—interesting talk radio
and podcasting (Figure 2.18).
Live 365.com Web Radio
http://www.live365.com/index.live
A large web radio broadcaster, offering thousands of stations to listen to.
Part 2 betas.pmd 288 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 289
98. Web Site Review
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Having a company Web site is a fact of life in the business community today,
but what good is having a Web site if no one can find it or if it doesn’t meet the
expectations of your target market?
Many companies are actively seeking the knowledge of other individuals to
evaluate their corporate Web sites. This presents you with an opportunity to
launch a business to meet their needs. You can offer your services to perform
in-depth Web site analyses. The formal report you hand over to the client should
contain information on whether or not the company Web site appeals to its
target audience, whether or not the site is easy to use, the extent of search
engine friendliness, and so on. Revenue would come directly from Web site
review services rendered.
SKILLS NEEDED
A background in Web site design, knowledge of the major search engines and
their ranking criteria, and experience in Internet marketing are important. The
Figure 2.18. Webtalkradio.com offers a large variety of Web radio stations to its
visitors.
Part 2 betas.pmd 289 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
290 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
ability to communicate your observations and recommendations clearly and
concisely to your client is a necessity. Your clients generally will not be familiar
with the technical jargon surrounding the Internet and will look to you for
advice in plain English.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Your initial setup costs will include a personal computer. If you do not have an
extensive background in marketing online or a basic understanding of what
you need to do during the Web site design process, then you may need to invest
additional money in educational materials, such as Internet marketing and Web
site design books. Some companies that offer Web site reviews as a service use
specific programs to perform part of the Web site analysis process (e.g., HTML
review, link verification), and these software packages and services are available to you for a fee; however, this is not a necessity. You will also need to pay
for the design, development, and hosting of your Web site. The cost to set up
and run this type of business ranges from $3,000 to $10,000.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This business can easily be started with one part-time experienced individual.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
The international reach of this business is dependent on language. Businesses
all over the world need Web site reviews conducted. This business will work
well based on referrals, so if your client base has international ties, your services could be solicited from virtually anywhere.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 or 2 is most appropriate for the Web site review business. If
you would like to accept payment online for your services, then level 2 makes
more sense. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
A Web site review is a critique, and in all critiques the client will question your
reasons for having one opinion or another, so to back up all your advice in
your reports, use pertinent examples. These examples may come directly from
the client’s Web site or, when trying to illustrate a suggestion, you may want to
reference a competitor’s site that is making use of what you’re recommending.
Remember not to dispense the information until you have collected the amount
you are owed for the entire job. Once clients have your report in their possession, your job is essentially done and they no longer need you.
Part 2 betas.pmd 290 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 291
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Develop a comprehensive link strategy. Negotiating and reciprocating
links from other, related sites is an excellent way to bring targeted business to your Web site. You will want to be linked from all content sites
and meta-indexes that cater to your target market.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• You might also consider using a viral marketing technique like “Tell a
Friend about This Useful Service.” This will allow your clients to refer
your site to their friends.
• Get your services mentioned in e-zine articles about online marketing
success stories and online publications about advancements and resources
within the Internet marketing industry.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Additional income can come from expanding your services to include Web site
redevelopment consulting. You could also expand your business to include online marketing strategies. The Web site review business puts you in a perfect
position to upsell your services to each individual client.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
The Forrester Web & Commerce Site Review
http://www.forrester.com/ER/Products/Advisory/WebSiteReview/.html
This operation provides clients with a targeted, action-oriented assessment of
their Web site. Forrester analysts conduct a comprehensive examination of the
client’s site and corresponding strategies.
KillerSites.com
http://www.killersites.com/websiteReviews/websiteReviews_home.jsp
This is a great way to view a few successful Web sites.
Part 2 betas.pmd 291 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
292 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
99. Wedding Products
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
People take planning for a wedding seriously. There is a ton of organizing to
be done and items to be bought. The many related costs for a wedding can
add up, and in an effort to keep the whole lovely event within a budget that
doesn’t break the bank, many go online searching for the best buys available.
It saves them time and money, so putting a wedding products business online
is a great idea.
You can generate revenue for the wedding products Web site by selling
wedding products directly from your Web site and having them gift-wrapped if
need be or delivered to the correct address at the convenience of the customer.
You can offer anything from invitations and wine glasses to wedding dresses
and veils. You should concentrate on servicing clients within your geographic
reach because this will allow you to provide a personalized service with plenty
of local resources such as links to all the churches, caterers, halls, hotels, and
other related services. You should include a gift registry on the site where guests
can check what has already been bought for the happy couple and find suggestions of what they might like or need.
The possibilities for this business can go far if you use your imagination to
explore all the services within your power to make a wedding go smoothly and
make these services available online on your site!
SKILLS NEEDED
Knowledge of online promotional techniques would be an asset when operating this type of business. The wedding resources within your local area
need to be researched and provided on your site. You should know the latest
wedding trends and be familiar with different cultural traditions when it
comes to marriage. Knowledge of wedding planning would also be a primary
benefit. You will need basic Web publishing skills to update and manage
your Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
If you launch this type of business, you will initially have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your Web site, computer hardware, computer
software, a scanner, a printer, and possibly a digital camera. You will also have
to pay for the electronic storefront. This enables you to easily display and sell
your wedding paraphernalia. Other costs that you will incur are related to the
promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $5,000 to $20,000 to start.
Part 2 betas.pmd 292 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 293
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED
One person with wedding product, planning, and organization experience can
operate this business at the outset. If you acquire a significant client base and
save people money, your business will grow from referrals, so you may want to
hire an assistant later on to manage orders and distribution.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has low international potential. If you are selling wedding products online, chances are the customers will want to do business with someone
in the area, and the reason they choose to do it online will be for convenience
and discounted pricing.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 2 or 3 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
The site must be kept current. When items are discontinued or are out of stock,
this must be updated on the Web site. Since you are promoting your products to
an online audience, it is extremely important for you to generate as much traffic as possible to your site. There are multiple ways for you to do this; however,
it is essential that you allocate a significant amount of time to online promotion
of the site.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Developing a comprehensive affiliate/associate program would not only
increase the awareness of your wedding product site, it would also send
referral business to your site.
• Launching a strategic banner advertising campaign on Web sites frequented by your target market would be a great way to increase traffic
to your site. Sites that you could place banner ads on include familyoriented sites and noncompeting wedding-related sites. Sites targeted
toward party or event planning and sites that particularly target females would also be appropriate.
• You could hold a weekly or monthly contest on your site for a free
wedding product. You could ask people if they would like to be notified
of the winner via e-mail. This would encourage them to return to your
Part 2 betas.pmd 293 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
294 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
site and re-enter your contest, thus re-exposing them to your wedding
products.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes frequented by your target market. There are thousands of wedding-related Web sites online. These are the sites that your target market
will visit if they are planning a wedding; thus it is extremely important
that your site generate links from these sites.
• You could develop a Featured Product page on your site. You could
change this product every week. People will continue to return to your
site to see what the featured product is. You could even ask people if
they would like to be notified of your featured product via e-mail. This
would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic.
• Optimize your site for organic search engine placement.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop a wedding registry on your site so brides can inform their wedding guests, via your site, about their preferred gifts. This will increase
traffic to your site.
• Develop a viral marketing strategy where people can “Tell a Friend about
This Product” via a link on your site. This will spread the word about
your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
You can earn additional income by setting up a referral service with weddingrelated businesses such as limousine drivers, DJs, and caterers. If you promote
their services on your Web site and they receive business because of it, you can
collect referral fees from each person or business that provides their products
or services and generates revenue.
Part 2 betas.pmd 294 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 295
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Wedding Star
http://www.weddingstar.com
Wedding Star (Figure 2.19) provides a large database of wedding-related products and services excellent for helping families and friends organize a wedding.
WedNet
http://www.wednet.com
This site is the ultimate resource for planning a successful wedding. Their indepth database of wedding vendors can help everyone throw a beautiful and
successful wedding.
100. Weight Loss Service
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS MODEL
Weight is an issue for millions of people all over North America. The condition
is so widespread that some health professionals have named it an epidemic or
Figure 2.19. Wedding Star is a dynamite online wedding planning and gift registry
Web site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 295 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
296 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
disease. Being overweight is a source of shame for many, and often people feel
helpless and not in control of their own bodies. This sounds morbid, but the
good news is that it’s curable through proper eating habits and exercise.
The advantages of providing a weight loss coaching and resource center on
the Internet is that anyone with online access can get help; people do not need
to leave their home or take time out from work, but they can consult your Web
site 24/7 for most of the information they seek. Also, they can get consulting in
private and spare themselves the sometimes embarrassing experience of attending walk-in clinics.
The site should answer many questions that people who want to lose weight
need answers to. The content should be motivational and realistic. Your clients
who experience success should be featured on the site and mentor others by
sharing their strengths and stories of how they gathered the will power to get
their weight under control and stay that way.
The way to earn revenue in this business is by charging a fee for one-on-one
and group consulting and regime planning, which can happen in various ways
online such as e-mail, chat, voice chat, real-time audio, and real-time video
sessions. Other ways of consulting are telephone and face-to-face for clients
within your geographic reach.
Another way to gain revenue in this business is by joining affiliate programs
for weight loss-related products such as fitness wear, books, videos, motivational tapes, exercise equipment, and health foods.
SKILLS NEEDED
To successfully operate a weight loss resource and consulting business online,
you should have some credentials as a personal trainer, dietician, health and
wellness advisor, or fitness instructor of some kind. You should be active and
healthy in your own lifestyle. It could help if you had a personal story of weight
loss so that your clients are comfortable with your advice because it comes from
experience. You will need clear communication skills and basic Web publishing
skills to communicate clearly with your customers and update your Web site.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
The cost to initially set up a weight loss center will range from $5,000 to $15,000.
These costs include a computer, appropriate software, and a printer. You will
need an imaging program such as Adobe Photoshop, and it would help to have
a digital camera or scanner so you can put before, after, and “in the process”
images on the personalized pages to display the progress and motivate your
clients. You will also have to have your Web site designed, developed, and hosted.
Other initial costs to consider relate to the advertising of your Web site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 296 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 297
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
It is possible to run this business with one qualified person, and in the beginning this can be operated on a part-time basis while you keep your regular job.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Through your Web site you are providing online counseling and information.
Your business will exist primarily in the domain of cyberspace. For many people
in today’s busy world, the Internet is a new private and anonymous place to
access personal services that have never before been available in such a convenient medium. Some clients may prefer to have a weight loss consultant who
lives in their geographic area, and some may not care if they know you face-toface or not. The language barrier is one obstacle to consider if you are interested in running a truly international business; however, there are translation
services available to you. If you are selling books, equipment, or medical products, then shipping and tariffs will limit your distribution to an extent.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
Depending on what your services are and how many clients you have, the
e-business model you choose can upgrade from level 1 to 2 or 3 as the business
grows. You may accept payment in the form of check or money order at the
outset because you will have a one-on-one relationship with each customer, so
the experience will be quite personalized and the need for online credit card
payment is not necessary. The option to join affiliate programs and therefore
avoid e-store management and simply gain commissions from those sales is
also available. If you decide to sell products from your site, you may choose to
move to an online storefront and level 3. For more information, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
Fierce competition can be expected from bricks-and-mortar operations such as
Weight Watchers and Jenny Craig that have established an international presence in the weight loss field. Fortunately, their Web sites are simply marketing
and communication outlets to back up their physical locations.
Remember that weight loss consultation is a pseudomedical field, so please
do not attempt this business unless you are qualified to provide this kind of
advice. The signs you must be aware of are of a serious nature. For example,
people could get sick if they lose too much weight too quickly, or they could be
diabetic or need emotional counseling due to an eating disorder. Everyone does
not lose weight at the same pace or in the same way. You should have a thorough questionnaire and legal agreement for your clients to sign so both of you
are protected and understand each other.
Part 2 betas.pmd 297 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
298 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
Your pricing should be competitive and reflective of the amount of time you
dedicate to each customer’s individual counseling sessions.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Write articles communicating your theories about effective weight loss
plans throughout advice columns in weight loss- or health-related
e-zines, newsletters, and newsgroups.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Get linked from online advertising directories.
• Create a mail list and send out your newsletter or e-zine about weight
loss tips, breaking news, and low-calorie recipes for people to try.
• Develop a comprehensive and rewarding permission marketing strategy whereby clients can easily tell a friend about your services and in
return receive a discount on a product being sold from or recommended
by your site.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
Extra income can come from targeted banner advertising if your traffic is high.
One way to ensure this is by providing plenty of resources and content on your
site for users, making them stick around on your pages and providing more
time for banner impressions and rotations.
Another facet for extra income is providing personal training and coaching
to customers in your local area. Finally, if you are good with slogans, you could
sell motivational T-shirts or other customized items.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Total Body Fitness
http://www.tbfinc.com
A weight loss consultant for men and women based in Houston, Texas, who
provides consulting for anyone through her Web site.
Part 2 betas.pmd 298 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 299
Herbal Life Independent Distributors
http://www.loseit.com
This site sells Herbalife weight loss pills.
101. Who’s Who Directory
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Prestige and honor are things everyone likes to have, no matter what walk of
life they come from. You can start a Who’s Who directory on the Internet to
recognize those individuals who have accomplished much with their careers
and in their community. There are many Who’s Who directories already on the
Internet. Some focus on individual communities; others focus on people who
have high achievements in a particular industry.
How does this business generate revenue? It’s simple. When individuals
visit your Web site and see the prestige that others have received from being
listed on your site, they will be willing to pay to be listed also. If you host an
industry-specific Who’s Who directory, you would be surprised how many industry professionals will contact you to be listed on your site. You obviously
wouldn’t charge an obscene price for a listing on your site. Most Who’s Who
directories charge anywhere from $10 to $100 for a listing.
Your Who’s Who listings could include the individuals’ names, their achievements, and where they are from. You could then charge an additional fee to list
in-depth biographies on the individuals, photographs, links to personal or business Web sites, and previous awards and recognitions that the individuals have
received.
SKILLS NEEDED
Since this type of business requires that your site receive a high number of Web
site visitors, knowledge of online marketing techniques would be an asset. If
you are targeting individuals in a particular industry, it would be an asset to
possess knowledge of the industry and what is involved in being successful in
that particular industry.
COST TO START THIS BUSINESS
Initially you will have to pay for the development, design, and hosting of your
Web site, computer hardware, computer software, a scanner (to scan your clients’ photographs if they don’t have a digital copy), and a printer. If you currently have some of these items, your initial start-up costs will be considerably
lower. If you plan to set up a mailing list for your Who’s Who site, you will have
Part 2 betas.pmd 299 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
300 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start From Home
to purchase mailing list software to help you organize and maintain it. Other
costs that you will incur are related to the promotion of your Web site. Estimated cost is $3,000 to $10,000 to start.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES NEEDED TO START
This type of business requires approximately one part-time employee. This business is one that can be worked on in the evenings. You could fulfill all requests
during the evenings and communicate with potential clients via e-mail; thus
you don’t have to worry about being in an office.
INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
This business has strong international potential, particularly if you target the
Who’s Who of a specific industry.
E-BUSINESS MODEL/PAYMENT PROCESSING METHOD
E-business level 1 would be most appropriate for this type of business. For
more information on this, see Part 1.
IMPORTANT BUSINESS ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED
If you are trying to keep your Who’s Who directory extremely elite, make sure
you don’t let members pay to join who are not remotely qualified to be on the
list. If you let just anyone pay to join your directory, your site will become
saturated with people who are not worthy of being listed. This could discourage some industry professionals from purchasing listings on your site.
Since the success of your Who’s Who directory relies heavily on the number
of Web site visitors that you receive, you will have to dedicate a significant
amount of time to the online promotion of your site. You should participate in
as many different online marketing media as possible to promote your site.
ONLINE MARKETING TECHNIQUES
• Participating in newsgroups and discussion forums related to your target market would be a great way to generate traffic to your Web site. If
you are targeting specific industries, you could participate in newsgroups
related to those particular industries. For example, if you were targeting Internet Technology (IT) professionals, you would want to participate in newsgroups related to IT.
• You should develop a newsletter that can be distributed weekly or
monthly that will update visitors about new additions to your Web site,
specials, and news about your Who’s Who directory.
Part 2 betas.pmd 300 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
101 Profiles of Top Internet Business Concepts 301
• You can ask people if they would like to be notified via e-mail whenever
a new listing is added to your site. This would be a great way to encourage repeat traffic to your Web site.
• You could have a Featured Listing section on your site, where you choose
a particular person who you feel has excelled in his or her field. People
will return to your site constantly to see who is the new featured listing.
Again, you could ask people if they would like to be notified via e-mail
when you make updates to your Featured Listings page. This will remind them to return to your site to see who is listed.
• Develop a sponsored listings campaign to bid on appropriate keyword
phrases with the popular search engines.
• Develop as many links as possible from Web sites, directories, and metaindexes related to your target market. There are hundreds of Who’s
Who directories and meta-indexes on the Internet that would be appropriate for your site. This would generate targeted exposure for your
online business.
For a more detailed description of these techniques, along with many other
effective online marketing methods, I recommend the companion book 101
Ways to Promote Your Web Site. You can also find tons of free resources at
http://www.susansweeney.com/resources.html.
ADDITIONAL INCOME
An additional way to generate revenue for your Who’s Who site is to sell annual or quarterly publications of your Who’s Who listings. This would be of
interest to many industry professionals who are researching competitors or are
simply interested in finding out more about what’s happening in their industry.
ONLINE EXAMPLES
Marquis Who’s Who on the Web
http://search.marquiswhoswho.com/executable/login.aspx
This is a dynamite Who’s Who directory that includes over 1.3 million leaders
and archives.
Who’s Who on the Web
http://vl.fmnet.info/whos-who
An Internet directory featuring “The Best of the Web” of people involved in
various catagories. Basic listings on this site are free.
Part 2 betas.pmd 301 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
302 101 Ways To Promote Your Web Site
About the Author
Susan Sweeney, CA, CSP
Susan Sweeney, CA, CSP, renowned industry expert, consultant, and speaker, tailors lively keynote speeches and full- and half-day seminars and
workshops for companies, industries, and associations interested in improving their Internet presence and increasing their Web site traffic and sales.
Susan is a partner of Verb Interactive
(www.verbinteractive.com), an international Internet marketing and consulting firm. She is also
president of Connex Network Incorporated and
SusanSweeney.com.
Susan holds both the Chartered Accountant
and Certified Speaking Professional designations.
She is an experienced Internet marketing professional with a background in computers, marketing, and the Internet.
Susan is the author of several books on Internet marketing and e-business:
101 Ways To Promote Your Web Site, Internet Marketing for Your Tourism
Business, 3G Marketing on the Internet, Going for Gold, 101 Internet Businesses You Can Start from Home, and The e-Business Formula for Success.
She is also the developer of a two-day intensive Internet Marketing Boot
Camp. Susan offers many Web-based teleseminars, seminars on CD, and
e-books related to Internet marketing.
Susan is a member of the Board of Directors of the Canadian Association of
Professional Speakers, and is a member of the National Speakers Association
and the International Federation for Professional Speakers. Susan holds her
Certified Professional Speakers designation which is the only earned designation for professional speakers. Less than 10 percent of professional speakers
hold this professional designation.
Verb Interactive is a marketing firm that provides Internet and international
marketing consulting and training services to industry and government. Their
clients range in size from single-person startup operations to multi-million-dol302
101 Int Biz Author.PMD 302 11/21/2006, 12:10 PM
About the Author 303
lar international firms. Their primary services include Internet marketing workshops, Web site design and development, Internet marketing strategies, Web
site report cards, Internet marketing consulting, market research, and competitive analysis.
SusanSweeney.com is Susan’s speaking and training business. During her workshops and training sessions, she ensures that her clients have a complete understanding of the principles involved with developing a strong online presence.
The team of Internet marketing analysts at Verb Interactive is highly trained
in the area of Internet marketing, and all stay up-to-date with the latest technological advancements and industry trends in the online marketing world. Every
person on the team has extensive practical hands-on experience and the necessary skills to use proven tips, tools, and techniques to generate high volumes of
traffic to your site.
As a result of technological change and global competitiveness, a strong
Internet presence is essential. Susan instructs individuals with her enthusiastic
personality combined with her vast hands-on international marketing experience, which keeps her listeners informed and captivated. Let Susan help you
increase your traffic and make your business prosper!