India ' s billionaire vaccine prince held the key to ending the pandemic . His plans went awry
By Diksha Madhok , CNN Business

Updated 0838 GMT ( 1638 HKT ) November 4 , 2021

As Covid-19 wreaked havoc around the world last year , the 39-year-old son of an Indian billionaire was laying the groundwork for a plan he hoped would eventually end the pandemic . 

Adar Poonawalla — the CEO of Serum Institute of India ( SII )  , the world ' s largest vaccine maker — pumped hundreds of millions of dollars into his Indian manufacturing facility and committed to make millions of doses of a then-unproven coronavirus vaccine . 
That vaccine , created by Oxford University and AstraZeneca ( AZN )  , was still in clinical trials at the time . Nobody was sure how long a vaccine would take to develop , let alone whether it would even work .  
 " It was a calculated risk ,  " Poonawalla told CNN Business .  " But I didn ' t see the choice at that time , to be honest . I just felt I ' d regret not committing one way or another .  " 
Adar Poonawalla , CEO of Serum Institute of India , chose to commit to making a vaccine while it was still in clinical trials . 
Adar Poonawalla , CEO of Serum Institute of India , chose to commit to making a vaccine while it was still in clinical trials . 
To make his plan work , Poonawalla first had to raise nearly $1 billion . And the lives of hundreds of millions of the planet ' s most vulnerable people were at stake , since SII had pledged to provide poorer countries with jabs . If the gamble paid off , Poonawalla would save countless lives and be hailed as a hero during a period of historic turmoil . His fabulously rich family also would stand to grow even more wealthy by profiting from a significant deal . 
As the world gave its money — and trust — to Poonawalla , things seemed to be going according to plan . The AstraZeneca vaccine received approval from UK regulators in December 2020 , and Poonawalla became a household name in India .  
 " It was a calculated risk . But I didn ' t see the choice at that time , to be honest . I just felt I ' d regret not committing one way or another .  " 

SII CEO ADAR POONAWALLA , ON COMMITTING HIS COMPANY TO MAKE MILLIONS OF DOSES OF A THEN-UNPROVEN COVID VACCINE

But soon it became evident how badly Poonawalla had miscalculated the challenges that come with distributing millions of vaccines in the middle of a once-in-a-century pandemic . 
His company ' s ability to inoculate even his own countrymen was thrown into doubt earlier this year as a devastating wave of coronavirus hit India . He ' s also failed to keep up with his commitment to deliver shots to other nations — the consequences of which have dented his reputation and shed light on the perils of such heavy reliance on one manufacturer . 
From horse breeders to vaccine makers
It ' s easy to see why some of the biggest names in public health chose to rely on Poonawalla . 
Few manufacturers can come close to the scale at which SII is able to produce vaccines . The company — which was founded by Poonawalla ' s father , Cyrus , 55 years ago — produces 1 . 5 billion vaccines each year for measles , rubella , tetanus and many other diseases . The jabs are mainly distributed to low-income countries worldwide , including India . Poonawalla estimates that just over 50% of the world ' s babies depend on vaccines made at SII . 
The Poonawalla family charted an unusual path to becoming one of the world ' s preeminent vaccine makers . They have bred and raced thoroughbred horses since the 1940s , diversifying into pharmaceuticals , finance and real estate over the last half-century . 
Cyrus Poonawalla is now India ' s seventh-richest man , worth more than $16 billion , according to the Bloomberg Billionaire Index . His son Adar took over as CEO in 2011 and has focused on expanding in international markets . 
To prepare for the AstraZeneca vaccine production , Poonawalla said he spent $800 million on buying chemicals , glass vials and other raw materials , as well as ramping up manufacturing capacity at his plant in the Western Indian city of Pune . 
More than $250 million came from the company ' s own funds . Another $300 million came from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation , which SII collaborated with to provide discounted or free doses to low-income countries . The rest was paid by other countries once SII started accepting orders for vaccines . In total , SII agreed to make up to 200 million vaccine doses for as many as 92 countries , as part of its deal with the Gates Foundation and Gavi , a vaccine alliance . 
All of that happened , though , before regulators signed off on the AstraZeneca vaccine . Had trials for that vaccine been unsuccessful , SII would " just be making batches and then end up throwing them away ,  " Poonawalla said . 
Poonawalla said he spent $800 million on materials including chemicals and glass vials to prepare for vaccine production . 
Poonawalla said he spent $800 million on materials including chemicals and glass vials to prepare for vaccine production . 
A business studies graduate of London ' s University of Westminster , Poonawalla said SII was able to make that decision more swiftly than many other companies , since it is a family-run business .  
 " The flexibility of being able to decide on the spot very quickly was really the main game-changer that enabled us to be able to do this ,  " said Poonawalla , whose office in India is a refurbished Airbus A320 . 
After UK regulators approved the vaccine , Poonawalla began supplying doses to Indians and other other countries . By May , Gavi had received some 30 million jabs from SII . 
India ' s Covid-19 tsunami
But Poonawalla ' s plans soon went awry when a second wave of Covid-19 hit India in the spring . At its peak the country was reporting over 400 , 000 cases per day , though experts say the actual number was likely much higher . 
At that point , only 2% percent of India ' s 1 . 3 billion population was fully vaccinated , and the country ' s national government had been slow in placing orders for more vaccines . Without a massive stockpile , states in India began to run out of the limited number of jabs they had . 
India then decided to stop the export of all vaccines , preventing SII from keeping up with its commitments elsewhere . 
A brutal second wave of Covid-19 hit India in spring 2021 . 
A brutal second wave of Covid-19 hit India in spring 2021 .  
 " I ' ve always been a patriot for my country .  .  . and if my country needs my facility first , I have to do what they say ,  " Poonawalla said .  " There was no two ways about that .  " 
The inability to export vaccines hurt some of the poorest nations in the world . The director of Africa ' s disease control body , for example , warned India ' s hold on exports could be " catastrophic " for the continent . People in several countries , from neighboring Nepal to Kenya , were left stranded after receiving the first dose of Covishield , the name of the India-manufactured vaccine . 
When asked why the global vaccine alliance chose to rely so heavily on one manufacturer , a Gavi spokesperson told CNN Business it had few options . 
At the start of 2021 ,  " very few vaccines were approved and available for deployment ,  " the spokesperson said , adding that it was " natural " that SII would be contracted for early doses given its size . 
But public health expert Jeffrey Lazarus said there were flaws in the plan .  
 " Relying on one manufacturer was a mistake , which is easier to see in hindsight ,  " said Lazarus , who heads the health systems research group at the Barcelona Institute for Global Health . 
Being held to account
While Poonawalla cannot be held responsible for some of the issues that led to the vaccine rollout stalling — chief among them , India ' s massive outbreak — his detractors have questioned parts of his approach . 
They point out Poonawalla hasn ' t delivered the number of jabs he initially promised , and they claim he hasn ' t been transparent about how he ' s been using all of the money he raised for the big vaccine push .  
 " There isn ' t much accountability for where the money he raised went ,  " Malini Aisola , co-convenor of health sector watchdog All India Drug Action Network , told CNN Business . 
In June last year , SII pledged it would make one billion doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine for low and middle income countries , with 400 million doses ready by the end of 2020 . 
But by January 2021 , the company had a stockpile of just 70 million doses . His critics weren ' t impressed , given the amount of capital he raised last year . 
SII declined to comment on the amount it has made from its vaccine production so far . Poonawalla called it & quot ; very unreasonable and naive & quot ; for people to expect companies not to profit from these efforts . 
SII declined to comment on the amount it has made from its vaccine production so far . Poonawalla called it " very unreasonable and naive " for people to expect companies not to profit from these efforts . 
The global media coverage also turned unfavorable , with headlines linking the global shortfall in vaccines to SII ' s problems , including the India export ban and a fire at the company ' s Pune facility . At the time Poonawalla said the fire had no effect on Covishield production . But he has since reversed course , saying that the incident has played a major role in hampering manufacturing . 
He also insists he was realistic about his goals .  " We always underpromise ,  " Poonawalla told CNN Business , when asked whether the company pledged more than it could deliver . 
Still , he ' s been dogged by other controversies that have dented his reputation . As India ' s Covid-19 cases were skyrocketing in April , Poonawalla lowered the price of his vaccine and referred to the move as a " philanthropic gesture " — leading to heavy criticism , with activists pointing out that even a small profit is still a profit for SII .  
 " AstraZeneca has pledged that it won ' t make profits from low income and middle income countries during the pandemic , but that does not seem to apply to SII ,  " Aisola said . 
According to AstraZeneca , the companies the drugmaker has sublicensing agreements with , including SII , dictate their own prices . 
SII declined to comment on how much it has profited from the vaccine efforts so far , but Poonawalla said it is a " very unreasonable and naive way of looking at the world " for people to expect companies not to profit from the vaccine . 
While Poonawalla has yet to match his lofty goals , there is a chance that he and SII can get back on track , which is critical to ending vaccine inequality worldwide . India has decided to begin exporting vaccines once again as its own rate of inoculation increases . The nation had administered one billion doses by October — about 90% of which came from SII , according to the company . 
SII also says that it has increased its production to 220 million doses a month as of October . 
SII is also expanding its partnerships , having signed a deal with American biotech firm Novavax to manufacture its Covid-19 vaccine , which is awaiting regulatory approvals . It ' s also partnering with the Russian Direct Investment Fund on production of the Sputnik vaccine . 