Why is the UAE a hot spot for Russians dodging sanctions ? 
It ' s sunny and politically stable , there is little financial transparency and it ' s easy enough to invest in a business or property and get a residency visa in return .  


Luxury villas in Dubai . 
In Dubai , a luxury villa comes with a residency visa

On its website , the Dubai-based lifestyle magazine Russian Emirates offers readers a selection of commonly asked questions . They include everyday queries about where to find Russian food in the United Arab Emirates , and whether there are Russian-speaking doctors there . But by far the most popular question on the Russian-language magazine is this one , with over 83 , 000 views :  " Can I get UAE citizenship ?  " 

Over the past two weeks — that is , since Russia invaded Ukraine and Western nations imposed sanctions as a result — the readership of the Russian Emirates website has almost doubled to nearly 300 , 000 views in a week . 

That trend is likely to continue , experts say , as Russians look for ways to avoid sanctions and secure their wealth . Some are likely also trying to escape what they see as an increasingly perilous political situation at home . 


One oil industry insider , who visited the emirate of Dubai this month , told DW about a palpable change in atmosphere there .  " There ' s the feeling that this is an incredible game changer , in terms of the influx of capital to Dubai as a result of Russians exiting [ their country ] and looking for safe havens financially ,  " the insider said . 

Elsewhere , there have been reports of Russian oligarchs ' private jets flying back and forth from Moscow to Dubai . A Ukrainian newspaper reported local intelligence agency suspicions that the oligarchs were ferrying private property to Dubai for safety . 

Open source investigators , using maritime traffic websites , also spotted several superyachts moored in Dubai . Because the UAE hasn ' t imposed the same tough sanctions on Russia , the superyachts are safe there . 

Invisible increases ? 
Despite its long-term security relationship with the US , the UAE has attempted to avoid taking a side in the Russia-Ukraine war and has not imposed sanctions . 

As a result , Russian-speaking business consultants in Dubai have told international media there is a huge increase from inside Russia in requests for information .  
 
 " There is increasing concern that Dubai will indeed become an even greater hub for Russian oligarchs ' money ,  " Jodi Vittori , a professor at Georgetown University in Washington and expert on corruption , illicit finance and state fragility , confirmed . 

Italian Finance Police stand by the yacht Lady M , owned by Russian oligarch Alexei Mordashov , docked at Imperia ' s harbor , Italy . 
Several EU governments have impounded superyachts belonging to Russian oligarchs

The flow of ill-gotten Russian gains has actually been washing through Dubai since the late 1990s , Vittori , who was previously assigned to NATO ' s counter-corruption task force , added . 

But it ' s going to be hard for anybody to tell how much of an increase there might be now .  " Because most of it won ' t be visible ,  " Vittori explained . 

This is because the UAE authorities don ' t actually collect the relevant information , Maira Martini , a researcher with Transparency International , pointed out . 

Corruption investigators have mostly had to rely on leaked documents when it comes to working out who owns what in the UAE , Vittori explained . 

Genuine improvements ? 
Thanks to increased scrutiny by organizations like the Financial Action Task Force , or FATF , a global money laundering watchdog , there have been some recent rule changes , Martini said . 

Earlier this month , after a year of observation , the watchdog put the UAE on a so-called " gray list "  , which means " a jurisdiction under increased monitoring .  " 

Russische Oligarchen Roman Abramowitsch Chelsea-Fußballverein
MEMBERS OF PUTIN ' S INNER CIRCLE HIT BY WESTERN SANCTIONS
Roman Abramovich
Chelsea football club owner Roman Abramovich is one of the latest billionaires to be blacklisted . Last week , he put the club up for sale and promised to donate money from the proceeds to help war victims in Ukraine . But the UK government thwarted his plans by freezing his assets on March 10 . In 2008 , Abramovich ' s net worth peaked at $23 . 5 billion , making him Russia ' s richest man . 


123456789
The UAE had come up with a number of new rules to better control potentially illicit financing , even though Martini and Vittori agreed they haven ' t actually done much about enforcing those rules .  
 
 " Now , if you start a company in the UAE you are finally going to be asked who is really behind it ,  " Martini told DW . 

Despite more rules about company ownership , it would still be easy to hide wealth in the UAE , Martini continued . For example , the UAE has 39 different company registries across its seven emirates .  " How can that be an effective system ?  " Martini argued .  " It ' s a mess .  " 

There are also more than 40 of what are known as " free zones " in the UAE , mostly in Dubai , where foreigners can locate ( or relocate ) companies . 

A beachside scene in Dubai . 
After Indians , Russians form the second biggest group of tourists in Dubai 
 
 " And with real estate or investment funds , nobody is going to ask you any questions ,  " Martini said . 

Buying property in the UAE is comparatively frictionless and offers investors a residency visa , without needing local sponsorship . Paperwork to buy an apartment or start a business is minimal and cash is king , investigators have found . 

Investing in real estate worth around $272 , 000 ( €185 , 000 ) gets the buyer a three-year UAE visa . Investing about $1 . 36 million ( €1 . 18 million ) buys a five-year visa . Ordinary , upper middle class Russians , looking to avoid their business being appropriated by their own government or the economic meltdown back home , might well have the funds to set up a safe haven here too . 

The Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project , a global network of investigative reporters , runs a database that includes foreign property Russian politicians have declared under Russian law . In the UAE , only 62 properties — including garages , apartments and residential buildings — are registered . 

Why the UAE ? 
Of course , the UAE is not the only place that wealthy individuals fleeing sanctions could hide money . There are 23 countries on FATF ' s grey list , including Pakistan , South Sudan , the Cayman Islands , Yemen and Morocco , among others . But some of these nations are now supporting efforts to cut off Russia economically , and there are further reasons why UAE remains attractive .  
 
 " It ' s a unique location ,  " Vittori explained .  " It ' s not a transit point like the Cayman Islands , it ' s more of a one-stop shop for illicit finance .  " 

Dubai also has a lot of what Vittori calls " clean money .  " Many multi-national businesses operating in the Middle East base themselves here and operate legally . 

Ukrainian people and their supporters demonstrate in Parliament Square calling on the British government to support Ukraine . 
There are fears that Russians will use Dubai to escape sanctions 
 
 " Nobody invests in ' dirty money ' locations because everybody knows it ' s dirty there . It ' s too obvious ,  " Vittori explained .  " So it ' s the combination of clean and dirty that makes Dubai so attractive .  " 

Dubai has also long been a popular visa-free holiday destination for Russians , attracting around 730 , 000 Russian tourists in 2019 , before the pandemic curtailed travel . Around 100 , 000 Russian-speakers are thought to be living in the UAE currently , with about 40 , 000 from Russia and the rest from post-Soviet states . 

The political situation is also advantageous . Each of the UAE ' s emirates is run by a monarchy , based on tribal authority . Human rights activists describe the emirates as authoritarian , with no real political opposition , and where civil society , freedom of speech and a free press are muzzled . 

Secrecy , stability , speed
This means less scrutiny from journalists or activists , Vittori said , while at the same time there is comparative political stability .  
 
 " They might not care about stability at home but when it comes to where they keep their money , the kleptocrats and the corrupt care about law and order ,  " Transparency International ' s Martini added . 

She believes there are two other main reasons why the UAE is a great hiding place for ill-gotten gains . 

Firstly , the secrecy around financial transactions and then secondly , the fact that the UAE " doesn ' t cooperate too much with other countries on these issues ,  " she said . 

The FATF reported that Dubai received about 300 requests for assistance from abroad between 2013 and 2018 but only acted on 89 of them .  
 
 "  [ UAE authorities ] are very slow and they ' re definitely not proactive ,  " Martini concluded .  " If , for example , an individual physically moves there , it would be very unlikely they would be extradited . All of these qualities makes it very , very attractive to those wanting to avoid sanctions or hide wealth .  " 

Watch video03 : 32
Why many Russians are choosing to leave their country
Edited by : Jane Paulick