The goal of this book is to provide you with useful examples of tools to use in producing
business plans and implementing effective marketing. Part One provides you with 17
different business plans which you can use as samples or “models” when you prepare
your own business plan.
The 17 business plans you see in Part One actually worked. Whether you are a wouldbe entrepreneur or a business owner hoping to grow your business, you should find
helpful examples of business plans in this book. Here’s an overview of the types of
organizations for which you will find business plans:
an auto body shop
athletes on tour
medical business
brew pub
counseling service
electrical service
medical supply company
convenience store franchisee
hair salon
insurance group
janitorial supply business
manufacturing company
home-based mailing business
medical business
trucking company
used car warranty business
wholesale company
pizza business
When you are in the process of preparing your business plan, you may have a pretty
good idea of the facts and concept you wish to present. The business plans in this book
will help you in making your final decisions about what to say and how to say it.
Business plan #1 is a document used to obtain financing to establish a new auto body
shop through the purchase of an existing operation. This relatively simple business
plan shows you how to present a request for financing, how to provide a concise description
of the business, and how to communicate information about the market, personnel, and
competition. You will also see financial projections for three years along with an executive
summary.
2 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
AUTO BODY SHOP
Here is the business plan
for an auto repair shop
which an entrepreneur
wants to establish.
This business plan was
submitted to a bank in
order to obtain a loan.
PHILLIP’S AUTO REPAIR
SUMMARY
I know that Phillip’s Auto Repair Shop will come to be known as a very honest and
reliable service center. I will offer services that most shops do not offer. All customers
will be met with a smile and good service. My goal as a business is to give the customer
a little more than they expect in terms of quality service and cost. As a new business I
know that the first year will be hard but as a new business, most people will also want
to try our service to compare the service they are already getting, and that will be all
that we need and we will be able to prove that we offer quality service.
My location in 8741 Milburn Drive is very good location. Traffic flow is estimated
at 12,000 to 14,000 cars per day. We will perform major and minor auto repairs. My
personnel consists of two mechanics. I predict that within two to three years Phillip’s
Auto Repair Shop will be recognized as one of the best businesses in Springfield.
REQUEST FOR FINANCING
Phillip’s Auto Repair is requesting a loan for $30,000 to finance its new automotive
repair business, which has an opening date slated for April 7, 2004.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
I will be leasing with an option to buy an old, established business whose current
owner would like to retire. The owner has cultivated a loyal clientele drawn to his business
through his honesty and technical knowledge. My leasing terms will include use of the
land, building, and all owned equipment and tools now located on the premises.
This business will be a total auto repair and service shop available for all types of
vehicles. We will do brake jobs, tune-ups, rebuilding or replacing motors, transmissions,
starters, alternators, valve jobs, oil changes, and lube jobs on all American cars, and
most import cars. Days of operation are Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
and a trained mechanic will be on duty who has two years specialized training from a
technical community college along with several years of experience as a General Motors
Mechanic at their plant. An important differentiating feature of my business is that all
mechanics will be fully trained. Service costs will be competitive to most similar
businesses in the Braxton County area. My research has shown that there is a definite
need in this area for an auto shop that provides such service. I have an outstanding
reputation as a reliable professional full of integrity, creativity, and vision, and believe
Phillip’s Auto Repair’s established customers will like the “new blood” I’m bringing to
the business. I plan to improve upon business profits by hiring excellent mechanics
with excellent moral character.
My clientele will not only consist of the Milburn Drive neighborhood, but will also
consist of military personnel stationed at Fort Leonard Wood, MO.
The “option-to-buy” lease states a price of $90,000 for land, building, equipment,
and tools. The building has been rewired and a new heating system has recently been
installed. The building has four vehicle bays and a large storage area. A large parking
lot is adjacent to the building and all exterior and interior signage is already in place.
BUSINESS PLAN #1: Auto Body Shop
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 3
LOCATION OF BUSINESS
Phillip’s Auto Repair is located at 8741 Milburn Drive, Springfield, MO. The building and land are in
fine condition and need no renovation. The neighborhood surrounding the business is stable and growing
with many active small businesses in the area including a pawn shop, NAPA Auto Parts, Mega Market,
Circle K Convenience Store, Gerald’s Engine Repair, Allied Executive Care, Liberty Body Shop and
Transmission Repair, a hair salon, and a fish market.
The shop is 2,267 sq. ft. and is done in block build. The lot size is 175 sq. ft. long and 95 ft. deep. The
lease agreement is nine hundred dollars per month with a year-to-year agreement. I have “first rights” to
buy the building and land. After one year, I intend to buy the place. I will maintain the building and grounds.
As stated previously, traffic in the area tends to be high at 12,000 to 14,000 cars per day. I am close to Fort
Leonard Wood, therefore very accessible to military professionals. The shop is very easy to find and Milburn
Drive is a very well known road — it is like the main vein in your heart. Since Logan’s Tires closed, we have
been fortunate to get a great deal of their business.
LICENSES AND PERMITS
The name Phillip’s Auto Repair is registered with the Missouri and Braxton County Register of Deeds.
Local zoning regulations will have little if any affect on the business. All licenses and permits are in order
and copies of them are included in this proposal:
City License of Springfield — cost $5.00
County License, Missouri Department of Revenue - Braxton Taxes — Cost $50.00
State License of Braxton County and taxes — cost $20.00
MANAGEMENT
I, Phillip McMillan, the manager and prospective owner of Phillip’s Auto Repair exercise direct
operational and management experience in auto repair and maintenance. I managed a profitable car wash
for almost two years, worked as an Assistant Manager with AutoZone stores for six years, and operated a
detail shop in Hillsboro, MO. I am in excellent health and am physically suited for the job.
I have 12 years of formal education, have worked as a mechanic for five and a half years, and have also
worked at Advanced Auto Parts for two years as an Assistant Manager. As the manager, my job is to greet
customers with a smile and let them know my job is to help them in their automotive needs. I personally will
evaluate the problem and assign the right mechanic to the job. The chain of command will be my secretary
and head mechanic in charge when I am not at the shop.
PERSONNEL
Personnel will initially consist of three fully trained and qualified automotive mechanics. These
employees are personally known to me and have a wide range of repair and maintenance skills, including
rebuilding motors and transmissions, doing tune-ups and brake jobs, and replacing motors on all makes and
models of vehicles.
Requirements for the job as a mechanic are to have at least 2 1/2 years of experience working on
automobiles. Knowledge of how to do brake jobs, tune-ups, front-end work, rebuilding motors, and replacing
transmissions is essential in order to work at Phillip’s Auto Repair. The relationship between management
and employees needs to be such that all must be competent and honest individuals.
4 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Wages will be 45% commission for mechanics with 55% going to the shop. Training
will be done on an as-needed basis and will be done on new cars using new car books,
and during night at Ozarks Technical Community College.
THE MARKET
The market’s present size and growth potential are almost unlimited in terms of
this business. I project that I will handle between 15-18% of the Springfield automotive
repair market. The demographics of my market segment will range from 18-65 year-old
male and female car owners. As stated before, I expect a large number of military
customers with incomes ranging from $17,000-$65,000 a year.
I have several “come again” promotions planned, including having a drawing every
month for a $25 gift certificate to Phillip’s Auto Repair. All customers who have patronized
the shop during that month will have a chance to win.
Methods of acceptable payment will be cash or credit cards. I will accept no personal
checks or “run a tab” for any customers.
The size of the market is very large in terms of population. With Milburn Drive
and Fort Leonard Wood Army Base all being in close proximity, 38,000 to 45,000
registered vehicles travel in the area daily. The number passing directly by the shop is
estimated to be between 12,000 and 14,850. I will be marketing to the consumer by
means of advertising with signs, flyers, and through word-of-mouth advertising. We
will advertise in the yellow pages; we will also post business cards at shopping centers,
convenience stores, and at the AutoZone at Fort Leonardwood, MO. We will carry products
such as motors and transmissions which will be priced very competitively.
My research has shown that signage in front of the business on a heavily trafficked
road is possibly the best form of advertising. While complying with all city regulations
regarding to signage, I will erect a very professional sign that puts the business’s “best
face forward” and which communicates a highly professional image to drive-by potential
customers.
COMPETITION
My “distinctive sales advantage” will be competitive prices and honest automotive
advice and labor, in addition to conducting drawings and other promotions.
The quality of work performed by Phillip’s Auto Repair will be of the highest
caliber. I take great pride in my work and like to hear people say how good my work is.
I can operate a Sun machine, do valve jobs, and troubleshoot most U.S. and foreign cars.
As previously stated, within a one-mile radius of my shop are Malcom’s Body,
NAPA Auto Parts, Gerald’s Engine Shop, Liberty Body Shop, and Transmission Repair
Shop. My hourly rate of $35 per hour is competitive in the area, but we will sell our
motors and transmission at a lower-than-market price because I am a wholesale dealer
with my closest competitors being Englemen’s Auto and Neal’s Performance Shop. Neal
does very good work, but my costs for parts will be just a little bit cheaper because I can
get motors and transmissions cheaper than he can — thus using lower costs to attract
customers.
AUTO BODY
SHOP
Notice the
Executive
Summary at the
end of this
business plan.
Some business
plans position the
executive
summary at the
beginning of the
business plan in
the form of an
introduction.
Other business
plans, such as this
one, position the
executive
summary at the
end of plan, where
it functions as a
summary.
BUSINESS PLAN #1: Auto Body Shop
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 5
Since Logan’s Tire Shop has reopened we have been able to work together through his referring motor
and transmission work which he is not equipped to handle.
THREE-YEAR PROJECTION
I estimate the shop’s income and expense figures for the first three years of operation according to the
chart shown on the following page.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I believe our automotive repair shop, located at 8741 Milburn Drive, Springfield, MO, will come to be
known as one of the most innovative and respected in the city. Phillip McMillan, Manager, and Carl Edinburg
and Paul Swanson, Mechanics, will be offering services and products in conjunction with a professional
customer service system that can usually only be found in much larger cities and at a much higher cost. Our
goal is to give all customers more than they expect in terms of quality service at less than they might expect
to pay. Word-of-mouth recommendation by satisfied customers will eventually become the business’s best
advertisement.
The sole owner/lease holder is Phillip McMillan, who is also requesting the loan in the amount of
$30,000. If you look at APPENDIX A, you will see that the loan will easily be repaid by means of the projected
monthly profit amount.
6 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
PHILLIP’S AUTO REPAIR
FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
Sales
Retail Products $ 20,000 $ 35,000 $ 44,000
Labor Sales 42,000 64,000 83,475
Total Sales $ 62,000 $ 99,000 $127,475
Expenses
Advertising $ 1,500 $ 2,800 $ 3,500
Bank Charges 350 350 350
Insurance 1,450 1,750 2,000
Miscellaneous 1,000 1,150 1,200
Office Expenses 800 1,200 3,500
Professional Fees 300 300 300
Rent 10,800 10,800 10,800
Repair/Maintenance 200 300 400
Telephone 875 1,000 1,000
Utilities 2,580 2,900 3,100
Total Expenses $ 19,855 $ 22,550 $ 26,150
Profit from Operations $ 42,145 $ 76,450 $101,325
Other Expenses
Equipment Lease $ 1,200 $ 2,900 $ 4,500
Loan Payment 3,600 3,600 3,600
Equity Line 3,500 3,500 3,500
Employee Benefits 0 3,400 3,575
Total Other Expenses $ 4,800 $ 13,400 $ 15,175
Net Profit $ 37,345 $ 63,050 $ 86,150
AUTO BODY SHOP
BUSINESS PLAN #1: Auto Body Shop
BUSINESS PLANS #2, #3, #4, #5, and #6:
Backing Athletes on Tour
Medical Business Loan Request
Loan Request for a Brew Pub
Counseling Services Business
Construction Loan Request
In this section, you will see a variety of business plans which illustrate varied techniques for using business
loans to obtain financing.
In Business Plan #2, you will see a concept for a business plan which involved backing athletes on tour. If
you are planning on developing a business which involves financing other professionals, you might find some
interesting ideas in this plan. The plan was circulated to private investors in an effort to obtain financing
from approximately 20 private individuals who wanted to invest in “local talent.”
Business Plan #3 is a plan designed to obtain bank financing in the amount of $250,000 in order to purchase
a successful medical business from the original financier and venture capitalist.
Business Plan #4 is a somewhat lengthier plan which was used to secure financing for a business start-up
from a base of wealthy regional individuals. The business plan was very successful, and the financing was
obtained which allowed a successful brew pub to be built.
Business Plan #5 illustrates a business plan which was used as a solicitation bid for a government contract.
In this specialized business plan, the author had to demonstrate that the service business possessed key
abilities which would allow the service to be delivered effectively and efficiently.
Business Plan #6 shows a business plan used by a construction business to embark on a major building
project in order to boost its business capability.
8 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
BACKING ATHLETES
ON TOUR
This is a sponsorship
request for two
successful tennis
players.
This letter and Estimated
Expenses document
were circulated to
wealthy individuals and
businesses in a
community with the goal
of obtaining “seed
money” for two talented
young tennis
professionals.
 Date
Exact Name of Person
Title or Position
Name of Company
Address (number and street)
Address (city, state, and zip)
Dear Exact Name of Sponsor: (or Dear Sir or Madam if answering a blind ad.)
We are requesting your financial support to help us represent Portland, OR as we
seek to attain our goal of rising to the top of the international tennis tour.
We have both dedicated the last several years to refining the tennis talents with
which we have been blessed. Although we have both had excellent success in singles, we
feel that our best chance to attain a world ranking is in doubles. One advantage for us in
doubles is that, unlike many top teams, we have had the same partner, namely each
other, for over ten years. Secondly, we love playing the doubles game, as it allows us to
set a team goal and share whatever success we have.
To attain the next level in the tennis ladder, we need your help. The upcoming
USTA Satellites Circuit, which runs in six segments from March through November of
this year, is our opportunity to gain points so that we can play the larger circuits. In
particular, by the end of this year, we hope to have enough ATP points to play only in
USTA Challengers tournaments, where the prize money is $50,000+ per event. Our
immediate goal is to make the main draw of each tournament we play in. Our ultimate
goal is to earn enough ATP points to attain a world ranking and play, and excel, in the
U.S. Open and Wimbledon.
We plan to play singles and doubles in each event, and we are confident in our
abilities to attain world rankings in both. However, we are committed to rising to the
top together, as a team, and we feel that experience is the main thing, which separates
us from the top doubles teams worldwide at this point.
We have compiled resumes of our singles and doubles results throughout our
careers as well as an estimate of expenses which is exclusive of coaching expenses.
Having our coach with us at the tournaments adds approximately $4,000 per segment
to expenses, but greatly helps us maximize our results.
If you were to decide to sponsor us, we would want you to feel free to advertise
that you are sponsors of ours. We assure you that we would take very seriously our
responsibility of representing Portland in the most professional manner possible.
 Sincerely,
 Alexander M. Kahn
BUSINESS PLAN #2: Backing Athletes On Tour
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 9
Alex and Andrew Kahn: Estimated Expenses for USTA Satellite Tour
Segment 1 Segment 2 Segment 3 Segment 4 Segment 5 Segment 6
Travel 652.00 1552.00 1463.00 1612.00 1618.00 1618.00
Lodging 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00
Food 2240.00 2240.00 2240.00 2240.00 2240.00 2240.00
Entry Fees 40.00 40.00 40.00 40.00 40.00 40.00
Equipment:
Racquets 1200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Strings 256.00 256.00 256.00 256.00 256.00 256.00
Grips 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
Shoes 480.00 480.00 480.00 480.00 480.00 480.00
Clothes 1000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
PLAYERS’
SUBTOTAL: 7368.00 6068.00 5979.00 6128.00 6134.00 6134.00
Coaching:
Travel 326.00 776.00 731.50 806.00 809.00 809.00
Lodging 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00 1400.00
Food 1120.00 1120.00 1120.00 1120.00 1120.00 1120.00
Salary 3000.00 3000.00 3000.00 3000.00 3000.00 3000.00
COACHING
SUBTOTAL: 5846.00 6296.00 6251.50 6326.00 6329.00 6329.00
TOTAL: 13214.00 12364.00 12230.00 12454.00 12463.00 12463.00
The above schedule is intended to illustrate tennis-related expenses which would reasonably be expected to be
incurred during the six actual segments of the 2004 USTA Satellite Tour. There are four tournaments in each of the
six segments.
10 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
THE CENTER FOR PODIATRY & SPORTS MEDICINE
Dr. Michael D. Wright, D.P.M.
8540 Gristmill Road
Slidell, LA 78998
(888) 888-8888
August 28, 2003
CONFIDENTIAL BUSINESS PLAN PREPARED FOR
FIRST FEDERAL BANK
I. Loan Request Summary
The purpose of this document is to request a business loan of $250,000 for the purpose
of purchasing an existing and growing medical practice in Slidell, LA. The business was
established in 2001 through the financial backing of a financier, and it is my desire to
use the loan proceeds to purchase the business so that I can become its sole owner. The
equity for this loan is the existing practice along with the fixed assets and accounts
receivables. I am anticipating an interest rate of approximately 8%.
II. Management Summary
As is revealed by the attached resume, the owner would be Dr. Michael D. Wright. I
completed the Southern University School of Podiatric Medicine and then completed
my residency from 1998-01 at the Podiatry Hospital of Slidell. The three-year Podiatric
Surgical Residency program which I completed has equipped me with unique expertise
which is in much demand not only in my market area but throughout the state. While I
offer the capabilities of a physician and hold a Doctor of Podiatric Medicine, I am the
only podiatrist within a nearly 200-mile radius qualified to perform surgery of the hind
foot and ankle as well as trauma and reconstruction surgery. The surgical component of
the business now constitutes approximately 15% to 20% of the business of the practice,
and it is the segment which is expected to grow as my quality reputation expands
geographically. There are no doctors in the Slidell area qualified to perform surgery of
the hind foot and ankle as well as trauma and reconstructive surgery. Indeed, the doctor
who is closest geographically who performs surgery is in Baton Rouge, LA. In addition
to the surgery which I perform, I routinely see patients suffering from a wide variety of
ailments which include sports injuries, heel pain, and complications due to diabetes,
arthritis, and other diseases. Since establishing the practice in Slidell in 2001, I have
established excellent relationships with doctors who have become strong referral sources
including Doctors Yabolon, Augustine, Wyatt, and Hobbs, as well as other doctors in
Slidell. I have also established an excellent relationship with the only other podiatrist
in Slidell, who refers patients to me for surgery as well as for routine ailments, because
demand for his services tends to exceed his capacity. I have also established a strong
working relationship with Slidell Medical Center, where I perform most of my surgeries.
The type of medical services I provide are typically covered by a wide variety of insurance
including Medicaid, Medicare, private insurance, and many others. Since establishing
the practice in 2001, I have taken great pains to ensure that the foundations of the
business are solid. For example, The Center for Podiatry & Sports Medicine has a fully
computerized accounting and bookkeeping system. In order to ensure correct and
maximum allowable billing for all services provided, The Center for Podiatry & Sports
Medicine has, nearly since its inception, utilized a third party billing service which
specializes in podiatry practices. This has ensured the fastest possible cash flow and
maximum profitability. In addition to my unique surgical expertise, one strength of the
BUSINESS PLAN #3: Medical Business Loan Request
BANK LOAN REQUEST
This is a loan request
for a medical practice
based in Louisiana. The
loans will be used to
purchase a medical
business which was initially
financed by a venture
capitalist. This confidential
business plan was
developed after the medical
business proved to be
profitable. The document
intends to persuade the
bank that the business is
profitable so that bank
financing can be obtained
to pay off the initial
investor. Request for
financing: $250,000.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 11
business is that the Pryor County area has been relatively underserved medically while
the market is growing rapidly. I have established an outstanding reputation as a surgeon,
doctor, and medical colleague in the community. I have an excellent office staff of two
individuals who appear to be dedicated and loyal individuals. I am confident I can build
on that good will and develop the practice into a booming and successful entity. Although
I was born in New Hampshire, I have made Louisiana home and I am very happy in
settling in this part of the country. I believe strongly that the state of Louisiana will
experience rapid growth and Slidell is poised geographically to enjoy a rapid growth
rate.
III. Business Summary
The practice which I have established includes a practice through which I see patients
on a daily basis. This includes daily monitoring of patients with patients being seen on
Monday through Thursday with surgery on Friday. I am also on call and am known for
my cheerful willingness to respond to emergencies, such as the urgent need to perform
surgery on the foot or ankle when someone has been in a car accident. I have become
known for my skill in performing reconstructive surgery of the foot and ankle. My strategy
at all times is to provide the finest care so that I can grow the business by word of mouth
because of my reputation as a superior doctor and highly skilled surgeon. In terms of
short-term goals, my goal is to increase my number of surgeries, which is the highticket and high-profile aspect of my business. I want to become the leading authority in
Louisiana and perhaps in the Southwest on the bones of the foot and ankle. The type of
surgery I perform is among the most delicate type of surgery performed, and orthopedic
surgeons — who can perform this type of surgery — seem quite delighted to refer patients
to me because of the extremely delicate nature of the type of surgery which I perform. I
have built the practice from scratch to its current point of more than $200,000 annually
revenue on an annualized basis, and it is growing rapidly. In five years it is my goal to
grow the business to a $400,000 practice with a high profit margin. One day, I might
want to grow it even more by bringing a new podiatrist into my practice. I have a goal to
grow The Center for Podiatry & Sports Medicine into a practice which has a regional,
and perhaps even a statewide, reputation, but my short-term goal is to become established
to the maximum degree possible in my local community.
IV. Industry Summary
Since the business is a medical practice with surgical components and physical therapy,
the demand for the services I provide is already strong with demand expected to be
stronger in the future. Simultaneously, the market is growing. Although there really
are no cyclical trends in medicine, I have found that profits are marginally weaker in
the winter months, although the difference is slight. With the aging baby boom generation
experiencing arthritis, diabetes, and numerous other ailments which tend to bring
patients to podiatrists, I forecast a strong and growing demand for the services I provide.
V. Market Summary
The Slidell community and the Chamber of Commerce have both welcomed me with
open arms. The Slidell area is growing, but I also network aggressively with doctors in
Baton Rouge who are viable sources of referral for surgery and medical care. The Slidell
area has one other podiatrist, with whom I have an excellent relationship and who
refers patients to me for medical treatment and surgery. My strategy is to develop a
growing reputation as a skilled surgeon who is highly regarded by the general public as
well as the medical community. I believe I am poised to expand on the quality reputation
of The Center for Podiatry & Sports Medicine.
12 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
MORRISON BREWING COMPANY
1. Executive Summary
A. General Business Overview
B. Market Overview
C. Company Structure
D. Investment Structure
E. Management
2. The Industry
A. Introduction
1. Industry Defined
2. Dynamics
B. Industry Growth Statistics
C. Success Rates
D. Competition & Pricing
E. Architecture Design
F. P.A. Brewery Index
3. The Brewpub
A. Introduction & Philosophy
B. Operations
1. Business Hours and Product Descriptions
2. Marketing
3. Service
4. Target Audience
5. Organization & Staffing
6. Typical Brewpubs
7. Menu
4. Analysis of the Industry
A. Introduction and Philosophy
B. Microbrewery Operations
C. Outline for Product/Market Development
D. Risks
BREW PUB
Here is a business plan
for a brewery operation
which includes the
industry structure and
a market strategy.
Request for financing:
approximately $1.5
million.
BUSINESS PLAN #4: Loan Request for a Brew Pub
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 13
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
General Business Overview
Morrison Brewing Co. will be an upscale brewpub--a restaurant where varied
styles of beer are craft-brewed on the premises and served with quality food at reasonable
prices. Our goal is to locate in an upscale building where we can create the ambiance
and character which matches the rich history of hand-crafted beers and authentic
wholesome food which will be served. We will perform all necessary leasehold
improvements in order to create a spacious, unique and comfortable atmosphere while
ensuring the proper design and placement of the brewery.
We will open during the fourth quarter of 2003, and be open seven days a week for
lunch and dinner. The driving theme of our business will be freshness and quality
accompanied by superior service. We anticipate catering to patrons from every walk of
life; people who appreciate a good meal with a pint of their favorite brew in a relaxed
setting.
Morrison Brewing Co. will be located in one of the various shopping centers that
have expressed interest in our project. We have met and will continue to meet with
representatives from Allendale, Pinehaven Shopping Center, and Crowfield Plaza. The
brewery will be a welcomed and attractive addition to any of these locations.
Morrison Brewing Co. will be characterized by the authentic old neighborhood
pub brewery/restaurant design. The brewing equipment (copper-clad brewing kettle
and mash tun, copper-clad fermenter tanks and serving tanks) will be highly visible
from the restaurant area, and the bar area. We will feature a high quality sound system
for after-dinner entertainment and several television sets in the bar area for special
sporting events.
Morrison Brewing Co. will also keg and bottle their special brands of beer for
retail sales. Morrison Brewing Co. will sell to other bars and restaurants as well as to
convenience stores, supermarkets, and commissaries.
Market Overview
In the mid-1980’s the American consciousness was tapped by a startling realization:
Beer is supposed to have flavor. Europeans have been savoring ale, porter, pilsner, and
stout for centuries. But in the United States, such news was a revelation. Small breweries
sprouted tentatively here and there. One by one, American beer drinkers sat down with
unfamiliar brews from unknown sources - Anchor Steam, Redhook, Sierra Nevada,
Bigfoot Ale. As they sipped, they were quietly converted. American “microbrews” became
the beer aficionado’s small stash of secret joy.
Ten years later, brewpubs and microbreweries have experienced explosive growth.
Beer production at US brewpubs has risen by an average of 44% during the last five
years. US craft brewers, (brewpubs, microbreweries, regional specialty brewers and
contract brewers) produced nearly 1,669,982 barrels (51, 769,442 gallons) in 2001,
reflecting a 40.4% increase over the previous year and nearly thirteen fold growth since
1993. This contrasts dramatically with production by the ten largest brewers which
14 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
experienced only 0.7% growth during 2001. The craft brewing industry has been, and
will continue to be, the fastest growing segment of the US beer industry for many years.
Extensive market research indicates that the demographic profile of the Harrisburg
area with the large number of military and the immediate surrounding communities is
almost identical to our desired target audience — young to middle age, “white collar”
population with high, median, and average household incomes. This target audience
also includes several transient individuals that have spent time in foreign countries
that have always served full-flavored beers. Our unique selection of brews will lead the
potential German/Irish/English/Scottish beer drinker through our doors.
Introduction to Management
William Addison is Chief Executive Officer and Co-Founder of Morrison Brewing
Co. Mr. Addison has several years experience in the food and beverage industry including
positions at Harrisburg’s Anheuser-Busch and Miller Products Distributors. Mr. Addison
has worked the last nine years in sales and marketing in the paper industry. He received
his Bachelor’s degree in Psychology from La Salle University in 1997.
Thomas Caldwell is Chief Operations Officer and Co-Founder of Morrison Brewing
Co. Mr. Caldwell has served as Store Manager and District Supervisor of Kroger Grocery
Stores since 1998. Mr. Caldwell has opened and managed numerous locations from the
ground up. He is experienced in personnel, payroll, inventory management, and vendor
relations. Mr. Caldwell majored in Business at Bryant College.
Everett Johnson is Vice President, Restaurant Operations. Mr. Johnson has
worked in the restaurant business since 1992 including being an Owner/Operator of
Moon River Cafe since 1998. Mr. Johnson’s experience includes kitchen operations,
controlling food costs, personnel, and accounting. Mr. Johnson received a Bachelor’s
degree in Management from Marshall University in 1999.
Lionel Ramon is Vice President, Brewing Operations. Mr. Ramon has been
brewing beer since 1994. Mr. Ramon is experienced in brewing ales and lagers utilizing
a variety of specialty grains, honey, and fruits. Mr. Ramon is knowledgeable of malted
barley varieties, application to beer style and grain milling. Mr. Ramon has served as
Senior Systems Engineer for Satellite Ground Systems Development at Boeing since
1991. Mr. Ramon received his Bachelor’s degree in Astronomy from Widener University
in 1997.
William Addison, Thomas Caldwell, and Everett Johnson have all attended
the Northeastern Brewers Academy. Lionel Ramon will attend the upcoming Fall
session. This intensive 12-day course provides broad exposure to the science of brewing
and the operation of a brewpub and microbrewery:
1. Brewing Process: Theory and Practice includes discussion and demonstration
of all aspects of brewing science from malt milling through packaging.
2. Product Formulation and Flavor Analysis: Recipe design, appropriate use
of ingredients and beer flavor defect identification.
3. Quality Assurance: Lab analysis techniques of CO2, oxygen, and
microbiological instruments.
4. Beer Styles and History: A discussion of the characteristics of all 59 recognized
brewing styles.
BUSINESS PLAN #4: Loan Request for a Brew Pub
LOAN REQUEST FOR A
BREW PUB
This is a loan request
for a start-up business.
Although the entrepreneurs
who established this
business could have gone
to banks and more
traditional sources of
financing, they chose to
circulate a business plan to
private individuals and
attract equity capital as a
means of financing their
new venture.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 15
5. Equipment Selection and Requirements: Choosing the proper space and
facilities and sizing of brewery tanks and accessories.
6. Leasing and Financing: A discussion of raising capital and locating a suitable
location for the brewery.
7. Government Regulations and Agencies: Includes major requirements of
Federal, State and Local authorities.
8. Flow of Operations: A dissertation on the day to day management of the
brewery/pub including hiring practices, training, and personnel management.
9. Practical Business Management: Covers what reporting is unique to the
brewing business and practical choices for bookkeeping and inventory control.
INTRODUCTION TO THE INDUSTRY
Introduction
“Out of this world growth” was the title of the cover story contained in the
November-December June 2002 issue of The Entrepreneur Magazine. The article reads
... “Sales of craft-brewed beers skyrocketed to more than 1.6 million barrels in 2001, a
phenomenal increase of 40 percent. Once again, the domestic craft-brewing industry
has rocked the beer world. Estimated total sales for this segment reached 1,670,000
barrels in 2001 - an increase of 40 percent over 2000 sales. This amount represents 0.9
percent of the estimated total consumption of beer in the United States, up from 0.6
percent in 2000. Top-tier brewing companies enjoy a banner year yet again, each with
sales growth ranging between 47 and 83 percent. ‘Critical mass’ is a term many are
using to describe the level of maturation currently enjoyed by this industry. The
popularity of the beers of the above-mentioned companies - together with brands brewed
by 10 regional specialty breweries (that started as micros), 131 microbreweries, 241
brewpubs and roughly 60 contract brewing companies in the US - has contributed to a
critical mass of consumer acceptance for full-flavored beer. Whether it’s called microbrew
or craft-brew, full-flavored, brew with character, beer with class, beer like it used to be,
European-style, or simply hand crafted beer, the new turn in the tide of American brewing
history is unstoppable. City-by-city, county-by-county, state-by-state, and spanning all
regions, local beer is back. All malt beer is back. Beer with the flavor and aroma of hops
is back. The post-prohibition trend to homogenize, and by the 1970’s, lighten the flavor
profile of beer made good business sense for a few decades. Today, however, this trend
appears to have faded. Just as large numbers of consumers recently have grown to
expect more from the wine they enjoy or the coffee they drink and many other consumable
products termed wholesome, hearty, all-natural and traditional style - more consumers
are expecting more from the beer they drink ...”
The above article accurately summarizes the increasing momentum and size of
the craft-brew industry. There are over 80 million beer drinkers in the United States
who in 2002 spent over 50 billion dollars on their favorite malt beverage. People are
more likely to reach for a beer than for any other drink when they choose to consume an
alcoholic beverage.
16 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Industry Defined
Craft-brewing is a term used to define the hand-crafted brewing method that only
a small segment of the US beer industry utilizes. This brewing method is usually very
traditional, employing old European techniques, the finest ingredients, and no chemicals
or preservatives. This process is relatively costly and tedious compared to that utilized
by the larger brewers, but the final product is far superior. Unless explicitly stated
otherwise, ‘crafted-brew’ includes brewpubs and microbrewery production, regional
specialty brewery production and contract brewery company production as defined below.
Brewpub: In simple terms, a brewpub is a restaurant-brewery that sells at least
50% of its beer on premise. The beer is brewed for sale and consumption in the adjacent
restaurant and/or bar. The beer is often dispensed directly from the brewery’s storage
tanks. In states where it is allowed, some pubs package their beer for carry out and offsite sales. Note: Brewpubs whose off-site sales grow to represent more than 50% of total
sales are re-categorized as microbreweries.
Microbrewery: A brewery that produces less than 50,000 barrels of beer per year.
Microbreweries sell to the public by one or more of the following methods: The traditional
three-tier system (brewer to wholesaler to retailer to consumer); the two-tier system
(brewer acting as wholesaler to retailer to consumer); and in some cases, directly to the
consumer through carry outs or on-site tap-room sales.
Regional Specialty Brewery: A brewery with a capacity to brew between 50,000
and 1,000,000 barrels and offer a “specialty” or “micro” style beer as their flagship brand.
Although it may distribute its beer only within a specific region, as used here the term
refers to the brewery’s size only.
Contract Brewing Company: A business that markets and sells beer brewed to its
specifications by an already existing brewery. The existing brewery provides to the
contract brewing company its space, equipment, and in most cases, personnel for brewing
and packaging the contract brewing company’s recipe. The contract brewing company is
responsible for marketing, selling and distributing its beer to wholesalers and retailers.
In the late 1970’s the three major US breweries began far more aggressive
marketing campaigns in an effort to gain a nationwide market. Smaller, regional
breweries could not compete or were bought out by the giants. Since the rule of mass
marketing is to offend as few people as possible, brewers made beers blander and blander
in order to maintain a wide appeal for their product.
In the early eighties, on the East coast, major importers noticed an increased
demand for imported beers; products that retained some of the character that had been
stripped from their domestic counterparts. On the West coast, meanwhile, the foundation
of the microbrewery and brewpub explosion were being laid. Various breweries in
Pennsylvania were attracting local clientele with full-bodied beers which contrasted
sharply with domestic mass-produced beers. When coupled with the recent growing
interest in fitness and healthier lifestyles, it is easy to see why the craft-brewing industry
has exploded.
Today’s consumer is demanding a more natural, healthier, product based more on
actual substance than advertising hype; a product that symbolizes quality and recognizes
BREW PUB
Why did these
entrepreneurs decide to
circulate their business
plan to wealthy individuals
instead of banks? They
decided that banks would
consider the start-up too
risky and determined that
they would be better off to
try to raise the needed
capital “$20,000 at a time”
from wealthy local and
regional individuals who
would secure small equity
positions in the new
company.
BUSINESS PLAN #4: Loan Request for a Brew Pub
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 17
not only that the consumer wants a choice, but is discerning in what he or she chooses to
purchase. Thus has begun the latest development in the retail markets; a highly
segmented market has become the norm, with retailers serving specialized audiences
with superior quality products. There are homemade cookie shops and ice cream parlors,
fresh pasta stores, espresso bars and now brewpubs.
Dynamics
Why now? Where did brewpubs come from? Those of us who have developed more
than a passing fancy for beer have asked these questions at one time or another. Is this
a fad? It would seem not. Craft beer production grew by more than 40% in 1998 and 50%
in 1999. Specialty brewed beer is here to stay, and sales figures suggest that the market
has only just begun to be tapped. There is no doubt that the retail consumer market is
changing. Anyone who ventures out, if only to the supermarket, must notice this change.
People want quality products; natural, healthy items that they can feel good about using
and eating and drinking. In the 1970’s, people bought white bread. In the 1980’s, they
bought whole grain. People now buy boutique wines instead of jug wines. People choose
expensive flavored bottled waters over tap water. One can see the same happening with
coffee, ice cream, soft drinks, salsa, cheese and pasta - to name a few products. It is also
happening with beer. Several events in the last twenty years have combined to create
the demand for higher quality beer.
SUCCESS RATES
Openings & Closings
Brewpub growth alone has skyrocketed in the last six years, with production
reaching 302,127 barrels (9,365,937 gallons) in 2001. The chart below illustrates this
trend vividly and clearly shows that the failure rate for a brewpub is almost one fifth
smaller than that for an ordinary new restaurant, 17% for the former and 80% for the
latter.
Year Barrels Number Openings Closings
2001 302,127 347 106 5
2000 201,418 241 70 14
1999 146,792 186 39 7
1998 112,154 155 47 13
1997 88,112 124 34 9
1996 61,639 107 41 3
1995 33,589 69 44 4
1994 11,113 29 13 0
1993 7,803 16 10 2
_____ _____
Totals 404 57
18 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Competition and Pricing
There are no brew pubs in Harrisburg. Our prices will be competitive with the
successful bars and restaurants in our area. We expect to price our house beer
competitively with the bottled beer offered in area bars. For example, a 16 oz. serving of
our beer will be priced at $3.00, while less desirable bottled products cost $2.75 for a 12
oz. serving. Based on national brewpub data, we can expect 80-85% of our beverage
sales to consist of our house beer, ensuring adequate volume to realize favorable profit
margins.
Morrison Brewing Company will offer competitive pricing on our menu selections
which will focus on fresh and wholesome salads, appetizers, sandwiches, a varied selection
of entrees, and gourmet brick oven pizzas. The entrees will consist of a core of offerings
that will remain on the menu and will be complemented by seasonal dishes and
homemade soups. Our menu will focus on fresh, homemade dishes which will be
complemented by our house brews. The average entree price (including all food items
apart from appetizers) will be $8.50. We will be able to offer quality and freshness at
reasonable prices so our customers feel confident that they are getting value for their
money. Our overall pricing strategy will be based on:
1. Price of competitive products.
2. Price needed to be profitable.
3. Price sensitivity and its relationship to potential sales.
Pricing will be under continuous review by the company’s CEO, COO, V.P. of
Restaurant Operations, and consultants. Pricing and menu selections may be altered to
respond to competition and other variables. Our menu selections will be priced similarly
to comparable items at other area restaurants but we will strive to make our total
product superior in every way.
INDEX OF COMPETITORS
Allentown
• Manson Brewing Co. — Large Brewery
Johnston
• Pinehaven Brewing Co. — Microbrewery
Lancaster
• Blue Moon Grille — Brewpub
Levittown
• Golden Mill Brewery — Brewpub
• Hobson Brewery — Brewpub
McKeesport
• Sinclair Micro Brewery — Microbrewery
• Pink House Bakery Brewery — Brewpub
• Keesport Micro Brewery — Brewpub
New Castle
• Brandywine Brewery & Cafe — Microbrewery
Norristown
• Upstein Brewing Co. — Microbrewery
BREW PUB
On these pages you
will see an
illustration of how
to present facts
about competition
and pricing
strategies.
BUSINESS PLAN #4: Loan Request for a Brew Pub
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 19
Philadelphia
• Ridgecrest Brewing Co. – Brewpub
• North Bound Brewery & Smokehouse — Brewpub
• Cameo Beer Co. — Microbrewery
• Ballard Pro Brewing Co. — Microbrewery
Pittsburg
• Millstone Brewing Co. — Microbrewery
• Chalet Restaurant & Brewery — Brewpub
• Pinehurst & Southern Pines — Microbrewery
Pottstown
• Eden Way Brewery And Pub — Brewpub/Microbrewery
• Shire Brewing Co. — Microbrewery
• Cobblestone Brewery — Brewpub
Reading
• Steak & Ale Brewery — Microbrewery
West Chester
• Red Gate Brewery — Brewpub
• Sky Line Co., Inc. — Microbrewery
York
• Sapphire Brewery Co. — Large Brewery
THE BUSINESS PLAN
Introduction and Philosophy
Morrison Brewing Company will be formed and operated under the guiding
principles of product integrity, impeccable service and respect for the individual - both
employees and customers. At the heart of the enterprise is a hands-on participative
management style. We will strive to create a place that we ourselves would like to work
for; a neighborhood atmosphere where one knows the product he or she is selling, knows
their customers because they keep returning, and where the customer knows they are
receiving a good value and enjoying a unique experience.
Our beers will be fresh, all natural, and of world class caliber. Our food will be
tastefully prepared with only the freshest and seasonal ingredients whenever possible.
The management team will bring much significant experience to this venture in
the areas of start-up, management, restaurant operations, brewing, marketing and
human resources. These combined talents and energies coupled together with an
experienced, enthusiastic and imaginative restaurant manager and an experienced and
diverse consulting team will ensure success and prosperity.
Morrison Brewing Company will operate and be managed with creativity, insight,
and hard work. This venture represents the culmination of many years of education and
unique business experiences, and many months of intense examination of the
marketplace in Harrisburg.
20 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
OPERATIONS
Business Product Line
Morrison Brewing Company will be open seven days a week, 363 days a year. We
will open at 11:00 a.m. and close at 2:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays, Sunday 11:00
a.m. - 12:00 a.m. All menu selections will be served from opening until 11:00 p.m., and
we will offer a limited but appealing bar menu during all hours of operation. The menu
will consist of a wide variety of appetizers, homemade soups and fresh salads, original
style pizzas from our wood-fired pizza oven, hot and cold sandwiches, and a selection of
entrees.
We will offer a minimum of four fresh, home-brewed beers at all times. A light
beer will be on tap throughout the year with an amber ale variety or a pale ale variety.
The textures and styles of our home-brews will reflect the current seasons; lighter beer
during warmer months and heartier beers during cooler months. Other possible selections
are described below.
Amber Ale: An American version of the English mild ale. Medium amber in color,
complemented by a sweet, malty body ending with a floral hop finish.
Pale Ale: A deep gold patina in this beer belies its aggressively hopped character.
Enhanced Cascade hops explode off the top and reappear in the aftertaste. The full
malty taste is balanced with a dryness that complements lighter food.
Wheat or Weisse: One of the most refreshing beers made with a substantial
portion of wheat in addition to the normal barley. A pale and sometimes cloudy beer
deriving from Southern Germany.
Porter: A great introduction to the many darker styles of beers. A rich, velvet
brown color and full flavor recommend this beer to be served with heartier dishes.
Oatmeal Stout: The granddaddy of beers, this style is almost a meal in itself and
not for the faint of heart. Generous amounts of roast barley, oatmeal and specialty
malts give this beer its spectacular head, deep black color and full body. A smoky, coffee
flavor predominates and is best served as an aperitif or a fine after meal drink.
Light Beer: This style has a place even in the world of boutique brews. Ours will
complement different menu selections and highlight the fact that a low alcohol beer can
have color and taste.
Seasonals: We will offer beers that ring in the seasons and celebrate varied
holidays. Possibilities include an Irish ale for St. Patrick’s Day, a pumpkin porter for
Halloween, a summer-fest beer to refresh and rejuvenate parched customers, a fall
harvest beer to serve during the Oktoberfest, and the traditional English Wassail, a
spiced beer that warms hearts and heads to celebrate the holiday season. Other possible
products will include a wheat beer, fruit beers, lambics, cask conditioned real ales, and
nonalcoholic beverages.
BREW PUB
On this page
you will see a
discussion of
the company’s
business
product line
and marketing
strategy.
BUSINESS PLAN #4: Loan Request for a Brew Pub
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 21
Marketing
Market entry will initially be driven by the unique character and novelty of the
brewpub concept in this area. Morrison Brewing Company will generate a majority
clientele that has not yet had the opportunity to experience quality prepared food as
well as finely made hand-crafted beer. An informal survey showed that many people are
excited about the concept of a brewpub and would be eager to visit and take part in this
unique experience.
Historically, brewpub openings have generated interest and coverage from the
local and regional media. We will invite the major local and regional newspapers and
magazines to our opening as well as their radio and television counterparts. Our premiere
will be a newsworthy “opening” including generous samples of our beer and food as well
as a few surprises which are currently fermenting.
We also plan to invite government officials, business leaders, suppliers, friends,
family and the many people who have supported us from the beginning. Our opening
will be a day to celebrate and commemorate the return of fresh, hand-crafted beer to
our region.
The goals of our promotional efforts are to:
1. Maintain contact with our patrons.
2. Develop positive community relations.
3. Educate the public about fresh brewed beer.
We will sustain the energy and interest created at the opening by ensuring that
the quality of the beer, food, atmosphere, and service is something that people will
appreciate, publicize and return to enjoy. The initial flurry of articles on the brewpub
will be due to the novelty of our concept. Follow-up articles will be the result of press
releases and our own promotional efforts. In addition to maintaining an ongoing
advertising presence through the local media, other promotional ideas include brewer’s
banquets, brewery tours, beer tastings and seminars, and brew-of-the-month club.
Positive press and media relations will be cultivated at all times by the principles.
The image we wish to consistently portray is that of an enterprise of dedicated employees
who are knowledgeable and enthusiastic about the beer, food and service that we provide
to our patrons.
We will offer seasonal beers and menus to commemorate and celebrate the arrival
of the seasons. Special events will also be tailored to correspond with the specific
celebrations. We plan to include an Oktoberfest and Summerfest. After the opening, all
subsequent “hoppenings” will be communicated by a newsletter sent to everyone on our
mailing list.
Our efforts to become part of the community, will include cosponsoring local
recreational activities. These types of events will publicize the brewpub, encourage
healthy lifestyles and responsible behavior. We also believe such events will attenuate
potential negative reactions from anti-alcohol groups.
We will also strive to form amiable relationships with the neighboring restaurants
outside of our specific area in an effort to provide these restaurants with our fresh, local
22 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
brews. We will be very discerning in this pursuit but we feel that this could benefit
Morrison Brewing Company all the while increasing awareness of our tasty beers while
bolstering sales. This will also help bring tourists in from surrounding cities to visit our
brewery.
The customer base will be expanded by always sustaining the highest quality of
beer, food, atmosphere and customer service. Market penetration will be sustained and
driven by adhering to these basics and by creating a place and product that honors the
history of microbrewing, while always remaining fresh and unique.
Service
SERVICE SERVICE SERVICE will be the catch phrase of Morrison Brewing
Company. We recognize that maintaining a superior service platform is of paramount
importance to the success of the company. Staff meetings which focus on service will be
held on a bi-weekly basis. We will also emphasize company pride and loyalty. We are in
the process of producing a comprehensive and stringent service manual that will detail
the following service requirements and perspectives.
• Training: All staff members will undergo a demanding, thorough, and continuous
training regiment.
• Attitude: Staff will be polite, outgoing, professional and attentive to our customer’s
demands at all times. The customer is always right!
• Execution: Food and beverage serving, seating by hostess, food preparation, table
dress, taking orders, receiving payments, etc. will be performed
consistently and professionally, utilizing exact procedures for each task.
Service will be prompt and efficient.
• Knowledge: All servers, bartenders and managers will be very familiar with the
preparation and content of all menu items, daily and seasonal specials,
the various styles of our house-brewed beers, wines, and other beverages,
and the history of the company.
• Cleanliness: The restaurant, bar, kitchen, bathrooms, utensils, glasses, staff, etc,
will remain spotless at all times.
• Image: All visible staff members will maintain a professional yet relaxed
appearance. Staff will wear sharp looking but comfortable uniforms
and will be neat, handsome, mature, impeccably trained, courteous and
smiling.
• Awareness: Staff will be perceptive of customers’ wants and needs at all times.
• Interaction: Management will maintain constant interaction with customers in an
effort to make them feel welcome and important. We will take note of
customer’s name, occupation, livelihood, beer of choice, etc.
• Safety: Stringent safety policies will be employed at all times.
BREW PUB
This discussion of the
company’s service
orientation and target
audience is intended to
inspire confidence and
persuade potential
investors that the
business concept is
strong.
BUSINESS PLAN #4: Loan Request for a Brew Pub
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 23
Target Audience
Over the last ten years, there has been a distinct shift in the way Americans
relate to food, almost a renaissance in the culinary arts. People now want to eat better
and know what they are eating, and regional cuisines emphasize fresh and natural
ingredients. There has been a dramatic shift from the excesses of the eighties to the
value-added theme of the nineties.
The same trend is visible in beer consumption. Today’s beer drinker is more
sophisticated and finds himself or herself confronted with a wide assortment of beers to
choose from. There are new regional, micro, and pub-brewed beers flooding the market
in both draft and bottle forms. As with wine drinkers, beer drinkers are becoming
increasingly sophisticated.
An in-depth analysis of the local demographics shows that our anticipated core
audience will consist of groups of educated males and females (graduated or attending
college) and the military population, with a secondary audience consisting of adults
ages 25-54. We anticipate that our customers will primarily be a combination of singles
and parents who work in the following fields: professional/managers, sales and precision/
craft, and the resident military. We believe our customers will cover a range of high,
median, and average household incomes and will fall broadly into one of the following
groups:
1. Destination Diners: Composed of a mature, affluent audience who dine our more
than once a week and are looking for the new, the good and the
trendy. We believe this group will pay a fair price for quality
food and beer.
2. Beer Enthusiasts: Made up of home-brewers and beer connoisseurs who can
identify and appreciate a quality brewed product and are also
willing to pay for it. This group is loyal and will spread the
word to friends and fellow enthusiasts. We believe the military
population to make up the major portion of this groupinformal surveys show that military personnel, with their wide
experiences throughout the US and the world, prefer a quality
hand-crafted brew to less desirable brands.
3. Walk-ins: This group is highly contingent on location and come in off the street or
as they are driving by. We feel we can optimize on this group by placing
the brewpub in a highly visible and convenient location.
4. Families: Moderate to high income families with young children who are attracted
to a hospitable environment and who appreciate good value in their
dining experience.
5. Tourists: Several hundred thousand tourists visit Morrison every year-once again,
we include all new incoming military personnel in this group.
24 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Organization and Staffing
Staff training: Everyone involved in this project must be committed to the responsible
consumption of our alcoholic beverages. Clearly, the majority of the 80 million adults
who drink beer are responsible drinkers. The few individuals that abuse alcoholic
beverages cast a dark shadow over the responsible drinkers and the entire industry. We
will do everything in our power to ensure that our customers do not abuse our product.
Staff education is the area over which we have most control. We will require all serving
staff to participate in a training program designed to instruct servers to recognize
underage drinkers, false ID’s and customers that have had too much. Servers will also
be reminded through posters and staff meetings that their livelihoods and ours depends
on our patrons responsible consumption of our alcoholic beverages. Morrison Brewing
Company will be involved with local and community programs such as “Designated
Driver” and we will offer free nonalcoholic beverages to designated drivers.
Drug free environment: Morrison Brewing Co. will be a drug-free workplace. Drug
abuse is one of the greatest challenges facing employers today. Drug abuse can result in
absenteeism, loss of productivity, medical expenses, and workplace crime.
Morrison Brewing Co. is aware that we may risk loosing potential employees. However,
we feel it is necessary to take that risk to ensure we have the best employees available.
Federal companies (i.e. U.S. Army) require government contractors to be drug-free.
Internal Organization
The goal of this organization structure is to keep it as flat and responsive as
possible, while at the same time ensuring that everyone knows who they report to for
guidance, support, and motivation.
The Chief Operating Officer will have overall day-to-day and strategic management
responsibilities for the company, including personnel, purchasing and financial
management. The Chief Executive Officer will maintain responsibility for marketing,
public relations, advertising, new business development and strategic planning. The
Restaurant Operations Manager and Brewing Operations Manager will report directly
to the Chief Operating Officer.
This philosophy will further enhanced by a reward and compensation based on
skill-based pay, bonuses, and flexible benefits. The specifics of the compensation system
we finally design and implement will contingent on how we ultimately finance the
business as well as input from our accountant and attorney.
Participative management, flexible compensation, and regular communication of
goals, objectives and state of the business will be an integral part of ensuring that our
employees are motivated and feel like they work in a positive environment. These actions
will also spawn the type of atmosphere where employees are encouraged to be creative
and committed to the company. Successful staffing, along with a quality product, great
service and a comfortable and unique atmosphere, will ensure our success. The secret
to good staffing includes recruiting, selection, training, and management.
BREW PUB
The business plan ends
with a discussion of
concepts related to
organization and
staffing, internal
organization, and
organizational design.
BUSINESS PLAN #4: Loan Request for a Brew Pub
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 25
Recruiting: Our recruiting efforts will focus on four sources:
• Best people from other establishments
• Word-of-mouth, friends and referrals
• Develop relationships with local Food Service, Restaurant
Management, Cooking and Bartending schools to ensure quality
referrals
• Advertisement in local papers
Selection: Every candidate for employment will interviewed by the Operations
Manager as well as the appropriate Vice President of Operations. We
will strongly suggest that each prospective employee talk to at least
two current employees in order to understand the operating philosophy
behind Morrison Brewing Company. This is a significant time
investment but is more prudent than having to terminate some one
who shouldn’t have been hired in the first place. “Money can be saved
on things but not on people.” People are our best investment. Key
characteristics to assess are: attitude, skills, previous experience,
education, and future plans. The profile of our staff will reflect the profile
of the customers we serve and the community in which we operate.
Training: Training will focus on four areas: Attitude, company philosophy, skills
and external development. All employees will be cross trained so that
they can assume three or four different positions in the brewpub.
Management The management philosophy can best be described as a combination of
Philosophy: participative management based on a respect for the individual and
responsibility to the organization. This approach reflects a healthy
combination of an organization that gives as much as it expects. The
responsibilities in a high involvement enterprise are equally shared by
both owners and employees. The advantages of this participative
approach can be summarized in the following way:
• Respect for the individual is paramount
• People want to be part of a team and be included in decisions that
will affect their responsibilities in all aspects of the organization
• When employees participate, they are more satisfied and committed
to the organization
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
The sketch below illustrates a tentative look at the structure we desire for our
brewpub/microbrewery. Ralph Tresvant, a registered P.A. Architect, sketched this design
as well as the floor plans shown on the next two pages. The floor plans, includes seating
for 250 plus, with a mezzanine for brewing equipment and office space.
26 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Solicitation and Bid for a Government Contract
KARL H. JUSTUS
RFP 659-16-94
SSN: 000-00-0000
1. Organizational Information:
a. Describe in narrative form your organization’s ability to provide required
services in the State of Washington for eligible service members and veterans
requesting these services. A detailed description of the organization’s ability
to support the required performance of this contract will be provided. This
description should include the locations of the offices, staffing and managerial
makeup of the organization. In summary, information should be provided which
will demonstrate the offeror’s understanding of how they intend to manage
tasks called for under the contract.
The organization providing these services — CCI, Career Consulting, Inc. — is
operated by a respected professional who combines a distinguished military career with
a master’s degree education in the counseling/human services area as well as extensive
recent experience in providing educational and vocational guidance counseling for the
Veterans Administration. As the sole proprietor of CCI, I personally guarantee
satisfaction with all services provided by CCI. A brief look at my background will reveal
that I have the experience and qualifications to provide this “satisfaction guaranteed”
service by CCI.
CCI’s ability to provide these services is based on my ability personally to deliver
these services. As a retired lieutenant colonel, I offer extensive knowledge of the military
professional and of his/her needs as he/she transitions from military service into the
civilian sector or into academic environments to strengthen his/her education. In my 25
years as an Army officer, I have provided extensive guidance and counseling to soldiers,
and I have provided the service person with information of an educational and career
nature along with self-information that facilitated decisions concerning education and
career planning.
• Most recently, I have applied the concepts and techniques I acquired while earning
my master’s degree in counseling/human services as a contract Educational and
Vocational Guidance Counselor for the Veterans Administration. While performing
in that role for the past 15 months, I have performed activities which included
administering testing and providing initial counseling interviews for Chapter 36
candidates. From May 1999 to October 2003 I completed more than 100 cases. I am
currently under contract with the VA to provide initial testing and counseling services
for Chapters 31, 35, and 36. The process which I conducted included counseling and
interviewing veterans as well as conducting tests that assessed interests, aptitudes,
and abilities to assist the individual in making informed career decisions. I spent a
considerable amount of time interpreting counseling notes, explaining interest
profiles, and helping the counselee/veteran develop a plan of action. In my most
recent experience, I have demonstrated that I possess, and am able to apply in a
counseling situation, my keen understanding of “pending” veterans’ needs and what
adjustments they will be exposed to after leaving military service.
• My 25-year career in the U.S. Army, during which time I rose to the rank of lieutenant
colonel, provided me with certain kinds of “expert knowledge” that is needed in order
COUNSELING SERVICES
Here is a business plan
for a career consulting
service. The business
plan was designed to
serve as a response to a
solicitation and bid for a
government contract.
BUSINESS PLAN #5: Counseling Services Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 27
to counsel eligible service members and veterans. In particular, I have gained expert
knowledge of the military occupations (“military occupational specialties” or MOS’s)
and their applications in civilian life. I have made it a point during the past five
years to immerse myself in reading magazines and periodicals which keep me apprised
of trends and conditions in the job market. I also read newspapers from major
metropolitan areas when I travel in order to gain insight into “who’s hiring whom.” I
believe the U.S. economy is in a period of great fluctuation when many jobs
traditionally available to retiring military professionals are in short supply, so I am
avidly engaged in my spare time in obtaining whatever information I can about supply
and demand situations so that I can be of maximum utility to military professionals
planning a job search after departing from military service. Industries which I feel
are “hot” at the present time and therefore viable targets for military professionals
seeking employment include the transportation industry, the construction industry,
and the environmental cleanup industry. I also have made it a point to perform some
research into jobs available in government — local municipalities, state, and federal
— because many military professionals seeking employment after military service
have a preference for working in a government organization. Non-for-profit
organizations such as the Red Cross, United Way, churches, and many other
organizations also are hospitable homes for former military professionals, and I
attempt to remain abreast of opportunities in not-for-profit organizations, too, in
order to provide wise counsel and prudent guidance to the military professionals I
counsel.
In addition to my expertise in the process of interviewing people, assessing their
interests/aptitudes/abilities, and helping them develop plans to achieve their educational
or employment goals, I offer proven abilities in the area of organizational effectiveness.
In my 25 years of military service I became known as an exceptional manager of time
and resources, and I have developed detailed plans which will permit me (CCI) to carry
out the tasks involved in the process. I am known for my attention to detail and I have
developed detailed plans which include the following:
• I have direct access on a daily basis to a private counseling office (please see Appendix
A) located at a convenient site on Fort Lewis, WA. The office provides a comfortable,
private, and professional environment in which to administer vocational and
educational tests and conduct guidance counseling interviews. The office is located
in the Army Career Alumni Program Building located on the corner of Bailey and
Cumming streets on Fort Lewis. The map attached as Appendix A shows the location.
• I have direct access (one day a week) to a test facility that can accommodate 30
individuals for educational and vocational testing. The facility is located on McAllister
Street in the Fort Lewis Main Post Area. Again, please see the map attached as
Appendix A. This location as well as the one described above are conveniently located
in an area which should be either well known or easy to find for military personnel.
• As the provider of these services myself, my main task will be to manage my time for
maximum effectiveness, and I offer a reputation as a proven performer in time
management. In the event that a need develops for additional staff, I am also a
proven performer in recruiting, training, developing, managing, coaching, and
evaluating employees. I have excelled in both “line” management jobs and in “staff”
consulting and planning roles, and I have managed numerous personnel in those
line and staff positions. Because I am not assuming that I will be hiring staff at the
present time, however, I will not elaborate on my ability to recruit and train and
manage a qualified staff of dedicated and motivated people.
28 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
In summary, I believe that the key ingredients in expertly providing the services
under this contract are (1) communication skills, both oral and written, (2) managerial
effectiveness, and (3) specific expertise through education and experience. I offer
outstanding skills as a writer and as an oral communicator; my managerial skills have
been refined and tested in numerous “hotseat” positions as a military officer; and I offer
the master’s-level education along with practical counseling experience that this award
seems to require. Finally, I offer a reputation for total honesty and reliability, and it
would be a gratifying experience to assist fellow service members in achieving their
educational and employment goals after serving their country as military professionals.
Solicitation Offer and Award
KARL H. JUSTUS
RFP 659-16-94
SSN: 000-00-0000
2. Ability to Provide Initial Evaluation Services:
a. (1) Describe in narrative form your established program of services which
will be evaluated in order to demonstrate the ability of your clinician(s) to
provide evaluation services which comprehensively meet the requirements
specified in the contract.
The services I intend to provide are exceptionally strong in the area of providing
evaluation. As is described in Section l.a. of this Solicitation Offer and Award, the
evaluation services have been finely synchronized into a well coordinated process. That
process is briefly summarized below:
• Each client will be provided with educational and vocational testing. The clinician
who will be administering those tests will be a professional who is expert in
administering and evaluating a variety of educational and vocational tests, including
those used most frequently by the VA in guidance counseling: the Differential Aptitude
Tests (DAT) and the Kuder Preference Record (KPR).
• The test will be specially selected by me and administered by me. The test will be
administered in an environment of comfort and privacy in a test facility that can
accommodate up to 30 individuals. The facility is located on McAllister Street in the
Fort Lewis Main Post Area.
• Once the test is concluded, the tests will be scored and the scores will be analyzed in
order to determine interests, preferences, and other profiles which will be helpful to
the individual being counseled with the goal of formulating employment or educational
plans. Extensive analysis of the test will be performed by me.
• Although many counselors will determine plans of vocational/educational action based
on the results of the tests administered, I intend to perform more individualized fact
finding in order to provide thorough evaluation services. Before any planning is
attempted, and before any goals are articulated of an employment or vocational nature,
a personal interview will be conducted in order to gain information on the veteran’s/
serviceperson’s/dependent’s history. The intent of this personal one-on-one session
will be to gather information to help profile his or her personality and current
circumstances. It is my strong belief that, while testing instruments are helpful and
COUNSELING SERVICES
BUSINESS PLAN #5: Counseling Services Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 29
often necessary in counseling, it is also important to gain, through oral communication,
the counselee’s perceptions of their current circumstances and of their future goals
and objectives. An Interview Questionnaire which I have developed is intended to
elicit information related to these and other areas:
Personal history — family and marital status, support systems, finances
Early interests/involvements and pre-military background
Military occupational specialties
Post military work experience
Financial resources for extended educational involvements
Disabilities/impairments that may affect educational or employment plans
• Performing syntheses of evaluations is an especially strong ability of mine, and I
will be the provider of the services described in this award. After educational and
vocational tests have been administered and evaluated, and after the counselor has
conducted a personal interview to determine orally the client’s personality
characteristics and goals, a “partnership” will be formed between the counselor and
the counselee in order to develop a Vocational/Educational Plan of Action.
• The Vocational/Educational Plan of Action that will be developed is at once a synthesis
of all information and data obtained so far as well as a long-range plan targeting
educational and employments goals. It may be that a “best case” and “most probable”
and “worst case” will be developed so that options for future employment may be
analyzed in light of variables in educational attainment. Alternatives will be addressed
and tradeoff analysis will be performed of both educational and employment
alternatives.
• The Vocational/Educational Plan of Action will clearly identify plans to overcome
identified obstacles to planned educational goals and will attempt to formulate the
plan of attack for overcoming those anticipated obstacles.
• The Vocational/Educational Plan of Action will incorporate in as much detail as
possible the specific steps and tasks the individual will take to accomplish the goals
and objectives identified. Where feasible a chronology will be developed. Specifics,
details, micro-targets, mini-goals, milestones, and other itemized goal setting will be
the heart of this Plan of Action.
30 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
J.J. Felix & Co.
General Contractor and Electrical Contractor
4815 Canady Pond Drive
Melbourne, FL 33433
(111) 111-1111 phone
Current Address:
P. O. Box 444, Tampa, FL 33484
Non-dedicated fax: (222) 222-2222
INDEX
1. Business Summary
2. Current License
3. Resume (Business History)
4. Confidential Statement
5. Cash Flow Chart & Projections
6. Annual Expenditure & Income
7. Scope of Work 4815 Canady Pond Drive (Alterations & Repairs)
8. Industry Analysis and Marketing Information
GENERAL
CONTRACTOR
This is a business
plan for an electrical
contracting company
formed in Florida.
BUSINESS PLAN #6: Construction Loan Request
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 31
BUSINESS SUMMARY
Phase one: It is our business intention to embark upon a dramatic renovation
project so that we may become more aggressive as a general contractor, especially in
major industrial and commercial projects. The renovations will provide a more
professional exterior while also permitting greatly enhanced capacity to take on larger
jobs with higher profit margins.
Expanded facilities will permit us to bid on the most lucrative government contracts
available at military bases in the South, since many government contracts specify that
a company must have warehouse facilities of a certain size in order to bid on major
projects.
With the objective of growth in mind, it is our intention to renovate the office/
warehouse facility and associated general area near 4815 Canady Pond Drive. Our
renovated professional facility will enable us to compete aggressively in the more lucrative
commercial and industrial market. The facility will also enhance employee morale and
will do much to ensure that we are an “employer of choice” within our local market.
Warehouse security is a “no-compromise” necessity. The state- of- the- art fire
and burglar alarm systems we intend to install will allow for maximum security of
inventory. Added warehouse capacity will also permit us to order needed items at the
most economically advantageous rate. The modern facility will allow clientele to feel
comfortable and will create an environment for productive negotiations.
We have discussed the matter with entrepreneurial associates and real estate
appraisers who feel that the necessary cosmetic structural allowances and site
preparations with associated rear parking area would introduce the possibility of the
area’s becoming a very lucrative office/industrial center.
The estimate for work to be performed in the renovation phase is $150,000.00.
Phase Two: The second phase of this project is to build a retirement community
which will become a state-of-the-art living environment for senior citizens.
32 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
JAMES JACKSON FELIX
4815 Canady Pond Drive, Melbourne, FL 33433
Mailing address: P.O. Box 444, Tampa, FL 33484
Bus: 333-3333 —— Home: 444-4444
__________________________________________________________________________________________
LICENSURES Current Florida HA & Developmental Disabled Administrator License
(02/03).
Current Florida General Contractor License (02/03).
Basic Emergency Medical Tech Course, Hillsborough Technical
Community College, Tampa, FL (09/01-12/01).
Electrical Installation and Maintenance, Polk Community College,
Winter Haven, FL (03/99-06/99).
Studied Business and Economics, University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL (01/97-05/97).
Tampa Industrial Training Center, Tampa, FL (06/94-08/94).
Have completed continuing education credits for Electrical Contractor,
and Bonding and Grounding classes to fulfill licensure requirements.
Continue to take fifteen hours of continuing education annually to
retain current license for Administrator of Health Facility.
Participated in numerous industry and trade association seminars and
workshops dealing with the evergrowing needs of the health care
industry.
EXPERIENCE ELECTRICAL CONTRACTING (part-time). (01/03-present). Various
jobs that required limited consideration. (See also attachment A labeled
“Confidential”).
ASSOCIATE. (12/01-01/03). Worked on various projects as an associate
with a number of electrical contract companies including SCANA
Electricity Co., South Florida Electricity, Co., and Piedmont Electricity
Co., as time permitted in conjunction with the development of C.R.H.
and the staff’s support.
ASSOCIATE DEVELOPER. (09/99-12/01). Developed a retirement
community along with other well known architects and engineers
including Justin Hanover of Hanover & Associates and Pete Norsworthy
PE.
PROJECT MANAGER. (03/97-09/99). While working with Kyle &
Odom International, procured and maintained industrial power
installations negotiating with engineering personnel of major oil
refineries and a chemical processing plant concerning various
alterations and new installations.
SUPERVISOR. (07/95-03/97). Supervised and installed electrical
systems in two wings of an already constructed hospital (Melbourne
Memorial) while working with E. L. Clapper Electric Company.
Installed electrical system in a newly constructed hospital (Xavier
Hospital) while working with Clarkston & Associates out of Melbourne,
Florida.
GENERAL
CONTRACTOR
Any time someone seeks a
loan, from a traditional
financing source such as a
bank, or from a group of
investors, the character
and expertise of the
individual requesting the
loan are of primary
importance. A part of this
business plan is the resume
of the individual who
possesses the knowledge of
the construction industry
as well as the retirement
community.
BUSINESS PLAN #6: Construction Loan Request
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 33
INDEPENDENT SUB-CONTRACTOR. (06/94-07/95). Provided
residential and commercial electrical contracting services performing
mainly service and repair work for major corporations such as IBM
and FL General Services Administration.
ASSOCIATE ENGINEERING TECHNICIAN. (10/92-06/94).
Inspected servicing electrical utilities companies around the state along
with complaint officer as part of the FL Utilities Commission; supported
utility staff engineer with rate increases to present to the commission.
ELECTRICIAN. (12/91-10/92). Installed different electrical systems
in an industrial waste water facility while employed with Elite
Electrical Co., St. Petersburg, FL.
ELECTRICIAN. (08/89-12/91). While employed with Amberwood
Electrical Co., Fort Pierce, FL installed a variety of electrical systems
in an entire shopping center.
CONSULTANTS The Fletcher Corporation, Tampa, FL.
ASSOCIATES Associated General Contractors of America
(Tentative) National Electrical Contractor’s Association
34 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Phase One: Physical Facilities: Construction Costs
Office and Warehouse Facility ( 50X25 )
This scope of work and cost analysis is for the completed renovation of said location
to the specifications of J.J. Felix, a small Electrical Contracting Firm. These renovations
would satisfy any small scale distribution store or commercial garage or facilitations.
1. Roofing System: ( Demolition )
A. Remove existing roofing system, all tin, and tar and material debris to
be disposed of _______________
2. Roofing System: ( Renovations )
A. North elevation’s graduation to be framed with 2" X 8" treated cap
1. Blocks to be concrete-filled every eight (8) feet with 12" anchor
bolts. _______________
2. 2" X 8" cap to be extended around the
building _______________
B. South elevation’s graduations to be leveled with 8" blocks to be concretefilled every eight (8) feet with 12" anchor bolts
_______________
C. Rear elevation to be framed with 2" X 4" studs from existing block wall
1. (Preferably solid-block wall up to new truss system
D. Truss system to be standard per specification with Sullivan’s Supply
Co. Representatives _______________
E. Plywood sheeting complete with asbestos shingles and aluminum storm
drain in its entry _______________
F. Roof structuring to overlap existing bathroom wall (walls to remain if
possible), new room structuring to join new overlapping roofing
structure _______________
TOTAL ROOF RENOVATION COST _______________
3. Existing Structure’s Renovations
A. All existing openings to be filled in with masonry units (cinder blocks).
1. Left front window to be replaced with masonry units and a 24"
X 44" metal-clad window. _______________
2.. Existing garage door to be filled in with masonry units and a
24" X 44" metal-clad window. _______________
3. South front entrance to be a standard three foot (3') metal door
and jam, primed and painted. _______________
4. South rear entrance to be standard garage
doors (two 10' X 10'). _______________
5. Rear entrance to be reframed where necessary and new (42")
metal door and jam installed (primed and painted) __________
TOTAL COST FOR STRUCTURE’S RENOVATION. ________________
4. Interior Renovations are to be applicable to the specification of the general
guidelines of facilitation of this structure.
A. Ceiling work: five hundred (500) sq. ft. of 2' X 4' ceiling tile
(Gen. Spec.) ______________
B. All walls bondexed and painted white _______________
C. Eighty (80) linear feet of 2" X 4" X 8' studded wall _____________
BUSINESS PLAN #6: Construction Loan Request
GENERAL
CONTRACTOR
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 35
D. Four standard 30" regular interior doors hung _______________
E. Floor System (prices include installation):
1. 500 sq. ft. floor leveling compound _______________
2. 18 sq. yds. graded comm. carpet _______________
3. 4 sq. yd. 12" X 12" comm. tile _______________
4. Warehouse flr. cleaned and painted. _______________
TOTAL INTERIOR RENOVATION COST _______________
5. Heating and Air Conditioning System: _______________
TOTAL COST OF HVA _______________
6. Electrical System:
A. Lighting _______________
B. Switches _______________
C. Twenty-five (25) duplex receptacles _______________
D. Service equipment 200 amps (30 ckt’s) Distribution
panel in conference room _______________
TOTAL FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEM. _______________
7. Security and Fire Alarm System
A. Three (3) smoke detectors. _______________
B. Two (2) five-pound ABC extinguishers _______________
C. All entrances to be announced _______________
D. Security system to be monitored by local dispatcher
(City of Melbourne) Sawyer’s Electric _______________
TOTAL COST OF ALARM SYSTEM _______________
8. Plumbing Repairs:
A. Existing laboratory facility to be removed and disposed of_______
B. New 20-gallon water heater (bthrm area) _______________
C. Install and furnish commode and sink _______________
TOTAL COST OF PLUMBING ALTERATIONS _______________
9. Exterior Surfacing:
A. Painting _______________
B. Oscillation System _______________
TOTAL SURFACING CONTRACT _______________
10. Landscaping:
A. All trees and bushes to remove and dispose of _______________
B. It is the owner’s contention and preference to do the necessary land
scaping in the rear area of 4817 and 4815-B to accommodate the drive
ways as well as the front yards of these locations.
TOTAL LANDSCAPING COST _______________
• All prices include labor and material unless otherwise specified.
TOTAL JOB COST _______________
JOB/OVERHEAD 10% _______________
JOB PROFIT 10%^ OF COST & O/H _______________
COMPLETED JOB COST ______________
36 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Phase Two: Development of Retirement Community
With respect to the proposed retirement community referred to as Addison
Retirement Homes (A.R.H.), the ultimate intention of the facility is to become a stateof- the- art retirement community. It will be a thirty-bed group home with four to seven
associated handicapped duplex apartments with community club house in a campus
setting. This area with its proximity to the broader community would allow for a
wholesome and graceful environment for the elderly in the community.
The retirement community has been a part of the American mindset now for the
past twenty years, and we have created various visions of structural environments in
which senior citizens may allow themselves the graceful opportunity of growing old. In
this proposed community environment, we have provided for disabled individuals.
Building a facility for the developmentally disabled is very similar to building a facility
for senior citizens. Ultimately, the key to making this facility a success is staffing and
administration.
We will seek governmental assistance in the administrative phase of this project.
In the ten years that I have been associated with the rest home industry we’ve seen
several satellite programs spun from the industry as viable alternatives. This is because
of the structural environment of the rest home/nursing home setting.
GENERAL
CONTRACTOR
BUSINESS PLAN #6: Construction Loan Request
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 37
Projection of overhead expenses and profits
These projections anticipate annual overhead expenses and profits.
$ 450.00..........................................Mortgage
 250.00..........................................Utilities, ltg’s, telephones, and advertisements
 158.00..........................................Office equipment
 200.00..........................................Insurance (facility)
 850.00..........................................Adm. Personnel
 1,908.00..........................................Monthly expenses
 1,538.00..........................................Mgr. Salary
$3,446.00..........................................Monthly overhead expenses x12
41,352.00..........................................Annual overhead expenses
{ 10% }...........................................Overhead expense applied to each job
$413,520.00......................................Given volume
 41,352.00......................................Annual overhead cost
$454,872.00......................................Required work volume to be secured annually
x10% ......................................... Anticipated profit margin applied to each job
 45,487.00........................................Projected profit earnings
$454,872.00..................................... Volume to maintain overhead
 +45,487.00.......................................Anticipated PROFITS
$500,359.00......................................This figure reflects the total dollar value of
work to be secured annually to maintain
overhead costs as well as anticipated profit
margins.
All property hereafter mentioned as 4815 Canady Pond Drive owned totally by
J.J. Felix and S.T. Quinn. Two independent deeds identifying these properties accompany
this package: 4815 Canady Pond Drive, a 50’X25' cinder block building, and a proposed
office and warehouse of J.J. Felix & Co.
This page intentionally left blank 
BUSINESS PLANS #7, #8, #9, and #10:
Electrical Service Business Loan Request
Medical Supply Company
Franchise Application for a Convenience Store
Hair Salon, Request for Financing
Many people want to read this book because they wish to see examples of business plans
which were used to obtain loans.
Business plan #7 shows you a business plan which provides for the start-up of a business in
the entrepreneur’s spare time. This concise, relatively simple plan contains a simple balance sheet as well as a proposal for financing.
Business plan #8 is an executive summary pertaining to a medical supply company which
had aspirations to become a multi-billion dollar company one day.
Business plan #9 is a lengthier plan which was successful in helping an individual obtain a
franchise for a highly sought-after convenience store operation. The guidelines provided by
the convenience store chain for potential franchisees was extensive and detailed, and this
plan shows how one successful entrepreneur executed that plan.
Business plan #10 was used to obtain financing for a dynamic and progressive new hair
salon.
40 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
COMPANY
This is a business plan
for an electrical company
based in Illinois.
Yarboro Electrical Service Company
Business Plan
I. Form of Organization: Sole proprietorship. To provide industrial installations,
commercial and family dwellings with electrical installation and maintenance.
II. Objectives:
Personal: The development of a business which will become a full-time
occupation for myself once I have retired from my current employer, just one
year from now. I will work part-time while I establish the business.
Business: To organize a business for the primary purpose of profit and growth.
The continued growth of the company will be insured through the reinvestment
of all profits after set salary has been paid to myself.
III. Desired Market
Due to the continued growth of industry within the state of Illinois as well as in
the Decatur area for a home base, all indicators point to a large demand for
electrical contractors. There is still a growing pattern of single-family and multifamily units within the Decatur and Tatum county area. Existing units as to
repair and maintenance would also be included in said market.
IV. Competition
Will include all electrical contractors within the state of Illinois. The competition
most close at hand will be in the Decatur area where there are as many as 180
registered electrical contractors. Only 60 of these contractors are listed by the
yellow pages. The companies registered in the yellow pages in Tatum County
are from the eastern side of the county only.
V. Market Stability
Due to new construction and existing units within Decatur and Tatum County
as well as the entire state of Illinois there is no limit to business to be generated.
Many single-family dwellers are adding on additional rooms to their homes
which will also need wiring. Daily homeowners have electrical problems that
are too small for the larger electrical companies to realize a profit from.
VI. Personnel
The staff will include myself on a full-time basis with the help of one part-time
helper. The helper is a close friend who is not interested in full-time employment.
Other staff will be added according to need for each individual job. The market
for such short-term helpers is plentiful due to numerous graduates from the
Richland Community College who are looking for work. Many trained retired
military persons live in the Decatur area that are seeking part-time employment.
Physical Qualifications: Have good general physical health being able to lift
50 pounds. All workers should be able to stoop, bend, and crawl. They must be
able to work in small limited areas such as attics and crawl spaces which may
have intense heat at times.
Technical Qualifications: The basics of electrical installation and repairs
must be known. They should have necessary personal electrical tools. The use
of electrical hand tools and bender must be known. Each helper must have a
valid driver’s license.
BUSINESS PLAN #7: Electrical Business Loan Request
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 41
VII. Location
The company will begin in an office that I will set up on my home. All heavy
equipment used in installation will be stored in my garage. My wife will keep
the books for me and take care of all correspondence.
VIII.Zoning
There will be $350,000.00 liable insurance carried on my business. The city of
Decatur requires that my company have a bond of $10,000.00. A Illinois Electrical
Contractors license and permit will be held by the company.
IX. Capital Needs
Capital needs include the following:
Cash 6,600.00
Equipment Expense 2,500.00
Supplies Expense 2,300.00
Salaries Expense 1,600.00
Advertising Expense 1,600.00
Miscellaneous Expense 1,000.00
30,000.00
X. Traffic
My customers will be gained through advertising (newspapers, flyers, and yellow
pages) as well as satisfied customers and word of mouth.
Supplemental Information
1. Geographic Boundaries
Business will be concentrated in the Decatur, Tatum County, Illinois areas.
2. Source of Supplies and Equipment
Supplies for the company will come from the numerous electrical supply
distributors in the Tatum County, Illinois area. A limited amount of supplies
will be stored at the business location. When jobs require additional supplies,
they will be purchased as needed. With the expansion of the company growth
in equipment will incur.
3. Labor Pool
The employees for the company will come predominately from Richland
Community College graduates. All workers will begin on a part-time basis and
as the business grows they will become full-time employees.
4. Legal Requirement
Self (Owner): An Illinois Electrical Contractor license, Illinois Privilege Permit.
Bonding for Decatur City limits and trucker drivers class C license.
Other Employees: Truck driver licensed; qualified electricians.
5. Promotion
Advertising: The local phone book and newspaper will carry the company ad.
Ads will be placed on an annual basis. Other Promotions: Flyer handouts and
feedback, and word of mouth from satisfied customers.
6. Optional Business Area of Expansion
Illinois issues an unlimited Electrical Contractors License which will allow the
company to expand into the states of Missouri, Kentucky, and Indiana. This
will leave the door open for future expansion.
42 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Initial Requirements for First-Year Operations
Cash: 6,600.00
Equipment:
1 ea. truck 1/4 ton pickup (used) 1,200.00
Hand tools (electrical) 300.00
Benders (used) 500.00
Power tools (used) 500.00
 9,100.00
Supplies: 2,300.00
 11,400.00
Salaries: 16,000.00
 27,400.00
Advertising:
Newspaper ads 1,000.00
Telephone Directory ads 300.00
Flyers, Publications, and Mailings 300.00
 29,000.00
Miscellaneous:
Insurance and Bonding 500.00
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #7: Electrical Business Loan Request
Repairs, etc. 500.00
Total Investment Required: 30,000.00
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 43
Balance Sheet
December 1, 2002
Assets:
Cash $ 6,600.00
Real Estate (Residential) 80,000.00
Land 35,000.00
Deposits (savings) 20,000.00
Vehicles: two (car - truck) 25,000.00
$166,600.00
Liabilities:
Mortgage payable 83,000.00
Owner Capital:
Net Worth 83,600.00
Total Liabilities and Capital $166,600.00
44 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
U.S. expenditures on drugs and other medical nondurables approached $100 billion in
2002, and spending on medical devices such as wheelchairs, eyeglasses, and hearing
aids was about $16 billion. Worldwide drug sales are rising at a rate of 8%-10% a year,
and medical device sales at 7% a year. In the international marketplace, U.S. firms
account for more than 40% of the $120 billion market for medical devices and more than
30% of the $265 billion pharmaceutical market. Medical products is indeed a huge and
lucrative business.
Harrington Medical Technologies, Inc. (HMT, Inc.) is a Georgia corporation engaged in
the research, design, engineering, clinical trial, field testing, manufacturing, marketing,
sale, and distribution of primarily medical products. Our business is divided into four
divisions.
SUPPLY DIVISION: Every so often a product or design philosophy comes along which
revolutionizes an industry. As the innovator, pioneer, and leader in the area of medical
supplies technology, we have the potential to absolutely transform the structure and
methods of the medical supply industry worldwide. HMT’s products can dramatically
improve the quality of life for millions of patients throughout the world. The ingenuity,
diversity, and marketability of our ideas and product lines have a unique history of
growth.
HMT is much more than a stand-alone product company. We are a “system” company.
We think in terms of systems and we design fully integrated systems to solve medical
problems. We look at how the human body works, how biomedical and biomechanical
systems function in the body, and how we can replicate them. We support the products
we develop with defining medical and clinical models. Applying a computer analogy, we
are both a “hardware” and a “software” company. Our medical models are the software
which clinically support the hardware of all our medical devices.
In June 2002, a humanitarian mission to Haiti successfully deployed $1.5 million dollars
worth of wheelchairs, glasses, hearing aids, and other much needed medical supplies.
HMT’s systems are the only functional devices which can be deployed cost-effectively in
great quantity to the less fortunate people of this world, and as such, has already
generated tremendous interest as a potential solution to many worldwide problems.
MEDICAL DIVISION: While our Supply Division is already generating sales and
attracting national and international attention, we believe that our Medical Division
could possess even greater worldwide market potential. Our Medical Division includes
four groups:
• Medical Equipment Group: Two cutting edge medical device innovations will lead
the success of the Medical Equipment Group.
Human Spectrometer: We own exclusive manufacturing and marketing rights for
a sophisticated physician-designed human spectrometer which accurately measures
individual performance against individual potential. This is the first time in history
that a device of this type has been constructed. Currently in the refinement and
clinical testing phase, we are developing a relationship with a major international
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
for a medical supply
corporation
in Georgia. This
executive summary does
not mention money or
investment costs. It is
simply intended to
generate interest and
stimulate discussion so
that financial
negotiations can be
pursued at a later date.
BUSINESS PLAN #8: Medical Supply Company
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 45
university and technological institute to further explore the multiple application
parameters of the device.
Diagnostic X-ray Device: We are in the design stage of a revolutionary diagnostic
x-ray device for brain cancer screening.
• Clinical Group: We develop biomedical and biomechanical models which support
our technological designs and systems. We are currently defining the grant model
and the research parameters for a jointly developed Harvard University’s School of
Medical Sciences grant with the Director of the Living Laboratory and the Medical
University of Berlin, Germany. We have written a model for a clinical study on
phantom pain and phantom sensation. Data will be compiled by a full clinical team
as part of an upcoming major humanitarian mission to Colombia supported by HMT,
Inc.
• Pharmaceuticals Group: We are in negotiations for exclusive licensing rights to a
treatment protocol to combat several of the deadliest forms of cancer; the protocol is
currently in the clinical trial stage.
• Medical Supplies Group: We currently have patents pending in the wound care
area.
TEXTILE DIVISION: We have several copyrighted designs in the adaptive clothing
field.
CONSUMER DIVISION: We have one consumer product patent pending and other
products in the design stage.
This Executive Summary should not be construed in any way as a solicitation to invest.
It is intended solely as an overview of our philosophy, values, goals, and objectives.
Questions should be directed to HMT at 888-888-8888.
46 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Date
Exact Name of Person
Title or Position
Name of Company
Address (number and street)
Address (city, state, and ZIP)
Dear Exact Name of Person (or Dear Sir or Madam if answering a blind ad):
Attached is my business plan for Circle K. After reviewing my plan, you will, I
am sure, realize that the potential for such a business is good.
To start my venture, I will need a loan of $85,000. I am sure you will also agree
that my military background and management knowledge will ensure the success of
this venture.
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call me. Thank you for your
consideration. I look forward to hearing from you shortly.
Sincerely,
Wesley Hamilton
FRANCHISE
This is a business
plan for a Circle K
convenience store. The
convenience store provides
extensive paperwork which
gives details about the
business plan which must
be submitted in order to
apply for a franchise. This
individual was successful in
obtaining a franchise.
PLAN #9: Franchise application, convenience store
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 47
BUSINESS PLAN
I. PRIORITIES
The Circle K Store will offer high quality take-out foods, beverages, candies, dairy
products, specialty items, and nonfood merchandise at moderate prices compared to
the convenience retailing market. In order be successful in operating a Circle K, I
believe the following five priorities are critical:
• Management control: First in importance, I believe, is the necessity for the
owner-operator to exert strong control over personnel and finances. My
background is ideally suited to this priority, as I have distinguished myself as a
leader and manager as a noncommissioned officer in the U.S. Army. I have
become adept at using automated technology to account for inventory and
equipment, and I have also become skilled at managing personnel and motivating
them to achieve maximum efficiency. It is my belief that the four following
priorities are a subset of managerial competence and managerial control.
• Extended hours: The owner recognizes that extended hour convenience stores
emphasize convenience to the customer and provide high quality takeout foods
and nonfood merchandise. This is a priority, and it takes a well-oiled machine
to achieve this priority. Consumers must be able to count on the Circle K being
open at all times at the advertised hours so that the convenience factor—a
great motivating reason for frequenting the Circle K—is something the consumer
can rely on.
• Local service and local image: It is anticipated that the great majority of
customers who will patronize the establishment will be from local neighborhoods
and individuals using the heavily traveled Ellison Road, Highway 56, and Butler
Street. These customers are mostly individuals traveling east and west bound
on Ellison Road going to and from work in a heavily populated area. I believe it
is important that the local Circle K be perceived of as a “good citizen” in the
community. The Circle K tends to become a mainstay and a well-known site in
the community. It must be maintained in a clean and respectable fashion at all
times so that it is always an attraction and never an eyesore.
• Employee training: Although I do not underestimate the difficulties of staffing
and retaining good personnel at the lower-level wage scale which must be paid
within a Circle K structure, I am excited about the challenge of recruiting and
training good quality employees. I am an experienced trainer and motivator,
and I will aggressively tackle the challenge of finding the best employees and
training them to do their jobs in an outstanding fashion with “Outstanding
Customer Service At All Times” as our first priority. I intend to attempt to
attract quality individuals from the local neighborhood to work within the quality
organization I intend to build, as I feel that many people could derive job
satisfaction from having a job they enjoy at close proximity to their home.
• Quality stock selection and skillful inventory control: In a relatively small
store, I believe it is of critical importance to make sure that the consumer finds
the merchandise he or she is looking for when they come to shop. For that
reason, I intend to perform extensive research of other area convenience stores
48 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
to assess their inventory selection policies, and I will also thrive on the training
provided by the Circle K Corporation. However, I feel there is no substitute for
listening to the customer, and for that reason I intend to maintain a “consumer
suggestion box” near the front cash register so that consumers can always make
suggestions about items they would like to see carried in the store, changes in
policy or hours they would like to see, or other alterations which consumers feel
would make their neighborhood Circle K more convenient for them.
“Convenience” is the name of the game, I believe in the convenience retailing
business, so I intend to keep my thumb on the pulse of the consumer and make
sure that consumers know they can make their ideas, suggestions, and problems
known to management at any time!
II. CUSTOMER RELATIONS
As stated previously, “Outstanding Customer Service At All Times” will be the
motto of the Circle K I manage, and I feel it is customer service which will keep a
customer coming back time and time again when he has the choice of patronizing
other similar establishments. The great majority of customers will come from the
neighborhood areas, main thoroughfares, and nearby shopping centers. The store
will attract lunchtime customers, early shoppers, weekend, and holiday customers
and customers who may need only a few items.
• The primary marketing objective for the Circle K is to gain maximum market
share of the area neighborhoods as well as the travelers going both west and
east on Ellison Road. These travelers are primarily area employees and those
driving long distances, and their primary vehicle is the automobile. It is expected
that the average number of passengers per vehicle will be two. There will be
some seasonality to the business in view of the much heavier traffic that is
expected on the interstate during the winter months. However, our main
concentration will be on becoming a positive influence in the community and in
“courting” the “locals” who will be the “bread and butter” of our business.
• A second marketing objective will be to gain repeat business from those who
patronize the Circle K for the first time as well as to gain customers through
word of mouth advertising from first-time users. This will be done by serving
high quality products in pleasant surroundings and a clean comfortable
atmosphere.
A. I plan to provide the service in my store which will meet the needs and
wants of customers through a strong employee training and development
program. Because of my background as a manager and trainer in the U.S. Army, I
am professionally equipped to training employees to aim for the highest standards of
customer service, and I will at all times model the behavior which I expect my
employees to demonstrate.
B. While advancing ahead of my peers to leadership positions in military
service, I have become aware of the importance of effective communications.
I will train employees in the “big picture” of customer service as well as in the minute
details of handling instore traffic. For example, research has shown that people who
smile at others are perceived of as more intelligent than those who do not smile. I
will make the details of customer service—such as making eye contact, and providing
“service with a smile”—standard ingredients and “the common denominator” of my
store’s customer service policy. Employees relate to customers through body language
BUSINESS PLAN USED
AS AN APPLICATION
TO OBTAIN A
FRANCHISE
FOR A CONVENIENCE
STORE:
Financing sought:
$85,000.
PLAN #9: Franchise application, convenience store
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 49
as well as through verbal communication, and I will make sure that employees know
that their future advance and bonuses are dependent on their maintaining outstanding
customer service. One thing the military has taught me, however, is that people are
not always born knowing the right thing to do; they have to be trained and often
retrained. I will relentlessly train and retrain my employees to achieve the highest
standards of effective communication. Furthermore, as stated previously, I will
maintain a Customer Suggestion Box and will encourage customers to communicate
with management about any store policies or personnel which led to an unusual
amount of satisfaction or dissatisfaction.
C. First appearance is critically important in merchandising, and one of
the first priorities appearance-wise is to maintain an outstanding sanitary
rating and the highest standards of cleanliness. “Cleanliness is next to
godliness,” they say, and while in military service I have been trained to achieve
exceptionally high standards of orderliness and cleanliness. A neat, clean store would
not only be a pleasure for an customer to visit but it would be a pleasure for an
employee to work in such a place. So I believe the first key to presenting a good store
image is to maintain the highest standards of cleanliness and orderliness.
III.STORE STAFFING AND SCHEDULING
In the area of store staffing and scheduling—a critical ingredient of success—I feel I
am exceptionally well qualified to establish and manage a business which depends
upon quality staffing and scheduling of employees. Although I do not underestimate
the difficulties of staffing and retaining good personnel at the lower-level wage scale
which must be paid within a Circle K structure, I am excited about the challenge of
recruiting and training good quality employees. I am an experienced trainer and
motivator, and I will aggressively tackle the challenge of finding the best employees
and training them to do their jobs in an outstanding fashion with “Outstanding
Customer Service At All Times” as our first priority.
I intend to attempt to attract quality individuals from the local neighborhood to
work within the quality organization I intend to build, as I feel that many people
could derive job satisfaction from having a job they enjoy at close proximity to their
home. Studies have shown that, when people are asked about what motivates them
at work, they do not mention money first, but they say that they need enough
equipment to get their job done, and they say that they want to feel appreciated.
With those research findings in mind, and with my 10 years of experience as a middle
manager in the U.S. Army constantly training and managing employees, I am
confident that I can attract and retain the most qualified employees who will be a
credit to the Circle K corporation as well as to the local community.
The competition to my Circle K store will come from the local Ellison Road Shopping
Center which has four eating establishments which are located near the Circle K,
and I believe we can compete aggressively with our competitors because of the
professional store staffing and scheduling policies which I will implement and control.
50 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
IV.STORE BUDGET
Please see projected store budget.
V. PERSONAL STATEMENT OF INCOME AND EXPENSES
It is the objective to operate the business with a minimal first year loss and have an
operating profit by the first quarter of the second year of operation. The principal
will pay himself a minimum salary so as to not imperil the cash flow of the business.
Please see attached sheets for detailed discussion of my personal statement of income
and expenses.
VI.CONCLUSION
In conclusion, I believe I am well qualified to enter into a franchise relationship with
Circle K, and I believe I possess many qualifications which will make me an effective
franchisee. My 10 years of military service as a middle manager has helped me gain
experience in managing and motivating people as well as in solving problems, making
decisions, utilizing automated systems for accountability and control, and serving
customers. I see the proposed franchise relationship as a mutually beneficial one in
which I am trained to do things “the Circle K way” and then I in turn become “the
voice and face” of the Circle K corporation to the common man in the street who
visits the store. I believe Circle K must be very careful indeed about choosing its
franchisees because it is we franchisees who shape the consumer’s opinions of the
overall organization. As a franchisee, it would be my goal to make a career out of my
relationship with Circle K, and I believe the Circle K corporation would do well to
seek franchisees who have a very long-term orientation such as I do. My outstanding
personal character, my 10 years of management experience in supervising people
and organizing activities, and my strong personal qualities of initiative and
perseverance all make me an outstanding choice for a Circle K franchisee, and I
believe strongly that Circle K should franchise this store to me because of the
outstanding bottom-line results and impressive customer satisfaction levels which
would be produced through my commitment and management skill.
VI.WHO AM I?
In order to introduce myself and my strong qualifications for becoming a franchisee,
wish to provide a brief summary of my background through the enclosed resume.
Furthermore, I am providing a couple of “testimonials” regarding my character and
skills in the form of two letters of recommendation and reference which are also
shown in this section.
VII.MAP OF THE AREA SHOWING THE DESIRED LOCATION OF CIRCLE K
The town boasts several institutions of higher learning and, indeed, the site of the
Circle K which I propose is nestled within the University of Colorado grounds. The
business would be located near Dowling Street. The business would be in an upscale,
fashionable neighborhood with a clientele accustomed to requiring the services of an
excellent convenience store.
The competition to my Circle K store will come from the local Ellison Road Shopping
Center which has four eating establishments which are located near the Circle K,
and I believe we can compete aggressively with our competitors because of the
professional store staffing and scheduling policies which I will implement and control.
PLAN #9: Franchise application, convenience store
BUSINESS PLAN USED
AS AN APPLICATION TO
OBTAIN A
FRANCHISE
FOR A CONVENIENCE
STORE
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 51
POSTSCRIPT: PERTINENT FACTS ABOUT GOLDEN:
Expected to see its population grow to 40,817 in the year 2004, Golden is in Central
Colorado about 110 miles southwest of Denver; 70 miles west of Greely. It is in Gilpin
County, which is bordered by Brookvale, Evergreen, Morrison, Indian Hills, and
Englewood. The city of Golden covers 10.8 square miles.
The city is considered an upscale area with a wide variety of cultural and social activities
available. The climate of Golden, CO is modified continental with mild winters and
humid summers, with average temperatures of 37 degrees December through February
and 75 degrees June through August.
Because the site of the Circle K is within the community of the University of Colorado,
I anticipate being able to draw from the pool of students as part of my labor supply.
STORE BUDGET
After evaluating the past performances, I have investigated each item line-by-line and
determined that historical growth has occurred at 16 percent over the last 12 months.
However, for purposes of this analysis, the growth rate was held to 3 percent. The actual
year-to-year growth rate varies in accordance with decline and flow of the local economy.
The 2000-02 year shows an actual moderate increase in sale and gross profit dollars.
SALES
While sales levels have risen moderately, much can be attributed to the change in
management. Initially the original franchisee was rather successful. The predecessor
was not as successful in the development of the business Historical growth has shown a
continued and steady 3 percent increase in merchandise sales each year. I have based
my projections on the assumption that the trend will continue.
GROSS PROFIT PERCENT AND DOLLARS
For the past 12 months of 2001 the gross profit percent and dollars were 16 percent
higher than the comparable months of 2000. My projections are based on inventory
controls. I have based my projections on achieving a 3 percent increase.
PAYROLL AND PAYROLL ITEMS
The payroll and payroll taxes will not vary sufficiently from season to season. It will not
necessarily impact the payroll. The payroll will normally be the same during slow months.
If I wish to maintain the same gross profit margin, I must cut hours.
Example: Let’s assume the months of May, June, and July average sales of $90,000.00.
Let’s also assume that the months of October, November, and December average sales
of $80,000. Based on the average sales, there is a 12 percent decrease in merchandise
sales during the slower period. It will be necessary to curtail the number of personnel
hours and not the payroll. Assuming that there are 265 total hours per month, one must
curtail 12 percent of hours.
52 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
INVENTORY VARIATION
I anticipate that I will be able to sustain a minimum gross profit margin of 39 percent.
I will seek to sustain this level through management of the inventory sourcing. The
establishment of the opening inventory levels is a key issue which a new franchisee
faces. The franchisee must balance the need for the broad selection of products with the
capital needed to pay for the inventory. Careful attention must be paid to the selection
of the products as cash flow will be restricted if too much start-up capital is incorrectly
spent on slower moving products.
The computerized inventory tracking system will support this strategy by allowing me
to monitor inventory levels, track sales levels, and project the need to reorder stock on
a daily basis.
FINANCING SOUGHT
I am seeking to secure financing of an $85,000 loan. The $85,000 loan would be for
seven years and the money will be repaid from the proceeds of the Circle K located on
9374 Ellison Road. The $85,000 will be spent on beginning inventory, franchise fee,
good will fee, cash register fund, licenses, permits, bonds, and working capital for the
first three months.
I anticipate that I will be able to sustain a minimum gross profit margin of 30% to 35%.
I will seek to maintain this level through management of the inventory. I will contribute
$70,000 cash during the start-up phase.
The working capital will enable the franchise to meet current expenses, offset any possible
negative cash flow in the beginning, and ensure growth of the business.
APPLICATION AND EXPECTED EFFECT ON BUSINESS LOAN
The $85,000 loan will be used as follows:
Use of Funds $
Initial Franchise Fee $50,000
Down Payment on Opening Inventory $18,000
Good Will Payment $60,000
Cash Register Fund $ 1,000
Licenses, Permits, and Bonds $ 1,000
Working capital (reserved, not disbursed)
 for the first three months: $10,000
________
140,000
Minimum cash on hand $15,000
Total Use of Funds 155,000
Personal Contribution 70,000
________
LOAN NEEDED $85,000
PLAN #9: Franchise application, convenience store
BUSINESS PLAN USED AS
AN APPLICATION TO
OBTAIN A
FRANCHISE
FOR A CONVENIENCE
STORE
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 53
FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS
The following projections are based on past performances:
• Most conservative projection of $1,046,282/year in sales is based on 364 days/year.
• Most optimistic projection of $1,015,808/year in sales is based on 364 days/year.
• Labor costs are based on prevailing wages for necessary employees. Hours and duties
based on similar operation. Current government tax rates and insurance quotes are
the basis for the payroll taxes and benefit package.
• Growth in sales is figured to sustain 2% - 3% per year.
LOAN REPAYMENT
A loan was requested for $85,000 with a monthly payment plan of $1,367.57. The
amortization is 7 years. The interest rate requested is 9.0%. The first payment should
be due 60 days from closing to allow Purchaser to be certified by Circle K as a Franchisee
and take possession of the Circle K convenience store.
54 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
REQUEST FOR FINANCING
NEW IMAGE, INC.
New Image, Inc. is requesting a loan for $65,000 to finance its new salon, which
has an opening date slated for March 15, 2004.
SALON SIZE AND TYPE
The salon is designed to accommodate 12 to 24 hairstylists at full capacity. The
salon will open with two to five stylists, and should reach full-stylist status within two
to five years after opening. The salon will occupy a spacious 3,000 square-foot freestanding
building in a high-traffic area with very much exposure at the corner of Wilshire Drive
and Roxdale Boulevard, across from the Howard Johnson Hotel. The salon is in the
middle of a small cove of restaurants and shares the community parking area. It is
easily accessible for the clients of Howard Johnson. The location is leased from Dr.
Phillip Evanston, Piermont Medical Center, Frankfort, KY.
Other salons located within a three-mile radius are single-person salons and booth
rentals. We do not view these salons as direct competition; in fact, we see them as an
asset in that clients will now have the option for an updated full-service salon with a
strong business structure that is quality service oriented. Many of these salons have
not been renovated in several years and are in poor condition. The stylists have had few
training updates and many customers are only receiving basic haircare services. We
feel the proposed salon both creates a need and fills a void in the community where
haircare options and spa services are concerned.
The primary goal of the salon is to provide men, women, and children of all ages
with a full-service haircare package (including shampoo, conditioning, haircutting, and
chemical services) plus other salon services (makeup, skin care, body waxing, body
treatments, massage, manicures and/or pedicures). All salon services are designed to
meet the needs of fashion-conscious individuals desiring a complete line of quality services
at moderate prices.
SALON PRICING STRUCTURE
The salon services will be moderately priced, with haircuts ranging from $15 to
$28, depending on the pay rate of the particular stylist (see EMPLOYEE PAY/BENEFIT
PACKAGE). Chemical services will range from $45 to $80 for color services — depending
on the type of service done and time needed to complete it. Other salon services are
based on a per application cost, i.e. one skin care/makeup session will range in cost from
$25 to $50 and one full-body massage $45.
THREE-YEAR PROJECTIONS
According to the preceding SALON PRICING STRUCTURE, we estimate the
salon’s income and expense figures for the first three years of operation according to the
chart shown as APPENDIX A.
HAIR SALON,
 REQUEST FOR
FINANCING
for a full-service
organization which
includes a spa
located in Kentucky.
Amount of financing
sought: $65,000.
BUSINESS PLAN #10: Hair Salon, Request for Financing
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 55
EMPLOYEE PAY/BENEFIT PACKAGE
Services Sales up to $600/week $4.25-$4.50/hour
Services Sales from $600-$700/week $4.50-$5.50/hour
Services Sales from $700-$800/week $5.50-$6.75/hour
Services Sales from $800-$900/week $6.75-$8.00/hour
Services Sales over $900/week $8.00-$9.25/hour
Staff is eligible for one week paid vacation after one year of service, two weeks
after three years of service. Paid holidays are New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July 4th,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Health insurance and a retirement
program will go into effect one year after date of employment, the cost of which will be
shared between employees and the salon.
THE STATE OF THE INDUSTRY
In a time when a large portion of the population is becoming more and more
concerned with health and appearance combined with an increase in dual income families,
the salon industry finds itself faced with unique possibilities. The health-conscious
working male and female population requires salons that fit their image and lifestyle.
Customers are demanding services and products that allow them to look equally good
at board meetings and on the tennis court, in group advertising meetings and at the
gym, at the theater and at the beach. These dual income families require extended
hours, a variety of services, and the convenience of purchasing all body and beauty care
items and services in one location. The majority of these families are willing to pay
moderate to high prices but expect quality service.
Our salon is aware of the unique needs of today’s customers. The salon is designed
to meet these needs with evening and weekend hours, an extensive service menu, a
variety of professional haircare products, and quality staff to bring it all together.
DEMOGRAPHICS
The salon will be located in a city with a population of 75,700 and a county with a
population of 279,995, contained within approximately 417.7 square miles. The median
household buying income is $26,590 for Franklin County. Ninety percent (90%) of the
existing clientele of our business has an effective buying income of $27,000 to more than
$50,000 a year. The median age of our clientele is 37 years old, with the average age of
the population falling in the 22 to 62-year group. Average years of schooling completed
is 16.
Population experts estimate increases in both total population and income over
the next 10 years. The salon is geared to appeal to customers in the 22 to 62-year age
group with a sophisticated and upbeat decor plan. The services and products that will
be available are designed to satisfy the most discriminating older customer as well as
cater to the younger clients and their ever changing fashion needs (see STAFF
TRAINING).
There are numerous large companies in the area that each employ over 500 persons.
They include Franklin County Medical Center, U-Haul Moving and Storage Company,
56 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
and HONDA, just to name four. Franklin County and many other medical groups are
located within less than a half-mile radius of the salon. The Howard Johnson Hotel is
right next to the salon location. We expect to promote the salon to all these organizations
through special offers and incentives.
STAFF TRAINING
The first persons to be hired will be the salon apprentices. Information provided
to the salon industry proves that a stylist may double her service income by the use of
an effectively trained apprentice. The owner has training experience with both large
and small groups and has the ability to effectively evaluate the staff and communicate
their weaknesses to them. As the trainer/manager, the owner will work directly as part
of the management group so that the entire salon is updated regularly on the current
trends, techniques, and product uses available.
All staff members will undergo an intensive four-week training period prior to the
grand opening, and will be on “probation” for the first 60 days after the grand opening.
During that time they will undergo further training in customer handling (as per the
customer handling system recommended by the salon), technical training, and retail
sales training. At the end of 90 days, all staff members will either be fully prepared to
meet any and all needs of salon customers or they will be given further training or
replaced at the discretion of the management team. The ultimate goal of training must
be to increase the likelihood that the customer will be satisfied enough with services
received to not only return, but to recommend the salon to friends.
MANAGEMENT
The salon owners will take on the duties as managers and salon trainers and, as
sales increase, a receptionist will be hired. All staff members will be given job descriptions
prior to beginning work. The salon policy and procedure manual will be reviewed with
the group on the first day of employment. Corrective action procedures as well as daily
salon procedures that are the responsibility of each employee will also be reviewed and
the employee will be asked to sign a form stating that the information has been reviewed
and understood.
ADVERTISING AND GRAND OPENING
We expect to utilize an intensive and ongoing advertising plan that will include
gift-with-purchase, multiple purchase packages, referral and frequent visit packages,
and more for our customers. By working with our distributors, we believe we can put
together promotions that are effective in bringing in new customers without having to
discount prices. We will be utilizing a Merchandising, Advertising, and Promotions Kit
(MAP KIT) which contains many camera-ready ads, station banners, and point-ofpurchase materials. We expect to maintain an aggressive marketing plan which will
include at least 12 promotions annually and will coincide with in-salon training, contests,
and employee incentive programs designed to enhance the promotions.
Grand Opening advertising will go into effect three to four weeks after the salon
has opened. Our research tells us that the most effective grand opening plans include
gifts for the customer, a drawing, and special values for returning customers. We plan a
drawing for a weekend getaway to the La Vida Spa. We will take out an ad in the local
paper promoting the drawing and do direct mailings and have flyers made to be handHAIR SALON EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
BUSINESS PLAN #10: Hair Salon, Request for Financing
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 57
delivered (by employees) around the community to large businesses. Secondary prizes
will include various free services and miscellaneous haircare tools and products. Grand
Opening week will also include discount days such as Men’s Day, Women’s Day, Senior’s
Day, and Children’s Day, at which time anyone fitting the necessary criteria for the day
will receive a 10% discount on all salon products and services.
OWNER PROFILE
With 14 years in the industry, owner/manager Carol Manigault will bring strong
customer-service experience and staff leadership to the salon. She has been chosen as a
technical educator with the Lancome Corporation during her career, as well as attending
numerous advanced training classes to fine-tune her craft.
Her partner and spouse, Harris Broswell, has worked with their business for the
last six years and will add strength in both sales and management functions of the
salon.
We feel our desire for and dedication to quality in service will be a welcome addition
for all community members. We expect the same standard of service from our staff
members and we will place a major focus on employee training, which we will promote
through consistent and innovative advertising campaigns.
SUMMARY
We believe our proposed salon will come to be known as one of the most innovative
and respected in the city. We will be offering services and products in conjunction with
a professional customer handling system that can usually only be found in much larger
cities at a much higher cost. Our goal is to give all customers more than they expect in
terms of quality service at less than they might expect to pay.
Our training and operational systems are modeled after the most effective in the
industry. High-quality systems and computerization will allow the salon to run at
maximum efficiency and we project strong growth figures in the upcoming years.
58 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
APPENDIX A
YEAR 1 YEAR 2 YEAR 3
Sales
Haircare $115,000 $138,000 $165,600
Retail Products 63,000 75,600 90,720
Spa Services 25,000 30,000 36,000
Total Sales $203,000 $243,600 $292,320
Cost of Goods Sold
Stylist Salaries $ 39,200 $ 48,800 $ 58,400
Administrative Salaries 14,000 14,000 14,000
Payroll Taxes 10,640 12,560 14,480
Supplies - Backbar 11,200 13,440 16,128
Merchandise Retail 31,500 37,800 45,360
Total Cost of Goods Sold $106,540 $126,600 $148,368
Gross Profit $ 96,460 $117,000 $143,952
Gross Profit Percentage 47.52% 48.02% 49.24%
Operating Expenses
Advertising $ 6,000 $ 7,000 $ 8,000
Bank Charges 600 600 600
Cash Over/Short 120 175 225
Dues and Subscriptions 275 325 400
Business Insurance 1,700 1,800 1,900
Employee Benefits 0 3,140 3,620
Miscellaneous 1,000 2,000 3,000
Office Expenses 3,000 3,500 4,000
Professional Fees 300 300 300
Rent 10,000 12,800 15,600
Repairs/Maintenance 200 300 400
Telephone 2,100 2,300 2,400
Training 2,000 2,000 3,000
Utilities 6,000 7,000 8,000
Total Operating Expenses $ 33,295 $ 43,240 $ 50,445
Profit from Operations $ 63,165 $ 73,760 $ 93,507
Other Expenses
Equipment Lease $ 9,517 $ 9,517 $ 9,517
Loan Payment 19,620 19,620 19,620
Equity Line 4,524 4,524 4,524
Total Other Expenses $ 33,661 $ 33,661 $ 33,661
Net Profit $ 29,504 $ 40,099 $ 59,846
HAIR SALON EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
BUSINESS PLAN #10: Hair Salon, Request for Financing
BUSINESS PLAN #11
Insurance Group Plan
You have already seen that the business plans in this book vary in length. Business
plan #11 is one of the lengthier plans in this book. It goes into great detail on the
industry background, current trends, other ways of doing business in the industry, and
other matters. If you are looking to develop a comprehensive business, this could be a
valuable model. Some of the sections in this business plan are these:
Industry overview and analysis
U.S. health industry overview
Insurance provider market
Regulations
Trends
Insurance Demand
Competitive Insurance Demand
Strategy
Target Markets
Development
Operations
Administrative Service Agreements
Management
Key Success Factors
60 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
VAN ROBINSON INSURANCE GROUP, INC.
CONFIDENTIAL BUSINESS PLAN
This Confidential Plan (the “Plan”) and its appendices are furnished to you by
Van Robinson Insurance Group, Inc. (the “Company”) on a confidential basis. The
information contained in this Business Plan has been prepared by Robinson. This Plan,
however, is not intended to provide the primary basis for any decision about, or
recommendation that any person participate in, a transaction with Van Robinson
Insurance Group.
The Business Plan has been prepared in three separate parts for ease of reading:
(i) Executive Summary,
(ii) Business Plan and
(iii) Financial Analysis and Projections
regarding the future prospects of Robinson. All three sections of the Business Plan
should be read in their entirety for a complete understanding of the Company, its business
and prospects.
The information concerning Robinson’s insurance business and prospects set forth
in the Business Plan is derived from publicly available information as well as material
furnished by Robinson and its management. All references to projected or anticipated
results are based on financial projections prepared by Robinson’s management. The
financial projections and forecasts included herein are based on numerous assumptions
made by management, and no assurances can be given that any such assumptions and
the resulting projections and forecasts will prove to be accurate. All forecasts and
proforma financial information are included for illustrative purposes only. It is impossible
to predict future operating results of Robinson with certainty, and no representation or
warranty is made that any particular financial results can or will be achieved. No
representations can be expressed or implied as to the attainability of any such forecast.
Robinson reserves the right to request the return of the Plan at any time. Any
reproduction or distribution of the Plan, in whole or in part, or the disclosure of any of
its contents, is prohibited without the expressed prior written consent of Robinson. The
recipient will promptly return this Plan and all material received in connection herewith
without retaining any copies should Robinson request such action.
Insurance Officers of Robinson are available to answer questions concerning the
company and will, upon request, make available such other information as might
reasonably be requested. This Plan is a working document and changes will be
incorporated as necessary to refine the plan. Updates are reflected by the date of change
on modified pages. Readers are encouraged to review all three sections of the Business
Plan and forward any questions and comments to: Van Robinson Insurance Group, Inc.,
6430 Wellington Avenue, Suite 206, Charleston, South Carolina 29409, ATTN: Joseph
O’Connell, or call us at 123-456-7890.
I. INDUSTRY OVERVIEW AND ANALYSIS
Over the last several years, the insurance coverage industry has been in the process
of significant evolution and reform. The scope of services needed by the integrated
INSURANCE COMPANY
This is a business plan
for a company that offers
health, dental, liability and
supplemental insurance.
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 61
insurance industry has expanded to include the negotiation of managed insurance,
coverage and self-funded contracts, the creation and operation of sophisticated
information systems, and a turn-key management service for managing agency offices.
Robinson believes that this climate of change presents a significant opportunity to expand
market share and profitability of the business.
A. U.S. HEALTH INSURANCE INDUSTRY
National insurance spending currently exceeds $1.5 trillion, with approximately
$400 billion directly attributable to medical, dental, physician liability, and supplemental
insurance policies. At this level, insurance coverage expenditures represent more than
13.6% of the gross domestic product (“GDP”). The Insurance Provider Financing
Administration forecasts that national coverage spending in 2001 was approximately
$1 trillion, with approximately $310 billion directly attributable to agency services.
Insurance agency expenditures continue to be the largest sector in the insurance coverage
industry with costs of approximately $400 billion, representing 40% of all provider
expenditures. The Medicaid and Medicare programs, which provide coverage services
for approximately 31 million and 35 million individuals in the United States, respectively,
are estimated to each have accounted for over $200 billion of Federal expenditures in
2001. Despite industry-wide cost containment pressures, the Board of National Insurance
Providers (“NIP”) expects that the industry will continue to grow 12% to 15% per year
both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of GDP and projects that by the year end
2000, expenditures in the United States could increase to as much as $1.4 trillion or
15% of GDP. These estimates assume that continued cost containment measures will
be more than offset by demands resulting from current demographic trends, such as the
aging of the population, growth in income, general inflation and new technology.
Health insurance in the United States historically has been delivered through a
fragmented system of providers, including individual or small groups of primary care
physicians and specialists. According to the American Medical Association (AMA),
approximately 625,000 physicians are actively involved in patient care in the United
States. A study by the AMA estimates that there are over 86,000 physicians practicing
in 3,600 multi-specialty group practices (three or more physicians) and over 82,000
physicians practicing in 12,700 single specialty group practices in the United States.
All of these factors contribute to the increased cost of insurance coverage.
B. INSURANCE PROVIDER MARKET
Group Practice Insurance
The concept of group practice is not new, providing the basis for such leading
nonprofit organizations as the P.A. Joel Clinic and the Carolina Medical Clinic. The
environment in which they operate is what makes the new generation of group practices
different. The growth of managed coverage and capitated plans, the resource-based
relative value scale (RBVRS) payment system, and a growing demand for complex
outpatient services are the driving forces behind the growth of physician groups. A
study by the American Medical Association (AMA) estimates that there are 16,576 group
practices (defined as three or more formally organized physicians) in the United States,
with a mean number of 11.5 physicians per group. The number of physicians in the
groups ranges from three to more than 3,000 with 189 groups reporting 100 or more
physicians. However, most groups tend to be small, with 45 percent having three or four
62 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
physicians. Multi-specialty insurance groups tend to be larger than single specialty
groups, and their average size is 24.6. The proportion of non-federal physicians in group
practices grew from 10.6 percent to 33 percent.
FIGURE 1
INSURANCE GROUP MANAGEMENT
(Dollars in Billions)
Growth Rate 2002 2004
Total Health Insurance Expenditures $904 $1,500
7.5%
Percentage of Expenditures for Physician Services 18.5% 18.5%
Physician Service Expenditures $167.2 $277.5
7.5%
Percentage of Non-Federal Physicians
(Insurance Group Providers) 33.0% 56.0%
Insurance Group Revenues $55.2 $155.4
15.9%
Mean Percentage Net Practice Revenues 43.0% 41.0%
Revenues Net of Compensation $23.7 $63.7
15.2%
Retained by Physicians
Percentage Investor and Physician Owned Groups 50.8% 43.5%
Total Investor Owned Market $12.1 $27.2
12.6%
Insurance Investment Revenues $0.46 $8.6
52.1%
C. HOSPITAL AND INSURANCE INTEGRATION
Hospitals and insurance companies are two traditional business partner choices.
No data exist regarding the absolute number of these arrangements. Available statistics
place groups into broad categories, i.e., 75.6% are professional corporations, 15.0% are
partnerships, 3.4% are associations, and 1.2% are investor-owned. Figure 2 shows the
distribution of ownership reported by the AMA. This data implies that most groups are
still physician-owned, and that penetration by hospitals, insurers, and investor-owned
management services organizations is still quite low.
FIGURE 2
DISTRIBUTION OF GROUPS BY LEGAL FORM OF ORGANIZATION
Legal Form of Organization Percentage
Professional Corporation 75.6
Investor-Owned for Profit Corporation 1.2
Partnership 15.0
Association 3.4
Other 4.8
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 63
PIP Regulations
HCFA has issued final regulations (the “PIP Regulations”) covering the use of
physician incentive plans (“PIPs”) by HMOs, various insurance coverage agencies, and
other managed care contractors and subcontractors (“Organizations”), potentially
including Van Robinson Insurance Group. Any Organization that contracts with a
physician group that places the individual physician members of the group at substantial
financial risk for the provision of services (e.g., if a primary care group takes risk but
subcontracts with a specialty group to provide certain services) must satisfy certain
disclosure, survey, and stop-loss requirements. Under the PIP regulations, insurance
payments of any kind, direct or indirect, to induce providers to reduce or limit covered
or medically necessary services (“Prohibited Payments”) are prohibited. Further, where
there are no Prohibited Payments but there is risk sharing among participating providers
related to utilization of services by their patients, the regulations contain three groups
of requirements: (i) requirements for physician incentive plans that place physicians at
“substantial financial risk;” (ii) disclosure requirements for all Organizations with PIPs;
and (iii) requirements related to subcontracting arrangements. In the case of substantial
financial risk (defined in the regulations according to several methods, but essentially
risk in excess of 25% of the maximum insurance payments anticipated under a plan
with less than 25,000 covered lives) organizations must: (i) conduct enrollee surveys,
and (ii) ensure that all providers have specified stop-loss protection. The violation of the
requirements of the PIP regulations may result in a variety of sanctions, including
suspension of enrollment of new Medicaid or Medicare members, or a civil monetary
penalty of $25,000 for each determination of noncompliance. In addition, because of the
increasing public concerns regarding PIPs, the PIP regulations may become the model
for the industry as a whole. The new regulations could have an effect on the ability of
Robinson to effectively reduce the costs of providing services by limiting the amount of
risk that may be imposed upon physicians.
D. TRENDS
The health insurance industry in the United States has been placed in constant
motion by the government and private sectors as never seen before, driven by politicians,
employers, insurance companies, health maintenance organizations, hospitals,
physicians, nurses, and vendors to these organizations. Politicians are driving toward
change due to the budgeting process and the downturn in economic recovery. These
drivers are forcing the other players in the insurance industry to strategize in order to
maintain as much self-determination as possible. As shown in South Carolina, Tennessee,
and Georgia, these states are forging ahead with their own legislative laws hoping for
later Federal waivers from Medicare programs. Employers are becoming leaner and are
attempting to reduce insurance costs to improve their company’s bottom line. HMOs
are consolidating in order to create competitive delivery systems to fit in the managed
care world. Hospitals and physicians, together or independently, are forming foundations,
PHOs, management service organizations, as well as other competitive strategies.
Physicians, the gatekeepers, are forming the same groups in addition to clinics without
walls, IIAs, and networks. The vendors are attempting to find their role with technology
enhancements and new products, with cost efficiency.
Businesses, with non-insurance investors, attempted to bring business principles
and ownership to previously sanctified grounds by acquiring the assets of insurance
providers. In short, because of the market forces, large and small-scale consolidations
64 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
are occurring in nearly all segments of the insurance industry. Hospitals are currently
retooling, since in past years, they kept primary care physicians at the bottom half of
the decision-making chain. Specialists have placed these hospitals in competitively weak
positions by spurning the advances of HMOs and managed care organizations. The
hospitals’ purchasing of high-tech, underutilized technology has created inpatient services
that may be relocated to outpatient settings. Large insurance carriers are looking to
purchase physician and hospital delivery systems in order to maintain and improve
market share. These same insurance carriers will also bring their capital to the
marketplace by erecting managed service organizations. These companies will control
segments of the market where hospitals and physicians have been dormant.
Evolution in health insurance reform has taken on many faces, impacting the
force of managed care, the form it has taken, and the organization of forms of physician
groups. In addition, the economy of America will also force the delivery of health insurance
to change in the coming years.
Managed care has in the past few years become the most utilized form of health
insurance. Over 55% of all persons having health insurance have some form of managed
care plan, be it an HMO (22%), a PPO (25%), or a POS plan (8%). Of the 45% of health
insurance that is still indemnity-related, only 4% of the plans have no pre-certification
requirement for hospital admission, down from 22% as recently as ten years ago.
The growth of managed care has led to a shift to new arrangements over the past
few years, with more of the expansion taking the form of preferred provider organizations,
point-of-service plans, and independent practice associations. In addition, market demand
has led to greater development of integrated delivery systems, as well as specialized
products such as managed care “carve-outs” that handle broad categories of diseases or
treatments and “carve-ins” that contract with well-known providers for specific
treatments. HMO growth has been away from the staff model (down 35%) and toward
models of HMO networks offering more autonomy for the physicians (up 70%).
The health insurance industry has predicted rapid growth in group agencies over
the next five years. As these changes impact the form in which physicians practice, the
population’s aging will impact the manner of their practice. The size of the elderly
population, the segment with the largest per capita usage of various health insurance
services, is increasing more rapidly than the rest of the population largely as a result of
demographic trends and advances in medical technology that have increased life
expectancies. The rapid aging of the U.S. population also has resulted in a greater
incidence of disease and disability. In the United States, the general population has
aged dramatically since the beginning of the century. In 1900, only 4% of the population
was 65 or over; by the year 2020, with the aging of the “Baby Boom” generation, the
over-65 segment is expected to account for 17.7% of the population. The high prevalence
of chronic conditions among the elderly and the functional limitations that result generate
a large demand for diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative, and supportive services.
According to the U.S. Bureau of the Census, the American Hospital Association, and
HHS, persons in the United States aged 65 and older, while comprising only 13% of the
population in 1993, accounted for 35% of the hospital admissions, 46% of hospital
inpatient days, and 39% of health insurance expenditures.
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #10: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 65
The Evolution of Managed Care with Insurance Coverage
Robinson believes that portions of the United States are on the verge of a fourth
stage of evolution in the development of managing health insurance and insurance.
Phase One included reducing costs by developing purchasing power. With a critical
mass of enrollees and control of the patient, managed care companies exacted volume
discounts. In the early years of managed care, negotiating discounts with physicians,
hospitals, and other providers was a key driver in reducing insurance costs. Volume
discounts (or reducing unit prices) became a less significant driver in controlling costs,
and controlling utilization (or volume) came to the fore.
Phase Two involved the reduction of costs by curtailing inappropriate utilization
of specialists and other high-cost providers. In this phase, managed care organizations
allowed services by specialists and other providers only if a primary care physician
referred the care given. Managed care companies depended on the primary care physician
to act as a gatekeeper, assuring only appropriate utilization to flow through the system.
Volume discounts and the gatekeeper concept allowed HMOs to price products lower to
attract enrollees. However, the restrictive features that drove costs down also limited
enrollment growth potential; a large portion of the population demanded freedom of
choice and free access to the system.
Phase Three is the driving of enrollment by adding an indemnity feature. Although
managed care had developed an effective supply-side of the insurance equation, the
demand side was seeding unrestricted access to providers. To meet demand, managed
care companies developed the point-of-service plan, which is a hybrid of HMO and
indemnity coverage. In a POS plan, members choose a PCP (primary care physician)
and if they use the HMO system, out-of-pocket expenses are limited to a $5-$10 physician
fee and $5-$10 charge per prescription. In the HMO system, enrollees do not have to file
forms and there are no co-payments. If at any time, however, the enrollee chooses to
visit a specialist or other high-cost provider without a referral from his/her PCP, he/she
receives indemnity-type coverage. (This type of indemnity coverage customarily consists
of the beneficiary paying the first $1,000 out-of-pocket costs or meeting the deductible.
Then, the beneficiary is reimbursed 70-80% of his/her out-of-pocket costs.) When using
the indemnity option, an enrollee must fill out insurance claim forms. POS products
have been the main driver in the enrollment growth of many large HMOs. With a product
to expand enrollment growth, managed care companies sought means to further control
costs.
Phase Four will be the reduction of costs by medical management. Managed
coverage companies are developing a new, powerful tool that will provide a third layer
to controlling costs: medical (or disease) management. Contrary to limiting access to
specialists, medical management programs depend on effective use of specialists to
improve the care (and reduce the cost) of people with high-cost diseases and conditions.
This new concept revolves around the fact that 5% of the population consumes 60% of
the insurance claim dollars. Medical management centers on more effectively caring for
that 5% of the population and depends on sophisticated information systems as well as
comprehensive clinical systems. Managed care companies exploit this potential. Robinson
believes that clinical management will be the main driver in reducing costs over the
next five years and that the companies that are in the best position to capitalize on the
potential that disease management offers will be successful.
66 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
E. INSURANCE DEMAND
As the health insurance industry evolves, the demand for business partnerships
with physicians has increased for several reasons.
Managed care is pushing doctors to join together and with business partners.
Managed care has dramatically changed the business environment for physicians. HMOs
have now forced physicians to negotiate discounts and capitation arrangements before
treating patients. As a result, the physicians must estimate how sick the potential patient
population will be. Essentially, this requires patient information that the physicians
usually do not have; even if they did have it, they would not have time to analyze it.
Hence, they fear that HMOs may be providing them with unfairly low capitation rates
and volume discounts. Moreover, physicians fear that they could lose their patient base
to an HMO if they cannot negotiate group contracts. Physicians are also concerned that
they may eventually become dependent. Physician practice management firms relieve
physicians of the administrative burdens related to negotiating group contracts and
give them more power in negotiating contracts with HMOs. They also allow physicians
more say in clinical matters, which gives them more control over care delivery and a
greater feeling of autonomy.
Physicians would rather align together with a business manager than with an
insurance company, hospital, or HMO. Physicians see insurance companies and HMOs
as adversaries that have always focused on minimizing costs, with less regard for the
quality of patient care. Hospitals still seem to rely too much on length of stay management
rather than ensuring appropriate health care, while providing mediocre management.
Also, joining these organizations may limit doctors’ ability to see patients that are
represented by other hospitals or payors. Physician practice management actively
supports quality care and allows relationships with multiple hospitals and payors. Over
the long term, doctors should recognize this, thus giving business-oriented partners the
upper hand in the ability to sign additional practice management contracts.
Insurance providers like to use large physician groups. Multi-specialty insurance
groups can handle large patient volume, making it easier for managed care insurance
providers than for single or small group physician practices to negotiate, bill, and monitor
patients. In addition, since health care is a local service, a business-oriented physician
partnership that has 25-100 primary care physicians with a high-quality reputation
can be a dominant group. This gives the group pricing leverage with payors, even though
the payors may be large, regional companies with millions of enrollees.
II. COMPETITIVE INSURANCE ANALYSIS
The business of providing insurance-related services is competitive. Robinson
Insurance Group is aware of other companies actively pursuing a strategy of affiliating
with physicians and dentists, some of whom are larger and have greater financial
resources than Robinson. Robinson assumes that additional companies with similar
objectives will be organized in the future. Potential financial sources of competition
include hospital and alternate site management companies, larger, nationally known,
multi-specialty medical groups, dental groups, and others. Several of Robinson’s largest
competitors are described below.
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 67
A. BACKGROUND, GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
The formation of Van Robinson Insurance Group was driven by the marketplace
maturing to a point where the HMO industry was prepared to outsource the provision
of medical care to a network, and the physicians comprising the network were prepared
to consolidate their efforts to take advantage of this shift in the marketplace. Robinson’s
basic business premise is to help create an insurance network business structure so
that this entity could become the centerpiece for contracting, development of information
systems, education of physicians and the provision of practice management services.
As a multifaceted insurance provider, this e-business entity and a management
service organization, Robinson is structured to organize and manage insurance agents,
physician practices and networks that contract with HMOs and other insurance
providers. They provide funding and information to physician and related insurance
services to enrollees as well. Robinson provides primary and specialty services to prepaid
managed care enrollees and fee-for-service patients through a network of physicians.
The company’s objective is to provide cost-effective, high quality insurance coverage for
an increasing number of applicable enrollees served by physician within the Robinson
Network. Robinson believes new enrollees and provider relationships are possible because
of its ability to manage the cost of insurance premiums without sacrificing quality.
Robinson consolidated and aggregated the health insurance clients, contracts,
projects, employees and assets of several insurance agency businesses located in the
Charleston and all throughout the Southeastern part of South Carolina through the
acquisition of certain assets of such companies. Kellar Consulting Inc. developed the
majority of the physicians and professional corporation projects now part of Robinson
over the last 26-year period.
Robinson’s management has been serving the health, dental, and physician liability
insurance market for over 30 years and possesses an intimate knowledge of the marketing
skills and dynamics of how to successfully serve this client base. Over this period of
time, the scope of services needed by the integrated health and dental insurance industry
has expanded to include the negotiation of managed care and insurance contracts, the
creation and operation of sophisticated information systems, and a turnkey management
service for physician offices.
B. STRATEGY
Since the health insurance industry is in an evolutionary period, the plans and
strategies described in the following sections are evolutionary and subject to change.
Robinson’s mission is to develop regionally prominent, integrated health insurance
delivery networks that provide high quality, cost-effective insurance coverage throughout
Southeastern South Carolina, Western Tennessee and Northern Georgia markets. Its
financial goals are to (i) achieve returns through value added participation and active
oversight of the networks, (ii) capitalize on the health insurance information provided
by and to Robinson Network, (iii) capitalize on the development of chronic disease
management in given specialties, (iv) capitalize on the continued growth of the insurance
market in general and the physician services market in particular, and (v) reduce overall
insurance costs by expanding the availability of business and information oriented for
physicians.
68 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
By enabling physicians to develop and efficiently manage insurance payments
and network activities, Robinson seeks to assist physicians in facilitating risk-based
managed insurance contracts, developing and implementing disease management
programs and monitoring and controlling health care outcomes and costs. The key
elements of Robinson’s strategy to accomplish its mission and fulfill its goals are to (i)
establish long-term contractual alliances with physicians, (ii) develop integrated health
insurance systems through strategic alliances with other insurance providers, (iii) pursue
large scale managed contracts, (iv) develop and maintain a leadership position in
management information systems, (v) foster physician autonomy in selected geographic
markets that offer concentrations of physicians seeking Robinson’s services, and (vi)
provide cost effective insurance coverage.
To date, Robinson has focused upon developing its presence in Southeastern South
Carolina, Western Tennessee, and Northern Georgia. Robinson believes that once it
has developed a large base of affiliated physicians its strategy will enable Robinson to
generate increased demand for the services and capabilities of its affiliated physicians,
treat patients in lower cost settings and negotiate favorable managed insurance contracts.
Robinson intends to achieve growth through the recruitment of additional physicians,
the expansion of agent-physician relationships and the development of contractual or
strategic relationships with providers of supplemental insurance services.
1. Develop Long-term Alliances with Physicians
The core of Robinson’s proposed integrated health insurance delivery system is
its affiliation with groups of physicians and dentists and other supplemental providers
who enter into long-term management agreements with Robinson. Robinson assumes
responsibility for the nonmedical aspects of an affiliated professional’s practice (including
claims administration, and billing, credentialing, and recruitment) and focuses its efforts
on seeking to increase revenues and improve operation margins, implementing
management information systems and negotiating managed insurance contracts. The
physicians and dentists remain responsible for, among other things, the clinical,
professional and ethical aspects of their practices. By affiliating with Robinson, physicians
and dentists have increased opportunity to access capital, continue to participate in the
profitability of their individual practices.
Robinson affiliates with physicians and dentists by entering into long-term
management agreements with the affiliated practices, by managing IIAs and by providing
contract management services to physicians in primary and specialty care networks.
By affiliating with leading physicians, dentists and physician groups in a given
neighborhood or community, Robinson can secure a large patient base, ensure
appropriate, quality treatment and maintain patient satisfaction. Additionally, as
Robinson affiliates with professionals in certain insurance markets, it makes available
to these physicians and dentists medical support services. By integrating the affiliated
health, dental, and physician coverage, Robinson is able to develop a continuum of
insurance coverage within its target markets. Robinson believes that its affiliations
with additional physicians and dentists through managed networks will enable it to
increase its market share.
Robinson seeks to affiliate with physicians and dentists in solo or group practices
by entering into contractual arrangements to assume the practice management aspects
of the managed insurance. Upon affiliation, Robinson seeks to provide the physicians
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 69
and dentists with, among other things, increased opportunity to access capital,
management experience, improved information systems and increased opportunity to
participate in favorable managed insurance contracts. Robinson’s structure allows
physicians and dentists to continue to practice in their existing locations with no
disruption to patient flow patterns while providing access to coordinated supplemental
insurance services. By affiliating with Robinson, physicians and dentists, through the
services agreements between the affiliated groups and Robinson, continue to participate
in the profitability of their individual practices.
Robinson seeks to achieve operating efficiencies through the consolidation of the
administrative functions of physician and dental practices. By consolidating overhead,
including billing, collections, accounting and payroll, Robinson believes that it can realize
operating efficiencies. In addition, by rendering support and management functions,
Robinson enables its affiliated physicians and dentists to spend more of their time with
patients, thereby improving patient care and enhancing revenue.
2. Develop Integrated Insurance Networks Through Strategic Alliances
Robinson believes that strategic insurance alliances with physicians, dentists,
hospitals and health plans improve the delivery of managed health insurance coverage.
In addition, through its third-party administration (TPA) services, Robinson
processes numerous insurance claims for medical and dental services for certain of its
strategic affiliates. Employers often purchase TPA services which are bundled with
utilization review services and selected PPO networks in an effort to apply managed
techniques to their self-funded plans. Under its TPA arrangements, Robinson will not
generally bear any insurance cost risk and, accordingly, is not paid an underwriting
premium. Instead, Robinson’s TPA arrangements typically will provide for the payment
of administrative fees that generally vary by the number of members covered. A certain
number of these policy contracts may contain performance guarantees as to timeliness
and accuracy and certain other features which can place premium compensation under
such contracts at risk.
In conjunction with its network affiliation strategy, Robinson seeks to build
integrated networks of dental, health, and physicians liability, and supplemental
coverage in its targeted markets. Robinson typically affiliates with core physician or
dental practices. Robinson then seeks to affiliate with additional insurance providers
such as hospitals, supplemental facilities and providers of other medical support services.
Through the implementation of this strategy, Robinson seeks to provide a comprehensive
range of health insurance coverage within a given region, thereby enhancing its ability
to enter into contractual arrangements with numerous health, dental, physician liability,
and supplemental insurance organizations.
Robinson has proposed to include several business partners within the Van
Robinson Insurance Group that will ensure its propensity to be a more dynamic
organization as insurance coverage evolves into an industry that produces optimal
insurance premiums with outcomes at a cost that will not prohibit entry at any level.
This evolution will require extensive integration of the varied components of health
insurance to remain on the ”cutting edge” of effective delivery. By the involvement of
value added organizations, Robinson may continually explore new methods of providing
insurance coverage to ensure itself of a cost effective, high quality product that invariably
will endure through many variables that invades the industry.
70 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
The movement toward managed coverage in every aspect of the insurance industry
shouldn’t be viewed as the end of all strategies, nor will it be. There continually will,
and must be new mechanisms that will further the quality of medicine as it exists today.
As the varied insurance purchasers ratchet medical costs down, there will be the necessity
to find new and more effective methodologies to ensure a given population’s health
status. These can only be identified through a concerted initiative of the principle
deliverers of insurance coverage, the physicians and the other partners who have
knowledge, expertise and incentive to create such a delivery organization.
Robinson has identified as initial but certainly not all inclusive, value-added
partners, a major pharmaceutical company, a physician driven information system
company, medical supply and equipment companies and a consortium of hospital and
health research and education organizations. Robinson believes these entities represent
the most capable partners to forge a relationship with the physicians affiliated with
Robinson. With these prototypes, it is believed that the organization will establish itself
as an entity capable of competing in a managed insurance coverage arena, while fixing
an eye towards experimentation and creativity of future initiatives that will set the
course of the health insurance evolution and initiative. There can be no assurance,
however, that Robinson will be able to develop relationships with such entities.
Finally Robinson does not believe this list to be static but rather dynamic as other
partners may be mutually identified. Organizations representing the insurance industry,
medical specialty areas, medical supply companies, laboratories, and others may emerge
as sound contributors to the evolving organization.
3. Pursue Large-Scale Managed Insurance Coverage Contracts
Robinson intends to continue to aggressively pursue managed insurance coverage
business. Robinson believes that by providing comprehensive geographic coverage in
each market, Robinson Network will be strongly positioned to be offered managed
coverage contracts in the area, which may allow it to rapidly expand its patient base. In
addition, as managed coverage penetration increases, Robinson’s ability to improve
productivity, manage complex reimbursement methodologies, measure patient
satisfaction and outcomes of coverage protection, and integrate information from multiple
sources should serve it well. As Robinson continues to grow both internally and through
new affiliations, management believes that Robinson Network will be positioned to
compete effectively for large group managed coverage business.
Within each local area, Robinson seeks to provide an appropriate balance of
physician liability, health, dental, and other supplemental insurance programs to attract
managed coverage providers and payors. Depending upon the particular market,
Robinson may develop specialty recruitment networks which can be used to procure
managed coverage contracts pursuant to which Robinson’s affiliated physicians are
responsible for providing all or a portion of specific health coverage services to a particular
patient population, or Robinson may develop a broader array of services designed to
enhance its ability to attract comprehensive managed coverage contracts. In addition,
Robinson manages the contracts of specialty care physicians with managed coverage
companies in order to facilitate the delivery of services in specialty health coverage
networks.
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 71
Robinson’s target marketplace has made significant advancements to the point
where managed coverage companies are now willing to enter into negotiations of contracts
for integrated coverage delivery systems similar to those that Robinson develops and
manages. The magnitude and continuance of this trend in the marketplace has and will
continue to be dependent on the readiness of the insurance carriers to accept a redefinition
of their role in the insurance industry, as they move toward a more financial role and
away from the role of insurance sales. To this extent, management believes that Robinson
is in an opportune position to capitalize on this industry transition.
Robinson has signed ten contracts with various managed coverage organizations
for the provision of services for health, hospital, dental, vision and pharmacy services.
These contracts provide for capitated payments for services, predetermined fee schedules
for services, and contracted amounts for certain insurance coverage services. Robinson
receives a percentage of the revenue from these contracts as a negotiation and
management fee, and also performs administrative services to fulfill the contractual
terms.
4. Develop and Maintain a Leadership Position in Information Systems
Robinson believes that information technology is critical to the growth of integrated
insurance delivery systems and that the availability of detailed clinical data is
fundamental to quality control and cost containment. Robinson develops and maintains
sophisticated management information systems that collect and analyze clinical and
administrative data. These systems allow Robinson to control overhead expenses,
maximize reimbursement and provide utilization management more effectively. Robinson
evaluates the administrative and clinical functions of affiliated practices and re-engineers
these functions as appropriate in conjunction with the implementation of Robinson’s
management information systems to maximize the benefits of those systems.
In addition to providing administrative management services to physician and
dental organizations, Robinson seeks to differentiate itself by assisting physicians in
managing certain aspects of the clinical operation of their practices. Robinson believes
that its integrated management services and clinical information systems will enhance
the ability of physician group practices and networks to implement disease management
programs and to manage practice under risk-based contracts. It is anticipated that these
management programs will be delivered through linked practices and networks of
specialists under management or development by Robinson who will provide integrated,
high-quality coverage for patients based on clinical care guidelines developed by the
physician networks. Robinson anticipates that the physicians within these practices
and networks will be linked together by Robinson’s clinical information systems.
5. Preserve Autonomy Through Select Geographic Markets
While Robinson provides insurance management expertise to a newly affiliated
group, it believes that each physician and dental group presents unique management
issues and therefore is best served by decentralized management. Robinson generally
retains the group’s existing administrative staff, adding additional management
personnel as the group expands. Each group’s physicians and dentists continue to
maintain full professional control of the practice’s account. Robinson establishes for
each local market a policy council, comprised equally of physicians or dentists and
Robinson representatives, to determine the strategic and operational policies.
72 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Each of Robinson’s health, dental, and physician liability groups and IIAs will
operate in a very different market and focuses on the particular needs of each local
community to gain market share and improve profitability. As to the needs of the local
market, Robinson will rely in large part upon the marketing plans developed by local
management, in consultation with physicians, dentists, employers and other members
of the local communities. This localization reduces Robinson’s need for expensive market
research analysis. The ability to maintain a high level of market share locally is a
sustainable barrier to discourage further market entry by insurance providers and payors.
6. Providing Cost-Effective Health Insurance Coverage
Robinson organizes its managed insurance coverage networks around given
management specialties to create an environment conducive to the development of specific
policy management techniques. Robinson believes that a successful system should be
balanced between primary care physicians and specialists to provide efficient coordination
and utilization of the appropriate levels of coverage, and Robinson intends to seek to
develop this balance in the physician groups with which it affiliates. Of the 5000
physicians currently affiliated with Robinson, approximately one-half are engaged are
engaged in specialist practice are in need of effective delivery systems of coverage.
Robinson believes the industry trend toward integrated delivery systems will result in
an increasing demand for primary care physicians because a higher degree of coordination
of risk sharing and care. Insurance coverage will be required than that which can be
achieved in a system controlled by specialists. Robinson’s strategy is to have the primary
care physician serve as the central manager in the patient system and to develop effective
coordination between specialists and primary care physicians within its network.
Robinson believes that the management of insurance coverage costs provides
significant opportunities. Special populations, including the elderly, the disabled and
those with debilitating chronic or high-cost, complex diseases represent a minority of
the population but account for a disproportionately high percentage of the health
insurance coverage costs in the United States. Robinson believes that a significant portion
of these costs can be avoided with effective case management and proper use of
information systems, coordinated with the use of the full continuum of health insurance
coverage. At present, a relatively small percentage of these patients are enrolled under
capitated contracts. However, Robinson believes that the cost pressures that fostered
the development of managed coverage for other segments of the population should have
an even more significant impact on the rapid development of managed coverage for
such patients. Through affiliation with physicians and academic experts who specialize
in medical conditions that disproportionately affect these population segments, effective
use of case management techniques designed specifically for such populations, and
management information systems, Robinson believes that its affiliated physicians should
be able to manage cost effectively the risks of providing insurance coverage to these
populations on a capitated basis.
C. TARGET MARKETS
Robinson’s primary focus has initially been Southeastern South Carolina, Western
Tennessee, and Northern Georgia. Robinson believes its business model is replicable
and will allow it to compete in other areas as well. Robinson’s development goals
emphasize the affiliation of high-profile practices, both primary and specialty insurance
coverage, to meet the needs of patients and payors, adjusted according to the dynamics
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 73
of individual markets. Robinson focuses on developing and maintaining a comprehensive,
integrated insurance coverage network in each market to which it commits its resources.
Robinson targets markets by considering the following factors:
• Population Size and Distribution. Robinson believes that the ideal catchment area
has a population base of at least 100,000 to 200,000. A population base of this size
will support a primary insurance coverage physician base of twenty-five. Additionally,
a network of twenty-five primary care physicians, negotiating as a unified group,
will command the attention of managed insurance coverage organizations, specialists
and hospitals.
• Physician Practice Density, Specialty Composition, Saturation, and Average Group
Size. Robinson will develop an understanding of the physician population. As stated
above, at least twenty-five primary care physicians are ideal in forming a local
network. The mixture of primary care physicians to specialists within the network
should be approximately 50:50. The existing pool of physicians must be able to support
this goal. Attitudes toward manage health and dental coverage and group practice
will be surveyed to ensure that local physicians are able to accept the imminent
changes in work habits that network formation will bring.
• Local Competitors in the Physician Acquisition and Management Business. Robinson
will survey other efforts to unite local physicians. Markets with active efforts by
established or growing physician practice management companies may affect
positively or negatively the opportunities to recruit quality physicians into Robinson
Network.
• Level of Managed Insurance Coverage Penetration. Market forces, as created by
managed insurance coverage organizations, often create an air of urgency with regards
to physicians organizing into local groups and networks. Geographic areas with high
levels of managed coverage penetration may already have experienced efforts in
physician merger and consolidation. The threat of increased managed coverage
activity or early stages of managed insurance coverage enrollment present the highest
level of opportunity to develop an affiliated network. Markets with physician payor
mixes of 50% or less managed coverage contracting will offer the best opportunities
for network development.
• Local Industry and Economy. Efforts on the part of local employers to embrace
managed insurance coverage organizations will directly affect the growth of such
organizations. Financial stability of local employers must also be considered as a
large layoff or plant closure may have a significant negative effect on the local economy.
• Population Demographics (age, income, gender). Population age and its economies as
related to that age group offer Robinson insight as to the stability, growth and long
term needs of the catchment area. Robinson’s ability to project these needs should be
measured. An age and income analysis will also serve in long-term product
development.
• Market and Network Growth Potential. A primary care physician base of twenty-five,
serving a population base of 100,000 to 200,000 presents an attractive market.
Robinson will also consider the ability of the local network to expand in relation to
the networks ability to maintain market share.
74 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
• Geographic Barriers, (population’s ability to commute). Robinson will consider any
geographic barriers that prevent the local population from commuting to utilize
physicians involved in the network. Geographic barriers also increase the prosperity
for point of service plans thus increases Robinson’s need for geographic expansion.
• Numbers and Stability of Hospitals. The local region containing at least two hospitals
increases competition between those hospitals, competition that involves the
formation of MSOs, PHOs and other models to recruit physicians. Alliances to those
hospitals may fracture physician leaders or prevent the smooth development of an
affiliated network.
• Physicians’ Relationship with Hospitals. Formation of a local physician owned network
would require at least minimal support of the area hospitals. Robinson will survey
the physicians’ relationship with area hospitals, along with direct meetings with the
hospitals surveying areas of mutual understanding.
• Uninsured Population. A large uninsured population is indicative of a struggling
local economy. Robinson will consider these factors prior to commencing any effort to
establish a physicians’ network.
• Existence of Alternative Delivery Services (home health services, outpatient services).
Robinson’s savings models are based on the assumption that many forms of less
expensive delivery mechanisms are available. Robinson will survey the availability
and quality of alternative delivery services. These services must include rehabilitation
facilities, home health/visiting nurse services, home infusion services, durable medical
equipment suppliers and long-term care facilities.
The specific markets currently targeted by Robinson are described below:
Charleston, South Carolina - Independent physicians practicing in groups or in
solo practice represent the greatest marketing opportunity as the physician practice
management service will propel the sale of information systems and the retention of
Robinson for managed insurance coverage services and contract negotiation projects.
The Southeastern South Carolina market consists of over 7,500 physicians of which
approximately 5,000 are in independent practice. The remaining 2,500 physicians are
employed by several hospital systems or insurers in a staff model type of physician
organization. While these 2,500 physicians are being served by the hospital MSOs,
Robinson’s ability to provide services to this group is not entirely precluded. The 5,000
independent physicians nevertheless, are the clear near term marketing opportunity in
Southeastern South Carolina. Of this group, it is estimated that less than 2% have
contracted for MSO services with a corporate partner such as Robinson.
D. DEVELOPMENT
Development of each physician network follows a structured process, guided by
Robinson. The process involves recruiting physician leaders in the targeted market,
organizing the physicians, structuring alliances with other health, dental, physician
liability, and supplemental insurance providers, negotiating managed coverage contracts,
and guiding the entire process of organizing the individual entities into a functioning
network. This process results in the development of both an infrastructure for the network
and a culture for the newly formed entity.
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 75
Robinson’s physician recruitment begins by attracting physician leaders within
the specialties of family practice, internal medicine, pediatrics and/or obstetrics.
Attracting physician leaders is critical to the development of the network. Physicians
receive a presentation that not only serves as an educational presentation for the group
leaders, but also serves as a forum to receive their input with regards to how the
physicians will develop into a formal group. Participants must be in agreement with
Robinson as to the type of services needed whether it be health, dental, physician liability,
or supplemental insurance. The physicians to be recruited, the structure and timing of
developing the network, and the need for and type of strategic alliances are all factors
considered with developing Robinson’s basic strategy.
Robinson’s marketing strategy is to increase the size, number and locations of
medical practices to which it provides its services. Robinson’s strategy is also to broaden
the types of insurance options that it provides, to develop a client base of primary care
and specialty practices and to implement growth strategies for its existing and new
clients. Robinson expects to promote growth of the patient and revenue basis by assisting
its clients in the development of multi-specialty coverage practices and opening of
additional offices and implementing an aggressive program of affiliating with other
insurance coverage options. A major focus of Robinson’s near term marketing efforts
will be the identification of appropriate target markets within the southeastern South
Carolina area. This will make effective use of Robinson’s management services.
Robinson’s marketing efforts to establish relationships with new clients for its
full range of insurance management services are conducted by employees under the
direction of the Vice President of Managed Coverage Options. Marketing activities that
meet the size, quality and operating parameters set by Robinson. Robinson’s marketing
staff also helps existing clients analyze opportunities for expanding the services they
offer and expanding into new geographic areas either through opening new offices or
acquiring existing insurance coverage packages. Strategies are also developed for
increasing the patient volume of existing clients, including identifying to clients attorneys
handling workers’ compensation and no-fault insurance claims and arranging meetings
with such attorney to make them aware of all possibilities as a Robinson client. The
marketing staff also oversees and facilitates the exchange of information with attorneys
and insurance companies that are sources of new patients for Robinson’s clients.
Robinson believes it can increase its market share in the medical management
services industry by providing its clients with significant competitive advantages and
by relieving them of the complex, burdensome and time-consuming nonmedical aspects
of their businesses. Robinson believes that relieving agency personnel of these obligations
may enhance productivity, efficiency and profitability and the growth potential of the
client and thus also enhance the ability of such agents to serve their clients. Robinson
also believes that a fully integrated medical office for the diagnosis and treatment of
injuries provides significant advantages to patients and third-party payors. By providing
a full array of medical and testing services in one facility, a medical practice will serve
the patient more effectively and efficiently and also alleviate the injured patient’s burden
of traveling from one location to another. The centralization of comprehensive services
also facilitates administrative and regulatory reporting to third-party payors.
76 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
E. OPERATIONS
Upon affiliation, Robinson assumes management responsibility for the practices,
allowing physicians to focus on practicing medicine and developing medical guidelines.
Robinson performs all insurance business functions of the physician’s practice,
centralizing many functions such as billing, collections, accounts payable, payroll and
human resources, purchasing, lease administration, property management, and
telecommunications. Each of these systems will be integrated to achieve maximum cost
savings and efficiencies.
Robinson works with the affiliated physicians in targeting and recruiting additional
physicians into the affiliated physician networks. Robinson may also assist in the
development and capitalization of new and expanded supplemental services. Robinson
recognizes and develops opportunities to provide services throughout a market by
positioning its practice locations to service an entire geographic market. This approach
improves patient convenience and responds to demographic coverage criteria essential
to payors. The specific operations of Robinson are described below.
1. Managed Insurance Coverage
Robinson believes that managed insurance coverage will continue to play an
important role in the delivery of and payment for health, dental, physician liability, and
supplemental insurance services. In particular, Robinson believes that the most efficient
way to deliver high quality, cost effective insurance coverage is by utilizing primary
care physicians to manage the patient care, including the utilization of specialty care
physicians and supplemental coverage services. Robinson believes that as the importance
of primary care physicians’ role is recognized, more HMO’s will embrace the management
of services through these physicians. Additionally, as primary care physicians expand
their role in the delivery of medical care, Robinson believes that these physicians will
require the assistance of practice management companies, such as Robinson to help
them manage their operations and contractual relationships. Upon affiliation, Robinson
will immediately begin managed coverage contracting activities designed to increase
practice revenues and market share, identify additional network affiliations, and analyze
all operational aspects of the practices. After evaluation of these factors, Robinson and
the affiliated physicians develop and implement additional strategies, including: (i)
practice specific contracting designed to increase access to managed coverage patients,
(ii) development of global priced products which establish a single price for all medical
costs of a designated procedure, (iii) specialty carve outs with single specialty networks,
such as orthopedics, ophthalmology, and obstetrics/gynecology, that service as exclusive
providers, and (iv) perhaps over time full risk capitation by contracting with a payor to
provide all physician services and, in some cases, hospital and other facility services for
a fixed price.
2. Insurance Coverage Contracts and Payors
Robinson will arrange for insurance coverage contracts between payors and the
physicians, other insurance providers, or Professional Corporations within Robinson
Network. These contracts generally will provide for terms of one to three years, with
automatic renewal periods, terminable upon prior notice (generally between 30 and 180
days) by either party. These insurance contracts will obligate the Professional
Corporations to deliver covered medical benefits and to coordinate all inpatient and
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 77
outpatient care for enrollees. Under most of these arrangements, the Professional
Corporation will receive a capitation payment for each Payor enrollee who selects a
primary care physician who is employed by or affiliated with such Professional
Corporation.
In negotiating or renewing insurance payor/provider contracts, Robinson will
consider a number of specific factors that affect capitation rates, the risk pool and breadth
of covered benefits. These factors include, but are not limited to, the demographic risk
profile of the enrollee pool, prior financial experience, availability of stoploss protection
and an understanding of the fee-for-service equivalent charges. In undertaking this
process, Robinson will analyze pertinent data to assess the providers’ contractual and
economic opportunity and exposure, and then conduct the negotiations on behalf of the
physician, physician group or other providers.
3. Insurance Contracts with Providers
Robinson Network, through the Professional Corporations, subsidiaries and payors,
contracts with a variety of providers, including primary and specialty care physicians,
hospitals and other supplemental providers. These agreements generally have terms
up to three years, are automatically renewable and are terminable by either party upon
at least 90 days prior notice. A primary care physician’s affiliation and compensation
arrangement with a Professional Corporation or subsidiary may take one of several
forms. The physician may be (i) an individual or a member of a group practice or an IIA
which (a) insurance contracts with Robinson and a Professional Corporation for
Robinson’s services and receives capitation payments based on the number of enrollees
and premiums and is entitled to additional compensation based upon efficiency in
utilizing the services of insurance providers, subject to other factors including but not
limited to compliance with contractual quality standards, or (b) enters into an
arrangement with Robinson and one of its Professional Corporations; or (ii) an individual
or group practice of physicians which sells to a Professional Corporation the assets of its
practice and receives as compensation for employment a base salary and productivity
bonus, of receives a percentage of net collections of the practice determined in accordance
with applicable law. The physician or group, which sells its practice, still practices
medicine in the same location. While such physician or group is employed and paid by a
Professional Corporation or subsidiary, Robinson provides many administrative services
to such physician or group.
Specialty care providers contract with a Professional Corporation or subsidiary to
provide medical services to enrollees and are compensated on a discounted fee-for-service
or capitated basis. Hospital and affiliated medical facilities contract with a Professional
Corporation or subsidiary and Payors to provide both inpatient and outpatient services
to enrollees on a fee-for-service, per diem or capitated basis, which are discounted from
customary charges.
4. Management Information System
Robinson will utilize integrated information systems to enhance its strategic
development plans and its day-to-day management of operations. Robinson will configure
its systems to give affiliated physicians and their staff efficient and rapid access to
complex clinical data. Robinson also believes that the availability of timely information
on utilization patterns improves physician decision-making effectiveness. This data also
78 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
plays an integral role in the physician utilization control process by enabling the medical
directors and utilization control to monitor case management decisions, evaluate patient
outcomes and monitor coverage utilization trends. In addition, Robinson’s management
information systems will perform various administrative functions, including
appointment scheduling, insurance verification, billing, accounts payable and receivable,
out of network referrals and verification, financial reporting and all third-party claims
processing.
Members of the network will access the management information systems from
their individual offices, thereby eliminating communication barriers often found in
managed care environments. The real time information system will allow for an
opportunity to eradicate the static production of outdated clinical protocols and referral
sources associated with paper manuals and directories.
Robinson recognizes the need to centralize the insurance coverage data being
generated by the individual physicians in the network. Robinson has determined a
successful performance measurement/improvement program to include the following:
• The organization’s strategic initiatives and mission determine needs
• Focuses on high-leverage areas: high-volume, high-risk, or problem prone areas
• Contains a systematic method of performance improvement that assures rapid,
ongoing, sustained improvement
• Can easily monitor performance
• Based on industry best practices
• Is supported by leadership
• Is data driven
Many organizations believe a physician is responsible for clinical results, the
finance department guides and directs fiscal expenditures, and administration assures
patient satisfaction. This compartmentalized ‘silo’ approach does not acknowledge that
various insurance coverage organizations are inherently systems, in which any change
in one department affects all players. It is this concept that demonstrates the importance
of an enterprise-wide information system. The ability to store every piece of information
that the organization encounters and easily manipulate that data to produce a variety
of statistics is the key feature behind any successful insurance organization of present.
Robinson has designed its Information System to meet the communication, business
and clinical needs of practicing physicians, hospitals, payors and employers. Robinson
utilizes e-business application service provider (ASP) solutions in the design of the
Information System to minimize insurance coverage costs to physician practices and
maximize the ability for them to share data across the care spectrum. This technology
allows physicians to access the Information System remotely; thereby eliminating
cumbersome servers, hardware and sophisticated information technology personnel from
the physician office. Instead, each office is supplied with state of the art communication
devices that allows for instant access to the central data repository, the Internet,
Robinson’s Intranet, business tools such as the billing system, electronic patient records
and on-line purchasing.
Robinson has partnered with the pharmaceutical industry to distribute
workstations to the network at no cost to the individual physicians. Robinson can;
therefore, quickly disseminate this technology.
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 79
Robinson has established centralized computing capabilities to enable effective
access to information and communication capabilities required to improve effective
insurance coverage services and reduced costs. The services delivered through this
centralized capability include:
• Data warehousing and visualization
• Quality insurance management, utilization management, and coverage outcome
reporting
• Insurance policy order entry and results reporting
• Professional referrals
• Electronic mail
• Internet access
• Electronic access to standard reference literature
• Transcription services
• Managed Insurance Coverage services
5. Insurance Claims Administration and Billing Service
Robinson possesses complete medical bill review and insurance claims processing
capabilities. These capabilities include determining enrollee eligibility, identifying
appropriate benefits, issuing payments to providers, processing hospital and outpatient
facility charges for the payment of insurance claims and providing and analyzing
encounter data. As a service to certain Professional Corporations, Robinson will perform
fee-for-service billing and collections. The billing staff will register fee-for-service patients,
send monthly statements and pursue collection.
6. Insurance Coverage Management
Insurance coverage management involves the coordination of a variety of services,
including health, physician liability, and supplemental insurance including the coverage
of durable medical equipment. This approach is designed to provide a continuum of
quality insurance coverage throughout an extended period.
7. Physician Credentialing and Recruitment
As a service to Payors and the Professional Corporations, Robinson will verify
that the credentials of physicians in Robinson meet the minimum requirements specified
in payor/provider insurance contracts. In addition, Robinson may assist the Professional
Corporations in the recruitment of highly competent physicians and other insurance
coverage providers who share in the philosophy of prepaid managed insurance coverage.
All of the physicians will be licensed to practice medicine in the state where they practice
medical services and will generally be either board certified or board eligible.
8. Managerial and Financial Controls
Robinson will apply comprehensive managerial and financial controls in order to
enhance profitability. Practice managers and directors will be trained in methods for
analyzing and improving utilization, payor/provider mix ratios, reimbursement and
overhead controls. Robinson also will implement procedures designed to ensure that
information relevant to improving results of operations is gathered and evaluated in a
timely manner. To further improve operating efficiencies, Robinson will centralize certain
80 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
functions, such as payroll, accounts payable and financial statement compilation,
marketing and billing.
Specific controls will address reimbursement, financial, labor costs, accounts
payable and other areas of practice management.
9. Educational Programs
Robinson will use an educational program that provides a forum for the
dissemination of information to individuals who are working towards the goal of designing
a system that provides the appropriate insurance coverage. Each network physician
will address needs for education and training programs for member insurance and
financial management, information systems technologies supporting insurance coverage
programs, specific disease management methodologies for common illnesses, and
processes and techniques supporting the development of practice guidelines.
10. Facilities
To the extent that it is unnecessary to control locations, Robinson will lease office
space for its corporate functions.
11. Personnel
Robinson is committed to a decentralized management style in which business
and clinical decisions affecting the local physicians network will be made locally.
Therefore employment policies will encourage as few non-local personnel as possible in
the local physician network. Key leadership positions in the local IIA may however be
hired and trained by Robinson. Policy guidelines will be undertaken and compliance
ensured by Robinson personnel. Advances in technology allow Robinson the opportunity
to centralize into the corporate office the general accounting, finance, and operational
analysis from information that will be processed at the local physician network.
12. Insurance
To manage the risk associated with the management of Robinson, Robinson will
undertake to secure general risk business insurance covering, general liability, directors
and officers’ liability, property damage, and business interruption.
13. Third-Party Administration Services
Through its TPA services, Robinson process insurance claims for medical, dental,
liability coverage and supplemental coverage of employer-sponsored, self-funded plans
and reimburses the provider or member according to the terms of each plan. Employers
often purchase TPA services that are bundled with UR services and selected PPO
networks in an effort to apply managed coverage techniques to their self-funded plans.
Under its TPA arrangements, Robinson will not generally bear any health insurance
cost risk and, accordingly, is not paid an underwriting premium. Instead, Robinson’s
TPA arrangements typically will provide for the payment of administrative fees that
generally vary by the number of members covered. Certain of these insurance contracts
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 81
may contain performance guarantees as to timelines and accuracy and certain other
features which can place compensation under such contracts at risk.
14. Physician Liability Insurance
Physician Liability Insurance provides coverage for physician involved in liable
suits of a malpractice nature. Robinson provides will provide this service to all eligible
physicians in the Southeastern South Carolina, Western Tennessee and Northern
Georgia markets.
F. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE AGREEMENTS
Robinson will enter into administrative services agreements with the physicians,
Professional Corporations and other insurance providers which will delegate to Robinson
certain administrative, management and support functions which are required by
physicians in Administrative Services Agreements, Robinson will provide practice
management services. The Professional Corporations and the providers which contract
with Robinson will be solely and exclusively in control of and responsible for all aspects
of the practice of medicine and the delivery of medical services including, but not limited
to, diagnosis, treatment, surgery and therapy.
As compensation for services rendered to the Professional Corporations by Robinson
under the Administrative Services Agreements, Robinson will receive a management
fee, which will consist of a percentage of the practice’s revenue or a set monthly fee.
Robinson’s relationships with its subsidiaries, affiliated professional corporations
(the “Professional Corporations”), other providers of medical services, and Payors
(collectively, the “Robinson Network”) offer physicians the opportunity to participate
more effectively in managed coverage programs by organizing physician groups within
geographic areas to contract with Payors. Robinson improves physician practice
operations by assuming administrative functions necessary in a managed insurance
coverage environment. These functions include insurance claims administration,
utilization management of medical services, payor/provider contract negotiations, and
the operation of management information systems. Robinson believes that its network
management model is appealing to independent physicians because it allows the
physicians to retain control of their own practices while gaining access to more patients
through participation in a managed insurance coverage program.
G. MANAGEMENT
The principle officers of Robinson have been serving the Southeastern South
Carolina health, dental, physician liability, and supplemental insurance markets for
over 30 years and possess an intimate knowledge of the marketing skills and dynamics
of how to successfully serve this client base. Over this period of time, the scope of services
needed by the integrated insurance industry has expanded to include the negotiation of
managed care and insurance contracts, the creation and operation of sophisticated
information systems, and a turn-key management service for managing physician offices.
Robinson has the resources, personnel, knowledge and marketing plan to address this
new era of managed insurance coverage. Management believes that this climate presents
a significant opportunity to expand market share and profitability of the business.
82 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Operations
Network Development and Management is an area that represents the core
business of Robinson. Effective execution of the strategic and tactical plans of this division
will contribute to the ultimate success of Robinson’s sustainable competitive advantage.
Responsibilities will include the development of the local physician networks and IIAs,
market analysis, physician marketing, and full implementation of the Development
Plan. As local IIAs become effective, this group will assume responsibility for the oversight
of the local IIAs. Included in this function is the establishment of policies and procedures,
ensuring compliance and monitoring progress and growth. Both the development and
management component of this operating group will require detailed and innovative
analysis of the financial and operating potential, implementation and progress in meeting
tactical and strategic goals for local physician networks (including outcome analysis
and productivity reviews). The basis for this has been established in the prospective
financial model created as part of this Business Plan, which will serve as the initial
benchmark against which Robinson’s progress can be judged. The President will be
responsible for maintaining and augmenting this model’s function.
Managed Care Operations
Robinson’s ability to contract with insurance payors/providers at the local and
regional level will contribute to Robinson’s financial success. The managed insurance
operations group will also assist the local IIAs to develop, implement, measure and
improve policy and guidelines and ensure compliance with respect to business operations
of Van Robinson Insurance Group.
Directors and Officers
Shareholders of Robinson elect Directors for three-year terms who serve until
their successors have been elected and qualified. Officers serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Directors. Robinson will be actively seeking qualified individuals to serve on
the Board. The Board will be made up of persons from inside and outside of Robinson.
The following is a partial outline of the characteristics desired for potential Board
members:
• One member to be a physician having long tenure in the health care industry,
strong business orientation and expertise as a senior level health care executive
with possible national exposure.
• One member to have a nationally recognized background in health or dental
insurance laws.
• One member to have strong national background and recognition in insurance
coverage, product design and marketing.
• One or two members to have backgrounds as senior executives in national
companies involved in information technology and insurance coverage and
information systems.
• The balance of the Directors will be made up of individuals with strong business
backgrounds (insurance not a requirement), preferably representing Robinson’s
value-added partners.
Robinson believes that its sustainable competitive advantage can be enhanced by
augmenting its Board and advisors with individuals who are foremost among experts
within the health, dental, physician liability, and supplemental insurance industry.
INSURANCE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 83
The directors and officers must have a shared vision and culture of innovation and
leadership.
Principal Shareholders
The principal shareholders of Robinson, and the amount of stock owned by each,
it set forth in the following table:
Common
Name and Address Stock Percent
Thomas B. Kellar 600,000 98%
c/o Robinson
Other officers of Robinson 3,200 0.5%
Individuals 10,000 1.5%
As of July 31, 2002, there were 613,200 shares of common stock outstanding.
III. BUSINESS ANALYSIS-KEY SUCCESS FACTORS
Competitive Market Forces
The managed insurance coverage industry is highly competitive and is subject to
continuing changes in how services are provided and how providers are selected and
paid. Increased enrollment in prepaid premiums because of health insurance reform or
for other reasons, increased participation by physicians in group practices and other
factors may attract new entrants into the management service segment of the managed
insurance coverage industry and result in increased competition for Robinson. Certain
of Robinson’s competitors are significantly larger and better capitalized, provide a wider
variety of services, may have greater experience in providing insurance management
services and may have longer established relationships with payors. Accordingly,
Robinson may not be able to increase the number of providers affiliated with Robinson,
negotiate contracts with new payors on behalf of the Professional Corporations or
renegotiate favorable contracts with current payors.
Robinson’s strategy of concentrating on developing strategic alliances with
physicians and other insurance providers, rather than acquiring them, its state of the
art information systems, and its emphasis on more local markets, should give it a
competitive advantage in these areas, however.
84 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
The Components of Van Robinson Insurance Group
As Joint Venture Opportunities
Charleston Medical Market Regional National
Joint Venture Joint Venture
Segment/Joint Venture Investment Investment
Managed Insurance Services
Practice Management
• Robinson Management Services $ 400,000
• Robinson Financial Services 200,000
• Robinson Insurance Technologies 0 $ 400,000
Contract Insurance Sales
• Robinson Health 0 500,000
• Robinson Dental 100,000
• Robinson Pharmaceutical 200,000
Insurance Coverage Services
• Robinson Pharmaceutical Programs 200,000
• Robinson Dental Insurance 800,000
• Robinson Health Administrators 200,000 600,000
• Robinson Supplemental Insurance 200,000
• Robinson Physician Liability Services 200,000
• Robinson Work Related Services 200,000
• Robinson Insurance Fairs 400,000
• Robinson Insurance Group 200,000
Contract Insurance Sales
• Robinson Insurance Group Services 200,000 _________
 $3,500,000 $1,500,000
Other Information
• The investment equates in part to an organization fee payable by the Joint Venture
back to Van Robinson Insurance Group for having organized the Joint Venture. The
remaining part of the investment will stay in the Joint Venture company for working
capital purposes.
• Each Joint Venture, once created, will be self-sustaining with Van Robinson
Insurance Group providing sales, marketing and administrative services necessary to
sustain the operations of the entity. Each Joint Venture, however, can make autonomous
decisions.
• The Joint Venture will be the exclusive entity for specified functions that Van
Robinson Insurance Group would participate in and can conduct business on a national
level.
• Van Robinson Insurance Group and the Joint Venture partners will negotiate
revenue splits, responsibilities etc. on a case-by-case basis.
BUSINESS PLAN #11: Insurance Group Plan
BUSINESS PLAN #12: Insurance Company
Here you see an example of another business plan which is designed to set up an insurance organization.
You can compare features of this more concise business plan with the one immediately preceding it.
86 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
GRIFFIN & ASSOCIATES INSURANCE COMPANY
Griffin & Associates Insurance Company, brings together the diverse interests of the
insurance marketplace: physicians, other insurance professionals, insurance companies,
hospitals and patients. Griffin & Associates Insurance Company organizes and manages
physician practices and physician-managed networks. The chief advantage to the provider
network member is their ability to practice medicine free from most of the usual pressures
of the managed insurance coverage environment. As Griffin & Associates continues to
expand the network and refines our consulting/administrative capabilities, we will be
propelled into a role as a major provider of integrated solutions to the self-funded
marketplace in Phoenix, Arizona. We’ve recently added chronic disease management
and employee wellness programs to our offerings. Through our rapidly expanding network
base, combined with a variety of partner arrangements, we create dynamic options for
payors and self-funded employers on the demand side of the industry. On the supply
side, Griffin & Associates is committed to grow revenue through the expansion of our
practice management contracts and the addition of future contracts.
1. The National Market
The insurance industry receives over $1.5 trillion in revenue from private industry,
government Medicare and Medicaid programs, and private self-insured payors. This
amount is divided almost equally among physicians and dentists, hospitals, and other
insurance professional services, including pharmacy, nursing homes, and outpatient
services. Nationwide, there are over 1,000,000 professionals providing medical care.
In addition to the more than $1 trillion of direct insurance coverage cost, over $300
billion is spent administering the process of insurance coverage. This $300 billion in
revenue is received by insurance companies and third party administrators for handling
claims payments, utilization management, financial reporting and health plan design.
The insurance market is growing at a rate of 7 percent a year, and is projected to be a
$2.0 trillion market within ten years.
2. Products and Services
Griffin & Associates provides the following products and services to companies that
finance the demand for insurance and/or supply services:
• Design, development, and management of practitioner networks, which are then
contracted to local and national Managed Insurance Coverage Organizations
(MICOs), such as Preferred Provider Organizations, Health Maintenance
Organizations, large employers, workers’ compensation carriers, Third Party
Administrators, Insurance Companies, and government entities. This business
line includes contracts to generate nearly $8 million in gross revenue annually.
This is a growth business that will increase in direct proportion to the expansion
of the network itself.
• Provides assistance to third party administrators, insurance companies, both
indemnity and casualty, and other claim payers in the development and
management of employee benefit plans. The network’s ability to manage claim
costs is especially valuable in the area of self-funding, as large employers in
Phoenix are presented with attractive options to the current dominant MICO
INVESTOR OVERVIEW
This is a business plan
discussing the products
and services needed for a
successful insurance
company in Arizona
BUSINESS PLAN #12: Insurance Co., Investor Overview
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 87
in this market. With market capital, we will accelerate our market network
expansion activities, adding practitioners in Northern Arizona, and then
continuing our expansion across the state. Ultimately, the cost-effective results
achieved by Griffin & Associates’ network model will provide opportunities for
all payors to compete on an equal basis in the marketplace.
• Provides administrative services on an outsource basis to any insurance claim
payer that assumes the risk and responsibility of providing medical benefits.
These opportunities can include health, workers’ compensation, or automobile
liability-related medical claims. Services can include network management,
delegated credentialing, and other horizontally integrated outsource
arrangements.
• Provides information technology services to the physicians, dentists, and other
insurance coverage professionals who function within the supply side of the
service. These information technology services can also be delivered to the
insurance companies, TPAs, government, and hospital sectors supply side.
• Financial and business administrative functions are marketed to the physician
community to streamline their business processes. These services include billing
and cash flow management, information processing, electronic medical records
and information technology deployment.
• Marketing and business development services are offered to existing physician
practice management clients. The fees for these services are based on a
percentage of the physician’s revenue or a set monthly fee.
3. Customers
Demand Side
We identify our customers based on their position within the circle as follows:
• Currently, employers are our single largest block of customers, because they
provide and pay for benefits for their employees. Their expenditures support
the entire structure of today’s insurance system.
• Managed Insurance Coverage Organizations administer benefit plans for
employers and, in attempting to control claim costs, recognize and support
managed network structures similar to those Griffin & Associates has developed.
These customers include all payors of insurance related claims.
• Public sector entities, such as Medicare and Medicaid, will benefit greatly from
our services because these sectors have seen cost overruns, and many payors
have withdrawn from these markets. Our concept of non-risk outsourcing of
services allows us to generate revenue from payors who are intent on finding
cost-effective delivery methods.
Supply Side
• Physician groups represent our major supply side customers. Their needs parallel
the development of our services due to the nearly 25 years we have been providing
them with business management services. We anticipate a growing need for IT
services and the business connectivity that will be engendered by our e-business
development. In addition, there will be a growing market for business and
financial management, as well as management of the contractual process with
the demand side.
• Physician groups are also important in the development of the insurance
networks with which we then contract. Their full value will be realized as we
develop gain-sharing arrangements with large MICOs to drive costs lower, and
88 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
as we generate additional revenues through contract management.
• We also negotiate contracts with payors on behalf of dentists and other insurance
professionals for the delivery of cost-effective services.
• Hospitals are customers for network management services. Additionally, there
is a large market opportunity here in purchasing efficiencies, as well in the
area of IT services and financial management.
4. Economics
The financial opportunity for Griffin & Associates revolves around forming and
contracting with insurance provider networks, and providing administrative services to
payors. Revenue from these services is earned from the total flow of medical costs at a
rate of 6% of the plan’s medical cost. Net operating revenues equal approximately 65%
of the income for these services. IT, financial, marketing and administrative services
comprise Griffin & Associates’s additional revenue stream. We provide these services
on a contract basis to individual companies, normally at a percentage of their revenue.
Net operating revenue for these services approximates 25% of our billing.
5. People
Our management team includes senior-level professionals who possess extensive business
management and growth skills in every area of the current and future business
environment, except a senior-level IT business development officer. We anticipate filling
that position in advance of the projected roll out of our practice support products.
The management team has developed business contracts that will generate gross revenue
of over $4.7 million annually. Current strategic plans call for gross revenue growth to
exceed $40 million in five years.
6. Strategic Objectives-Insurance Management Services
Griffin & Associates first asserted itself as a managed insurance coverage company in
mid-1999, using its network of approximately 1,400 practitioners to attract large national
Managed Insurance Coverage Organizations that were interested in marketing their
products in Phoenix. These insurance claims payors received significant health claims
costs savings, enabling them to access lower fee contracts we negotiated with these
physicians. Through our services, Managed Insurance Coverage Organizations also
enjoyed significant savings on costs associated with developing and managing their
own networks, including expenses involved with credentialing providers.
Execution
Griffin & Associates began closing on contracts with a number of national Preferred
Provider Organizations (PPOs). Combined, they represent more than 100,000 health
members using the Griffin & Associates Network in Phoenix. These PPOs are:
• Multiplan
• CCN
• Evolutions Health Systems
• QRS
• FOCUS
• USA Managed Insurance Coverage Organization
INVESTOR OVERVIEW
BUSINESS PLAN #12: Insurance Co., Investor Overview
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 89
This growth has positioned us as a major player in the Northern Arizona marketplace,
enabling us to negotiate contracts from a position of significant strength. This positioning
continues to increase our value to our existing clients, and generate new sales.
Another beneficial aspect of our aggressive management is that a number of early
contracts have been reassessed, resulting in more business and better arrangements.
The following are some examples:
• FOCUS and QRS, two major Workers’ Compensation networks, have added
our hospital network.
• USA Health Network is re-examining their business direction in Arizona, and
will add another eight counties to their marketing area. They will also work
with Griffin & Associates to direct more of their current members through our
network.
Network-Based Growth Strategies
In order to maximize revenue from the effective delivery of care, Griffin & Associates
has two network-based growth strategies. The first is to increase business from current
clients. The second strategy is to add additional clients.
Increased Business from Current Clients
• Each National PPO has lives outside our current network coverage area. To
grow this business opportunity, we will expand our physician base throughout
Phoenix and Northern Arizona. At the same time, we are asking our current
clients to use us as their “Regional Network Administrator”. In this capacity,
we act on their behalf, contracting with practitioners in areas where they either
already have business, or plan to expand. This means that fewer companies
will actively work at the local level to contract with physicians, and will turn to
us to perform this function for them. In essence:
• We gain by representing more members, giving us better fee arrangements
• We expand our number of directly contracted physicians, thus increasing our
revenue from all customers:
• We currently have 5,500 practitioners.
• We will add another 2,500 practitioners.
• We add additional value to prospects by giving them a better network
than they now access.
• We will expand the network throughout Arizona into Phoenix, Arizona, and
rural areas dictated by the location of client members, as well as by emerging
growth opportunities. We already have the agreement of National PPO clients
to use our network on a provider-by-provider basis.
• We are developing/enhancing additional products for our clients, as follows:
• Our hospital network is not being universally used by our National
PPOs. We are increasing our number of facilities to encourage
utilization.
• Coverage network savings are comparable to our physician network
results, and we are focusing on adding these services for each client.
90 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Adding Additional Clients
Since our core competencies relate to network development and management, we will
develop new clients through two basic areas of the insurance business.
The first is the insured market, represented by various Insurance Companies and the
National PPOs that contract with them. We are fully engaged in this market, and since
our PPO contracts represent nearly every large insurer in the country, we are well on
the way to being the network of choice for insured benefit plans.
The second area is the self-funded market, which we will address as follows:
• We are currently targeting nearly 100 Third Party Administrators as potential
clients for our network services. At this time, all of these TPAs use our major
competitors’ networks.
• We plan to contact every large employer in Northern Arizona, and to offer them
an alternative to their current coverage program. In order to succeed in this
major strategic initiative, we need the following services, at minimum:
• A competent Third Party Administrator and an Insurance Claim
Adjudicator with EDI/Internet capabilities.
• A cost-competitive Stop Loss Insurer.
• Effective Utilization Management/Case Management Programs.
• Disease Management Programs.
• Insurance Service Agreements.
7. Status of Company Operations
Network and Health Plan Management Services:
• 25 medical network access contracts have been signed which are projected to
generate $550,000 of net revenue.
• Griffin & Associates’ net revenue for these contracts will be attained in 2003.
• The provider network continues to develop and expand. There are now 5,000
physicians, 200 dentists, and 50 hospitals in our network. The Phoenix network
will grow to 7,000 physicians, 500 dentists, and 60 hospitals over the next 18
months.
8. Company Needs
Griffin & Associates needs cash to successfully execute our sales plan, which encompasses
IT, financial services, administrative services, and other products. We need to hire a
senior level IT business development officer, and eight sales management positions
need to be developed over the next twelve months as sales continue to expand. Although
sales positions are 100% commission-driven, we must still meet certain start up expenses
and training costs. In addition, Griffin & Associates needs cash to pay down accounts
payable and certain note obligations incurred during the network development and IT
service development stages. Both of the network and IT service areas are sufficiently
developed and are fully operational. Future development costs of our products and
services will be paid through operational cash flow.
INVESTOR OVERVIEW
BUSINESS PLAN #12: Insurance Co., Investor Overview
BUSINESS PLAN #13: Janitorial Supply Company
This business plan has the purpose of securing a loan of $75,000 to purchase an existing janitorial supply
company. The plan was successful in obtaining the financing, and the janitorial supply company which
resulted is today a thriving business. You will find these and other sections included in this business plan:
Licenses and Permits
Executive Summary
Personnel
Market
Competition
Major Supplies
List of Business Assets
Five-Year Projections
92 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
WHITAKER JANITORIAL SUPPLIES
We will be selling various cleaners and cleaning equipment both in-home and
commercial in type and strength. (See APPENDIX for detailed item list.) Our business
will be a retailer with a “flavor” of wholesale image. Our attraction will be free delivery
and personal service and attention, with rapid turnaround time from order to delivery.
The market we intend to serve are businesses and professionals both in town and
outer rural areas.
With telephone, WATTS line, fax, ordering, and personal contact ordering, we
expect to improve our market share another 10% from 15% to 25%.
Other points which will make our business special to the consumers are computer
invoicing and billing, along with information on uses and dangers on our products, along
with an unconditional guaranteed satisfaction, total refund, or replacement.
Making our customers satisfied will be “job one.” Our plan is to know the personal
history of all family members and key personnel if possible. There will be birthday
cards, anniversary cards, Christmas cards, and congratulatory notes, not only to direct
contact or owners, but to all employers and their family members.
The changes we will make should generate much new life in our business.
The first of many positive improvements will be to computerize the running of the
business. In that, we will have accounts receivable/payable, inventory, billing information,
and key item sells by customer, order cycles, monthly reports, or financials (such as
cash flow), pertinent customer information, specific sell trends, and customer information
such as type of business, address, owners, employee names, addresses, birthdate,
children, ages, and anniversaries.
We also plan to begin looking for a new business site, more strategic increased
walk-in traffic, larger floor area for displaying, and closer to the high traffic area of
town (Collier Road close to bypass, Highway 73, or “on” the bypass itself).
The price formula is $10,000 by equipment fixtures and vehicles, $59,000 in physical
inventory, $25,000 in accounts receivable, and $5,000 in goodwill, for a total of $95,000.
LICENSE AND PERMITS
Whitaker Janitorial Supplies is currently registered with the Wisconsin Secretary
of State and is incorporated. Our plans are to reincorporate under the same name (have
permission of owners to do so). We will also obtain the La Crosse County business
license through the La Crosse County Registrar of Deeds.
JANITORIAL SUPPLY
SERVICE
Here is a business plan
for an organization that
sells various cleaning
equipment and supplies
BUSINESS PLAN #13: Janitorial Supply Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 93
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
There are many good reasons for a business plan: set monetary goals, sales goals,
profits, general company direction, and lender information. I hope that this plan does
all.
During the past two months I have spent working on this plan, I have been forced
to discover a lot of questions I needed to know the answers to and even the questions
themselves. Even though it has been tedious at times, I have grown a great deal from
my endeavors here.
It is my hope that you, the lender, will appreciate the fact that my plan is simple
and direct.
This plan is to put down in words the direction I will be taking with the company
in the coming years. The marketing strategies, sales, expenses, profits, profit margins,
other expenses, personnel needs, and payroll projections.
I plan to incorporate the business in the next six months and will be President of
the corporation. The company will be “Whitaker Janitorial Supplies and More.”
The company will be successful for a number of reasons. Two of the most important
bare my character and credibility. Thirdly, a solid plan which will be monitored and
adjusted to ensure the necessary changes are made when needed. Fourthly, years of
background and experience (See RESUME). Fifthly, updating how we do business,
computerization of accounts, improving ordering methods (utilizing the 80/20 rule), future
relocation, better organization, and very important, committed to success whatever it
takes.
I, Melvin Brett Stephens, am requesting a “LOB” loan in the amount of $75,000,
to purchase Whitaker Janitorial Supplies Company, Inc. At an interest rate of 10.125%,
repayable in monthly installments over five years.
I will “put up” $20,000.00 of my own money and have $5,000 in the bank for any
unforeseen monetary needs. The owners will carry a note for $5,000 for one year, payable
June 2004. With this, I offer $59,000 in company inventory, $25,000 in accounts
receivable, $10,000 in fixtures and equipment assets, and my personal guarantee.
This loan will not only help me secure a lifelong goal and a means for my personal
dreams, but will secure jobs in the community, maintain tax base, and be an investment
in the future if the community which we all are a part of.
Further, I cannot end without writing a statement made to me by my grandfather
when I was a young boy. He simply said, “Son, always remember this: a man who is
willing to roll up his sleeves seldom loses his shirt.” This has been my guide in every
endeavor I have ever undertaken, and has carried me through both the easy and hard
times in my career. I will not forego my lifelong work ethic now. I will succeed.
94 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
MANAGEMENT
My education will be an asset to our business. With an Associate of Science degree
in Business, I completed courses in Business Management, Business Math, and
Marketing and Motivation, along with over 25 self-help tape courses and seminars, I
will be prepared to effectively handle opportunities as they present themselves to me.
Physically, I am trim and fit. Very seldom have a cold very rarely and am almost never
out of work because of illnesses.
My product knowledge and experience in selling the products, and overall sales
experience, should lend itself to be invaluable assets to our success. The organization
structure will be as follows: Myself, Melvin Brett Stevens, President of corporation;
Connie Alechia Williams, Vice-President; Office Manager, and Receiving and Delivery
Manager.
I will be doing 90% of direct sales calls and cold calls in addition to delivery work.
Sarah, our Office Manager, will handle walk-in sales, bookkeeping responsibilities, and
invoicing. Shipping and Receiving Manager will handle 90% of the receiving and 85% of
the delivery responsibilities.
The wages will be set as follows for the first year:
M.B. Stevens — $10,600 Sarah — $16,800 John — $10,900
We have retained Scott Sanford, CPA, as the corporation accountant and Anthony
Borris as the corporation lawyer.
PERSONNEL
The staff, other than the owners, will stay as is, with the exception of an additional
part-time office and part-time delivery person. These positions will be added during the
second year as sales demand it. Training will be minimal with the exception of updating
staff to be able to work with the information and forms of the planned computer
installation in the first months. The cost here should be minimal as the training and
support for computerization will be provided by the computer company, along with
ongoing training and support.
MARKET
Our market area is currently the fourth largest by population in Wisconsin and is
expected to have solid growth in the future. The influx of the manufacturing companies
locally and the request for a new distribution center will continue to constitute growth
and stability in our trade area.
Our market percent is currently about 30% of like business sales in the market
and we are planning to increase that by 5% to 35% over the next 18 months.
Our market is very diverse in that all ages, sexes, occupations, lifestyles, incomes,
and locations are included in our customers. But we will target small businesses and
business professionals, such as medical offices, dentists, funeral homes, janitorial
services, car washes, maid services, insurance offices, machine shops, independent
automotive parts, car dealerships, banks, churches, rest homes, glass companies, diet
centers, real estate offices, and other such businesses.
JANITORIAL SUPPLY
SERVICE
BUSINESS PLAN #13: Janitorial Supply Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 95
We will keep and attract our market segment with quality products, unconditionally
guaranteed customer satisfaction, personal service, and free delivery.
The company’s mission statement will be, “Satisfied customers are not just our
goal, it is the only reason we will be here tomorrow.”
COMPETITION
The main direct competition to us is “Taylor Commercial Cleaning.” They have
not existed nearly as long in the area as we have. “Taylor Commercial Cleaning” is
owned by Franklin L. Gregory and managed by hire. Their main selling point is price.
We will be owner-operated and motivated, and concentrate on products, and service.
MAJOR SUPPLIERS
Hollingsworth Mop Company Concord Manufacturing, Inc.
Montgomery, AL Portland, OR
Trellman Manufacturing Piedmont Corporation
Spokane, WA Charleston, SC
Hilliard Broom Company Ivarsson Laboratories
Richmond, VA Miami, FL
Kilmer Works Einsen-Dale, Inc.
Harrisburg, PA New Orleans, LA
Tri-State Manufacturing Hughes Manufacturing
Atlanta, GA Lawton, OK
Temple Supply Company Navarro Broom Company
Ozart, AL Pittsburgh, PA
Zackerman Company Edinburgh Cleaning Co.
Savannah, GA Los Vegas, NV
Briar, Incorporated Heritage Paper Plan
Manning, SC Portland, OR
Johnson Paper Company Lehmer Janitorial Inc.
Los Angeles, CA Bossier City, LA
Hinkamp, Incorporation
Seattle, WA
96 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
LIST OF BUSINESS ASSETS
Inventory
Accounts Receivable
Utility Deposits
Telephone Numbers
Whitaker Janitorial Supplies Name
1995 Ford Explorer
1998 Mercury Grand Marquis
3 Executive desks
3 Swivel Chairs
1 Gas Heater
2 Air conditioners
1 Victor Adding Machine
1 Texas Instrument Adding Machine, TI-8210
1 Texas Instrument Adding Machine, TI-5219
1 Four-Drawer Filing Cabinet
1 Accounts Receivable Cabinet on Wheels
1 Counter W/Storage in Bottom
2 Office Shelving Units
2 3' X 12' Platform Displays
1 Four-Tier Shelving Unit
2 12' Display Units
3 Roll Matting Racks
1 Six-Tier Aerosol Display
1 Three-Tier Mop Display
1 8' Carpet Mat Display
5 Peg Board Wall Units
18 Wholesale Shelving Units
2 Hand Trucks
1 Hydraulic Drum Lifts
1 Work Desk
1 Drum Rack
2 Set Skate Wheel Conveyer
JANITORIAL SUPPLY
SERVICE
BUSINESS PLAN #13: Janitorial Supply Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 97
FIVE-YEAR PROJECTION
I estimate the shop’s income and expense figures for the first five years of operation according to APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX A
YEAR 1 YEAR 2 YEAR 3 YEAR 4 YEAR 5
Cash Receipts
Sales $305,000 $315,000 $324,000 $324,000 $330,000
Less-Increase in A/R <2,000> <2,000> <2,000> <2,000> <2,000>
Net Cash Receipts 303,000 313,000 316,000 322,000 328,000
Cash Disbursements
Cost of Goods Sold $198,250 $204,750 $203,520 207,360 207,900
Add-Increase Inventory 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 2,000
Less-Increase in A/P <3,400> <3,000> <2,250> <2,250> <2,000>
Total Cash Expended $199,850 $205,750 $207,110 $207,110 $207,900
for Merchandise
Salary - Officer $ 10,600 $ 12,600 $ 14,000 $17,600 $ 21,600
Salaries - Other 25,800 27,600 29,400 31,200 33,000
Sales Commissions 0 0 0 0 0
Other Expenses $ 38,388 $ 39,540 $ 40,726 $ 41,948 $ 43,206
Capital Expenditures
Trade for New Delivery Van $ 0 $ 6,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Computer System 3,000 0 0 0 0
Debt Service $ 17,848 $ 17,848 $ 17,848 $ 17,848 $ 17,848
Total Cash Disbursements $ 99,636 $107,588 $106,574 $112,596 $119,654
Net Cash Flow $<7,514> $<4,338> $<9,656> $<6,294> $<4,446>
Cumulative Cash Flow $ 7,514 $ 7,852 $ 13,508 $ 15,802 $ 16,248
This page intentionally left blank 
BUSINESS PLAN #14:
Loan Request,
Manufacturing Company
This business plan was intended to obtain financing for an expansion of a relatively large manufacturing
business. You will see components which include the following:
Overview
The company
Strong market position
Management stability and commitment
Restructuring
Summary of asset sale
Cash flow of asset sale
Overview of request for financing
Detailed loan request
Company history
Product information
Summary of the production process
Schedule of manpower
Analysis of the competition
General comments
Management: officers and senior managers
Profit and loss
Project income statement/cash flows
100 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
TIDWELL & MCNEIL VULCANIZING COMPANY (TMV)
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
OVERVIEW
Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing Company (TMV) is headquartered in Lawton, Oklahoma,
just southwest of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and is owned by the McNeil family (50%)
and by the Tidwell family (50%).
THE COMPANY
TMV began operating in March 1997. The Company was the result of an asset purchase
of the Hydraulic Division of the Louisiana Vulcanizing Corporation (LVC). The assets
purchased consisted of three strategically located manufacturing plants in Oklahoma,
Texas, and Louisiana.
The Louisiana Vulcanizing Corporation (LVC) was a wholly owned subsidiary of Centura,
which continues to operate its synthetic rubber business at a nearby facility.
STRONG MARKET POSITION
TMV generates sales via service vulcanizing for miscellaneous synthetic rubber, conveyor
belts and polyurethane products. While TMV has three principal competitors in its service
vulcanizing business, its strategic plant locations provide freight and service advantages
that make it the dominant vulcanizing company in the Southwestern region. In its
vulcanized rubber manufacturing services, Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing has no
meaningful competition due to the cost and quality advantages resulting from its unique,
proprietary manufacturing process. Additionally, no other competitor has an inventory
of vulcanized or conveyor belting materials available for resale. Unlike the competition,
TMV can guarantee same day shipping of any item in its extensive inventory. TMV is
the only high temperature vulcanizer in the Southwest region with an established outside
sales force and is the largest in the Southwest. The Company has far exceeded its three
competitors due to its reputation for quality, capacity, and service. Having multiple
plant locations gives customers the confidence that a vulcanizing job will be completed
on a timely basis.
MANAGEMENT STABILITY AND COMMITMENT
Mr. McNeil worked with LVC for over 20 years before the asset purchase. Mr. Tidwell
managed the former LVC’s operations for over 12 years and is currently President of
TMV.
RESTRUCTURING
Management has determined that the time has come to expand the vulcanizing business
by adding an additional facility. Management also desires to enter into a new conveyor
belt product line — idlers. Conveyor idlers are new to TMV — but not to management.
Conveyor idlers were a product of LVC since 1985 and are a major product of Centura,
the parent company of LVC. Management was in direct control of the idler product
BUSINESS PLAN #14: Loan Request, Manufacturing Co.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 101
LOAN REQUEST
For a vulcanizing
corporation located in
Oklahoma
until 1997, when management signed a five-year non-compete agreement which expired
on April 15, 2002. The vulcanizing facilities were always run as an operating division
separate from the conveyor application division.
Management feels that it is key to the success of both products (vulcanizing and
conveyor belts) that they be separated in the future.
Management intends to produce conveyor idlers in the TMV Legal Entity. The conveyor
idler production will be located at the Irving, Texas TMV production facility. The largest
potential vulcanized conveyor idler customer (Centura) has a second plant located nearby.
A new entity has been formed to manage the vulcanizing business. The new entity is
the South West Industries (SWI). SWI will purchase all of the inventory and receivables
of TMV.
Millhide Management, LLC will purchase from TMV all of the equipment located at the
Louisiana plant. Millhide will lease this equipment to SWI.
Vanderhorst Management, LLC will purchase from TMV all of the equipment located
at the Oklahoma plant. Vanderhorst will lease this equipment to SWI.
SWI will assume the land leases for Vanderhorst and Millhide on December 20, 2004.
A second, newly constructed company, Beringer, has also been formed. Beringer will
construct a new vulcanizing plant near Shreveport, LA. This construction has begun
and the building will be erected during the summer of 2004. The plant will be in operation
by mid 2004. Management determined that Shreveport was the best location for a new
plant because of the growth in Louisiana and the concentration of business on the I-43,
I-10 interstate highways. Management also determined that a 50' kettle is necessary to
service the changing market and that it was not practical to enlarge the Lawton plant
to accommodate the larger kettle. We protect our OK market, and open up the Louisiana
market, by building a large, strategically located facility in Shreveport. SWI will lease
the new facility from Beringer.
SWI will lease the Lawton facility from TMV for one year. This will give SWI time to be
operating the new Shreveport facility. There will be no service vulcanizing at the Lawton
facility after June 1, 2004. TMV will start the production and marketing of vulcanized
conveyor idlers on August 31, 2005. This activity will take place at the Lawton facility.
TMV and SWI will be managed as separate companies.
102 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
SUMMARY OF ASSET SALE
PURCHASE PRICE PAID BY SWI
1. Accounts Receivables $1,625,236
2. Cash 35,000
3. Inventory 1,037,975
4. Prepaids 71,400
__________
TOTAL: $2,769,611
PURCHASE PRICE PAID BY MILLHIDE AND VANDERHORST
1. Equipment 491,303
__________
TOTAL PURCHASE PRICE $3,260,914
SOURCE OF FUNDS/PURCHASE PRICE
1. Millhide and Vanderhorst Equipment Loan 686,000
2. Payables assumed 1,188,846
3. SWI Line of Credit 1,176,080
4. SWI Loan to TMV 210,000
__________
$3,260,914
CASH FLOW OF ASSET SALE
CASH OUT CASH IN
TMV:
1. Pay existing Fidelity Bankers (436,596)
2. Pay existing Centura loan (671,686)
3. Pay existing Coldwell Bankers (755,202)
4. Cash from SWI 1,863,484
___________ ____________
1,863,484 1,863,484
SWI, Millhide, Vanderhorst:
1. New equipment loan
Millhide/Vanderhorst 686,000
2. New working capital loan
SWI 1,177,486
3. Cash to TMV 1,863,484
____________ ____________
1,863,484 1,863,484
This loan will not be paid until the due date (12/04). The proceeds will be kept in escrow
and the payments and final payments will be made from escrow.
LOAN REQUEST
BUSINESS PLAN #14: Loan Request, Manufacturing Co.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 103
OVERVIEW OF REQUEST FOR FINANCING
South West Industries
• A working capital loan financing 80% of receivables and 40% of inventory.
• The initial loan amount will be $1,176,068 on August 31, 2003.
Beringer
• A 3-year fixed loan of $1,000,000 which will be used to complete the new vulcanizing
facility.
Millhide Management Company, LLC
• A total Millhide and Vanderhorst 3-year fixed loan of $686,000 which will be used to
purchase the equipment of TMV located at the Louisiana plant.
Vanderhorst Management Company, LLC
• A total Millhide and Vanderhorst 3-year fixed loan of $686,000 which will be used to
purchase the equipment of TMV located at the Oklahoma plant.
104 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
DETAILED LOAN REQUEST
I. South West Industries
A. SWI Working Line of Credit
1. Line $1,750,000
2. Interest Rate Not to exceed 3/4% over prime
3. Term 1 year
4. Processing fee Not to exceed 1/2% per year
5. Security Inventory and receivables
Guarantors: Jackson McNeil and Kalvin Tidwell
II. Millhide Management, LLC
A. Machinery and Equipment Loan
1. Principal requested Total Millhide and Vanderhorst loan of $686,000
2. Term 36 months
3. Interest rate 9.5%
4. Security Vulcanizing equipment located at LA location 3 year lease to
SWI. Lease to be assigned to lenders.
Guarantors: Jackson McNeil and Kalvin Tidwell
III. Vanderhorst Management, LLC
Machinery and Equipment Loan
1. Principal requested Total Millhide and Vanderhorst loan of $686,000
2. Term 36 months
3. Interest rate 9.5%
4. Security Vulcanizing equipment located at OK location 3 year lease to
SWI. Lease to be assigned to lenders.
Guarantors: Jackson McNeil and Kalvin Tidwell
 IV. Beringer, LTD — Loan to Build New Vulcanizing Facility:
1. Principal requested $1,000,000
2. Term 36 months
3. Interest rate 9.5%
4. Security Land, building, equipment of Beringer. Three (3) year lease to
SWI. Lease to be assigned to lenders.
Guarantors: Jackson McNeil and Kalvin Tidwell
Note: The Millhide and Vanderhorst loans are only secured by the equipment located
in LA and OK Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing will not guarantee any loans, nor will any
asset remaining at Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing be used as security for any loan of any
other company. TMV will need to borrow funds to enlarge and add to its conveyor idler
facility. The purpose of this reorganization is to create separate entities, independent of
each other, created to achieve distinct business goals.
LOAN REQUEST
BUSINESS PLAN #14: Loan Request, Manufacturing Co.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 105
LOANS BEFORE AND AFTER SALE OF TMV ASSETS
TMV SWI Millhide & Vanderhorst
Loans before sale:
1. Coldwell Bankers 755,202
2. Fidelity Bankers 436,596
3. Centura 671,686
Loans after sale:
1. New working capital loan 1,177,484
2. New equipment loan 686,000
_________ __________ _________
TOTALS: 1,863,484 1,863,484
Note: Centura note will not be paid off until maturity. Loan proceeds will be kept in an
interest bearing account. Monthly payments will be made until the due date, 12/31/04,
when the balance will be paid.
WORKING CAPITAL AVAILABLE AFTER ASSET SALE
South West Industries:
A/R 1,648,190
Inventory 1,075,035
____________
TOTAL: 1,975,725
A/R 80% 1,318,552
Inventory 40% 430,014
_____________
M/L 1,748,566
106 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
COMPANY HISTORY
1975: Louisiana Vulcanizing Company (LVC) founded by Jackson McNeil’s father
on October 25, 1979 as job shop vulcanizer.
20 Employees $50,000 Annual Sales
1978: LVC started carrying inventory of vulcanized bar material allowing for
vulcanized steel sales in addition to service vulcanizing sales.
40 Employees $1,000,000 Annual Sales
1980: LVC started line of vulcanized synthetic and silicone rubber, with one salesman
for all product lines.
70 Employees $2,700,000 Annual Sales
1981: LVC built the Hydraulic Division and installed the first high tension steel cord
for conveyor belting.
90 Employees $3,800,000 Annual Sales
1985: LVC started manufacturing rubber, plastic, steel banded drainage seals and
stone guards.
187 Employees $10,000,000 Annual Sales
1988: LVC purchased by Centura for its Hydraulic Division which sells high tension
steel cords and vulcanized polyurethane and rubber.
112 Employees $13,000,000 Annual Sales
1989: Centura acquired hydraulic molding and frame presses.
153 Employees $20,000,000 Annual Sales
1991: Added Louisiana Vulcanizing Plant.
175 Employees $24,000,000 Annual Sales
1993: Added Oklahoma Vulcanizing Plant.
195 Employees $27,000,000 Annual Sales
1997: Centura made the corporate decision to consolidate its U.S. and European
hydraulic manufacturing operations after a fire destroyed the European facility
in November 1996. To finance this move and the cost of a new facility in
California, Centura agreed to sell the 98-employee Hydraulic Division to
Jackson McNeil and Kalvin Tidwell.
210 Employees $32,000,000 Annual Sales
1997: Asset purchase of LVC’s Hydraulic Division.
Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing Company begins business with 90
employees and $10,500,000 in sales
2002: Tidwell & McNeil sells Vulcanizing Assets with the purpose of exiting the
Vulcanizing business to enter and specialize in conveyor belting services.
• Relates to Hydraulic Division not purchased from LVC and Centura.
HISTORY
South West Industries
2002 SWI formed to expand in service vulcanizing and investigate other vulcanized
products.
2003 SWI leases all vulcanizing assets of Millhide and Vanderhorst located in LA
and OK SWI leases the new vulcanizing facility owned by Beringer.
Millhide Management, LLC
2002 Millhide was formed in 2002 to purchase the land and buildings of TMV located
in Louisiana.
LOAN REQUEST
BUSINESS PLAN #14: Loan Request, Manufacturing Co.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 107
2003 Millhide purchases all equipment of TMV located in Louisiana. Millhide leases
all land, building and equipment for SWI.
Vanderhorst Management, LLC
2002 Vanderhorst was formed in 2002 to purchase the land and buildings of TMV
located in Oklahoma.
2003 Vanderhorst purchases all equipment of TMV located in Louisiana. Vanderhorst
leases all land, building and equipment to SWI.
Beringer, LTD
2002 Beringer, L.T.D. is a LA Limited Liability Company formed for the purpose of
constructing a new, state-of-the-art vulcanizing facility near Shreveport, LA.
• Beringer, L.T.D. is 50% owned by Richard Fields and 50% owned by
Kalvin Peterson, Jr.
• Beringer, L.T.D. has a three-year lease with South West Industries for
the new facility. The lease will be triple net and the monthly fee will be
$45,000.
• Beringer intends to assign the SWI lease to a lender for use as collateral
for a three-year term loan in the amount of $1,000,000.00.
PRODUCT INFORMATION
SERVICE VULCANIZING
Because customers send in plastic to be vulcanized and are charged by the pound, this
is a freight-sensitive, territorial business. The rubber with sulfur used in the vulcanizing
process is supplied by Aulden, a European corporation and Lancaster, an importer of
Sulfur. Due to the large amount of rubber purchased by SWI, the Company is able to
negotiate favorable pricing significantly lower than the prevailing market price. The
crude Indian rubber price is fixed under contract and negotiated annually each year.
SWI will have three mature and established satellite plants located 250 miles apart.
Each plant will dominate its respective market region in Texas, Louisiana and Oklahoma.
VULCANIZED PLASTICS SALES
SWI purchases plastics and synthetic and silicone rubber from mini-mills, vulcanizes
them, places the finished product in inventory, and resells to manufacturers of automobile
products such as rubber tires, bearing seals, and conveyor rollers. SWI is able to purchase
plastics from several regional mini-mills at competitive prices.
NEW PRODUCTS
The market for new and used conveyor belting services is starting to develop after many
years of work. The current competitive product has experienced many failures and
shortcomings. SWI is uniquely positioned to take advantage of this potentially large
market. SWI is currently analyzing the market for vulcanized materials such as rubber
lined pipes, drums and hoppers made from raw or cured rubber. These products are
manufactured for the construction market which require minimal fabrication.
PRODUCT SERVICE INFORMATION
Vulcanized conveyor belting systems are manufactured for new facility installations
as well as belt change outs. Our new facility will provide various products such as
108 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
transmission belts (joined and supplied), poly belts (round or flat), lag pulleys and head
drums. We will offer splicing and vulcanizing services for onsite or factory work. The
standard splicing equipment will accommodate 2.2 mtrs wide in rubber and 1.5 mtrs
wide. The products will be sold through agents who charge an average of 8% for their
services.
We are cultivating a new vulcanized product not yet revealed. This product will be
revolutionary in the automobile industry. A press release for our new product will be
available after September 30, 2005 once construction of our new plant in Texas has
begun. Management is completely familiar with this product.
Centura is the largest consumer of vulcanized conveyor belts in the U.S. They are
located less than one mile from the Lawton production facility. Centura currently
purchases all vulcanized conveyor belts from outside sources. TMV is preparing a quote
to supply all vulcanized conveyor belts to Centura.
SUMMARY OF THE PRODUCTION PROCESS
RECEIVING SPLICING
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
1. MATERIAL UNLOADED FROM 1. MATERIAL IS DEGREASED
TRUCK, INSPECTED, WEIGHED, 2. MATERIAL IS CLEANED TO
AND COUNTED. BARE RUBBER
2. MATERIAL PLACED ON RACKS. 3. MATERIAL IS RINSED IN
3. RECEIVING REPORTS COMPLETED. IN WATER
VULCANIZING SHIPPING
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
1. MATERIAL IS SUBJECTED TO 1. MATERIAL IS CLEANED,
INTENSE HEAT TO CREATE PACKAGED, WEIGHED, AND
DURABLE ELASTICITY, SHIPPED.
STRENGTH AND STABILITY.
SCHEDULE OF MANPOWER
2003
Direct labor:
Conveyor belts 6
______________
Indirect labor:
Conveyor belts 3
_______________
Sales:
Conveyor belts 2
________________
Administrative:
Accounting 2
_______________
2
TOTAL: 13
LOAN REQUEST
BUSINESS PLAN #14: Loan Request, Manufacturing Co.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 109
SCHEDULE OF MANPOWER BY PLANT LOCATION — 2003
Shreveport, LA Lawton, OK Irving, TX
DIRECT LABOR:
Group Leaders 4 5 6
Material Handlers 17 18 17
_________ _________ ________
TOTAL DIRECT LABOR 21 23 21
INDIRECT LABOR:
Plant Managers 1 1 1
Shift Managers 2 2 2
Shipping 2 2 3
Maintenance 2 3 3
Administrative Assistances 1 1 0
_________ _________ _________
TOTAL INDIRECT LABOR 8 99
SELLING:
Sales Manager 0 0 0
Inside Salesperson 1 2 1
Clerical Salesperson 0 0 1
Rubber Salesperson 1 0 0
___________ _________ _________
TOTAL SELLING 2 22
TOTAL: 31 34 32
ADMINISTRATIVE:
President 1 Treasurer 1
Controller 1 Accounting Clerks 3
Administration 1
TOTAL: 7
ANALYSIS OF THE COMPETITION
Competitor Volume Started Employees Facilities
Fargo Vulcanizing $3,000,000 1972 40 40,000 sq. ft.
Portland Vulcanizing $3,000,000 1970 50 25,000 sq. ft.
Vulcan Industries $3,000,000 1978 85 90,000 sq. ft.
Fargo Vulcanizing, Inc. - The Company’s largest competitor. Fargo is a strong
competitor in the deep Northwest. The owners have been in the industry for over 20
years. Fargo is price competitive on large jobs. Fargo performs heated vulcanizing at all
three plants located in Rapid City, SD, Fargo, ND, and Omaha, NE.
Portland Vulcanizing Corporation - A non-aggressive competitor and will not lower
prices in a bidding situation. Management tends to go after low-volume, high-margin
work. The owner has been in the vulcanizing business for over 25 years. The company
also manufactures related vulcanizing equipment and is well capitalized. Added a 42'
kettle in 1998. We expect more aggressiveness and price competition.
Vulcan Industries - An aggressive competitor. Merle Higgins, President, purchased
the company in 1992 from his family. Mr. Higgins is 49 and has worked in the business
since college. Vulcan Industries is squeezed between the Louisiana SWI plant in
Shreveport, Louisiana, and the plant in Lawton, Oklahoma in which sales are generated
by vulcanizing synthetic and silicone rubber as well as manufacturing vulcanized forklift
mats and power blocks. Added a 42' kettle in 1999. Have become very aggressive.
110 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
GENERAL COMMENTS
The competitors listed represent companies with vulcanizing operations which have
territories that, to some degree, overlap with the territories of SWI. As a general rule,
all the competitors mentioned are not as aggressive as SWI. Most of the competitors
focus on service vulcanizing sales and have little or no experience successfully
manufacturing vulcanized products. None of the competitors have an outside sales force.
They all depend on longtime customers. SWI started the Oklahoma and Louisiana plants
with no customer base. It was necessary to use aggressive selling. This team of
experienced salesmen has been chipping away at the foundation of the competitors in
their territory. The sales force is trained to look for low-volume, high-margin products
which SWI will produce and vulcanize. The SWI sales force and its aggressive approach
in the market sets SWI apart from its competitors.
As noted above, our closest competitors have added larger kettles and/or replaced their
existing kettles with a larger one. It is essential that SWI have a larger, better located
facility. It is the management’s opinion that if SWI does not put a large facility on the
85/40 corridor in TX, someone else will. There are three major manufacturers and
distributors of vulcanized conveyor belts.
1. Centura Buys and sells 100,000 - 200,000 belts per month
Irving, TX
2. Vulcan Produces and sells 100,000 belts per month
Texarkana, TX
3. Eppson Produces and sells 75,000 belts per month
Hammond, IN
MANAGEMENT EXPERIENCE: OFFICERS
KALVIN TIDWELL, President Age: 50
1997 - Present Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing Company - Lawton, Oklahoma;
President, Responsible for all operations of the company.
1988 - 1997 Louisiana Vulcanizing Corporation - Shreveport, Louisiana; V.P.
and General Manager
1992 - 1997: Directed all Vulcanizing operations for Texas, Louisiana,
and Oklahoma operations.
1988 - 1992: Responsible for all manufacturing and related production
activities at finishing plants in Shreveport, Louisiana.
1978 - 1988 Gaston Battery Company – Kansas City, KS; Assistant Plant
Manager
1986 - 1988: Responsible for manufacturing, maintenance, industrial
engineering, and production/inventory control departments at the
Kansas City complex. This plant employed 1,200 persons and produced
“Energizer” brand batteries.
1982 - 1986: Responsible for management of the company’s foreign
and domestic battery chemical plant at Kansas City, Kansas.
1978 - 1982: Responsible for quality control, process development, and
operations supervision.
Education: University of Kansas at Lawrence - B.S.
LOAN REQUEST
BUSINESS PLAN #14: Loan Request, Manufacturing Co.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 111
JACKSON MCNEIL, Vice President, Age: 44
1997 to Present Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing Company - Lawton, Oklahoma;
Vice President
• Responsible for finance and purchasing.
1996 to Present Hobbs & McNeil, Attorneys - Lawton, Oklahoma; Partner in law
firm
1991 to 1996 Centura, Inc. – Bolivar, MO; Vice President
1993 - 1996: Designed and implemented a turnaround strategy for
Centura Fastening Systems in Irving, TX. Involved in all phases of
manufacturing of stud welding equipment; established new control over
inventory, accounts receivable, and quality; reorganized sales
management and marketing strategies; renegotiated union contracts;
consolidated Missouri operation into the Texas operation resulting in
a 270-employee profitable operation.
1991 - 1993: Directed manufacturing facilities in Texas, Missouri and
Hawaii with total sales of $60 million.
1989 - 1991 Louisiana Vulcanizing Corporation - Shreveport, Louisiana;
General Manager
• Implemented a management system for LVC which at the time
had 200 employees and $23 million in sales. Actively involved in
managing every department of the Company.
1983 - 1989 Louisiana Vulcanizing Corporation - Shreveport, Louisiana;
1985 - 1989: President: Developed operating policies and procedures
that helped sustain company growth from $7 million to $15 million in
annual revenues. The Company was sold to Centura, Inc. in 1988.
1983-1985: Controller: Performed various production-related
responsibilities. Controlled financial functions and developed
manufacturing cost system. Implemented a new management team
and developed the Hydraulic Division which resulted in a 200% increase
in sales in 1985.
Education: Louisiana Tech University - M.B.A., McNeese University
- J.D. Louisiana Tech University - B.S., Certified Public Accountant
SENIOR MANAGERS
JOHN PALLON - Age 57. The Plant Manager at the Lawton, Oklahoma plant for over
ten years. He has been employed by Louisiana Vulcanizing and Tidwell & McNeil
Vulcanizing for 20 years.
NORMAN HARPER - Age 41. The Plant Manager in Texas. Mr. Harper has been
employed by Louisiana Vulcanizing and Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing for the past five
years. He had five years of management experience at Powell National and eight years
of experience with Jasper Industries ranging from production control to assembly
supervisor.
WALTER JENKINS - Age 38. The Plant Manager at the Lawton, Oklahoma plant for
over six years. Mr. Jenkins was formerly the production shift supervisor in Texas for
over five years.
FELIX KEYES - Age 60. Overall responsibility for Tidwell & McNeil sales and marketing
program. Mr. Keyes has over eight years of experience with the Company and has had
both sales and plant management responsibilities in the Lawton, Oklahoma plant.
ROBERT POWELL - Controller. Overall financial responsibility. CPA with 16 years
of managerial accounting experience with Centura. Has managed all financial
departments in several Centura companies with sales from $1,000,000 annually to
$28,000,000.
112 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
HISTORICALLY STRONG PROFITABILITY
The Tidwell & McNeil Vulcanizing Company has a steady track record of profitability.
Earnings before interest, depreciation, and taxes for the past six years have been as
follows:
2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997
_____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
NET SALES 10,196 12,556 12,429 10,885 10,335 9,521
COST OF SALES 7,939 9,918 9,890 8,578 8,173 7,914
_____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
GROSS PROFIT 2,257 2,638 2,539 2,307 2,162 1,607
GROSS PROFIT % 22.1% 21.0% 20.4% 21.1% 20.9% 16.9%
SELLING, GENERAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE
EXPENSE 1,417 1,698 1,441 1,411 1,485 1,258
_____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
INCOME FROM
OPERATIONS 840 940 1,098 896 677 349
Add backs:
DEPRECIATION 425 550 483 545 516 623
_____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
EBITD 1,265 1,490 1,581 1,441 1,193 972
_____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____
Note: EBITD stands for “Earnings before income taxes and depreciation.” All figures
shown are expressed in thousands (000’s) of dollars.
LOAN REQUEST
BUSINESS PLAN #14: Loan Request, Manufacturing Co.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 113
PROFIT AND LOSS
P/L 131,547 364,624 396,084 156,037
Taxes 43,500 120,500 130,500 51,493
NET PROFIT 88,047 244,124 265,584 105,544
Add depreciation cash 53,487 107,963 107,963 107,963
available _________ ________ ________ ________
141,894 352,987 373,547 212,507
Principal 147,591 316,983 348,443 186,983
Cash (5697) 35,104 25,104 25,524
(for plant improvement)
Note: All figures above expressed in thousands (000’s) of dollars.
PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT/CASH FLOWS
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
_____ _____ _____ _____ _____
INCOME
Rent 287,640 287,640 287,640 71,640 71,640
EXPENSES
Interest 22,700 21,600 20,490 5,450 4,900
Depreciation
Building 7,900 7,900 7,900 7,900 7,900
Equipment 98,000 98,000 98,000 98,000 98,000
Other Expenses 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
Total Expenses 149,040 137,500 136,390 121,354 120,800
P/L 138,600 150,140 151,250 (49,894) (49,160)
Taxes 45,738 49,500 49,500
Net Profit 92,862 100,640 101,750 (49,894) (49,160)
Add Depreciation 106,900 106,900 106,900 106,900 106,900
Add Principal due 58,864 64,705 71,128
TOTAL CASH AVAILABLE 258,626 272,245 279,778 57,006 57,440
PRINCIPAL DUE
Term loan 207,401 227,987 250,611
Other 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000
TOTAL PRINCIPAL DUE 227,401 247,987 270,611 20,000 20,000
NET CASH 31,225 24,258 9,167 37,006 37,440
This page intentionally left blank 
BUSINESS PLANS #15, 16, 17:
Trucking Company
Used Car Warranty Business
Wholesale Company, Home-Based
In this final section related to business plans, you will see business plans related to the start-up of a new
trucking company providing long-haul commercial services, the establishment of a company providing used
car warranties, and a home-based wholesale company. Here are some of the component parts of these business
plans:
Executive summary
Start-up expenses
Ownership and business concept
Management and strategic overview
Business description
Marketing plan
Business strengths and weaknesses
116 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
I am interested in starting a trucking company that provides long haul transportation
for commercial companies. I request that I be provided finances to purchase one tractor
truck. I have enclosed a profit estimation after expenses. This trucking business will be
a joint venture by myself and Gary Faircloth. The following contains information on his
financial history:
Gary Faircloth SSN# 000-00-0000
Salary: Retirement pay $550 monthly
Social Security $350 monthly
Employment $600 monthly
Accounts: Bank of America #8888777766
First Federal #9998887777
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I am interested in starting a trucking company that will provide quality long haul and
local transportation to America’s premier shipping population throughout the United
States. Currently there are two leasing companies that are being considered: The
Fordham Truck Line Inc., and Clayton Transportation, which both provide owneroperators/fleets owners programs that are very competitive. However, Fordham appears
to be the best of the two; they are a financially strong company which first began
operations in 1967. Since that time they have grown into one of the nation’s premier
carriers with revenues exceeding $125 million dollars in 2003. Their mileage scale is
designed as a competitive package for owner-operators that are concerned with deadhead
costs and productivity.
Fordham is a market-driver truckload company, with nearly forty years experience in
the industry. They employ drivers to operate the equipment they own, which includes
1,300 tractors and 2,300 trailers. They are also a part of Roadster Transportation, Inc.,
the largest group of truckload companies in the United States. Consisting of five truckload
carriers, Roadster controls more than 7,000 tractors, 10,000 trailers, and 750 field
locations.
Fordham is our choice as a leasing company because they provide a more complete
package that eliminates the worry over what percentage the load pays and focuses on
running miles for the trucks. Their program consists of .83 cents per mile loaded and
.76 cents empty. We estimate that our truck will travel 2,500-3,800 miles per week.
Fordham offers 401K and Driver Protection Plan (DPP) that covers occupational
accidents, disability income, accident medical expense, non-occupational accidents and
passenger accident coverage. Fordham also uses a modern computerized central dispatch
system capable of effectively managing fleet through pre-planning the next load before
the current load is delivered. Fordham will also advertise for a truck driver, and provide
the test at no cost to the owner.
TRUCKING COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #15: Trucking Company Start-up
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 117
START-UP EXPENSES
We estimate that we will require between $28,500 and $34,000 to purchase one tractor (truck). This tractor
will be a conventional vehicle that is powered by engines with 9 and 10 speed transmissions.
The following is a breakdown of items and costs:
ITEMS LOW HIGH
Tractor Truck 2000-01 $28,500 $34,000
Initial Business Cost $ 500 $ 700
Miscellaneous $ 200 $ 500
VARIABLE COST
Price of Tractor $28,500 $34,000
FIXED COST
Repairs/Maintenance per 15,000 miles $ 200 $ 300
Payroll/Benefit and Taxes $ 500 $ 600 weekly
Insurance $ 45 $ 55 weekly
Monthly Notes Payments $ 800 $ 950 monthly
INCOME
Gross $ 2,200 $ 2,500 weekly
Formula:
Estimate 2500-2800
Mile per week at
83 cents per mile
EQUITY/CAPITAL
Owner’s Tractor $28,500 $34,000
OPERATIONS EXPENSES
Driver Salary $ 500 $ 600 weekly
Repairs/Maintenance $ 200 $ 300 monthly
Insurances $ 45 $ 55 weekly
Miscellaneous $ 100 $ 150 bi-weekly
Net Profit after expenses estimate: $ 750 $ 950 weekly
118 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
USED CAR WARRANTY
BUSINESS
Here is a preliminary
proposal involving a motor
club and an auction
company in Las Vegas.
LAS VEGAS ELITE MOTOR CLUB
America has always had a love affair with cars. For the average consumer, that
love is most often expressed in the purchase of a used car. Used vehicles are less expensive
and the purchaser’s investment doesn’t depreciate as quickly. However, new cars have
always enjoyed one major advantage over used cars—perceived reliability, seen as the
result of the manufacturer’s warranty.
Increased market for warranties on pre-owned vehicles. The “warranty advantage
of new cars” has gradually been eroded over the years, with the proliferation of “program”
vehicles which still have much of their factory warranty remaining, and with the growing
business in after market used car warranties. A number of companies have entered the
used car warranty business in the last decade and a half, but very few of them are
making full use of the latest marketing tools to expand into nontraditional areas, such
as direct-to-consumer warranty sales.
An Exciting Concept: A Pre-Owned Car Warranty Endorsed by Las Vegas Elite
Motor Club! We propose to start a different kind of used-car warranty company, one
that capitalizes on the latest cutting-edge marketing technologies while benefiting from
“brand-name” recognition through our proposed affiliation with the Las Vegas Elite
Motor Club.
• Elite Motor Club Affiliation: With the skyrocketing interest in the Classic Auto
Auction Company located in the heart of Las Vegas, we feel that an affiliation with
the company would lend name recognition to our warranty products. In exchange for
this name recognition, we propose to pay the company a set amount for every used
car warranty contract sold. For their part, The Classic Auto Auction Company would
give our club their official endorsement and participate as fully as possible in the
marketing of our warranty products. This would be achieved through promotional
materials in the print, radio, and television media, as well as through personal
appearances and other joint promotions.
Organizational Structure: Our company would be divided into two divisions:
• Dealer Division: the Dealer Division would market our warranty products to all of
the traditional markets, selling used car warranties to the more than 80,000 used
car dealers in the United States.
• Consumer Division: the Consumer Division would market our used car warranty
services directly to the customer; via the Internet and other cutting-edge marketing
technologies, information on our products would be widely available to used car owners
nationwide. The company web site would explain the benefits and advantages of our
warranty products, and then offer the customer additional information on how to
purchase those products. Banner ads would link our site to the Classic Auto Auction
web site and other motor sports web sites, increasing the benefits realized by both
the company and club.
An easy method of obtaining the warranty: Potential customers who wish to
purchase a warranty could then make use of our products simply by taking their used
vehicle to one of many inspection stations nationwide. Once the vehicle passed an initial
inspection covering those areas required by our insurer, the consumer would be able to
purchase a used car warranty directly from our company, without having the hassle
and additional expense of going through the dealer.
BUSINESS PLAN #16: Used Car Warranty Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 119
Marketing Strategies: In addition to the Internet marketing strategies mentioned
above, our warranty products would be offered through aggressive direct mail campaigns
to new car customers whose factory warranties have expired. We would also offer our
services through national telemarketing campaigns, point-of-purchase brochures at
dealer locations and our inspection stations, etc. Contracts with established automotive
service centers such as Midas, Meineke, Pep Boys, and Precision Tune would provide
additional outlets for potential customers to have their vehicles certified for warranty
purposes.
Insurance Coverage: Warranty coverage would be fully insured by an insurance carrier
licensed in all fifty states. Companies we are negotiating with have vast experience in
underwriting mechanical breakdown insurance and in claims handling.
History of the Successful Entrepreneur Proposing this Concept: The proposal is
being organized and directed by Carlos Montego, the original founder, President, and
CEO of Auto-Marketing Corporation. This Nevada Corporation provided marketing and
servicing of used car warranties in more than 40 states between 1995 and 2001. AutoMarketing grew from a start-up company to employ more than 120 representatives
nationwide as well as a 40-person claims department. Over the course of his involvement
with AMC, Mr. Montego supervised all aspects of the business including managing
human and fiscal resources, marketing, claims, underwriting, and dealer liaison. In
only six years, Auto-Marketing took in warranty premiums in excess of $30 million, and
Mr. Montego built this start-up company into a prime acquisition target, which he then
sold in 2001.
In Summary: The Las Vegas Elite Motor Club is invited to endorse a potentially
profitable and popular concept which could be of great value to the consumer
and which would be implemented by knowledgeable industry professionals:
With the new technology available for marketing and purchasing, combined with the
growing popularity of the Elite Motor Club and other motorsports, this venture could
prove to be a tremendous profit center for them. Based on preliminary projections, we
expect to generate in excess of 2,000 contracts per month between the dealer and
consumer divisions.
Mr. Montego is advising a group of investors who are building a newer, stronger concept
for marketing used car warranties. Clearly he and the rest of his development team
have the industry experience and hands-on knowledge necessary to make this new
venture an even greater success than Auto-Marketing Corporation was in the nineties.
We hope that the Las Vegas Elite Motor Club will see the obvious advantages, and lend
their endorsement to this exciting venture which offers much profit potential to everyone
concerned.
120 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
JCI WHOLESALE COMPANY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
OWNERSHIP AND BUSINESS CONCEPT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MANAGEMENT AND STRATEGIC OVERVIEW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
BUSINESS DESCRIPTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
DOLLAR & SENSE ARTICLE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
HOME-BASED BUSINESS ARTICLE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MARKETING PLAN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MAIL ORDER PROGRAM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MAP OF TARGETED AREAS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ADVERTISEMENT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
PARTY PLAN (OPEN HOUSE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SUB-WHOLESALER. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
POPULATION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
RETAIL SALES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
OWNERSHIP AND BUSINESS CONCEPT
Joseph C. Ivarsson is the President of JCI Wholesale Company. He owns 100% of this
business. JCI Wholesale Company is a wholesale retail business supplying jewelry,
electronics, knick knacks, and gift items. These sales (wholesale/retail) can also be done
through mail orders.
MANAGEMENT AND STRATEGIC OVERVIEW
The President of JCI Wholesale Company is directly involved in all internal and external
aspects of the business. Mr. Ivarsson is responsible for inventory, advertising, budgeting
and forecasting, training, and purchasing.
Mr. Ivarsson’s role within JCI Wholesale is also to handle all financial matters, to train
employees in quality customer service, and to make its service known to New Jersey
and throughout the world. JCI Wholesale will get its exposure from the service of New
York and New Jersey Ad Mail, which can reach 90,000 households. The Trenton Times’
classified section, which can reach over 200,000 readers, will also be utilized.
Mr. Ivarsson’s received his leadership skills from the NCO Academy, and he gained his
hands-on management experience as a squad leader in the 5th Avionics Division of Fort
Drum, NY. Mr. Ivarsson received the rank of Sergeant in less than three years of his
service in the U.S. Army, a rank which is normally achieved in six years.
Wholesale Company is a home-based business. This will give this young business a
competitive edge. By being home-based, Mr. Ivarsson does not have to pay money to
rent office space at a high overhead cost. The growth potential of the market is unlimited,
due to mail order aspects of this business. So, Mr. Ivarsson will spend more time and
money reinvesting into the business and paying off the loan. We can conclude that a
home-based business allows this business to operate “on a shoestring” and maximize
the efficiency of initial working capital.
WHOLESALE COMPANY
This is a business plan for
an organization that
supplies jewelry,
electronics, and various
gift items.
BUSINESS PLAN #17: Wholesale Company, Home-Based
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 121
BUSINESS DESCRIPTION
To better understand JCI Wholesale Company and its abilities, I will attempt to break
this business down into three categories. These categories are Wholesaling, Direct Sales,
and Mail Orders.
I. WHOLESALING
A. General Wholesaling: Cash & Carry Wholesaling: Stocks merchandise
and requires the retailer to transport and pay for merchandise which
he orders. Merchandise is stocked in showroom where customers (cash
& carry customers) can browse and buy on impulse.
B. Drop-ship Wholesaling: Orders obtained for Sub-wholesalers and Open
House (party plan) representatives. Orders are drop shipped to them
or to their customers.
C. Catalog Jobber: Catalog distribution at discount prices. Catalogs are
distributed to consumers and retail stores. Catalogs for retailers are
at wholesale prices.
D. Direct Mail Distribution: Wholesaling and retail sales by mail.
E. Premiums and Promotional Wholesaling: Supplies needs of business,
nonprofit organizations, and professional people who purchase
quantities of specialty merchandise for purposes other than retail sales
(P.T.A.’s, churches, fraternal groups, such as Rotary Clubs, etc.).
Premiums used by sales organizations, retail stores, and manufacturers
are used to accomplish the following:
1. Induce a prospect to buy a product.
2. Require that a demonstration be viewed.
3. Be present at the opening of a store.
4. Purchase of larger than normal quantity of products.
5. Offset competitor activity.
6. Inspire greater effort by salesman.
F. Rack Merchandising: Pre-sold products on self-service racks placed in
drug stores, grocery stores, variety stores, and retail businesses.
G. Wagon Jobbing: Load truck with merchandise, take orders from retail
merchants, and deliver them at the same time.
H. Catalog Shopping Center: Shopping centers with catalogs, orders forms,
etc. These shopping centers will be placed in drug stores, grocery stores,
variety stores, retail businesses, etc.
I. Sub-Wholesales: Recruited wholesalers with a complete business kit.
They are independent wholesalers supplied by JCI Wholesale Company.
II. DIRECT SALES
A. Fund Raiser: Supplies the needs of PTA’s, churches, schools, and other
organizations that purchase quantities of specialty merchandise for
the purpose of raising funds.
B. Party Plan (open house): Open House Representatives with complete
kits. Open House Representatives are supplied by JCI Wholesale
Company.
III. MAIL ORDER
A. Retailing and Wholesale: Done by mail. This gives the business the
opportunity to extend its service throughout New Jersey and beyond.
122 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
MARKETING PLAN
The goal of JCI Wholesale Company is to reach 90,000 to 1.9 million customers/clients.
This can and will be done by the services of New York and New Jersey Ad Mail and The
Trenton Times’ classified ads. These vehicles will help JCI Wholesale Company expand
its boundaries by way of Direct Mail (mail orders).
This business can and will expand itself “without leaving its own back yard.” Direct
mail will be fastest in getting consumer and retail accounts. These orders will be dropshipped by UPS to the consumer’s and retailer’s address. Cost of drop ship is included
with every order, so it will not come out of our pockets.
JCI Wholesale Company believes in sharing the wealth by giving entrepreneurs the
opportunity of going into business themselves. This is done by the Sub-Wholesale and
Party Plan (open house) program. They have access to all of our products at wholesale
prices.
STRENGTHS
- Services not limited to Mercer County
- Business is home-based (see article attached regarding growth of home-based
 employment)
- Don’t need to warehouse merchandise
- Order drop-ship by UPS
WEAKNESSES
- Need phone receptionists to fill orders
- Size of work area and showroom are small
- Small selection on electronic items
- Takes one week for consumer and retailer to receive orders
MAIL ORDER PROGRAM
GOAL: $2,000 worth of orders will produce $24,000 in gross profits.
STEPS TO ACHIEVE GOAL
1. Price-break circulars (10)=$249.50
2. 10-Day Sale Program (100)=$300.00
3. Christmas collection (1,000)=$89.95
4. Fragrances (1,000)=89.95
5. Gift World Discount Package (100)=$250.00
6. Gift World (1000)=$250.00
7. 14K Catalog (1000)=$250.00
8. New Jersey and (90,000)=$5,305
9. New York Ad Mail (90,000)=$5,305
TOTAL = $12,189.40
WHOLESALE COMPANY
BUSINESS PLAN #17: Wholesale Company, Home-Based
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 123
MAIL ORDERS
# of orders Sales Yield Gross Profit
50 1,200 600
75 1,800 900
100 2,400 1,200
300 7,200 3,600
500 12,000 6,000
700 16,800 8,400
1,000 24,000 12,000
2,000 48,000 24,000
4,000 96,000 48,000
• 90,000 8x10 circulars plus 90,000 2 oz. magazines will reach 90,000 households.
 Look at map for targeted areas.
PARTY PLAN (OPEN HOUSE)
GOALS: 100 Open House Representatives will yield $1500 in profits, if each have one
party per month.
2 STEPS TO ACHIEVE GOAL
1. Open House Master Plan Kit (100)= $595
2. Home Video Shoppe Master Package (10)= $299.50
TOTAL: $894.50
PARTY PLAN (OPEN HOUSE)
Parties per month Total Sales Monthly Profits
5 1250 750
10 2500 1500
15 3750 2250
20 5000 3000
25 6250 3750
50 12000 7500
100 25000 15000
124 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
WHOLESALE COMPANY
SUB-WHOLESALER
GOALS: 400 Sub-Wholesalers will yield $20,000 in profits.
2 STEPS TO ACHIEVE GOAL
1. Sub-Wholesaler Recruitment Pamphlets=$129.95
2. Sub-Wholesaler Kit=$595
TOTAL: $724.95
SUB-WHOLESALING
Active Sub-Wholesaler Monthly Sales Monthly Profits
5 1000 250
 10 2000 500
 15 3000 750
 20 4000 1000
 30 6000 1500
 40 8000 2000
 50 10000 2500
 100 20000 5000
 200 40000 10000
 400 80000 20000
BORROWER: JCI Wholesale Company
PURPOSE: The Loan proceeds of $16,959.45 will be used to finance the start-up of JCI
Wholesale Company; $12,189.40 will be used for mail orders; $724.95 will be used for
Sub-Wholesale Recruitment and Kit; $894.50 will be used for Open House Kit and Video
Shoppe; and $3,150.60 will be used for supplies and printing.
AMOUNT: $16,959.45
TERM: 5 years
COLLATERAL: 2001 Ford Mustang, 2002 Chrysler Sebring, Various Furniture
GUARANTOR: Mr. and Mrs. Joseph C. Ivarsson with net worth $34,453.72.
 1. Price Break Circulars (10)=$249.50
 2. 10-Day Sale Program (100)=$300.00
 3. Christmas collection (1,000)=$89.95
 4. Fragrances (1,000)=$89.95
 5. Fund-Raising Manual (100)=$30.00
 6. Sub-Wholesaling Recruitment (1000)=$129.95
 7. Sub-Wholesaling Kit (100)=$545.00
 8. Open House Master Plan Kit (100)=$595
 9. Home Video Shoppe Master Pack (10)=$299.50
10. Gift World Discount Package (100)=$250.00
11. Gift World (1000)=$250.00
12. Catalog Shopping Center (10)=$675.00
13. White Fast Action Forms (100)=$350.00
14. Blue Order Envelopes (100)=$350.00
15. 1994 Catalog Packet (1)+$7.95
16. 14K Catalog (1000)=$250.00
17. Artistic Greeting Inc.= $73.65
18. New Jersey and (90,000)=$5,305
19. New York Ad Mail (90,000)=$5,305
TOTAL = $16,959.45
BUSINESS PLAN #17: Wholesale Company, Home-Based
 PART TWO:
Marketing Tools
Whether you have a small business or are part of a huge corporation, you always need
marketing letters to communicate what you do to the outside world and to your customers
in particular. In this section you will find examples of marketing letters used to promote
an artist, to sell the services of a small business, and to try to interest the consumer in
the service or product you are providing.
Marketing is a multifaceted function and is more a “mind set” within an organization
than a specific action taken “every now and then.” Many of the letters in this section were
written for companies that “think marketing” all the time. There is no end to the types of
letters that can be created to make the public aware of what you do as a business.
We hasten to say that this tiny section in the book can only “hit the highlights” of
what we need to show you about business marketing, but you will find inside this
section the following:
• A press release for an art gallery
• A press release for a new book
• A personal marketing letter
• A letter of introduction to be used in a mass mailing
• A letter of introduction used by a specialty steel company
• A letter expressing “thank you” to existing customers
• A letter saying “welcome” to new customers
• A business estimate used by a cleaning company in marketing its services
• A letter and resume used to market a mobile home repair business
• A letter marketing outplacement services
You will notice that all of these letters aim to “get to the point” rather quickly. The
average person is bombarded by direct mail, and a marketing piece must usually be
concise and attention-getting in order to have maximum “marketing power.”
Use the ideas in this section to create your own letters, brochures, and other tools to
market your business and develop awareness of your products and services.
126 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
ART GALLERY
PRESS RELEASE
Business marketing letters
can take the form of
standard press releases,
too, since a press release
and a business marketing
letter have similar
objectives. Both are
intended to make the
public aware of a product
or service.
For release: immediately
Date:
For further information: contact Kaley James, 910-483-6611
CARDIAN ZIGBUAWE OPENS NEW GALLERY
The Princess Hotel in Atlanta, GA, is pleased to announce the opening of a new gallery
by Cardian Zigbuawe on December 15, 1999. Mr. Zigbuawe is a world-class authority on
Asian sculpture and is recognized as a authority throughout the art world on period
pieces from 1975-present.
Cardian Zigbuawe found his calling in 1968 when he opened his first gallery at the
prestigious Beverly Hills Hotel in Beverly Hills, CA, with a focus on Asian sculpture. In
1969 he began his extensive collection of Chinese and Japanese art, acquiring a special
expertise in jade works of art. It was at this time that Cardian started to display a
special talent for discovery of important overlooked art.
Because of Cardian’s knowledge and love for art, his gallery outgrew its original location
enabling him to relocate to a larger space in the Beverly Hills. By this time his name
was becoming so well known that insurance companies started to seek Cardian’s opinion
regarding evaluation of various jade works of art. Numerous complex insurance claims
were subsequently settled as a result of his uncommon knowledge not only of jade and
oriental art, but also of paintings and sculptures as well.
In 1975, Cardian and his two partners opened a gallery at a new location in the San
Francisco Fairmont Hotel. As a result of a major purchase shortly thereafter from the
Arcadia Museum in San Diego, CA, the business grew tremendously in the ensuing
years. Throughout this period Cardian continued to broaden his art knowledge through
extensive study of world history and its major religions. It is his love for research and
his drive to find the hidden truth that makes him unique among peers. A classic example
is a missing masterpiece by Turner, formerly owned by the king of Poland, which was
overlooked by the famous auction house, Christies. Cardian bought out his partners in
1993.
Over the last 20 years his expertise has been sought by The Smithsonian Institute and
Museum of Natural History, Washington; The Los Angeles County Museum; The Asian
Art Museum, San Francisco; Oakland (CA) Museum; Internal Revenue Service; United
States Postal Service; and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (re: stolen art).
Art Gallery Press Release
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 127
BUSINESS ESTIMATE
This document is used by a
cleaning company in
marketing its services.
Letters can be used as bids
and business estimates.
This letter could be used
as a “model” so that the
business needs to change
only the specific names
and pricing details each
time the letter is sent.
AMY’S HOME AND COMMERCIAL CLEANING SERVICE
(910) 483-6611
“No job too large or too small”
1110 Hay Street, Atlanta, GA 28305 • 910-483-6611 • preppub@aol.com
 Date
To Whom It May Concern:
This letter is a formal estimate of work to be performed for Mr. and Mrs. Joe Beasley at
their private residence in Atlanta, GA. The home has recently suffered smoke damage due
to a fire in the back bedroom, and this estimate is being made available to both the
insurance company and the Beasleys.
For the price of $50 an hour, Amy’s Home and Commercial Cleaning Service will furnish
all cleaning products needed to clean damage caused by grease and smoke and to complete
all tasks including these:
• Clean all walls, woodwork, cabinets, doors, mantels, light fixtures, chandeliers, lamps,
ceilings, fans, etc.
• Clean draperies, blinds, and windows in all rooms as well as all upholstered furniture,
couches, antique chairs, needlepoint chairs, odd/miscellaneous chairs, the seats of
12 dining room chairs, bedspreads, mattresses, pillows, and accessories.
• Other items to be cleaned include a china closet filled with crystal and china as well
as an Oriental curio cabinet filled with precious keepsakes, three completely
furnished bedrooms, a TV, a stereo set, and VCR equipment.
• The home to be cleaned is elegantly decorated with pictures, mirrors, wall hangings,
pedestals, Oriental statues, and vases as well as numerous crystal, porcelain, and
wooden Oriental boxes and cabinets. The home will be dusted/cleaned.
• Other items covered in this agreement include trees and plants, silk floral arrangements,
and Oriental coffee and end tables.
• The house is carpeted throughout and additionally contains Oriental rugs in the
living room as well as other assorted rugs.
• Due to the large quantity of valuable and irreplaceable items contained in the house,
it is impossible to list each piece separately. Considerable care will be taken to clean
these valuable collectibles and keepsakes.
• We estimate it will take three people between 50-100 hours to complete this job.
Total for services rendered: 75 hours at $50 an hour — $3,750
Home and Commercial Cleaning Service
128 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
BUSINESS PROPOSAL
By a resume writing and
outplacement service.
This letter could be used
as a template or model
each time the company
needs to prepare a
business proposal tailored
to specific customer needs.
PEOPLEFIND, INC.
1110 Hay Street, Houston, TX 28305
Telephone: (910) 483-6611
Fax: (910) 483-2439
http://www.prep-pub.com
e-mail: PREPPub@aol.com
To: Barry Wizardon
From: Dale Durgens
Confidential
Schedule of Fees for Outplacement Assistance
provided to Mainline Manufacturing
PEOPLEFIND, INC., is prepared to provide the finest quality resume-writing services
and job-hunting planning assistance to Mainline Manufacturing employees. Services
which could be provided include the following:
Group planning session: During this session which PEOPLEFIND would conduct at
the Mainline Manufacturing site, PEOPLEFIND will provide expert guidance on jobhunting, introduce the Personal Review Form which is an essential tool used by
PEOPLEFIND in the resume-writing process, and provide for an extensive questionand-answer session by the approximately 20 participants to be laid off by Mainline.
Cost: $1,500.00 (includes preparation time by PEOPLEFIND and materials for all
participants).
Resume and Cover Letter Preparation:
Cost: $235.00 for each person for a professional resume with 15 copies and a model
cover letter
or $243.00 for a professional resume with 15 copies, model cover letter, and both on a disk
or $250.00 for a resume (15 copies), cover letter, 15 sheets of stationery & 15 envelopes
or $258.00 for resume (15), cover letter, 15 sheets, 15 envelopes, and R/CL on a disk
Optional Group Follow-up Session with all participants on job-hunting tips
and techniques and important strategies to use in getting in the door: Such a
session could be provided which would allow for all participants to get together in a
strategy formulation session with PEOPLEFIND to discuss the techniques in using
their professional resume and cover letter to maximum effect.
Cost: $1,500.00 ( includes preparation time by PEOPLEFIND and all materials to be
distributed).
PEOPLEFIND’S services are prepaid. Satisfaction is always guaranteed.
Personnel Placement Service
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 129
BUSINESS SPONSORSHIP
RESUME
This resume is used for
soliciting funds. Some
activities, like racing,
require sponsors. This
resume is an attempt to
solicit sponsorship money.
DEVLIN DONALDSON
Business: CarPlus, Inc., President and Owner
FORD Service Center
Work: (910) 483-6111
• We at CarPlus Inc. are currently purchasing $60,000 worth of FORD parts from the
store #910 in Greenville, SC.
• We anticipate a large sales increase in 1998.
• We travel approximately 35,000 miles along the east coast and Midwest.
• We would be very proud to display the FORD logo on the side of race car and 26’
enclosed trailer.
Accomplishments
• Started racing in 1975 as Stock Elimination 360 Plymouth Duster I/SA.
• Held N.H.R.A. national record for two years.
• Division I Champ and two I.H.R.A. national events wins.
• 16 N.H.R.A. class wins between stock and super stock; then proceeded to SS
elimination in a 74 Plymouth Duster 360 SS/KSA.
• Won one I.H.R.A. national event.
• Won N.H.R.A. Gold Cup national in Lester, NY; also held national record.
• Then proceeded to the rear engine Super Comp Dragster and rear engine B-econo
Dragster with Bill Jenkins of Detroit; we won several bracket races in Division 2.
Most Recent Accomplishments
• We have recently built a new 1996 FORD Daytona IROC car which is in the class as
SS/GTCA.
• We came 7th in the I.H.R.A. World Championship Points.
• In 1997 - our very first year with this car - we got into the finals of two division
events and also one national event at M.I.R. as well as three semifinal finishes. We
also won class 3 out of three races.
• We are planning to run the entire I.H.R.A. schedule for the 1998 season and also six
N.H.R.A. races.
• We also receive a lot of publicity for having the only FORD GT/CA car on the I.H.R.A.
circuit.
• We are now planning on building a new modified engine using W-7 heads and the
new FORD block for the upcoming seasons.
What we are requesting from FORD
• We would appreciate any financial help which can be provided to a vehicle and a
racing expert who will bring much publicity to the FORD Corporation.
• We would be proud to repaint our car with the FORD logo if this is desired by FORD.
• Our racing schedule begins in February 2000. We are excited about putting our
Daytona in the low 9 seconds to high 8.90 elapsed time in this up-and-coming season!
Racing Sponsorship Business
130 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Date
Exact Name of Person
Exact Title
Exact Name of Company
Address
City, State, Zip
Dear Exact Name of Person (or Dear Sir or Madam if answering a blind ad):
With the enclosed resume, I would like to make you aware of my interest in
exploring consulting opportunities with your organization.
As you will see from my resume, I offer a proven ability to sell services and products
while establishing strong channels of distribution throughout U.S., Canada, and South
America. Although I would gladly work in a challenging sales role in the U.S., I believe
my next employer would benefit most from my extensive contacts. For the past 13 years,
I have worked with companies in the telecommunications, construction, manufacturing,
and other industries in order to set up distribution for their products. I am accustomed
to operating in an essentially entrepreneurial role, and I would cheerfully travel
extensively. I am knowledgeable of the culture, customs, sports, and politics in dozens
of international countries. In my current consulting assignment, I help to establish
location-based service (LBS) products similar to the Global Positioning System (GPS).
In previous consulting assignments, I have introduced voice processing systems, set up
distribution for radio products, and sold a wireless e-mail platform and related software.
As a result of my extensive sales and marketing experience, I have come to believe
that the main keys to success in sales are fourfold: (1) knowing your product, (2) knowing
your market, (3) knowing your marketing program, and (4) offering good pricing. I also
believe that a key to sales success is developing well-structured channels of distribution,
and I believe that I am “an expert without an equal” in that area.
If you can use a dynamic and self-confident marketing executive to enhance your
business, I would welcome an opportunity to discuss your needs with you. I am a loyal
and trustworthy individual who subscribes to the highest principles of business ethics,
and I can assure you in advance that I would hold in confidence any business opportunity
which you wanted to discuss with me.
Yours sincerely,
Jeffrey D. Lockridge
CONSULTING BUSINESS
This is an entrepreneur
with marketing and
telecommunications
experience.
Consulting Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 131
JEFFERY D. LOCKRIDGE
1110½ Hay Street, Fayetteville, NC 28305 • preppub@aol.com • (910) 483-6611
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
OBJECTIVE To benefit an organization that can use an experienced sales executive who offers a proven
ability to establish and strengthen various channels of distribution while successfully
introducing new products/services, developing new accounts, and increasing market share.
EDUCATION Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering (B.S.M.E.) degree, Florida Institute
of Technology, Melbourne, FL.
Completed courses in International Business studies, Florida International University,
Miami, FL.
Numerous executive development courses related to sales, export operations, and
management.
EXPERIENCE PRESIDENT & SALES MANAGER. Jeffrey D. Lockridge & Associates, Inc., Chicago, IL
(1999-present). Have developed an up-to-date database of thousands of national and
international contacts while acting in an essentially entrepreneurial role selling products,
services, systems, and concepts.
Highlights of customers served in telecommunications, construction,
manufacturing and other industries:
• Kramer Industrial Kreations, New York, NY: Provided expert advice on pricing related
to selling industrial tools.
• DataComm, Alaska: Set up distribution in Anchorage, Alaska for OEM radio products.
• Wire.net, New York, NY: Sold wireless e-mail platform and related software.
• Advanced Satellite Systems, Los Angeles, CA: Work with companies including,
Motorola, Nortel and Ericson while selling a location-based service (LBS) product which
provides services similar to the Global Position System (GPS) without a satellite.
• Inter-Market, Detroit, MI: Performed a market study of a startup of fixed wireless
companies both national and international.
• BWI Consulting, West Indies, NA: Established a British West Indies construction
consulting company.
• Napa Connection, Napa, CA: Played a key role in a $2 million cable tv installation
project.
• Hargray Wireless, Atlanta, GA: Sold fiber optic cables to Canadian telephone companies.
• TECH Instruments, Chicago, IL: Sold a computerized system for monitoring fiber optic
cable networks.
• NetLink Communications, Atlanta, GA: Sold voice processing systems used by
telephone companies, and successfully introduced valuable products.
• International Electronic Supply, Chicago, IL: Introduced more than 700 “outside
plant” products to telephone and construction companies in Central America, Grand
Caymans, and the Bahama Islands.
DIRECTOR. Dorsey Electronics, Chicago, IL (1994-99). Was recruited to introduce the
company’s product line on an international level; grew sales from zero to $5 million.
REGIONAL SALES MANAGER. United Technologies, Los Angeles, CA (1988-94).
Established a distributor network with ten major markets while introducing the product
lines of forty suppliers of outside plant and testing equipment.
PERSONAL Outstanding references. Believe that the keys to success in sales are these: knowing your
product, knowing your market, knowing your marketing program, and offering good pricing.
Believe that a key to sales is developing well-structured channels. Fluent in Spanish.
Consulting Business
132 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
CONTRACT AGREEMENT
Agreement made and entered into as of this 12th day of June, 2003 by and between HIFI MARKETING of 1369 32nd Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11281 and whose Post Office
Box is 11321, Brooklyn, New York 11351 (“COMPANY”) and VARIETY RECORDS
(“LABEL”) whose address is 1165 82nd Street, Brooklyn, New York 11341.
WHEREAS Brady Thrusher and Kelly Waterson individually and jointly are known as
the executive officers of Variety Records have entered into an agreement with COMPANY.
WHEREAS COMPANY is in the business of promotions, marketing, and public relations
for the recording and entertainment industry, LABEL desires to hire COMPANY for
such service.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of premises it is hereby agreed as follows:
1. (a) LABEL hereby engages COMPANY to handle radio promotions for LABEL in
the Northern/Northeastern District to include New York, New Jersey, Maryland,
and Pennsylvania.
(b) COMPANY agrees to use reasonable effort to exploit the likeness of the LABEL
and its artist through such mediums as radio, television, newspapers, and
magazines.
(c) COMPANY agrees to devise and implement marketing strategies in the defined
district.
2. (a) LABEL agrees to retain COMPANY at monthly fee of $1,200 per month. 50% to
be absorbed by Kelly Waterson and 50% to be absorbed by Brad Thrusher.
(b) Kelly Waterson’s 50% shall be paid in cash and Brad Thrusher’s 50% shall be
paid by in-kind contribution from Downtown Studios of which Thrusher is owner
and/or monetarily whenever negotiated by COMPANY and Thrusher.
(c) The initial starting fees, to be paid at the signing of the contract are the
administrative fee (HI-FI’s fee) of one month $1,200 and the expenses as billed
on invoice.
3. (a) Expenses shall include but not be limited to telephone, mail, shipping, travel,
and entertainment as it relates to LABEL Business.
(b) COMPANY agrees to discuss all expenses with LABEL prior to proceeding with
said expense and upon approval LABEL agrees to provide the monetary
compensation.
(c) Travel expenses shall include but not be limited to gas, hotel, food, car rental,
air travel, and ground transportation.
4. The term of this contract shall commence the 30th day of June, 2003 and end the 30th
day of June, 2006.
5. This contractual agreement cannot be changed orally and shall be construed, governed,
and interpreted pursuant to the laws of New York.
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the parties here to have executed this Contractual Agreement
the 13th day of June, 2003.
__________________ sig ________________________ sig
___________________ title _______________________ title
CONTRACT AGREEMENT
For a recording studio and
 a promotions company
in New York City.
Contract for a recording studio/promotions company
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 133
Hillgram Home Health Care
Marketing Plan
The mission of Hillgram Home Health Care is to promote the products and services
provided by the healthcare providers in the Hillgram Home Health Care Network. These
provider types include the following:
Respiratory Care Medical Supplies
Home Medical Equipment Physical Therapy
Home Health Care Hospice
Residential Care Personal Care
Home Infusion Wound Care
Hillgram Home Health Care’s business plan is to encourage patient care referral sources
to use the Hillgram Home Health Care network of providers for the home care needs of
their patients. Hillgram Home Health Care will receive referrals using several means
of communication.
• Develop & maintain the relationships with referrers
• Maximize potential by meeting with referrers to educate them about
products & services
• Distribute prescription pads
• Periodic phone calls to all referrers to increase satisfaction
• Prioritize leads for additional sites
• Physicians • Facilities
• Hospitals • Schools
• Discharge Planners/Social Workers • Teams
• Emergency Rooms • Clinics Gyms/Private Clubs
• Physical Therapy Departments • Ambulance Companies
• Institute Ongoing Communication Pieces
• Blast Fax
• Information Pieces
• Press Releases
• Newsletter: describe manufacturer relations, product updates, back orders
• Marketing Collateral
• Advertising
• Manufacturer Relations
• Web Site development: Promote ease of use of program:
• Links to manufacturers
• Provide all necessary forms to distribution network
• Certificate of Medical Necessity
• Prescription On Line
• Pre-authorizations
• Billing Forms
Health Care Plan Marketing Overview
HOME HEALTH
CARE
MARKETING
PLAN
Here is a
document used
to promote a
network of
patient care
providers
through
referrals.
134 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Date
Exact Name of Person
Exact Title
Exact Name of Company
Address
City, State, Zip
Dear Exact Name of Person (or Dear Sir or Madam if answering a blind ad):
With the enclosed fact sheet describing Columbia Care Center, I would like to
make you aware of my interest in obtaining a contract with your county for a target
population of males 10-18 who are seriously emotionally or neurologically disturbed,
mentally handicapped, or substance abused. Columbia Care Center is a residential
treatment facility licensed by the State of South Carolina (License MHL—060-805).
When I graduated from University of South Carolina, it was my intention to pursue
a career in the corporate world. After working in corporate sales and mortgage banking,
I became employed as a supervisor of mildly disabled clients and then subsequently
worked as a High Risk Intervention Technician working one-on-one with male youth
ages 10-15/16. My experience in working with High Risk client inspired my desire to
establish a facility which provides residential treatment programs for High Risk youth.
As the founder of Columbia Care Center, I have assembled a quality, well-trained staff
which is ready to provide round-the-clock care to four High Risk clients in a facility
which offers a 2-4 ratio of client to staff. As the enclosed fact sheet describes, the Columbia
Care Center utilizes the widely accepted Behavior Modification Process tied to a point
system and will provide a mentoring program as well as an exciting program of planned
summer activities. The newly constructed facility is located in a quiet neighborhood
which has quality elementary, middle, and high schools nearby. A nurse and therapist
will be on call 24 hours a day.
Already licensed by the State of South Carolina, we are now seeking contracts
with counties such as yours so that we can become a provider.
I hope you will review the enclosed fact sheet and then call me to suggest the next
step I should take in seeking a contract to become a provider with your county. If you
wish, I would be happy to make a PowerPoint slide presentation to your staff about the
Columbia Care Center. I hope you will welcome my call next week when I attempt to get
your guidance about the next step I should take in becoming a provider. Thank you in
advance for your time and professional courtesies.
Yours sincerely,
Damian R. Baldwin
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF OPERATIONS
This resume and cover
letter are both designed
to be sent to important
decision makers in an
attempt to obtain
contracts.
Group Home Plan
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 135
COLUMBIA CARE CENTER
Damian R. Baldwin, Owner
2021 Atlas Drive, Columbia, SC 22781-1075
Phone/Fax: 999-999-9999
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
OBJECTIVE The Columbia Care Center seeks to become a provider of residential treatment programs for
High-Risk male children and adolescents aged 10-18 who have been diagnosed by a licensed
physician or psychologist as seriously emotionally or neurologically disturbed, mentally
handicapped, or substance abused.
WHAT’S DIFFERENT ABOUT COLUMBIA CARE CENTER?
• Equipped with an on-call nurse 24 hours a day and equipped with a therapist on-call 24
hours a day.
• Utilizes the widely accepted Behavior Modification Process tied to a point system.
• Continuous updating of client files by therapists.
• A 2-4 ratio of client to staff.
• A Mentoring Program which matches kids with caring mentors.
• An exciting program of planned summer activities to help kids develop new skills,
interests, and competencies. Summer activities: horseback riding and museum visits.
• A structured environment in which tutors and counselors are provided as needed.
THINGS YOU CAN COUNT ON:
• A newly constructed facility with three bedrooms and two bathrooms within 1100 square
feet. Built in 2003, Columbia Care Center at Atlas Street has a big back yard! The home
has passed sanitation and fire inspections, state structural inspections, and meets all
state requirements.
• A quiet neighborhood in a nice community.
• Quality schools nearby: David Manning Elementary School and Hillcrest Elementary
School; S. M. Fairley Middle School; and R. M. Stall High School.
• A facility licensed by the State of South Carolina, Department of Health and Human
Services, Division of Facility Services: Facility ID is 020058 and License Number is
MHL-060-805. (License valid until July 31, 2005).
A STAFF YOU CAN COUNT ON:
• Executive Director of Operations Damian R. Baldwin is the founder of Columbia
Care Center. Earned a B.S. degree, University South Carolina, 1999. Worked in corporate
sales and mortgage banking prior to becoming involved in social services. Worked as a
Supervisor for Tri-County Industries where he supervised up to 25 mildly disabled clients,
the major of which were mentally impaired individuals aged 18-43. Subsequently worked
as a High Risk Intervention Technician for Harden County Rehabilitation in Florence,
SC, where he worked one-on-one with male youth ages 10-15/16 who suffered from ADD,
ADHS, schizophrenia, substance abuse, and other problems.
• Columbia Care Center’s Residential Manager is Monica Lucey, who is an experienced
teacher who is certified in SC to teach in middle school.
Training of Damian R. Baldwin, Director of Operations, and Monica Lucey,
Residential Manager, includes the Medication Administration Course, the Protective
Intervention Course (PIC), Confidentiality and Clients Rights Training, Incident Reporting.
• Carla James, Third Shift staff member, is trained in all required areas.
• Fourth staff member Damian R. Baldwin, retired businessman, trained in all areas.
OUR GOAL & PHILOSOPHY:
We want to make a difference in the lives of youth and offer them the best care possible.
Group Home Plan
136 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
INDEPENDENT
SUBCONTRACTOR
AGREEMENT
This is a business
providing services utilizing
subcontractors, and an
agreement may need to
be drawn up to clarify
responsibilities and
obligations of the
respective parties.
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING & AGREEMENT
WITH INDEPENDENT SUBCONTRACTOR
This Agreement made this ___________ day of _____________________ in the year 2000
by and between Therapy Plus Speech doing business at this address: 3567 Avery Street,
Suite 150, Morganton, SC (hereinafter referred to as the “contractor”) and _______, an
Independent Subcontractor of Therapy Plus Speech whose address is ______________
(hereinafter referred to as Subcontractor).
AGREEMENT
1. TERM
The term of this Agreement shall be nine (9) months from the date of its execution.
Either party hereto may at any time during the term hereof terminate this Agreement
upon thirty (30) days written notice to the other party of such termination. At the end of
said thirty (30) day notice period, this Agreement shall forthwith terminate for all
purposes, as if said date were the date set forth herein as the termination date of this
Agreement, provided that any obligations arising prior to the termination of this
Agreement shall be governed by the terms hereinafter set forth until satisfied.
2. SERVICES
The parties agree that the Subcontractor is to provide speech pathology services under
the terms and conditions of this Agreement and in accordance with The South Carolina
Guidelines for Speech and Language Programs and with any applicable requirements
of federal, state or local laws, rules and/or regulations.
3. COMPENSATION
The Subcontractor will be compensated by Therapy Plus Speech for speech and language
services rendered from the first to last day of each month (hereinafter referred to as the
“billing period”) according to invoices submitted to Therapy Plus Speech no later than
three (3) working days following the end of the billing period in which said services were
rendered. Therapy Plus Speech agrees to pay for the foregoing services at the consultation
rate of $35.00 per hour for five (5) days per week ____not to exceed 6 hours_____ per
day. Therapy Plus Speech Services shall pay the Subcontractor upon the conditions
hereinafter set forth, for all services rendered by the Subcontractor within fifteen (15)
days following the date in which the Subcontractor’s invoices have been received by
Therapy Plus Speech Services for the applicable billing period.
Any amendments or changes to the schedule of fees herein above stated shall be effective
thirty (30) days following the date upon which the parties agree to such amendment or
change in writing. Upon the parties’ mutual acceptance in writing, the amended schedule
of fees shall become part of this agreement.
4. INDEPENDENT SUBCONTRACTOR
It is the parties’ intention that so far as shall be in conformity with the law the
Subcontractor shall be an independent Subcontractor. In conformity therewith
Subcontractor shall retain sole and absolute discretion and judgment in the manner
and means of providing speech services to the Meridian County Schools. This agreement
shall not be construed as a partnership and Therapy Plus Speech Services shall not be
liable for any obligation incurred by the Subcontractor. However, Subcontractor shall
comply with all policies, rules and regulations of Therapy Plus Speech Services in
Independent Subcontractor Agreement
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 137
connection with provision of Speech Pathology services. All services rendered by the
Subcontractor shall be rendered in a competent, efficient and satisfactory manner and
in strict accordance with currently approved methods and practices of Subcontractor’s
profession.
5. SUBCONTRACTOR QUALIFICATIONS
All services to students in Meridian County Schools shall be performed by the speech
pathologists who are holders of current licenses of the state in which they are practicing
and of the Certificate of Clinical Competence (CCC) in their area of specialization, as
issued by the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. The only exception to
the above shall be employees of the Provider who are in the process of completing their
Clinical Fellowship Year as specified by the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association and who are supervised by a certified and licensed speech pathologist.
6. INSURANCE
Therapy Plus represents that it has in effect appropriate liability coverage, including
coverage for any acts of professional malpractice.
7. RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS
The employee agrees for a period of one (1) year following the termination of this
Agreement, whether such Agreement is terminated by the Employee or Employer, that
the Employee will not, directly or indirectly, engage in either as an Employee or Employer,
or in any manner whatsoever, the private practice of speech and language pathology
which in any manner whatsoever would be competitive with the Employer within a 25-
mile radius of the Morganton office of Therapy Plus Speech.
8. MISCELLANEOUS
Each party to this Agreement acknowledges that no representations, inducements,
promises or agreements, orally or otherwise, have been made by any party, or anyone
acting on behalf of any party, which are not embodied herein, and that no other
Agreement, statement or promise not contained in this Agreement shall be valid or
binding.
Any modification of this Agreement will be effective only if it is in writing and signed by
all parties to this Agreement.
In WITNESS WHEREOF, we the undersigned, duly authorized representatives of the
parties to this Agreement herein above expressed, have entered into this Agreement
without reservation and have read the terms herein.
By_____________________________________________________________________________
Director, Therapy Plus Date______________
By_____________________________________________________________________________
Independent Subcontractor Date______________
Independent Subcontractor Agreement
138 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
LETTER EXPRESSING
“THANK YOU” TO
EXISTING CUSTOMERS
A letter is also a nice way
to tell customers that you
appreciate their business
and value them. This letter
is sent to each customer
from a book design and
binding firm. In a
competitive marketplace,
customer retention is often
a high priority, and this
type of letter helps to keep
customers coming back.
BOOK DESIGNERS, INC.
1110 Hay Street
Post Office Box 66
San Diego, CA 28302
910-483-6611
Pager: 910-483-6611
Fax: 910-483-2439
Date
Dear Exact Name:
In all the hustle-bustle of life, isn’t it easy to forget to appreciate the people we
value the most? That is why I’m writing you this letter. I want you to know how deeply
appreciative I am to you for the business relationship we have enjoyed, and I want you
to know that we are committed to helping you achieve your future business goals in
whatever way we can. It is our company goal to be known as the most reputable and
most quality-conscious bookbinding producer in the business today.
We’ve come a long way since 1989…
I think you already know that Book Designers, Inc. was founded in 1989 by Cayton
Williams and has grown into a business that operates at the highest level of technical
sophistication. Our highly professional staff now consists of the following key individuals,
all of whom have Your Total Satisfaction as our foremost goal:
• Grace Williams, President
• Winston Turner, Sales Representative
• Caison Matthews, Office Manager
Our goal—Your Total Satisfaction at all times…
Providing the best service possible at all times while guaranteeing a quality product
is our number one goal. We are committed to a Total Quality Management approach to
product performance and customer service.
We’re here when you need us…
If you have a potential project coming up and want some expert consulting and
advice at an early stage, please call us and we’ll make ourselves immediately available
to provide advice or a bid. I personally guarantee your total satisfaction with our price,
product, quality control, customer service, and follow-through. But, in the meantime,
let me again just say “thank you” for the privilege of serving your business needs.
Yours sincerely,
Grace Williams
President
Customer “Thank you” Letter
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 139
LETTER FOLLOWING UP
ON AN INITIAL VERBAL
PROPOSAL
A business marketing letter
often finalizes deals which
have been discussed
verbally or in concept. By
putting in writing the
details of a prior
discussion, the company is
committing to specific
prices and terms and can
“close the sale.”
ALL-PURPOSE CLEANING AND REPAIR
Owners: Jan and Robert Abernethy
 P.O. Box 87, St. Pauls, MN 90234
(910) 483-6611
Date
Mr. Michael Foster
Vice President
Nexus Construction Company
P.O. Drawer 9034
St. Pauls, MN 90234
Dear Mr. Foster:
I enjoyed talking with you in your office on March 18, and I am responding to your
request for a formal expression of our desire to provide extensive cleaning services to
Nexus Construction. Here is what I propose:
Services to be performed:
For a price of .09 (nine cents) a square foot, the following cleaning services could
be provided:
Cleaning of interior and exterior windows
Cleaning of store fronts
Cleaning of interior glass and frames
Vacuuming of carpet
Dustmop wood floors
Mop vinyl floors
Clean and mop bathrooms
Dust and clean casework
Clean food prep areas
For complex architectural building designs, we would reserve the right to provide
a separate quote on a project basis.
As you know, we pride ourselves on our reliability and dependability, and you are
aware of the quality services we have performed for you for various jobs on a project
basis. It is our desire to handle as much of your cleaning business as possible, and I
believe we can of valuable assistance to you in this area. We do take pride in our work,
and you can certainly depend on our reliability at all times.
From our discussions I understand that you will be discussing this concept with
your colleagues, and I will look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
Robert Abernethy
Customer Follow-up Letter
140 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIES, INC.
1110 Hay Street, Columbia, SC 28302
Telephone: (910) 483-6611 Fax: (910 483-2439
Date
Exact Name of Customer
Exact Title of Customer
Exact Name of Company
Address
City, state zip
Dear Exact Name of Customer:
It is my great pleasure to welcome you “on board” as a valued customer of
Commercial Industries! You will see that we will be committed to your needs for rapid
distribution of your products and to your business success, and we will attempt to serve
your needs with an emphasis on Total Quality Management in every aspect. A permanent
and long-lasting relationship with you is our goal, and we intend to achieve that goal by
providing the finest service available for your needs.
Good communication is the key…
Commercial Industries was founded by Dillon Extasis in 1984, and there’s one
thing we have learned during those years when we’ve grown from a three (3)-warehouse
operation into a twelve (12)-warehouse company. We have learned that good
communication is the key to satisfying you and making sure that you are
completely happy with the quality product we intend to deliver.
Please help us to serve you best by communicating freely with me about anything
you may not be sure of as your business develops. I not only want our distribution
services to be of outstanding quality, but I also want your experience to be an enjoyable
one. We are committed to the highest quality standards in our customer service.
Let me close this brief letter by telling you again, “Welcome!” We appreciate
your business, we will do our best to serve you, and we look forward to putting all of our
resources and knowhow at your disposal. Thank you for your confidence in Commercial
Industries.
Yours sincerely,
Davida Smith
Manager,
Customer Relations
Customer Letter: Welcome to New Customers
LETTER OF WELCOME
TO NEW CUSTOMERS
Getting off to a good start
can be a critical factor in
business relationships, and
this letter is intended to
welcome new customers
while emphasizing the
need for vigorous two-way
communication.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 141
Lightning Courier Service
325 Bladen Drive, Chicago, IL 28305
Office: (910) 483-6611 e-mail: preppub@aol.com
“For a quick trip, call Lightning”
 Date
Dear Sir or Madam:
Do you have important documents and time-sensitive materials which require
immediate delivery by a fast, reliable courier service with extensive experience and an
outstanding reputation?
Locally owned and operated, Lightning Courier Service is positioning itself to
serve the needs of Chicago’s business, financial, and legal communities by providing fast,
reliable, same-day delivery of your materials to any location within 200 miles.
Convenient hours, emergency availability
As a service business, our primary concern is to make ourselves available to
meet the needs of our customers. We are available for “emergency” deliveries on Saturday, in
addition to our regular hours of 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., Monday-Friday.
Experience in servicing commercial accounts
From 1979-1993, I ran Zip Courier Service in Vallejos, CA, servicing major
accounts which included North American Title, Home Federal Savings & Loan, Bank of
America, and Fidelity Savings & Loan, as well as AmeriMac Advent Mortgage and NMS
Mortgage Service, Inc. These and other satisfied customers came to rely on our prompt,
courteous, and dependable service. In over fourteen years of business, we never
missed a deadline or misplaced a package. I can provide letters of recommendation
from these customers, and I’m certain that any of our previous accounts would be more
than happy to provide outstanding references upon request.
Integrity and dependability
When you choose a courier service to handle your most important, most sensitive
documents, you want to ensure that you are dealing with someone you can trust. In more
than twenty years of service to the Criminal Investigation Division of the U.S. Army, and
in 30 years as a minister, pastor, and Christian education leader, I have proven time and
time again that my integrity is beyond reproach.
It would be my pleasure to meet with you at your convenience to discuss your
priority delivery needs and how Lightning Courier Service could meet them. To schedule an
appointment, please call me at the numbers provided above, and I will be happy to provide
a price quote on the services you require. Thank you for allowing us the opportunity to serve
your needs in this area.
 Yours sincerely,
William Jenkins, Owner
Letter Introducing a Service
LETTER INTRODUCING A
COURIER SERVICE
How does a new business
get started? Often the
marketing help can come in
the form of a letter such as
this one, which the new
business can mail or
distribute by hand to
businesses which it has
targeted as potential
customers.
142 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
LETTER OF INTENT AND
INVESTMENT
AGREEMENT
A business arrangement
may require a letter
of intent and investment
agreement, such as the
one on this page.
Date
LETTER OF INTENT & INVESTMENT AGREEMENT
XYZ Check Cashing Facility, Inc.
82 Monton Street
 Decatur, GA 34509
The following agreement is made on the date which appears on this letter of
understanding between McKenzie Phillips (SSN: 000-00-0000) of 42 Enterprise Circle,
Decatur, GA, and XYZ Check Cashing Facility, Inc. of 82 Monton Street, Decatur, GA.
It is acknowledged that on December 30, 1999, XYZ Check Cashing Facility, Inc.,
will accept from McKenzie Phillips a cash investment in the amount of $4,500.00. This
will serve as an investment to be placed in the account towards operation of XYZ Check
Cashing Facility, Inc., 82 Monton Street, Decatur, GA, beginning on February 28, 2000.
It is acknowledged and understood that this investment equates to 5% of profit
and for losses in above business beginning February 28, 2000. Under no circumstances
may this be inferred or interpreted as a “guarantee” on a definitive return for the above
investor (McKenzie Phillips) or company (XYZ Check Cashing Facility, Inc.).
This agreement is made in good faith demonstrated by all parties. It is understood
that all efforts possible will be made to turn the business and above investment into a
profitable venture. All Alcohol Law Enforcement rules are to be adhered to by all parties.
Any deliberate violation of these policies will be considered a breach of contract.
A monthly financial statement will be made available upon request.
The above is agreed upon by the following parties and officers:
______________________________ ______________________________
McKenzie Phillips Clyde Taunton, President
Investor XYZ Check Cashing Facility, Inc.
______________________________
Marybelle Taunton
Vice President, XYZ Check Cashing Facility, Inc.
Letter of Intent and Investment Agreement
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 143
JANITORIAL SERVICES OF BUENA VISTA
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING & SERVICES AGREEMENT
This Agreement is effective as of ____________________ (date to be filled in by Janitorial
Services of Buena Vista (herein referred to as “Contractor”) and ____________________
(herein referred to as “Client”).
Contractor agrees to furnish the following services (check services which are applicable):
Install Flooring ____________ Refurbish Bathrooms ________
Replace Roofing ____________ Refurbish Kitchen ___________
Replace Shingles ___________ Refurbish Plumbing __________
Room Additions ____________ Build/Remove Walls__________
Other (Specify) ___________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
Contractor agrees to remove all work-related material from the site at the completion of
the job.
Contractor guarantees the aforementioned work for a period of____________________
from the date of its completion. All work will be performed in accordance with drawings
and specifications submitted by Client.
Client agrees to pay the full contract price of $__________ in the following manner:
(a) 50% down payment
(b) Remaining balance at the completion of the job
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement to be effective on
the day and year first above written:
Janitorial Services of Buena Vista:
Name _____________________ Signature ________________________ Date ____________
Client:
Name _____________________ Signature ________________________ Date ____________
Services Agreement
SERVICES
AGREEMENT and LETTER
OF UNDERSTANDING
Agreeing on the details
when an agreement is
entered into can do much
to deter problems later on
about what was promised
and what was expected.
144 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
LETTER OF
INTRODUCTION
USED BY A SPECIALTY
STEEL COMPANY
A letter can be a nice
way to introduce your
company to new business
prospects. Here you see
a letter used by a specialty
steel business to make
potential customers aware
of its products and
services. Notice in the last
paragraph the reader is
advised that a sales
representative will be
calling in a few days.
PREMIUM SPECIALTY STEEL CO.
1110 Hay Street
Post Office Box 66
Worcester, MA 28302
910-483-6611
Pager: 910-483-6611
Fax: 910-483-2439
Date
Dear Exact Name:
With this letter, I would like to introduce you to the most reputable and most
quality-conscious specialty steel fabricator in the business today. We have recently
learned of your possible business interest in our region, and we want to put our
considerable resources and knowhow at your disposal.
Who we are
Premium Specialty Steel Company was founded in 1974, and it has grown from a
fleet of three trucks into a 12-truck operation supported by a completely computerized
batching system, state approved and fully compatible with all current regulations. Our
highly professional staff consists of the following key individuals, all of whom have
Your Total Satisfaction as our foremost goal:
• James Franklin, President
• Judith Franklin, Sales and On-Site Representative
• Amy Beasley, Dispatcher
• Donna Gaskins, Accounts Receivables Manager
Our goal: Your Total Satisfaction at all Times
Very simply, providing the best service possible at all times while guaranteeing a
quality product is our number one goal. There is no other company in the specialty steel
fabrication business that can come close to matching our Total Quality Management
approach to product performance and customer service.
The next step
In the expectation that we will be able to “make you an offer you can’t refuse,” I
would like to call you next week to introduce myself by telephone and verify a few
details of your upcoming project in this area. I hope you will give me an opportunity to
bid on the job you have coming up, because I can guarantee in advance your total
satisfaction with our price, product, quality control, customer service, and followthrough. I hope you will welcome my call in a few days.
Yours sincerely,
Judith Franklin
Sales Representative
Letter of Introduction to Customers
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 145
ROPER MASONRY
Company Background:
Roper Masonry (formerly Andrea Roper Construction) has been in the masonry business
since 1988. This launched a fifteen-year career as a husband and wife team in the masonry
construction business. The company’s primary business concern is concrete & brick
retaining walls, drainage structures, and incidental concrete (sidewalks, curbs, gutters,
etc.). The permanent location of the business is Warren, MI.
Principals:
Andrea Roper, a native of Michigan, is the owner and General Manager of the company.
She is certified as a DBE, MB, and WB under the Michigan Department of Transportation.
She attended Detroit College of Business and received an Associate’s degree in General
Business. She is also a trained Brick Mason.
Phillip Roper is the Field Project Manager of the company, with over 35 years experience
in the masonry business. He studied Brick Masonry at Brentwood High School in
Dearborn, Michigan and Construction Technology at Henry Ford Community College.
He is now on the Brick Masonry Board of Directors at Henry Ford Community College.
Financial & Suppliers:
The financial stability of the company is strong, and the company has a good reputation
within the community. Financial or business references include:
Banking ———— Union Planters Bank
Accounting——— Wallace Green, CPA
Suppliers————Peterson Rentals
 Hendrick’s Block Industries
 Calhoun Concrete, Inc.
 Saginaw Construction Co.
Clients:
Roper Masonry is proud to mention a few of our satisfied clients as references:
1. Brandywine Concrete & Metal, Warren, MI
2. Saginaw Construction Co., Warren, MI
3. Washington Construction, Dearborn, MI
4. K&K Ramsey, Inc., Dearborn, MI
5. Northwestern Paving, Warren, MI
6. William Elmhurst, Dearborn, MI
The diversity of the masonry work varied from job to job, but primary construction was
in concrete & brick retaining walls, drainage structures, curbs & gutters, and incidental
concrete.
Conclusion:
Roper Masonry would like to state that we are experienced and qualified to perform any
projects, large or small, within the masonry business. We thank you for your consideration.
MASONRY BUSINESS
This is a press release
for a family owned
business with 15 years
of brick masonry
experience.
Letter of Introduction to Customers
146 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
SIMMONS ELECTRICAL SERVICES
Parker Simmons, Licensed Electrician
2352 Sanderosa Avenue, San Antonio, TX 76595
Phone: 333-333-3333
Please give me one minute of your time!!
Chances are, you have some problems in the following areas which I could help you
with:
Security systems installation, repair, and maintenance
Tree trimming
Phone and computer cabling including CATV
Bucket truck services
Sign repair
Pressure washing
Fire alarm repair and maintenance
Street light repair and maintenance
Electrical work of all types including residential, commercial, and industrial
Cleaning services of all types by experienced house cleaners and building cleaners
I became a Licensed Electrician while serving my country in the U.S. Air Force,
and I have lived and worked in San Antonio as a Licensed Electrician for the past 13
years.
If you would like to call my telephone number, I would be happy to visit your
location and give you a free inspection of your electrical or other needs. Please be
assured that no job is too small or too large for me.
Yours sincerely,
Parker Simmons,
Licensed Electrician
P.S. Sometimes people have problems they are not aware of. For example, I recently
helped a commercial landlord by strapping up abandoned conduits which were hanging
outside the building and which posed a safety hazard. My free inspection could benefit
you. Call now to schedule a free inspection.
LICENSED ELECTRICIAN
This is a mailing
for a company that
provides residential,
commercial, and
industrial services.
Customer mailing for an electrical business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 147
SIMMONS ELECTRICAL SERVICES
Parker Simmons, Licensed Electrician
2352 Sanderosa Avenue, San Antonio, TX 76595
Phone: 333-333-3333
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
QUALITY SERVICES Security systems installation, repair, and maintenance
Tree trimming
Phone and computer cabling including CATV
Bucket truck services
Sign repair
Pressure washing and window washing
Fire alarm repair and maintenance
Street light repair and maintenance
Electrical work of all types including residential, commercial, and industrial
Cleaning services of all types by experienced house cleaners and building cleaners
MEET PARKER SIMMONS, Licensed electrician and manager of Simmons Electrical Services:
• TX State Electrical Contractor’s License # 12345-6, valid until 2005
• Skilled in operating forklifts with attachments; 5 and 10-ton dump trucks; bucket truck;
backhoes; ditchwitch; utility locating equipment; cathodic protection equipment;
proficient with exothermic welding.
• Full Worker’s Compensation available on all employees
• Competitive rates
Highlights of Parker’s background:
Dyess Air Force Base, Texas: Provided utility location services; located gas, jet fuel,
steam, water, sewer, storm drains, fiber optics, and abandoned utilities for construction
projects on Dyess Air Force Base property. Installed and maintained interior wiring systems,
security alarms, and tempest ground systems. Troubleshot and repaired high voltage
distribution airfield lighting as well as interior lighting systems in buildings.
University of San Antonio: Installed and maintained campus fire alarms, security call
boxes, street and security lighting, high voltage distribution, emergency generators, interior
lighting and wiring. Performed troubleshooting of fire alarms and street lights.
Lehman Brothers Corporation & Hall County School System: Managed a crew of four
people on numerous construction projects. Supervised the running of CATV lines in the Hall
County School Systems and installed dedicated circuits in computers. Was involved in a
major overhaul of Hall County School System’s electrical work. Decreased number of “bad”
inspections in Hall County School System.
Alcoa Control: Installed safety interlock and control wiring, devices, and conduits on air
handling equipment, manufacturing equipment, and hospital equipment. Expertly used
control drawings and mechanical drawings. Passed the company’s most rigorous drug
screening and was specially selected for a high-profile project.
Dow Chemical: Advised Dow Chemical’s customers on current National Electric Codes
(NEC). Prepared material takeoffs for customers.
San Antonio Paper Mill: Renovated the electrical system of a downtown building.
PG&E: Wired 3-phase rectifiers for the telephone system of a military installation.
WHAT CUSTOMERS SAY:
• “Parker Simmons saved me thousands of dollars with his bucket truck services.” – Robert
Butler, business owner.
• “I appreciated the way Parker was willing to respond to my weekend emergency.” Nicholas
Farnum of Southwestern Electrics.
ABOUT PARKER: Parker Simmons served in the Air Force and has lived in San Antonio for 15 years.
Customer mailing for an electrical business
148 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
MOBILE HOME
REPAIR SERVICE
Sometimes a letter can be
part of a marketing
mailing. On these two
pages you will see a letter
and resume which were
used as companion
documents in a mailing
sent to interest
prospective customers in
the services of a
professional mobile home
repair specialist.
Date
Exact Name of Person
Title or Position
Name of Company
Address (number and street)
Address (city, state, and zip)
Dear Exact Name of Person: (or Sir or Madam if answering a blind ad.)
With the enclosed resume, I would like to make you aware of my background as
an experienced Mobile Home Repair Specialist and initiate the process of being considered
for work as a contractor or subcontractor as your needs require.
As a self-employed Mobile Home Repair Specialist, I operate a company called
Orion Mobile Home Repair in Warsaw, Wisconsin, and serve a variety of satisfied
customers in neighboring towns. Satisfied customers include the following:
Social Services/Housing & Urban Development
Warsaw County Social Services Department
American Home Star Sales
Sterling Homes
Wilfred Thompson, Jr.
I offer more than 20 years of experience in performing electrical work, carpentry,
and maintenance of all types. In addition to my experience as a Mobile Home Service
Technician and Maintenance Technician, I have worked as a carpenter and once owned
and managed a successful auto detail shop in Georgia. I am experienced in all types of
cabinet work, and there is virtually no piece of equipment or fixture in mobile homes (as
well as in apartments and houses) which I have not maintained, replaced, repaired, or
installed. We have all the tools and equipment necessary to perform any phase of the
setup, repair, and maintenance of mobile homes as well as for all types of general
construction.
If you can use a reliable and honest subcontractor for your properties, please
call me to discuss your needs. Our operation is highly mobile, and we can readily travel
to your job site to meet your needs. I can provide excellent credit references as well as
outstanding references from individuals and organizations who are acquainted with my
work and professionalism.
I would enjoy the opportunity to discuss how I could be of service to you.
Remember: “Over 20 years of experience, and we do it all.”
Yours sincerely,
Orion Hamstead Pierce
Customer mailing for a mobile home repair business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 149
 ORION HAMSTEAD PIERCE
 Mobile Home Repair Specialist
 OVER 20 YEARS OF EXPERIENCE
 “We Do It All”
 Box 95, Warsaw, WI 28305
 pager: 910-483-2439  cellular: 910-483-6611
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
OBJECTIVE To serve the needs of organizations and individuals that can use a skilled mobile home
repair specialist who offers an excellent personal reputation for reliability and honesty as
well as proven skills in all aspects of mobile home repair, maintenance, and setup.
EXPERIENCE MOBILE HOME REPAIR SPECIALIST (Self-Employed). Orion Mobile Home Repair,
Warsaw, WI (1998-present). Am the owner and manager of Orion Mobile Home Repair,
currently repair and/or replace floors, windows, doors, walls (interior and exterior), carpet,
and vinyl; perform minor electrical and plumbing work.
Offer expertise in all aspects of mobile home repair: Handle jobs involving Kool Seal,
skirting underpin, and remodeling.
Satisfaction Guaranteed/Excellent References: Guarantee satisfaction with all work
performed, and can provide excellent references from these and other organizations whose
mobile homes and apartments I service and maintain:
Social Services/Housing & Urban Development
Warsaw County Social Services Department
American Home Star Sales
Sterling Homes
SERVICE TECHNICIAN. Oakwood Mobile Homes, Warsaw, WI (1997-98). Was rehired
by this company for which I worked previously, worked on the company’s repossessions
(Factory Certified Homes); repaired or replaced anything that was broken.
• Resigned under excellent circumstances to go into business for myself.
MAINTENANCE TECHNICIAN. Fulsome Acres Mobile Home Park, Warsaw, WI (1993-
97). Repaired and rebuilt mobile homes in several parks which contained hundreds of trailers
and apartments. Performed repairs and maintenance in both the mobile homes and the
apartments.
SERVICE TECHNICIAN. Oakwood Mobile Homes (Freedom Mobile Home Sales), Warsaw,
WI (1992-93). Repaired and/or replaced fixtures and equipment which was broken in existing
homes and deficient in new homes.
• Selected for a special assignment to help set up a mobile home lot in FL.
MECHANIC. Craven Toyota, Warsaw, WI (1992). Managed the detail shop.
GENERAL MANAGER and OWNER. Scrub-A-Dub, Pensacola, FL (1988-91). Owned and
managed a successful detail shop; closed the business and moved from FL to WI when my
father became very ill.
CARPENTER. Quality Plus Construction, Sanford, NE (1986-88). Performed framing and
did finishing work; became skilled in installing cabinets and cabinet tops. Handled inside
and outside trim work.
Customer mailing for a mobile home repair business
150 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
Date
Exact Name of Person
Exact Title
Exact Name of Company
Address
City, State, Zip
Dear Exact Name of Person (or Dear Sir or Madam if answering a blind ad):
With the enclosed fact sheet, I would like to introduce myself and the services I can offer
your company. If you answer “yes” to any of the following questions, you may be in need
of my services:
• Would you like to give your exteriors a “facelift” and make your business “shine?”
• Would you like a free demonstration of how we can save you money through our
quality services?
For an overview of who we are and what we do, please look at the enclosed “fact sheet”
about our business and services. We can work anytime during the day or night in order
to cause the least disruption to your business, customer flow, and cash flow!
Please call me as soon as you look over the fact sheet enclosed and I can schedule a time
to give you a free estimate and demonstration of our services. Even if you are not sure if
you need our services, let me come to see you for 15 minutes to show you what I can do
for your business!
Best wishes,
Justin S. Caldwell
Owner
Caldwell Pressure Washing
PRESSURE WASHING
BUSINESS
This is a press release
soliciting local businesses
for pressure washing
and coating services.
Customer mailing for a pressure washing business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 151
CALDWELL PRESSURE WASHING
Justin S. Caldwell, Owner
1145 Village Square Road, Cleveland, MS 55566
Phone: 999-999-9999 · Pager: 888-888-8888 · Fax: 777-777-7777
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
OBJECTIVE To offer quality services related to pressure washing and coating.
THINGS YOU CAN COUNT ON:
• Perfect safety record
• Fully insured through the Delta Credit Union licensed for all jobs; more than $1 million
of protection.
• Full Worker’s Compensation available on all employees
• Competitive rates, Satisfaction Guaranteed
SERVICES, MATERIALS, AND COATINGS:
In addition to pressure washing your exterior, we are expert in applying a variety of coatings
to help you revitalize your old and worn concrete and spare you the expense of replacing it.
Coatings come in a variety of patterns, designs, and colors. Pictorial portfolio available for
review. Revitalize your concrete and select from the latest patterns which include rock patterns
and brick patterns!
• Monthly and quarterly cleaning services provided!
SOME OF OUR CUSTOMERS:
We serve primarily business and commercial customers; our satisfied customers include:
• Cleveland County Schools
• Cleveland County Housing Office
• Denmark, Inc.
• Caliber Corp.
• Dupont
• Cleveland County Apartment Association
• environmental cleanup projects
WHAT OUR CUSTOMERS SAY:
• “Caldwell Pressure Washing saved me thousands of dollars and inconvenience by coating
my concrete. Coated concrete is easier to clean and maintain!” – L. Hammonds business
owner
• “I appreciated the way Caldwell was willing to work in the early hours of the morning to
clean my concrete parking lot. This allowed me to give my business a clean look without
causing my customers any inconvenience, and without interrupting my cash flow!” – A.
Patterson, restaurant chain CEO
• Numerous other references available on request.
EQUIPMENT USED:
We believe the best result is achieved by utilizing the best equipment in addition to welltrained personnel. We use state-of-the-art equipment. including: Two LANDA self-contained
units. Hot water units: one mounted on 16’ trailer; one self-contained unit in full-size mobile
van. 3,000 PSI; Temperature: 300 degrees maximum; special adapters for special jobs.
ABOUT THE OWNER:
Justin Salazar Caldwell holds a B.S. degree in Criminal Justice from Delta State University
(2000). Started in the pressure washing business in March 1999, and formally formed and
incorporated Caldwell Pressure Washing in September 1999. Experienced in all aspects of
the business. Outstanding reputation. Known for integrity.
Customer mailing for a pressure washing business
152 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
PROMOTION PACKAGE
Here is a document
that provides a strategic
analysis for an
insurance company
NATIONAL PROMOTIONAL PROGRAMS
FOR INSURANCE PROFESSIONALS
OVERVIEW
Stewart Geiser Insurance Inc., can develop and execute strategies for insurance group
professionals so they can grow revenue, increase profitability and market share,
maximize their return on investment, increase brand awareness and strengthen brand
loyalty.
We are the premier outsourced marketing and sales service provider. We are positioned
to provide our clients with the solutions needed to grow a healthy, thriving business.
We can enhance your revenue and reduce your selling expenses. Marketing planning is
a great exercise because you know that you must increase patient volume and
differentiate your services from the competition. Many times, you need to educate the
patient before your service is deemed valuable and desirable. Networking and developing
referral sources are critical. Public relations and community exposure build brand
recognition and credibility.
We provide comprehensive sales, marketing and contracting solutions to our clients
based on our intense and detailed knowledge of the insurance coverage marketplace.
We execute strategies to meet our client needs with the physician, patient, hospital,
outpatient service, insurance company and employer markets. We have the knowledge
and innovation to provide outstanding sales, marketing and contracting results.
Our solutions include three core services:
• Strategic analysis and measurement to develop a plan for approaching the
target audience and optimizing the return on investment.
• Communications programs designed to reach your audience through education
and direct messaging.
• Sales and marketing for one-to-one access to the targeted audience.
Whether you need the assistance of one core service or choose to leverage our integrated
services, Stewart Geiser Insurance understands that exceeding goals and meeting
deadlines are critical to success. We also appreciate that the sales and marketing
challenge has never been greater nor the strategic benefits of outsourcing more evident.
Our capabilities extend beyond our current offerings, as we are continually evaluating
new technologies and a variety of insurance coverage initiatives to help our clients
compete in today’s business environment and prepare for tomorrow’s. Stewart Geiser
Insurance is as dedicated to your success as you are. Stewart Geiser Insurance will
assist in the development and enhancement of relationships with all parties that utilize
the products and services of the healthcare profession.
The target audience is:
• Insurance companies • Physicians
• Non-profit disease management organizations • Consumers
• Community advisory groups • Employers
• Labor groups • Hospitals
• Business health groups • Retail Pharmacies
Marketing strategy for outsourcing sales and marketing
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 153
Each of these groups involves a specific relationship plan and the interactions need to
be programmed so that the message delivered to each group is effective. Our services
are designed to comply with the most recent insurance marketing guidelines and to:
• Provide education on disease management and products
• Create greater visibility
• Promote public relations
• Improve patient care
How we deliver:
• Direct to Consumer Marketing to Increase Brand Awareness and Brand Loyalty
• Insurance Coverage Management Tables
• Group education meetings with patients
• Promotion of branded over-the-counter products and diagnostic tests
• Educational meetings with medical doctors, physicians, hospital personnel
• Peer-to-peer Continuing Education Program Implementation
• Physician Detailing
• Promotion of Patient Care Pathway Programs
• Medicare
• Low-income patients
• Function as an agent in a particular market to assist in the analysis,
development, research and activity of marketing products and services
• Education for Employers and Insurance companies to influence purchasing
decisions
• Seminars to introduce Insurance Coverage Management Programs,
information on products
As a contract sales partner with Catabaw and Stewart Geiser Insurance will provide
the following functions:
• Development of a customized referral network for insurance coverage services.
This network will be constructed with geographic access and specific referrers
taken into consideration.
• Development of a customized referral network for insurance coverage services.
This network will be constructed with geographic access and specific referrers
taken into consideration.
• Develop in-network contracts with insurance companies, workers’ comp panels,
case managers, etc. to assure Catabaw is an authorized, preferred provider for
all payors.
The value of contracting with Stewart Geiser Insurance Group can be best described as
follows:
• Once a client utilizes the sales services, all sales agents of Stewart Geiser
Insurance Group begin to promote the client within the specific geographic
area. This expansive sales effort can generate referrals quickly and therefore
accelerate the sales plan.
• We have been in the Charleston Medical Market for over 30 years. This active
participation in the insurance industry facilitates the sales effort and increases
the sales success rate.
• Our fee is only based on success and performance. We are not a fixed expense.
We do not need trained, prompted, managed, educated or replaced. We are a
turn-key solution to increasing sales.
Marketing strategy for outsourcing sales/marketing
This page intentionally left blank 
 PART THREE:
Key Financial Statements
If you picked up this book in order to learn how to prepare financial statements as part
of a business plan, you will find helpful samples in this section. You know that financial
statements and operating statements are shown throughout Part One: Business Plans,
so you should also return to these pages to see helpful examples of financial statements
on pages 6, 9, 37, 42-43, 58, 84, 97, 122, 113, and 117.
Financial Projections
If you are seeking to obtain financing for a new or existing business, you may find that
you have to supply financial projections. On the following pages you will find some
examples of financial projections that you can use in preparing your own forecasts.
Income Statement and Balance Sheet
Banks or investors will usually ask you to prepare an income statement and balance
sheet as a condition of evaluating your financial condition and considering you for a
loan. You will find examples of income statements and balance sheets in this section.
156 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS
These are detailed
examples of how to create
financial projections. One
document is a three-year
plan of financial
projections, and the other
is a five-year plan. Want
to see the business plan
that accompanied the
three-year projection? See
Business Plan #1 on page
2. Business Plan #13 on
page 91 is the business
plan which accompanied
the five-year plan.
Corporate financial statements
PHILLIP’S AUTO REPAIR
FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
Sales
Retail Products $ 20,000 $ 35,000 $ 44,000
Labor Sales 42,000 64,000 83,475
Total Sales $ 62,000 $ 99,000 $127,475
Expenses
Advertising $ 1,500 $ 2,800 $ 3,500
Bank Charges 350 350 350
Insurance 1,450 1,750 2,000
Miscellaneous 1,000 1,150 1,200
Office Expenses 800 1,200 3,500
Professional Fees 300 300 300
Rent 10,800 10,800 10,800
Repair/Maintenance 200 300 400
Telephone 875 1,000 1,000
Utilities 2,580 2,900 3,100
Total Expenses $ 19,855 $ 22,550 $ 26,150
Profit from Operations $ 42,145 $ 76,450 $101,325
Other Expenses
Equipment Lease $ 1,200 $ 2,900 $ 4,500
Loan Payment 3,600 3,600 3,600
Equity Line 3,500 3,500 3,500
Employee Benefits 0 3,400 3,575
Total Other Expenses $ 4,800 $ 13,400 $ 15,175
Net Profit $ 37,345 $ 63,050 $ 86,150
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 157
Corporate financial statements
WHITAKER JANITORIAL SUPPLY COMPANY
FIVE-YEAR PROJECTION
APPENDIX A
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
Cash Receipts
Sales $305,000 $315,000 $324,000 $324,000 $330,000
Less-Increase in A/R <2,000> <2,000> <2,000> <2,000> <2,000>
Net Cash Receipts 303,000 313,000 316,000 322,000 328,000
Cash Disbursements
Cost of Goods Sold $198,250 $204,750 $203,520 207,360 207,900
Add-Increase Inventory 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 2,000
Less-Increase in A/P <3,400> <3,000> <2,250> <2,250> <2,000>
Total Cash Expended $199,850 $205,750 $207,110 $207,110 $207,900
for Merchandise
Salary - Officer $ 10,600 $ 12,600 $ 14,000 $17,600 $ 21,600
Salaries - Other 25,800 27,600 29,400 31,200 33,000
Sales Commissions 0 0 0 0 0
Other Expenses $ 38,388 $ 39,540 $ 40,726 $ 41,948 $ 43,206
Capital Expenditures
Trade for New Delivery Van $ 0 $ 6,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Computer System 3,000 0 0 0 0
Debt Service $ 17,848 $ 17,848 $ 17,848 $ 17,848 $ 17,848
Total Cash Disbursements $ 99,636 $107,588 $106,574 $112,596 $119,654
Net Cash Flow $<7,514> $<4,338> $<9,656> $<6,294> $<4,446>
Cumulative Cash Flow $ 7,514 $ 7,852 $ 13,508 $ 15,802 $ 16,248
158 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
XYZ COMPANY, INC.
(A Partnership)
BALANCE SHEET
DECEMBER 31, 2003
ASSETS
 (000’s)
CURRENT ASSETS:
Cash $ 1,176
Accounts Receivable - Trade 5,732
Inventories 1,500
Total Current Assets 8,408
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT - NET 33,699
TOTAL ASSETS $42,107
LIABILITIES AND PARTNERS’ CAPITAL
 (000’s)
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
Accounts Payable - Trade $12,594
Payroll Taxes Payable 1,768
Accrued Taxes 791
Sales Tax Payable 2,201
Accrued Interest Payable 142
Notes Payable 8,981
Total Current Liabilities $26,477
NOTES PAYABLE (See Note 1) 32,722
PARTNERS’ CAPITAL (17,092)
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND PARTNERS’ CAPITAL $42,107
Note 1: Notes Payable:
The company is liable under certain installment obligations as follows:
First Federal Bank $ 33,844
Mark Ellison 7,859
Total Notes Payable 41,703
Less — Amount Due Within One Year 8,981
Amount Due After One Year $ 32,722
Income Taxes: The partnership is not a taxable entity for federal and state income tax
purposes, and thus no income tax expense has been recorded in the statements. Income
from the partnership is taxed to partners in their individual returns.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
On this page you see
examples of a balance
sheet and an income
statement. This
hypothetical company --
XYZ Company (A
Partnership) -- is
engaged in the
construction and sale of
cabinets and other wood
products.
Corporate financial statements
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 159
XYZ COMPANY, INC.
(A Partnership)
STATEMENT OF INCOME AND PARTNERS’ CAPITAL
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2003
(000’s)
INCOME
Cabinet and Wood Product Sales $192,956
COST OF GOODS SOLD
Inventory, December 31, 2002 1,500
Purchases 79,138
Subcontractors 2,228
Factory Expense 6,982
Other Construction Costs _____920
 90,768
Inventory, December 31, 2003 1,500
Cost of Goods Sold 89,268
GROSS PROFIT 103,688
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES (Schedule 1) _ 79,240
Operating Income 24,448
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Other Income 100
Interest Income 45
Interest Expense (2,969)
NET INCOME 21,624
PARTNERS’ CAPITAL, DECEMBER 31, 2002 22,784
 44,408
PARTNERS’ WITHDRAWALS
 (61,500)
Income Recognition: The financial records are maintained and the financial statements
are prepared on the accrual basis.
Corporate financial statements
160 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Other financial statements
you may be asked to
provide are these: a
statement of general and
administrative expenses,
and a cash flow
statement. Also shown is
a statement which shows
depreciation expenses.
Corporate financial statements
Schedule 1
XYZ COMPANY, INC.
(A Partnership)
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2003
 (000’s)
Accounting and Legal $24,484
Auto and Truck
Advertising 6,315
Depreciation (see detailed statement below) 4,741
Insurance
Office Expense
Payroll Taxes 11,560
Repairs and Maintenance
Equipment Rent 16,840
Salaries and Wages 6,315
Taxes — Other
Telephone
Utilities
Contributions 3,910
Miscellaneous Expenses
TOTAL GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE
 EXPENSES $79,240
DETAILED STATEMENT OF DEPRECIABLE ITEMS
 Cost Lives
Office Equipment $ 1,335 5-10 Years
Delivery Equipment 14,434 3-5 Years
Factory Equipment 26,111 5 Years
Building 65,446 18-20 Years
Leasehold Improvements ___ 589 10 Years
 $107,915
Less Accumulated Depreciation 74,216
$33,699
Depreciation expense aggregated $4,741 in 2003.
Fixed Assets and Depreciation: Fixed assets are carried at cost less accumulated
depreciation. Depreciation is computed by the straight line and accelerated cost recovery
systems over various useful lives of the assets. Maintenance and ordinary repairs are
expensed as incurred; major renewals and betterments are capitalized. When an asset
is sold or retired, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the
accounts and any gain or loss recognized is reported in income.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 161
XYZ COMPANY, INC.
(A Partnership)
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2003
 (000’s)
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net Income $21,624
Noncash Expenses, Revenues, Losses, and
Gains Included in Income:
Depreciation $ 4,741
Net (Increase) Decrease in Receivables,
Inventories, Prepaid Items, and Payables 30,912
Increase (Decrease) in Accrued
Expenses 909
(36,562)
NET CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES 58,186
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES:
Cash Outflows for Operational Assets (648)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Capital Contributions (Withdrawals) (61,500)
Payments to Settle Debt Obligations ( 6,929)
Proceeds from Debt Acquired 7,500
_______
NET CASH PROVIDED (USED) BY
FINANCING ACTIVITIES (60,929)
NET DECREASE IN CASH (3,391)
CASH BALANCE, DECEMBER 31, 2002 _ 4,567
CASH BALANCE, DECEMBER 31, 2003 $ 1,176
Corporate financial statements
162 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Here are other samples of
financial documents which
often accompany loan
applications. On the top of
the left page, you see a
simple balance sheet. On
the bottom of the left
page is a sample business
loan request. And on the
facing page you see a
Statement of Operations
for a business which has
been losing money and
which the new owners
hope to rescue after a new
infusion of capital.
Corporate financial statements
Sample Balance Sheet
December 1, 2002
Assets:
Cash $ 6,600.00
Real Estate (Residential) 80,000.00
Land 35,000.00
Deposits (savings) 20,000.00
Vehicles: two (car - truck) 25,000.00
$166,600.00
Liabilities:
Mortgage payable 83,000.00
Owner Capital:
Net Worth 83,600.00
Total Liabilities and Capital $166,600.00
SAMPLE BUSINESS LOAN REQUEST
The $85,000 loan will be used as follows:
Use of Funds $
Initial Franchise Fee $50,000
Down Payment on Opening Inventory $18,000
Good Will Payment $60,000
Cash Register Fund $ 1,000
Licenses, Permits, and Bonds $ 1,000
Working capital (reserved, not disbursed)
 for the first three months: $10,000
________
140,000
Minimum cash on hand $15,000
Total Use of Funds 155,000
Personal Contribution 70,000
________
LOAN NEEDED $85,000
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 163
STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
53 Weeks Ended 47 Weeks ended
November 31, 2001 November 15, 2002
Net Sales $94,475,010 $71,081,092
Other revenues, net 2,023,132 2,393,548
$96,498,142 $73,474,640
Costs and expenses:
Cost of sales 76,703,618 60,149,917
Selling, general and
administrative expenses 19,705,773 14,746,012
Interest Expenses 317,345 375,343
___________ ____________
 96,726,736 75,271,272
Loss before income tax credit ( 228,594) ( 1,796,632)
Income tax credit 14,000 983,400
____________ ____________
Net Loss ( 214,594) ( 813,232)
____________ ____________
____________ ____________
Range Restaurant Size 2,500 to 5,000 sq. feet
Seating 80-250 customers self-service format
Investment in leasehold improvement $60,000-$120,000
Investment in furniture, fixtures, equipment $60,000
Typical Wedgy’s Pizza Outlet
Achieved sales $400,000 and $500,000
New Wedgy’s Pizza Net $75,000 1st year
2001
Large Combo $9.75 to $11.50
Company owned outlets 56
Franchises 720
Multi unit 80
Franchise Fee/License Agreement Fee $15,000 per unit
Continuing fee of 3-5% of gross revenues
STATEMENT OF
OPERATIONS
Here you see a statement of
operations which shows a
business which has been
losing money.Wedgy’s Pizza
was a successful pizza chain
that grew from a small seed
and was then chopped
down.
The owners wanted to serve
a thick and juicy pizza to
their customers. Even
though the company grew
like wild flowers, there was a
lack of direction.
More and more franchises
were being offered. Through
poor management and
aggressive competition,
Wedgy’s Pizza was thrown
into a tailspin. This company
had an opportunity to
remain the second largest
pizza chain and even
surpass Luigi’s Pizza Place,
but because of internal strife
they opened the doors for
the competition to move in.
Earnings plunged 94 percent
and some franchises started
rebelling against
management by withholding
royalty fees.
Drive-through windows and
home delivery was growing
in popularity. Other pizza
joints like Hungry Howie’s,
knew what kind of business
they were in. There’s a
saying that “too many hands
in the pot spoil the food.”
Poor planning and
marketing, and lack of
research and unity within
the company, destroyed
what could have been a long
lasting relationship with the
public.
This page intentionally left blank 
 PART FOUR:
Valuing and Selling a Business
There often comes a time when entrepreneurs or business owners decide to sell their
business. The question then becomes, How do you value your business? In order to
interest a potential buyer or buyers, you often need to put down on paper some facts
about your business operations.
There is not only one way to prepare a business valuation. The purpose of this section is
to show you several concepts or ideas which relate to valuing a business. This small
section is by no means comprehensive. If you are in the process of valuing and selling
your business, you may wish to consult authorities in this area.
166 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
VALUING AND SELLING
A BUSINESS
Here is a document that
provides necessary
information and explains
reasons for wanting to
sell a business.
PHYSICAL & OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY
VALUATION CHECKLIST
Highly Confidential: We submit this information to you in total confidence, and with
the understanding that all the information we provide to you will not be duplicated
without our permission, and will be returned to the name and address shown below at
the conclusion of the communications between the two parties.
Company Name: Midwest Rehabilitation Center (“MRC”)
Contact Name/Mailing Address: Tonya W. Settles, c/o Staff Seekers, Inc.
PO Box 5486
Springfield, MO 68302
Contact Phone: (111) 111-1111 (w); (222) 222-2222 (w)
Corporate Structure/Background:
MRC started operations in July 2001 in Springfield, MO, which remains the location of
its central facility and its fabrication laboratory. The primary focus of the business is
Physical & Occupational Therapy (P&O), although it has provided wound care, sleep
studies, and pharmacy services. A second P&O facility opens November 5, 2003. For
expansion plans, see Strategic Business Plan in enclosed Company Report.
Tonya W. Settles is the major shareholder and serves as the point of contact for
any communications between your organization and MRC.
Entity Type: P&O Corporation, Subchapter
Services Provided (see enclosed Company Report)
Physical & Occupational Therapy services are provided, with Physical Therapy
comprising the major part of our services, perhaps 80%. This is through design and not
chance, as our growth has been so rapid because of the reputation of the personnel
affiliated with MRC, that we have had to make a strategic decision to focus so far on the
high-ticket Physical Therapy business. We turn nothing away, but we have not to date
actively courted the Occupational Therapy business. This is about to change as we bring
on board a second, and highly credentialed Orthopedic Specialist. We recently spoke to
the principal physician and decision maker in the practice (a principal of MRC knows
him and two other physicians in the practice personally), and we were asked to make a
proposal to his group at their next monthly meeting.
Both segments of the business are growing rapidly. The new orthopedic specialist coming
on board was Aaron Marshall’s (Director of our P&O Division) instructor in school, and
will oversee Orthopedic services. Mr. Marshall is firmly entrenched with the physiatrists
at the local hospital, which is a major medical center. Beginning November 16, 2001, he
will be taking over their pediatric work. Raymond Spears, M.D., is MRC’s Medical
Director. His reputation as a orthopedic specialist is second to none in the area. He is a
salaried employee with no participation in ownership or profits of MRC, but he is a vital
part of our business plan and philosophy (how many P&O practices have a board-certified
physician as a Medical Director?), and lends tremendous credibility as we continue to
expand our leadership position throughout the entire mid-western part of the state. We
Example #1: Valuing and selling a business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 167
anticipate that the opening of our second facility (we just helped a young orthopedist
establish a practice in this community, which is sorely in need of his services) could
result in us fabricating several additional physical therapy devices per month, as we
develop our relationship with the main orthopedist in the community, a physician with
whom our Medical Director has a good relationship. We have competition in this
community, but the quality of our work far exceeds that of the competition.
We have identified the three communities we intend to expand into within the next year
(this represents Phase 2 of our business plan). Also, our Medical Director has expressed
a desire to open a practice in one of these communities, performing his work under the
auspices of MRC (we will of course make sure that any such arrangement is set up in
the correct manner).
We look more at revenue generated per physical therapy device than revenue generated
per visit.
It should be noted that we are in a region of the country where physical injuries are
attaining what, as Mr. Marshall observes, appears to be almost epidemic proportions,
and if anything it will be getting worse. The usage of physical and occupational therapy
products seems to be higher than in other parts of the country. The future looks attractive
for our business.
Professional Contacts/References/Tax I.D. #’s: We would be delighted to provide
you with this information, in total confidence, should we both decide that we want to
take our discussions to the next level.
Strengths:
• Reputation and Technical Competence of Key Personnel: While acknowledging
that many facilities think their practitioners are top notch, we honestly believe that
the practitioner does not exist who could supplant Mr. Marshall (Director, P&O
Division) with his current referral base of satisfied doctors, hospitals, physical
therapists, and patients—a referral base which is centered in Springfield, but is
expanding rapidly throughout the entire region. Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Wilridge,
who manages our fabrication lab, are highly skilled professionals, current in stateof-the art techniques, extremely hard working, and share in management’s desire to
create the leading P&O operation in the state of Missouri. Furthermore, the
advantages of having Dr. Spears as our Medical Director are clear and have already
been mentioned. Tonya W. Settles, the founder and major shareholder, is a
Georgetown MBA, who has founded and built several successful businesses over the
past 20 years.
• Excellent Location: a strength from several points of view:
1. The market is superior for the products and services we provide.
2. We are an excellent starting point for expansion northwards through the rest of
Missouri and southwards into Arkansas.
3. Springfield, our headquarters, is a former state capital and conveniently located
on Interstate 95.
• Our Market and the Competition: It would be extremely difficult for anyone to
displace us in our market as (a) our reputation is impeccable, (b) it is a fragmented
region in which we possess specific knowledge of the opportunities and pitfalls
available, (c) our management team is strong and visionary, relatively young, and
aggressively committed to providing top-quality services while aggressively pursuing
Valuing and selling a business
168 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
growth and profitability, (d) we are in a region consisting of many rural communities
where key decision makers (referring physicians, etc.) remain extremely loyal to
providers they like and who serve them well (service providers such as ourselves, for
example)—we’ll temporarily leave alone markets such as St. Louis, Jefferson City,
and Columbia, where competition is strong, as we build and strengthen our base of
operations.
• Diversity of Services: Our philosophy of actively and creatively seeking, and being
receptive to offering, other medical services that are complimentary to P&O and
provide a measure of vertical integration only strengthens our overall operation.
Weaknesses:
Administrative, but not technical, inexperience is the only weakness we can think of.
Our electronic billing operation has been slow to become fully functional. Our change of
address in mid-February resulted in our going without receiving a Medicare-DME
payment from the middle of February until early September, because of a “Do Not
Forward” message on the Medicare payment envelopes, although we had followed correct
procedures in establishing a forwarding address. Hopefully, most of these administrative
learning experiences are behind us, but there will surely be others to handle. Fortunately,
referrals, patients, and sales have never been a problem, except perhaps in the
management of our continuing explosive growth.
Opportunities:
The enclosed Company Report discusses Phase 3 of our expansion plan, which involves
the establishment of four to six additional P&O facilities in 2004, after the setting up of
our initial four facilities (Phases 1 and 2) by the end of 2003.
Threats:
With the clear advantage of quality, reputation, and connections that we possess over
our competitors in our region, we do not consider competition a major threat to our
operations.
So what are our major threats? In our opinion, it would be the possibility of decreasing
(or non-increasing) Medicare reimbursements over time, along with the potential threat
in the future of an unexpected calamitous judgement awarded against us in excess of
the insurance coverage we possess, no matter how comprehensive such coverage may
be.
Reasons for Selling:
One of the two principals of the business recently had a major change in his personal
life situation. On March 16, 2001, his father passed away, leaving him as the primary
care provider for his mother, who, although in good physical condition, suffers from
Alzheimer’s disease. He will be moving his mother down from Michigan to his residence
in Missouri within the next few months. Prior to founding MRC, he operated a business
from a location adjacent to his residence. He seeks to sell his share of the business, thus
simplifying his life.
In this regard, we have already received an attractive bona fide offer from an experienced
medical business entrepreneur to purchase his share of MRC. The position of Tonya A.
Settles, the other principal in MRC, is that she is willing to either maintain or relinquish
her ownership in MRC, depending on what is in the best interests of her fellow owner,
the business itself, and the employees. Either option would work well for her. In the
VALUATION CHECKLIST
Example #1: Valuing and selling a business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 169
first case (maintaining ownership), she participates in the rapid growth of a business
whose revenues are likely to double, triple, or grow even more dramatically (through
additional P&O facilities, secondary modalities, and medical practices) in the next couple
of years, and then has the option to (1) sell a multimillion dollar operation to an
organization such as yours or (2) have what would be basically a generous annuity
income stream forever. In the second case, she sells her ownership share in the near
future to a large organization (e.g., you). A critical element in her decision is clearly the
valuation you decide to place on the business. It is possible that you may employ a
valuation method which would better value an older, more mature, but slower growing
P&O business. Applying the same earnings multiple in the case of MRC, without factoring
in the major strengths and anticipated high rate of growth of revenues and earnings,
would probably not produce an acceptable valuation for our business.
Payer Sources:
Our primary payment source is Medicare-Magnum. We also receive payments from
Medicaid, Workers Comp, private insurance, self pay and other traditional payment
sources.
Accounting/Financial Reporting Methods:
As allowed by the IRS, we use the cash basis of accounting for tax purposes. We use
both cash and accrual bases for financial reporting, as the dual bases of reporting are
helpful for financial analysis.
Referrals:
Dr. Spears, board certified orthopedist, and the physiatrists at Greene County Medical
Center, the leading medical facility in the region, are leading referral sources. We would
be happy to provide more detailed information on physicians who refer to us as our
communications with you progress to more serious negotiations.
Staffing:
Name Title Salary/Year
Raymond Spears, M.D. Medical Director $60,000
Aaron Marshall Director, PT Division $90,000
Max Wilridge Tech/Manager, PH Pharmacy $60,000
Shannon Barnell Clinic Administrator $25,000
Callie Herndon Billing Specialist $15,000
• Please do not contact any of the above personnel without the expressed written
permission of Tonya W. Settles.
• Mr. Marshall is certified as a orthopedist; Mr. Wilridge is planning on obtaining his
certification as a orthopedist in the near future; we are planning on soon adding
another orthopedist (approximately $60,000/year) and another technician
(approximately $20,000/year)—both employees have been identified and are very
interested in becoming part of MRC’s team.
Facilities:
Location 1:
• 8742 Crawford Road, Suite 166, Springfield, MO 68302
• approximately 3,000 square feet (exclusive of a large storage building behind the
facility)
• leased at $1,100/month—MRC pays utilities ($200-$300/month); owner of building
would like to sell building and land to MRC
Valuing and selling a business
170 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
• all treatment rooms have walls; spacious administrative/billing/reception area; large
fabrication/sewing/casting areas at rear of building (MRC has made major capital
improvements to building)
• open 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday—our employees are very
dedicated and Mr. Marshall and Mr. Wilridge do not consider their jobs to be “9 to 5.”
Location 2:
Opens November 6, 2001—we will be happy to provide further details at a later stage.
Financial Statements:
The following are provided with information current as of November 16, 2001:
• Summary Balance Sheet:
1. Accounts Receivable: $266,634.65, comprised of P&O receivables of $216,729
and Wound Care (“WC”) receivables of $45,671.37; the remaining $4,058.16 of
receivables represent some self pays/payment plans which were set up in the
first couple of months of operation; there are several other payment plans,
self/private pay receivables not included in the $266,634.65 figure, which
was taken from our billing software (which is different to our accounting
software, from which these reports were prepared); also WC receivables are
from only 30 of 67 patient charts—the remaining unbilled 37 charts (some of
which include physician treatment procedures performed by Dr. Spears when
he was overseeing the WC Division, currently dormant) could produce $50,000-
$75,000 in additional receivables; it is difficult to predict the collectability of
the WC receivables—only $23,945.81 has been collected to date, but a guess is
that $30,000-$45,000 of the $95,671-$120,671 (receivables plus unbilled charts)
will be realized—this is cash flow, as it will be nonrecurring (already generated)
revenue with no associated expenses. Of the $216,729 in P&O receivables,
perhaps 80%-90% will be realized as most patients have supplements and
many have secondaries. It should be noted that no allowance has been made
for uncollectables/bad debts in the Accounts Receivable figures, but when you
add the unbilled charts plus the receivables not included and subtract an
allowance for uncollectables/bad debts, you could arrive at a figure close to
$266,634.65.
2. Other Current Assets: $60,000: This is Mr. Marshall and Mr. Wilridge’s best
estimate of inventory in stock.
3. Accounts Payable: $91,593.63, includes P&O inventory/cost of goods sold of
$64,818.78, General payables of $1,758.28, (where “General” refers to balance
sheet, income, and expense items not specifically allocated to P&O or Wound
Care—items such as rent, administrative salaries, office expenses, etc.), and
Wound Care/Pharmacy payables of $25,016.57 (this $25,016.57 figure is also
shown on the Profit and Loss statement as Clinical Supplies, for purposes
of simplicity, although some of this amount is for equipment—also, and this is
important, many of these supplies/equipment are returnable and will be
returned, but they have already been charged against income—a conservative
treatment). The net result here is that true Accounts Payable has been
overstated, and Net Income understated, by approximately $20,000.
4. Other Current Liabilities: $193,060.82, includes Loans to Shareholders of
$174,218.98 and Payroll Liabilities of $18,841.84, reduced on November 12,
1999 by deposit of 941 tax.
5. Equity: $141,504.94, includes Net Income of $66,662.42 from the Profit and
VALUATION CHECKLIST
Example #1: Valuing and selling a business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 171
Loss statement and Capital Stock of $74,842.52.
• Profit and Loss:
Net Income of $66,662.42 is for all operations, including Wound Care/Pharmacy
operations, which generated substantial losses, and are not currently being pursued by MRC. For
factors affecting this Net Income value, see notes above under Summary Balance Sheet.
• Profit and Loss (P&O and General):
Net Income of $113,224.92 is for P&O and General categories. This figure could be lower (or
higher) if you think uncollectable receivables is greater (or smaller) than the receivables not
included, as described above. The Net Income figure should be increased because not all of the
General expenses would have been incurred (and are not currently being incurred) if P&O alone
was being operated. For example, Dr. Spears received $10,000/month for the first six months of
operation—he currently receives $5,000/month. This adds $30,000+ to the P&O bottom line, and
there are other such items. Net Income should be increased by another approximately $10,000
from the amount included in Building Repairs, an amount which should really be capitalized as a
Fixed Asset. Another key factor is that this Net Income figure has effectively been generated only
since March, when MRC received its Medicare-DME provider number.
• Profit and Loss (P&O):
Net Income of $249,215.86 is for P&O only. This is a hypothetical figure for your information—
Total Expense includes expenses attributable to P&O only. Again this is basically for operations
since March. The Net Income figure is revealing in that it shows what could be generated from the
just opened Facility #2, a facility with very low overhead.
Other Factors:
• Owner salaries are not included here. The principal seeking to sell his share of the business was very
instrumental in the construction/set-up work, which has been largely accomplished; his daily role is
currently minimal. Mrs. Settles is not critical to the daily functioning (during the day) of the business.
She is an entrepreneur with several business interests. Her contributions are primarily strategic and
developmental. She, or someone like her, would probably be required as the number of facilities grows,
but she need not be figured as an expense in the Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss statements included,
which just apply to one facility.
• Additional receipts of $25,000 have been taken in between November 6 (report date) and November 16,
2001 (today).
• As of the first of November, Accounts Receivable Aging Schedule is as follows:
>120 days 90-120 days 60-90 days 30-60 days Current Total
$28,109.04 $25,675.76 $44,921.70 $113,472.40 $108,102.11 $320,281.01
We would be happy to show details of the aging schedule as discussions progress. We are
comfortable with the schedule as is, but additionally there are some mitigating factors: old Wound
Care claims, Medicare checks returned and not yet reprocessed during our location change, move,
etc.
• Please refer to Company Report enclosed for projections for 2003 and 2004.
Reminder: please be totally confidential with all information submitted. Sole individual authorized to deal
with your organization is:
Tonya W. Settles, Treasurer/Secretary
(111) 111-1111 (work number at Staff Seekers, Inc.)
(222) 222-2222 (home number)
Valuing and selling a business
172 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
AMERICAN HEALTHCARE, INC.
Company Report
American Health Care, Incorporated (hereinafter referred to as “AHC”) is a California
corporation headquartered in Long Beach, CA. AHC began operations in March 2002.
AHC’s primary modality (or principal area of business) is Orthotics and Prosthetics
(“O&P”). The company’s O&P fabrication laboratory in Long Beach (“Facility #1”) has
already gained a reputation as the best such lab in the county, and in only its sixth
month of operation generated gross sales receipts in excess of $100,000. Indeed, O&P
received its Medicare Provider Number (a prerequisite for doing business with Medicare,
which is the primary insurer of a major portion of O&P’s patients) only in June 2002,
and we are pleased that within three months of receiving this number, the O&P Division
attained a six-figure gross sales receipts month in September 2002.
AHC has in place provider numbers, insurer relationships, licenses, etc. to provide other
medical, pharmaceutical, and durable medical equipment services in various modalities.
As of 10/20/02, Wound Care (“WC”) and Sleep Study (“SS”) services had generated $23,945
in revenue received, $45,671 in billings outstanding (reimbursements for which will be
low), with 37 patient charts remaining to be billed (perhaps totaling $50,000-$75,000,
which amount will not be included in Accounts Receivable until it is actually billed).
WC and SS fall under AHC’s Clinical Services (“CS”) Division. Clinical Services have
not been provided since October 2002, as AHC pursues its focus on its rapidly expanding
O&P business.
AHC’s third division is Pharmacy (“PH”). There are several viable service areas within
Pharmacy which we are considering and which we have been approached to provide by
home health agencies, hospitals, and other health care providers. Projections and
assumptions in this report give no consideration to the potential of the Pharmacy Division,
as it is not currently a primary focus of AHC.
Orthotic and Prosthetic Services
Orthotic rehabilitation includes the fitting, design, fabrication, and use of custom-made
braces and support devices for treatment of musculoskeletal conditions resulting from
illness, injury, or congenital abnormalities. Prosthetic rehabilitation entails the fitting,
fabrication, and use of custom-made artificial limbs usually required by people who
have suffered the loss of a limb from vascular diseases, diabetes, cancer, and trauma.
The principal referral source for orthotic rehabilitation services is the orthopedic surgeon,
with the podiatrist being an important secondary referral source. The principal referral
source for prosthetic rehabilitation is the vascular surgeon, with the physiatrist being
an important secondary referral source. Other specialized physicians, managed care
payors, physical therapists, orthopedic nurses, orthopedic technicians, and other
rehabilitation professionals are also important sources of referrals for O&P.
MEDICAL PRACTICE
This is a company report
and business plan for a
medical company in
California. A larger
company in the same
industry expressed an
interest in purchasing the
business.
Example #2: Valuing a Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 173
Strategic Business Plan
AHC’s strategic business plan is to establish several O&P mini-facilities, each headed
by a certified orthotist (CO) or a certified prosthetist (CP), initially in communities
within a 100-mile radius of the Long Beach lab (Facility #1). We have identified the
locations for Facilities #2, #3, and #4, which constitute Phase II of AHC’s expansion
plan, with Phase I being the establishment and development of Facility #1. Phase II is
currently being implemented, with Facility #2 opening on June 6, 2003.
Phase III will be implemented beginning in 2004. It will include the setting up of at
least six additional O&P mini-facilities. A second O&P lab will probably be required
during Phase III.
In each O&P mini-facility, HCC will evaluate which secondary modalities are needed
and have little competition in the particular community. A secondary modality has been
identified for each of Facilities #2, #3 and #4. A podiatrist who is extremely highly
credentialed (in terms of surgical training and expertise—surgery being the higher ticket
area of podiatry) will work closely with AHC’s Facility #2 (the podiatry practice is
structured as a separate corporation). The additional income and cash flow, and the
reduced overhead, which will result from synergies between podiatry and O&P in this
community have not been fully considered in our projections. With a podiatry practice
in place in Facility #2, we have established the critical link with the key vascular surgeon
in the community, a surgeon with whom our own Medical Director is already on very
close terms. Although Facility #2 is open for business as of June 6, 2003, we are assuming,
for the purpose of simplifying the projections in the exhibits, that Facility #2 will open
in 2003.
It should be noted that we have not included projections for potential income and cash
flow which could be generated by secondary modalities in any of Facilities #2, #3, #4, #5,
#6, #7, and #8.
The Market
Southwestern California, the initial focal point of AHC’s business, is a market with a
relatively high diabetic population, possibly due to various genetic and dietary factors.
Although we have a population with an above average incidence of diabetes and vascular
diseases, the supply of services available to meet these needs is greatly lacking in several
communities in our principal and immediate market area. We thus have a situation of
high and unmet demand combined with low levels of competition, to which we add our
ability to provide state-of-the-art design and fabrication services along with our
commitment to total quality patient care.
Key Personnel
Cynthia Barnes (entrepreneur, Yale M.B.A.-1988) is the major shareholder of AHC,
and is the AHC representative authorized to deal with individuals and companies
interested in investing in, acquiring ownership of, or establishing a joint venture with
AHC. Charles I. McCormick, M.D. (board-certified vascular surgeon), serves as Medical
Director of AHC. Paul Rolon, certified orthotist-prosthetist, directs the O&P Division.
Anthony Gaines oversees the O&P lab. Yolanda Sykes is the Clinic Administrator. Dr.
Example #2: Valuing a Business
174 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
McCormick provides great credibility as AHC’s Medical Director, while serving as an
excellent referral source and link to other medical providers in the region. Mr. Bryant is
extremely knowledgeable of state-of-the-art orthotic and prosthetic design and fabrication
techniques, with a fine reputation and an extensive patient base and connections
throughout our target market.
Assumptions and Projections
The May and June assumptions of $80,000 per month in billings were exceeded, as May
O&P billings were $126,305 and June O&P billings were $107,427. Of course, projections
can only be as accurate as the assumptions turn out to be. Nowhere in this report does
AHC or anyone affiliated with AHC guarantee or promise that any of these assumptions
or projections will come to pass. Indeed, we encourage any person who reads this report
to make his or her own assumptions and projections based on the information provided,
and to request any additional information he or she feels is needed.
Business Valuation
This plan makes a net income projection of $720,955 for 2004, based on certain
assumptions. At ten times net income, this equates to a value of $7,209,550 for AHC in
2002. Applying an appropriate discount rate (discounting back from December 2002 to
the present) could provide a current value for the business.
Exhibit 6 shows a net income projection of $1,497,642 for 2003, based on certain
assumptions. At ten times net income, this equates to a value of $14,976,420 for HCC in
2003. Applying an appropriate discount rate (discounting back from December 2003 to
the present) could provide a current value for the business.
Other Factors
Principal shareholder compensation has been deferred for work performed to date, which
will be paid at some future time. As cash flow permits, they will begin to receive
compensation for work performed from this time on. Charles McCormick, M.D., has
deferred compensation of $20,000 which is payable in August 2003.
As mentioned earlier, this report does not consider any potential revenue and cash flow
which could be generated by secondary modalities. Secondary modality income could
more than outweigh the above mentioned deferred and future compensation factors.
ASSUMPTIONS &
PROJECTIONS
Example #2: Valuing a Business
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 175
BILL OF SALE
February 7, 2003
I, Phillip W. Samuels, owner of K&K Partnership, Express Video, on this 7th day of
February 2003 am selling the Express Video business located at 17375 Millboro Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90781 to Lily V. Thompson.
Payments are as follows:
Total Price of Business: $46,000
Down Payment: $ 9,000
Amount to be financed $37,000
Remaining balance will be broken into two payments — one payment of $25,000 to be
financed over two years and one payment of $13,000 to be financed over four years. The
payment of $25,000 is financed at monthly payments of $1,166.67 over 24 months. The
$13,000 is financed in monthly payments of $292.50 for 48 months.
Payments of $1,166.67 will be paid to Carl T. Samuels at 2017 Bradford Avenue, Santa
Ana, CA 93576, and the payments of $292.50 will be paid to Phillip W. Samuels at 3762
Callaway Road, Los Angeles, CA 90762.
Payments will start on 3/1/04 and will be paid on every first day of the month with a 10-
day grace period.
This contract is written on 2/7/04 in the presence of the following persons.
SELLER:
Phillip W. Samuels
3762 Callaway Road,
Los Angeles, CA 90762
BUYER:
Lily V. Thompson
1037 Ravenhill Drive
Santa Monica, CA 93171
Example #1: Selling a Business
BILL OF SALE
Here is an example of a
simple bill of sale.
176 Real Business Plans & Marketing Tools
BILL OF SALE
August 1, 2003
We, Allan C. Kerr, Vice President and Phillip W. Samuels, Secretary with Harbor Video,
on this 1st day of August 2003, are selling the Motion Pictures Express business located
at 4170 Hwy 52, Los Angeles, CA 90775 to Lily V. Thompson.
Payments are as follows:
Total price of business: $68,000.00
Down Payment: $9,999.99
Balance: $58,000.01
The remaining balance of $58,000.01 will be paid in 48 monthly payments at 6% which
brings payments to $1,491.67. This payment will be paid at the first of every month and
with the 10 day grace period. First payment will be due September 20, 2003. After the
ten-day grace period, a 5% late fee will be due.
All payments will be made to the Allan C. Kerr at 1711 Saratoga Road, Los Angeles, CA
90784.
If Lily V. Thompson defaults on payments for three months (90 days), then we the
Harbor Video, Inc. will take over the business on the 91st day. At the time of takeover
all 4,000 tapes should be accounted for.
This contract is written on 8/25/03 in the presence of the following people:
SELLER:
Allan C. Kerr
2340 Fairway Lane
Los Angeles, CA 91062
Phillip W. Samuels
3762 Callaway Road
Los Angeles, CA 90762
BUYER:
Lily V. Thompson
1817 Hwy 12
Los Angeles, CA 90512
WITNESS:
William Bunce
Kenneth V. Dawkins
Witnessed by me this 1st day of August 2003.
Notary Public
Example #2: Selling a Business
BILL OF SALE
Here is another example
of a simple bill of sale.
Business Success Series edited by Anne McKinney 177
TERMS OF BUY-SELL AGREEMENT: Florida Eye Institute
Dr. Mason Langley (hereinafter referred to as “Buyer”) and Karen S. Wyatt/James R.
Wyatt (hereinafter referred to as “Seller”) have agreed in principle to the following
terms:
• Buyer will establish a corporation which will purchase the assets of the Florida Eye
Institute (hereinafter called “FEI”); these assets include current assets (deposits,
accounts receivable, etc.) and fixed assets (medical equipment, office equipment and
furniture, etc.), as well as going concern value (goodwill, the use of the name “Florida
Eye Institute,” etc.); purchased assets are depreciable (e.g., fixed assets) or amortizable
(e.g., goodwill) resulting in more favorable tax treatment for Buyer, thus resulting in
stronger cash flow for debt service and other purposes.
• Buyer will assume liabilities of FEI, including bank line of credit, accounts payable,
etc.
• Buyer will indemnify Seller from all potential future damages/liabilities resulting
from operations of FEI prior to the date of sale (professional liability insurance
provides coverage for such occurrences).
• Buyer will pay Seller $250,000.00 in cash.
• Seller will pay Buyer $5,000.00 towards Seller’s assumed line of credit.
{At the close of the purchase transaction, Buyer will have received Net Assets (i.e.,
Assets minus Liabilities or Total Equity) of $50,960.00 as per Balance Sheet (as of 7/31/
03).}
Example #3: Selling a Business
TERMS OF BUY-SELL
AGREEMENT
Here is a simple document
stating the terms of a buysell agreement.
This page intentionally left blank 
A B O U T T H E E D I T O R
Anne McKinney holds an MBA from the Harvard Business School and a BA in English
from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. A noted public speaker, writer,
and teacher, she is the senior editor for PREP’s business and career imprint, which
bears her name. Early titles in the Anne McKinney Career Series (now called the RealResumes Series) published by PREP include: Resumes and Cover Letters That Have
Worked, Resumes and Cover Letters That Have Worked for Military Professionals,
Government Job Applications and Federal Resumes, Cover Letters That Blow Doors
Open, and Letters for Special Situations. Her career titles and how-to resume-andcover-letter books are based on the expertise she has acquired in 20 years of working
with job hunters. Her valuable career insights have appeared in publications of the
“Wall Street Journal” and other prominent newspapers and magazines.