Ukraine war : Will Arab oil save the world from soaring prices ? 
Sanctions on Russia won ' t work unless the world reduces its use of Russian oil and gas . But it ' s difficult to do this without also increasing prices . Middle Eastern oil producers could help . But do they want to ?  
 

People with signs saying '  ' Stop buying Russian oil '  ' and '  ' Russian oil kills Ukrainian children '  ' at a rally in support of Ukraine held in front of the White House
Anti-war protesters around the world want their governments to stop oil imports from Russia

As the Russian invasion of Ukraine intensifies , calls have been growing to boycott Russian oil . In an appeal released last week , 465 organizations in 50 countries asked their governments to stop using Russian energy .  
 
 " The world ' s fossil fuel addiction is funding Putin ' s warmongering ,  " said the statement , which was signed by organizations like Greenpeace , Extinction Rebellion and Fridays for Future , among many others . 

In an oil market analysis published by The Oxford Institute for Energy Studies last week , Russia is ranked as the second-biggest producer of crude oil in the world , pumping around 14% of the world ' s total output in 2021 . About 60% of Russian crude exports go to Europe , with another 35% heading to Asia . 

Experts say Europe alone is paying Russia around €350 million ( $382 million ) a day for it . 

As the letter writers and others , including Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba on Twitter , have pointed out , if the world keeps using Russian oil and gas , this negates the international sanctions and boycotts that are supposed to persuade Russia to withdraw from Ukraine . 


No Russian energy sanctions
The importance of Russian oil is part of the reason why it has not been sanctioned . Even if governments would want to ban Russian oil , they would be hard-pressed to replace it and , most importantly , would find it difficult to avoid causing oil prices to skyrocket . 

Even before the Russian invasion of Ukraine , oil prices were high . As the world is recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic , higher-than-expected demand met sluggish supply from producers . 

Due to the war in Ukraine and fears of further market disruption , oil prices are now rising even higher . 

On Monday , the cost of a barrel of Brent crude oil surged to $139 ( €128 )  , coming close to its record price of $147 . 50 reached in 2008 . Brent crude sets the benchmark value of around two-thirds of the world ' s oil . 


According to the Oxford Institute ' s report , analysts expect an average oil price of around $116 a barrel this year . 

Higher prices obviously benefit Russia , and are also negatively impacting Western economies . So the search for substitutes for Russian oil , as well as ways to counteract energy price rises , has become even more urgent . 

Watch video02 : 52
Can the West target Russian gas , oil ? 
Output up , prices down
Part of the answer could lie with the world ' s largest producer of crude oil , Saudi Arabia . 

Saudi Arabia and neighboring United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) are thought to be the only two major oil producers who could ramp up spare production comparatively easily . 

It would still be difficult for their oil to quickly replace supply coming out of Russia , said Karen Young , founding director of the Program on Economics and Energy at the Middle East Institute , based in Washington .  " Increasing production does not mean increasing exports directly to Europe ,  " she told DW .  " Oil markets are not that easily redirected .  "  

Young said the biggest difference the Saudis could make is producing more oil to bring prices on the global market down . In mid-February , even before the Russian invasion began , the US government already asked the Saudis and UAE to pump more oil to ease prices . 

An oil worker looks at a natural gas pipe in Manama , Bahrain
Middle Eastern oil producers , notably Saudi Arabia and the UAE , are resisting global pressure to boost oil and gas output

At the most recent meeting of OPEC + — the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries plus allies led by Russia — members agreed not to deviate from their output plan made earlier this year . The group wants to only slowly increase output in 2022 after the COVID pandemic led to a historic fall in demand . 

During a meeting on March 2 that lasted only 13 minutes , the 23 OPEC + members simply said they would increase output by an agreed 400 , 000 barrels per day in April , and didn ' t even mention the Ukraine war in their final document . 

Not turning to Russia 
 " OPEC has had a long-standing policy of not changing production or supply on the basis of geopolitical events ,  " explained Hasan Alhasan , a research fellow on Middle East policy for the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London .  " They only change in response to changes in market fundamentals .  " 


Alhasan suggested that more US pressure might help . After all , the United States is a traditional security partner for the Gulf nations and they are not pivoting toward Russia . But right now , Alhasan cautioned , this is technically a conflict between third parties . 

The Saudi ' s perception of the conflict could change , though , if the war continues to worsen and other countries — or even NATO — gets involved , or if a total ban on Russian oil is introduced . 

The lack of sanctions on Russian energy exports undermines Europe ' s argument , Alhasan said . Without those sanctions ,  " it makes it difficult to make a case for why the Gulf states should stick their necks out ,  " he told DW .  
 
 " I think a warmer reception and a direct request from President Biden to [ Saudi Crown Prince ] Mohammed bin Salman could also go a long way to encourage more Saudi production ,  " said Young of the Middle East Institute . But the US president has yet to speak directly with the Saudi leader . 

The global pushback against Russia ' s war on Ukraine , including so-called self-sanctioning strategies , may also have an impact on Saudi Arabia ' s willingness to change output policy . Port workers all around the world have refused to unload Russian oil , while financiers , spooked by sanctions , are refusing to provide credit or payment methods for Russian oil deals . 


Better friends
Some market analysts also argue relationships in the Middle East should have been more carefully nurtured by the US and European Union , especially now that Russia ' s war has made oil producers in the region important again .  
 
 " Even if Western diplomacy succeeds in bringing these countries on board , their [ the Middle Eastern countries ] worry is that this will be only temporary ,  " Cinzia Bianco , an expert on the Gulf region at the Berlin office of the European Council on Foreign Relations , told DW . 

Dina Esfandiary , an adviser to the Middle East and North Africa program at the International Crisis Group think tank , believes the importance of Arab oil-producing countries waxes and wanes . In the long term , she said ,  " I think there has also been a realization among these energy producers , that they are not as important now as when the world was highly dependent on them .  " 

This is why any pressure on Middle Eastern oil producers needs to be carefully considered , said Alhasan . If there ' s too much coercion , he argued , it will only validate their concerns " and , in the medium term , accelerate their efforts to expand their circle of international allies .  " 