Foreword
Right there , in your driveway , is a really fast car . Not one of 
those stupid Hamptons-style , rich-guy , showy cars like a Ferrari , 
but an honest fast car , perhaps a Subaru WRX . And here are the 
keys . Now go drive it . 
Right there , on the runway , is a private jet , ready to fl y you wherever you want to go . Here ’ s the pilot , standing by . Go . Leave . 
Right there , in your hand , is a Chicago Pneumatics 0651 hammer . You can drive a nail through just about anything with it , 
again and again if you choose . Time to use it . 
And here ’ s a keyboard , connected to the entire world . Here ’ s 
a publishing platform you can use to interact with just about 
anyone , just about any time , for free . You wanted a level playing fi eld , one where you have just as good a shot as anyone else ? 
Here it is . Do the work . 
Th at ’ s what we ’ re all waiting for you to do—to do the work . 
Steven Pressfi eld is the author of the most important book 
you ’ ve never read : Th e War of Art . It will help you understand 
why you ’ re stuck , it will kick you in the pants , and it will get you 
moving . You should , no , you must buy a copy as soon as you 
fi nish reading this . 
About This Book
Th is book is designed to coach you through a project ( a book , a 
ballet , a new business venture , a philanthropic enterprise ) from 
conception to fi nished product , seeing it from the point of view 
of Resistance . 
We ’ ll hit every predictable Resistance Point along the way—
those junctures where fear , self-sabotage , procrastination , selfdoubt , and all those other demons we ’ re all so familiar with can 
be counted upon to strike . 
Where butts need to be kicked , 
we shall kick them . Where kinder , 
gentler methods are called for , 
we ’ ll get out the kid gloves . 
One note : Th is document is articulated for the most part in the 
lexicon of a writer—i . e .  , the model used is that of conceiving 
and constructing plays , novels , or screenplays . But the principles 
can be applied with equal eff ectiveness to any form of creative 
endeavor , including such seemingly far-afi eld enterprises as the 
On the fi eld of the Self stand a knight and a dragon . 
You are the knight . Resistance is the dragon . 
2 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 3
acquisition of physical fi tness , the recovery from a broken heart , 
or the pursuit of any objective—emotional , intellectual , or spiritual—that involves moving from a lower or less conscious plane 
to a higher one . 
ORIENTATION
ENEMIES AND ALLIES
4 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 5
Our Enemies
Th e following is a list of the forces arrayed against us as artists 
and entrepreneurs : 
1 . Resistance ( i . e .  , fear , self-doubt , procrastination , 
addiction , distraction , timidity , ego and narcissism , selfloathing , perfectionism , etc .  ) 
2 . Rational thought 
3 . Friends and family
Resistance
What exactly is this monster ? Th e following few chapters from 
Th e War of Art will bring us up to speed : 
Resistance ’ s Greatest Hits 
Th e following is a list , in no particular order , of those activities 
that most commonly elicit Resistance : 
1 . Th e pursuit of any calling in writing , painting , music , 
fi lm , dance , or any creative art , however marginal or 
unconventional . 
2 . Th e launching of any entrepreneurial venture or 
enterprise , for profi t or otherwise . 
3 . Any diet or health regimen . 
4 . Any program of spiritual advancement . 
5 . Any activity whose aim is the acquisition of chiseled 
abdominals . 
6 . Any course or program designed to overcome an 
unwholesome habit or addiction . 
7 . Education of every kind . 
8 . Any act of political , moral , or ethical courage , including 
the decision to change for the better some unworthy 
pattern of thought or conduct in ourselves . 
9 . Th e undertaking of any enterprise or endeavor whose aim 
is to help others . 
10 . Any act that entails commitment of the heart—the 
decision to get married , to have a child , to weather a 
rocky patch in a relationship . 
11 . Th e taking of any principled stand in the face of 
adversity . 
In other words , any act that rejects 
immediate gratifi cation in favor 
of long-term growth , health , or 
integrity . 
Or , expressed another way , any act that derives from our 
higher nature instead of our lower . Any of these acts will elicit 
Resistance . 
Now : what are the characteristics of Resistance ? 
6 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 
7
Resistance Is Invisible
Resistance cannot be seen , heard , touched , or smelled . But it 
can be felt . We experience it as an energy fi eld radiating from a 
work-in-potential . 
Resistance is a repelling force . It ’ s 
negative . Its aim is to shove us 
away , distract us , prevent us from 
doing our work . 
Resistance Is Insidious
Resistance will tell you anything to keep you from doing your 
work . It will perjure , fabricate , falsify ; seduce , bully , cajole . 
Resistance is protean . It will assume any form , if that ’ s what it 
takes to deceive you . 
Resistance will reason with 
you like a lawyer or jam a ninemillimeter in your face like a 
stickup man . 
Resistance has no conscience . It will pledge anything to get a 
deal , then double-cross you as soon as your back is turned . If 
you take Resistance at its word , you deserve everything you get . 
Resistance is always lying and 
always full of shit . 
Resistance Is Impersonal
Resistance is not out to get you personally . It doesn ’ t know who 
you are and doesn ’ t care . Resistance is a force of nature . It acts 
objectively . 
Th ough it feels malevolent , 
Resistance in fact operates with 
the indiff erence of rain and 
transits the heavens by the same 
laws as stars . When we marshal 
our forces to combat Resistance , 
we must remember this . 
8 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 9
Resistance Is Infallible
Like a magnetized needle fl oating on a surface of oil , Resistance 
will unfailingly point to true North—meaning that calling or 
action it most wants to stop us from doing . 
We can use this . 
We can use it as a compass . 
We can navigate by Resistance , letting it guide us to that calling 
or purpose that we must follow before all others . 
Rule of thumb : Th e more 
important a call or action is to 
our soul ’ s evolution , the more 
Resistance we will feel toward 
pursuing it . 
Resistance Is Universal
We ’ re wrong if we think we ’ re the only ones struggling with 
Resistance . Everyone who has a body experiences Resistance . 
Resistance Never Sleeps
Henry Fonda was still throwing up before each stage performance , even when he was seventy-fi ve . 
In other words , fear doesn ’ t go 
away . Th e warrior and the artist 
live by the same code of necessity , 
which dictates that the battle must 
be fought anew every day . 
Resistance Plays for Keeps
Resistance ’ s goal is not to wound or disable . 
Resistance aims to kill . 
Its target is the epicenter of our being : our genius , our soul , the 
unique and priceless gift we were put on this earth to give and 
that no one else has but us . Resistance means business . 
When we fi ght it , we are in a war to the death . 
10 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 11
Rational Thought
Next to Resistance , rational thought is the artist or entrepreneur ’ s worst enemy . 
Bad things happen when we employ rational thought , because 
rational thought comes from the ego . 
Instead , we want to work from 
the Self , that is , from instinct and 
intuition , from the unconscious . 
Homer began both Th e Iliad and Th e Odyssey with a prayer to 
the Muse . Th e Greeks ’ greatest poet understood that genius 
did not reside within his fallible , mortal self—but came to him 
instead from some source that he could neither command nor 
control , only invoke . 
When an artist says “ Trust the soup ,  ” she means let go of the 
need to control ( which we can ’ t do anyway ) and put your faith 
instead in the Source , the Mystery , the Quantum Soup . 
Th e deeper the source we work from , the better our stuff will 
be—and the more transformative it will be for us and for those 
we share it with . 
Friends and Family
Th e problem with friends and family is that they know us as we 
are . Th ey are invested in maintaining us as we are . 
Th e last thing we want is to 
remain as we are . 
If you ’ re reading this book , it ’ s because you sense inside you a 
second self , an unlived you . 
With some exceptions ( God bless them )  , friends and family are 
the enemy of this unmanifested you , this unborn self , this future 
being . 
Prepare yourself to make new 
friends . Th ey will appear , trust me . 
12 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 13
Our Allies
Enough for now about the antagonists arrayed against us . Let ’ s 
consider the champions on our side : 
1 . Stupidity 
2 . Stubbornness 
3 . Blind faith 
4 . Passion 
5 . Assistance ( the opposite of Resistance ) 
6 . Friends and family
Stay Stupid
Th e three dumbest guys I can think of : Charles Lindbergh , Steve 
Jobs , Winston Churchill . Why ? Because any smart person who 
understood how impossibly arduous were the tasks they had set 
themselves would have pulled the plug before he even began . 
Ignorance and arrogance are the artist and entrepreneur ’ s indispensable allies . She must be clueless enough to have no idea 
how diffi cult her enterprise is going to be—and cocky enough 
to believe she can pull it off anyway . 
How do we achieve this state of mind ? By staying stupid . By not 
allowing ourselves to think . 
A child has no trouble believing 
the unbelievable , nor does the 
genius or the madman . It ’ s only 
you and I , with our big brains and 
our tiny hearts , who doubt and 
overthink and hesitate . 
Don ’ t think . Act . 
We can always revise and revisit once we ’ ve acted . But we can 
accomplish nothing until we act . 
Be Stubborn
Once we commit to action , the 
worst thing we can do is to stop . 
What will keep us from stopping ? Plain old stubbornness . 
I like the idea of stubbornness because it ’ s less loft y than “ tenacity ” or “ perseverance .  ” We don ’ t have to be heroes to be stubborn . We can just be pains in the butt . 
When we ’ re stubborn , there ’ s no quit in us . We ’ re mean . We ’ re 
mulish . We ’ re ornery . 
14 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 15
We ’ re in till the fi nish . 
We will sink our junkyard-dog 
teeth into Resistance ’ s ass and not 
let go , no matter how hard he kicks . 
Blind Faith
Is there a spiritual element to creativity ? Hell , yes . 
Our mightiest ally ( our 
indispensable ally ) is belief in 
something we cannot see , hear , 
touch , taste , or feel . 
Resistance wants to rattle that faith . Resistance wants to destroy 
it . 
Th ere ’ s an exercise that Patricia Ryan Madson describes in her 
wonderful book , Improv Wisdom .  ( Ms . Madson taught improvisational theater at Stanford to standing-room only classes for 
twenty years .  ) Here ’ s the exercise : 
Imagine a box with a lid . Hold the box in your hand . Now open it . 
What ’ s inside ? 
It might be a frog , a silk scarf , a gold coin of Persia . But here ’ s 
the trick : no matter how many times you open the box , there is 
always something in it . 
Ask me my religion . Th at ’ s it . 
I believe with unshakeable 
faith that there will always be 
something in the box . 
Passion
Picasso painted with passion , Mozart composed with it . A child 
plays with it all day long . 
You may think that you ’ ve lost your 
passion , or that you can ’ t identify 
it , or that you have so much of it , it 
threatens to overwhelm you . None 
of these is true . 
Fear saps passion . 
When we conquer our fears , we discover a boundless , bottomless , inexhaustible well of passion . 
16 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 17
Assistance 
We ’ ll come back to this later . Suffi ce it to say for now that as 
Resistance is the shadow , its opposite—Assistance—is the sun . 
Friends and Family
When art and inspiration and success and fame and money have 
come and gone , who still loves us—and whom do we love ? 
Only two things will remain with 
us across the river : our inhering 
genius and the hearts we love . 
In other words , what we do and whom we do it for . 
But enough theory . In the next chapter we ’ ll start our novel , 
kick off our new business , launch our philanthropic enterprise . 
First question : When is the best time to start ? 
BEGINNING
1
18 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 19
Start Before You ’ re Ready
Don ’ t prepare . Begin . 
Remember , our enemy is not 
lack of preparation ; it ’ s not the 
diffi culty of the project or the 
state of the marketplace or the 
emptiness of our bank account . 
Th e enemy is Resistance . 
Th e enemy is our chattering brain , 
which , if we give it so much as a 
nanosecond , will start producing 
excuses , alibis , transparent selfjustifi cations , and a million reasons 
why we can ’ t / shouldn ’ t / won ’ t do 
what we know we need to do . 
Start before you ’ re ready . 
Good things happen when we start before we ’ re ready . For one 
thing , we show huevos . Our blood heats up . Courage begets 
more courage . Th e gods , witnessing our boldness , look on in approval . W . H . Murray said : 
Until one is committed , there is hesitancy , the chance to draw back , always 
ineff ectiveness . Concerning all acts of initiative ( and creation )  , there is one 
elementary truth , the ignorance of which kills countless ideas and splendid 
plans : that the moment one defi nitely commits oneself , then Providence moves 
too . A whole stream of events issues from the decision , raising in one ’ s favor all 
manner of unforeseen incidents and meetings and material assistance which 
no man could have dreamed would have come his way . I have learned a deep 
respect for one of Goethe ’ s couplets :  “ Whatever you can do or dream you can , 
begin it . Boldness has genius , power and magic in it .  ” Begin it now . 
A Research Diet
Before we begin , you wanna do research ? Uh-unh . I ’ m putting 
you on a diet . 
You ’ re allowed to read three books 
on your subject . No more . 
No underlining , no highlighting , no thinking or talking about 
the documents later . Let the ideas percolate . 
Let the unconscious do its work . 
20 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 21
Research can become Resistance . We want to work , not prepare 
to work .  
( Later we ’ ll come back and do serious , heavy-duty research . 
Later . Not now .  ) 
Two quick thoughts as we begin : 
1 . Stay Primitive
Th e creative act is primitive . Its principles are of birth and genesis . 
Babies are born in blood and 
chaos ; stars and galaxies come into 
being amid the release of massive 
primordial cataclysms . 
Conception occurs at the primal level . I ’ m not being facetious 
when I stress , throughout this book , that it is better to be primitive than to be sophisticated , and better to be stupid than to be 
smart . 
Th e most highly cultured mother 
gives birth sweating and dislocated 
and cursing like a sailor . 
Th at ’ s the place we inhabit as artists and innovators . It ’ s the place 
we must become comfortable with . 
Th e hospital room may be spotless 
and sterile , but birth itself will 
always take place amid chaos , pain , 
and blood . 
2 . Swing for the Seats
My fi rst job was in advertising in New York . I used to bring ideas 
to my boss that were so tiny , they made him apoplectic .  
 “ Th is idea is the size of a postage 
stamp ! If it were any more 
miniscule , I ’ d need an electron 
microscope just to see it ! Go back 
to your cubicle and bring me 
something BIG !  ” 
If you and I want to do great stuff , we can ’ t let ourselves work 
small . A home-run swing that results in a strikeout is better than 
a successful bunt or even a line-drive single . 
22 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 23
Start playing from power . We can always dial it back later . If we 
don ’ t swing for the seats from the start , we ’ ll never be able to 
drive a fastball into the upper deck . 
Lunch with My Mentor
Some years ago I had lunch at Joe Allen ’ s in Manhattan with my 
mentor ( though he would cringe at that word )  , the writer and 
documentary maker Norm Stahl . He was making some notes on 
a pad of yellow , legal-size foolscap paper . He told me something 
that has saved my bacon more times than I can count : 
Steve , God made a single sheet of 
yellow foolscap exactly the right 
length to hold the outline of an 
entire novel . 
What did Norm mean by that ? 
He meant don ’ t overthink . Don ’ t overprepare . Don ’ t let research become Resistance . Don ’ t spend six months compiling a 
thousand-page tome detailing the emotional matrix and family 
history of every character in your book . 
Outline it fast . Now . On instinct . 
Discipline yourself to boil down your story / new business / philanthropic enterprise to a single page . 
Is this easy ? Hell , no . 
So the next chapter off ers a helpful hint : 
Three-Act Structure
Break the sheet of foolscap into three parts : beginning , middle , 
and end . 
Th is is how screenwriters and playwrights work . Act One , Act 
Two , Act Th ree . 
How Leonardo Did It
Here ’ s the Last Supper in three acts on a single sheet of foolscap : 
1 . Supper table stretching across the width of the canvas . 
2 . Jesus standing in the center , apostles arrayed in various 
postures left and right . 
3 . Perspective and background tailing off behind . 
Th at ’ s all Mr . Da V needed to start . Th e rest is details . 
24 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 25
Positively Fourth Street in Three Acts 
1 .  “ You got a lotta nerve to say you are my friend .  .  .  . 
2 .  “  .  .  . when you know as well as me , you ’ d rather see me 
paralyzed .  .  . 
3 .  “  .  .  . you ’ d know what a drag it is to see you .  ” 
The Vietnam Memorial
In three acts , on one sheet of foolscap : 
1 . A wall with the names of the fallen in chronological 
order of the dates of their deaths . 
2 . Wall set below the level of the ground in a “ V ,  ” extending 
from a shallow end to a deep end . 
3 . Visitors descend to view the wall , which has no barrier 
to prevent them from touching the names of the 
memorialized or from leaving tokens of love or honor at 
the base of the wall . 
At the conception stage , the artist works by instinct . What feels 
right ? 
What does she love ? 
Is this her pure vision ? Does it feel so right to her that she can 
dedicate the next X years of her life to realizing it ? 
Th ose were the only questions , at the start , that Maya Lin needed to ask and answer . 
Did she analyze her design intellectually ? No doubt . Did she 
refl ect on the utility of negative space and the power of what ’ sleft -out ? Of course . Did she assess with her intellect which aspects of the design would produce emotion and why ? I ’ m sure 
she did . 
But all that is beside the point at this stage . Let the art historians 
worry about that later . 
Do you love your idea ? Does it 
feel right on instinct ? Are you 
willing to bleed for it ? 
Facebook in Three Acts 
1 . A digital commons , upon which anyone who wishes may 
establish , free , his or her own personal “ page .  ” 
2 . Each page owner determines who is permitted access to 
his or her page . 
3 . Th us creating a worldwide community of “ friends ” who 
can interact with other “ friends ” and communicate or 
share virtually anything they want . 
That ’ s Why They Call It Rewriting
Th e old saw says there ’ s no such thing as writing , only rewriting . 
Th is is true . 
26 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 27
Better to have written a lousy ballet than to have composed no 
ballet at all . 
Get your idea down on paper . You 
can always tweak it later . 
Next question : How do you get it down ? 
Start at the End
Here ’ s a trick that screenwriters use : work backwards . Begin at 
the fi nish . 
If you ’ re writing a movie , solve the climax fi rst . If you ’ re opening 
a restaurant , begin with the experience you want the diner to 
have when she walks in and enjoys a meal . If you ’ re preparing a 
seduction , determine the state of mind you want the process of 
romancing to bring your lover to . 
Figure out where you want to go ; 
then work backwards from there . 
Yes , you say .  “ But how do I know where I want to go ?  ” 
Answer the Question “ What Is This About ?  ” 
Start with the theme . What is this project about ? 
What is the Eiff el Tower about ? 
What is the space shuttle about ? 
What is Nude Descending a 
Staircase about ? 
Your movie , your album , your new startup .  .  . what is it about ? 
When you know that , you ’ ll know the end state . And when you 
know the end state , you ’ ll know the steps to take to get there . 
Moby Dick on a Single Sheet , Working Back to Front
What is Moby Dick about ? 
It ’ s about the clash between human will and the elemental malice of nature , i . e .  ( in Melville ’ s dark 19th-century view )  , the Old 
Testament God . 
So .  .  . a monster . A whale . A white whale ( because white is even 
weirder and scarier than whatever color whales normally are )  . 
Next : a mortal to challenge the monster . He must be monstrous 
himself . Obsessed , arrogant , monomaniacal . Ahab . 
Knowing our theme ( in other words , what Moby Dick is about )  , 
we now know the climax : Ahab harpoons the white whale and 
duels it to the death . No other climax is possible . 
Now we have Act Th ree . We have our end . 
28 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 29
Next : beginning and middle . We need to set the climax up and 
load it with maximum emotion and thematic impact . 
We must , in other words , establish both protagonist and antagonist , make clear to the reader what each of them represents and 
what their confl ict means thematically in the broader scheme of 
the human ( and divine ) condition . 
Beginning : Ishmael . Our point of view . A human-scale witness 
to the tragedy . 
Once we have Ishmael , we have our start and our ultimate fi nish—aft er the whale destroys the Pequod and all her crew and 
drags Ahab to his death in the depths , Ishmael pops up amid the 
wreckage , the lone survivor , to tell the tale . 
End fi rst , then beginning and 
middle . Th at ’ s your startup , that ’ s 
your plan for competing in a 
triathlon , that ’ s your ballet .  
 “ But hey , Steve .  .  . I thought you said ‘ Don ’ t think .  ’  ” 
Let ’ s pause for a moment then and consider the diff erence between thinking and “ thinking .  ” 
Thoughts and Chatter
Have you ever meditated ? Th en you know what it feels like to 
shift your consciousness to a witnessing mode and to watch 
thoughts arise , fl oat across your awareness , and then drift away , 
to be replaced by the next thought and the thought aft er that . 
Th ese are not thoughts . 
Th ey are chatter . 
I was thirty years old before I had an actual thought . Everything 
up till then was either what Buddhists call “ monkey-mind ” 
chatter or the refl exive regurgitation of whatever my parents or 
teachers said , or whatever I saw on the news or read in a book , 
or heard somebody rap about , hanging around the street corner . 
In this book , when I say “ Don ’ t think ,  ” what I mean is : don ’ t 
listen to the chatter . Pay no attention to those rambling , disjointed images and notions that drift across the movie screen of 
your mind . 
Th ose are not your thoughts . 
Th ey are chatter . 
Th ey are Resistance . 
30 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 31
Chatter is your mother and father ’ s well-intentioned expressions 
of caution , seeking to shield you from hurting yourself . Chatter 
is your teachers ’ equally well-meaning attempts at socialization , 
training you to follow the rules . Chatter is your friends ’ regularJoe buddy-talk , trying to make you like them and follow the 
rules of the pack . 
Chatter is Resistance . 
Its aim is to reconcile you to “ the way it is ,  ” to make you exactly 
like everyone else , to render you amenable to societal order and 
discipline . 
Where do our own real thoughts 
come from ? How can we access 
them ? From what source does our 
true , authentic self speak ? 
Answering that is the work you and I will do for the rest of our 
lives . 
Ready to Rock and Roll
We ’ ve got our concept , we ’ ve got our theme . We know our start . 
We know where we want to fi nish . We ’ ve got our project in 
three acts on a single sheet of foolscap . 
Ready to roll ? We need only to remember our three mantras : 
1 . Stay primitive . 
2 . Trust the soup . 
3 . Swing for the seats . 
And our fi nal-fi nal precept : 
4 . Be ready for Resistance . 
32 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 33
2
MIDDLE
The Universe Is Not Indiff erent
I blame Communism . I blame Fascism . I blame psychotherapy . 
Th ey—and a boatload of other well-intentioned ideologies that 
evolved during the mass-culture , industrialized , dehumanizing 
epoch of the late 19th and early 20th centuries—all posited the 
same fantasy . Th ey all preached that human nature was perfectible and that , thereby , evil could be overcome . 
It can ’ t . 
When you and I set out to create anything—art , commerce , science , love—or to advance in the direction of a higher , nobler 
version of ourselves , we uncork from the universe , ineluctably , 
an equal and opposite reaction . 
Th at reaction is Resistance . Resistance is an active , intelligent , 
protean , malign force—tireless , relentless , and inextinguishable—whose sole object is to stop us from becoming our best 
selves and from achieving our higher goals . 
Th e universe is not indiff erent . It is 
actively hostile . 
34 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 35
Every principle espoused so far in this volume is predicated 
upon that truth . Th e aim of every axiom set forth thus far is to 
outwit , outfl ank , outmaneuver Resistance . 
We can never eliminate Resistance . 
It will never go away . But we can 
outsmart it , and we can enlist allies 
that are as powerful as it is . 
One thing we can never , never permit ourselves to do is to take 
Resistance lightly , to underestimate it or to fail to take it into 
account . 
We must respect Resistance , like Sigourney Weaver respected 
the Alien , or St . George respected the dragon . 
Fill in the Gaps
On our single sheet of foolscap we ’ ve got the Big Beats . Now 
what ? 
Fill in the gaps . 
David Lean famously declared that a feature fi lm should have 
seven or eight major sequences . Th at ’ s a pretty good guideline 
for our play , our album , our State of the Union address . 
A video game should have seven or eight major movements ; so 
should the newest high-tech gadget , or the latest fi ghter plane . 
Our new house should have seven or eight major spaces . A 
football game , a prize fi ght , a tennis match—if they ’ re going to 
be entertaining—should have seven or eight major swings of 
momentum . 
Th at ’ s what we need now . We need to fi ll in the gaps with a series of great entertaining and enlightening scenes , sequences , or 
spaces . 
Do Research Now
Now you can do your research . But stay on your diet . 
Do research early or late . Don ’ t stop working . Never do research 
in prime working time . 
Research can be fun . It can be 
seductive . Th at ’ s its danger . We 
need it , we love it . But we must 
never forget that research can 
become Resistance . 
Soak up what you need to fi ll in the gaps . Keep working . 
36 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 37
How Screenwriters Pitch
When movie writers pitch a project , they keep it brief because 
studio executives ’ attention spans are minimal . But they , the 
writers , want their presentation to have maximum impact and 
to deliver , in concise form , the feel and fl avor of the fi lm they see 
in their heads . 
One trick they use is to boil down their presentation to the 
following : 
1 . A killer opening scene 
2 . Two major set pieces in the middle 
3 . A killer climax 
4 . A concise statement of the theme
In other words , they ’ re fi lling in the gaps . Th e major beats . 
We can do that , too . 
If we ’ re inventing Twitter , we start with What Are You Doing 
Now ?  , the 140-character limit , and the Following . We fi ll in the 
gaps : the hashtag , the tiny URL , the re-tweet . 
If we ’ re writing Th e Hangover , we kick off with Losing Doug , 
Searching for Doug , Finding Doug . Fill in the blanks : Stu marries a stripper , Mike Tyson comes aft er his tiger , Mister Chow 
brings the muscle . 
Any project or enterprise can be 
broken down into beginning , middle , 
and end . Fill in the gaps ; then fi ll in 
the gaps between the gaps . 
When we ’ ve got David Lean ’ s eight sequences , we ’ re home except for one thing : 
Th e actual work . 
Cover the Canvas
One rule for fi rst full working 
draft s : get them done ASAP . 
Don ’ t worry about quality . Act , don ’ t refl ect . Momentum is 
everything . 
Get to THE END as if the devil 
himself were breathing down your 
neck and poking you in the butt 
with his pitchfork . 
Believe me , he is . 
38 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 39
Get the serum to Nome . Get the Conestoga wagon to the 
Oregon Trail . Get the fi rst version of your project done from A 
to Z as fast as you can . 
Don ’ t stop . Don ’ t look down . 
Don ’ t think . 
Suspend All Self-Judgment
Unless you ’ re building a sailboat or the Taj Mahal , I give you a 
free pass to screw up as much as you like . 
Th e inner critic ? His ass is not 
permitted in the building . 
Set forth without fear and without self-censorship . When you 
hear that voice in your head , blow it off . 
Th is draft is not being graded . 
Th ere will be no pop quiz . 
Only one thing matters in this initial draft : get SOMETHING 
done , however fl awed or imperfect . 
You are not allowed to judge yourself . 
The Crazier the Better
My friend Paul is writing a cop novel . He ’ s never written anything 
so ambitious—and he ’ s terrifi ed .  “ Th e story is coming out dark ,  ” 
he says .  “ I mean twisted , weird-dark . So dark it ’ s scaring me .  ” 
Paul wants to know if he should throttle back . He ’ s worried that 
the book will come out so evil , not even Darth Vader will want 
to touch it . 
Answer : No way . 
Th e darker the better , if that ’ s how it ’ s coming to him . 
Suspending self-judgment doesn ’ t just mean blowing off the 
 “ You suck ” voice in our heads . It also means liberating ourselves 
from conventional expectations—from what we think our work 
 “ ought ” to be or “ should ” look like . 
Stay stupid . Follow your 
unconventional , crazy heart . 
If your notion violates every precept I ’ ve set forth in these pages , 
tell me to go to hell . Do what that voice says . 
40 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 41
Ideas Do Not Come Linearly
Remember when we broke our concept down into beginning , 
middle , and end ? Rational thought would tempt us to do our 
work in that order . 
Wrong . 
Ideas come according to their own 
logic . Th at logic is not rational . 
It ’ s not linear . We may get the 
middle before we get the end . We 
may get the end before we get 
the beginning . Be ready for this . 
Don ’ t resist it . 
Do you have a pocket tape recorder ? I do . I keep it with me everywhere .  ( A notepad works , too .  ) Why do I record ideas the 
minute they come to me ? Because if I don ’ t , I ’ ll forget them . 
You will , too . 
Nothing is more fun than turning 
on the recorder and hearing your 
own voice telling you a fantastic 
idea that you had completely 
forgotten you had . 
The Process
Let ’ s talk about the actual process—the writing / composing / 
idea generation process . 
It progresses in two stages : action and refl ection . 
Act , refl ect . Act , refl ect . 
NEVER act and refl ect at the same time . 
The Defi nition of Action and Refl ection
In writing ,  “ action ” means putting words on paper .  
 “ Refl ection ” means evaluating what we have on paper . 
For this fi rst draft , we ’ ll go light on refl ection and heavy on 
action . 
42 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 43
Spew . Let ’ er rip . Launch into the 
void and soar wherever the wind 
takes you . 
When we say “ Trust the soup ,  ” we mean the Muse , the unconscious , the Quantum Soup . Th e sailor hoists his canvas , trusting 
that the wind ( which is invisible and which he can neither see 
nor control ) will appear and power him upon his voyage . 
You and I hoist our canvas to catch ideas . 
When we say “ Stay Stupid ,  ” we mean don ’ t self-censor , don ’ t indulge in self-doubt , don ’ t permit self-judgment . 
Forget rational thought . Play . Play 
like a child . 
Why does this purely instinctive , intuitive method work ? 
Because our idea ( our song , our ballet , our new Tex-Mex restaurant ) is smarter than we are . 
Our job is not to control our idea ; 
our job is to fi gure out what our 
idea is ( and wants to be ) —and 
then bring it into being . 
Th e song we ’ re composing already exists in potential . Our work 
is to fi nd it . Can we hear it in our head ? It exists , like a signal 
coming from a faraway radio tower . 
Our job is to tune to that frequency . 
Did you read Bob Dylan ’ s Chronicles ? Th e lengths he goes to 
to fi nd a song ( or an arrangement or a producing partner ) are 
beyond insanity . 
He does it all by instinct . Fearless , child-like , primitive instinct . 
The Answer Is Always Yes
When an idea pops into our head and we think ,  “ No , this is too 
crazy ,  ”  
.  .  . that ’ s the idea we want . 
When we think ,  “ Th is notion is completely off the wall .  .  . should 
I even take the time to work on this ?  ”  
.  .  . the answer is yes . 
Never doubt the soup . Never say no . 
Th e answer is always yes . 
44 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 45
The Opposite of Resistance
I said a few chapters ago that the universe is not indiff erent ; it is 
actively hostile . Th is is true . 
But behind every law of nature stands an equal and opposite law . 
Th e universe is also actively 
benevolent . You should be feeling 
this now . You should be 
feeling a tailwind . 
Th e opposite of Resistance is Assistance . 
A work-in-progress generates its 
own energy fi eld . You , the artist or 
entrepreneur , are pouring love into 
the work ; you are suff using it with 
passion and intention and hope . 
Th is is serious juju . Th e universe 
responds to this . It has no choice . 
Your work-in-progress produces its own gravitational fi eld , 
created by your will and your attention . Th is fi eld attracts likespirited entities into its orbit . 
What entities ? 
Ideas . 
You started with a few scraps of a song ; now you ’ ve got half an 
opera . You began with the crazy notion to restore a neglected 
park ; now the lot is cleared and you ’ ve got volunteers tweeting 
and phoning at all hours . Your will and vision initiated the process , but now the process has acquired a life and momentum of 
its own . 
Th e un-indiff erent universe has stepped in to counter Resistance . 
It has introduced a positive opposing force . 
Assistance is the universal , 
immutable force of creative 
manifestation , whose role since 
the Big Bang has been to translate 
potential into being , to convert 
dreams into reality . 
46 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 47
Keep Working
Stephen King has confessed that he works every day . Fourth of 
July , his birthday , Christmas . 
I love that . Particularly at this stage—what Seth Godin calls 
 “ thrashing ”  ( a very evocative term ) —momentum is everything . 
Keep it going . 
How much time can you spare each day ? 
For that interval , close the door and—short of a family emergency or the outbreak of World War III—don ’ t let ANYBODY 
in . 
Keep working . Keep working . 
Keep working . 
Keep Working , Part Two
Sometimes on Wednesday I ’ ll read something that I wrote on 
Tuesday and I ’ ll think ,  “ Th is is crap . I hate it and I hate myself .  ” 
Th en I ’ ll re-read the identical passage on Th ursday . To my astonishment , it has become brilliant overnight . 
Ignore false negatives . Ignore false positives . Both are Resistance . 
Keep working . 
Keep Working , Part Three
Did I forget to say ? 
Keep working . 
Act / Refl ect , Part Two
Until now , our motto has been “ Act , Don ’ t Refl ect .  ” Now we 
revisit that notion . 
Now that we ’ re rolling , we can start engaging the left brain as 
well as the right . Act , then refl ect . Act , then refl ect . 
Here ’ s how I do it : 
At least twice a week , I pause in the rush of work and have a meeting with myself .  ( If I were part of a team , I ’ d call a team meeting .  ) 
I ask myself , again , of the project :  
 “ What is this damn thing about ?  ” 
Keep refi ning your understanding of the theme ; keep narrowing 
it down . 
Th is is the thorniest nut of any creative endeavor—and the one 
that evokes the fi ercest Resistance . 
48 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 49
It is pure hell to 
answer this question . 
More books , movies , new businesses , etc . get screwed up ( or 
rather , screw themselves up ) due to failure to confront and 
solve this issue than for any other reason . It is make-or-break , 
do-or-die . 
Paddy Chayefsky famously said ,  “ As soon as I fi gure out the 
theme of my play , I write it down on a thin strip of paper and 
Scotch-tape it to the front of my typewriter . Aft er that , nothing 
goes into that play that isn ’ t on-theme .  ” 
Have that meeting twice a week . Pause and refl ect .  “ What is this 
project about ?  ”  “ What is its theme ?  ”  “ Is every element serving 
that theme ?  ” 
Fill in the Gaps , Part Two
Ask yourself ,  “ What ’ s missing ?  ” 
Th en fi ll that gap . 
What ’ s missing in the menu of your new restaurant ? What have 
we left out in planning our youth center in the slums of São 
Paulo ? 
Did you ever see the movie True Confessions , starring Robert 
Duvall and Robert De Niro ? Th e story is set in 1940s Los 
Angeles ; De Niro is a rising-star monsignor for the L . A . diocese ; Duvall plays his brother , a homicide detective investigating 
a Black Dahlia–type murder . 
Th e script was great , the direction was tremendous . But in midshoot , De Niro ’ s instincts told him something was missing . Th e 
audience had seen his character wheeling and dealing on behalf 
of the Church , hosting big-money fundraisers , getting schools 
built , playing golf with L . A . heavyweights . 
De Niro went to Ulu Grosbard , the director , and asked for a 
scene where the audience gets to see where his character sleeps . 
Sounds crazy , doesn ’ t it ? 
Th e result was a simple sequence , without dialogue , of De Niro ’ s 
monsignor returning home in the evening to the dormitory ( a 
former mansion ) he shares with other senior priests of the diocese . He mounts the stairs alone , enters a room so bare it contains nothing but a bed , a chair , and an armoire , all looking like 
they came from the Goodwill store . De Niro ’ s character takes off
the cardigan sweater he is wearing and hangs it on a wire hanger 
in the armoire , which contains only one other shirt and a single 
pair of trousers . Th en he sits on the bed . Th at ’ s it . But in that one 
moment , we , the audience , see the character ’ s entire life . 
50 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 51
Ask yourself what ’ s missing . Th en 
fi ll that void . 
Now We ’ re Rolling
We ’ re weeks into the project now . Good things are happening . We ’ ve established habit and rhythm . We ’ ve achieved 
momentum . 
Ideas are fl owing . Our movie , our new business , our passage 
to freedom from addiction has acquired gravitational mass ; it 
possesses energy ; its fi eld produces attraction . Th e law of selfordering has kicked in . Despite all our self-doubt , the project is 
rounding into shape . It ’ s becoming itself . 
People are responding to us diff erently . We ’ re making new 
friends . Our feet are under us ; we ’ re starting to feel professional . 
We ’ re beginning to feel as if we know a secret that nobody else 
does . Or rather , that we ’ ve somehow become part of a select society . Other members recognize us and encourage us ; unsolicited , they proff er assistance—and their aid , unfailingly , is exactly 
what we ’ ve needed . 
Best of all , we ’ re having fun . Th e dread that had hamstrung us 
for years seems miraculously to have fallen away . Th e fog has 
lift ed . It ’ s almost too good to be true . 
And then .  .  . 
The Wall
And then we hit the wall . 
Out of nowhere , terror strikes . Our fragile confi dence collapses . 
Nighttime : we wake in a sweat . 
Th at “ You suck ” voice is back , 
howling in our head . 
Did we stand up to someone in authority over us ? Now we crawl 
back and grovel to him . Did we face up to someone who was 
treating us with disrespect ? Now we beg him without shame to 
take us back . 
We ’ re poised at the brink of a 
creative breakthrough and we can ’ t 
stand it . Th e prospect of success 
looms . We freak . Why did we start 
this project ? We must have been 
insane . Who encouraged us ? We 
want to wring their necks . Where are 
they now ? Why can ’ t they help us ? 
52 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 53
We ’ re halfway , two-thirds through . Far enough to have invested 
serious time and money , not to mention our hopes , our dreams , 
our identity even—but not far enough to have passed the crisis 
point , not far enough to glimpse the end . 
We have turned round Cape Horn and the gales are shrieking ; 
ice encases the masts ; sails and sheets are frozen . Th e storm howls 
dead in our faces . Th ere ’ s no way back and no way forward . 
We know we ’ re panicking but we can ’ t stop ; we can ’ t get a hold 
of ourselves . We have entered .  .  . 
THE
54 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 55
BELLY OF
56 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 57
THE BEAST
58 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 59
Welcome to Hell
Now you ’ re in the shit . 
Now you ’ re feeling the symptoms . Now you ’ re ready to listen . 
Th e next ten chapters are the most 
important in this book . 
Th ey ’ re the movie within the movie , the dance within the dance . 
If you take away nothing else from this document , take this 
section . 
It delineates the Seven Principles 
of Resistance and the two Tests . 
Th ese principles govern and underlie everything you ’ re experiencing now . Th ese tests are being set for you . 
Th is is your trial by fi re . 
What follows is what you need to know to get to the other side . 
Principle Number One : There Is an Enemy
Th e fi rst principle of Resistance is that there is an enemy . 
In our feel-good , social-safety-net , high-self-esteem world , you 
and I have been brainwashed to believe that there is no such 
thing as evil , that human nature is perfectible , that everyone and 
everything can be made nice . 
We have been conditioned to imagine that the darkness that we 
see in the world and feel in our own hearts is only an illusion , 
which can be dispelled by the proper care , the proper love , the 
proper education , and the proper funding . 
It can ’ t . 
Th ere is an enemy . Th ere is an 
intelligent , active , malign force 
working against us . 
Step one is to recognize this . 
Th is recognition alone is 
enormously powerful . It saved my 
life , and it will save yours . 
60 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 61
Principle Number Two : This Enemy Is Implacable
Th e hostile , malicious force that we ’ re experiencing now is not 
a joke . It is not to be trifl ed with or taken lightly . It is for real . In 
the words of my dear friend Rabbi Mordecai Finley :  
 “ It will kill you . It will kill you 
like cancer .  ” 
Th is enemy is intelligent , protean , implacable , inextinguishable , 
and utterly ruthless and destructive . 
Its aim is not to obstruct or to 
hamper or to impede . 
Its aim is to kill . 
Th is is the second principle of Resistance . 
Principle Number Three : This Enemy Is Inside You
Pat Riley , when he was coach of the Lakers , had a term for all 
those off -court forces , like fame and ego ( not to mention crazed 
fans , the press , agents , sponsors , and ex-wives )  , that worked 
against the players ’ chances for on-court success . He called these 
forces “ peripheral opponents .  ” 
Resistance is not a peripheral opponent . It does not arise from 
rivals , bosses , spouses , children , terrorists , lobbyists , or political 
adversaries . 
It comes from us . 
You can board a spaceship to Pluto and settle , all by yourself , into 
a perfect artist ’ s cottage ten zillion miles from Earth . Resistance 
will still be with you . 
Th e enemy is inside you . 
Principle Number Four : 
The Enemy Is Inside You , But It Is Not You
Th e fourth axiom of Resistance is that the enemy is inside you , 
but it is not you . 
What does that mean ? It means you 
are not to blame for the voices of 
Resistance you hear in your head . 
Th ey are not your “ fault .  ” You have done nothing “ wrong .  ” You 
have committed no “ sin .  ” I have that same voice in my head . So 
62 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 63
did Picasso and Einstein . So do Sarah Palin and Lady Gaga and 
Donald Trump . 
If you ’ ve got a head , you ’ ve got a 
voice of Resistance inside it . 
Th e enemy is in you , but it is not you . No moral judgment attaches to the possession of it . You “ have ” Resistance the same 
way you “ have ” a heartbeat . 
You are blameless . You retain free will and the capacity to act . 
Principle Number Five : 
The “ Real You ” Must Duel the “ Resistance You ” 
On the fi eld of the Self stand a knight and a dragon . 
You are the knight . 
Resistance is the dragon . 
Th ere is no way to be nice to the dragon , or to reason with it or 
negotiate with it or beam a white light around it and make it 
your friend . Th e dragon belches fi re and lives only to block you 
from reaching the gold of wisdom and freedom , which it has 
been charged to guard to its fi nal breath . 
Th e only intercourse possible 
between the knight and the 
dragon is battle . 
Th e contest is life-and-death , mano a mano . It asks no quarter 
and gives none . 
Th is is the fi ft h principle of Resistance . 
Principle Number Six : Resistance Arises Second
Th e sixth principle of Resistance ( and the key to overcoming it ) 
is that Resistance arises second . 
What comes fi rst is the idea , the 
passion , the dream of the work 
we are so excited to create that it 
scares the hell out of us . 
Resistance is the response of the frightened , petty , small-time 
ego to the brave , generous , magnifi cent impulse of the creative 
self . 
Resistance is the shadow cast by 
the innovative self ’ s sun . 
64 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 65
What does this mean to us—the artists and entrepreneurs in the 
trenches ? 
It means that before the dragon 
of Resistance reared its ugly head 
and breathed fi re into our faces , 
there existed within us a force so 
potent and life-affi rming that it 
summoned this beast into being , 
perversely , to combat it . 
It means that , at bottom , Resistance is not the towering , allpowerful monster before whom we are compelled to quake in 
terror . Resistance is more like the pain-in-the-ass schoolteacher 
who won ’ t let us climb that tree in the playground . 
But the urge to climb came fi rst . 
Th at urge is love . 
Love for the material , 
love for the work , love for our 
brothers and sisters to whom we 
will off er our work as a gift . 
In Greek , the word is eros . Life force . Dynamis , creative 
drive . 
Th at mischievous tree-climbing 
scamp is our friend . 
She ’ s us , she ’ s our higher nature , our Self . In the face of Resistance , 
we have to remember her and hang onto her and draw strength 
from her . 
Th e opposite of fear is love—love 
of the challenge , love of the work , 
the pure joyous passion to take a 
shot at our dream and see if we can 
pull it off . 
Principle Number Seven : 
The Opposite of Resistance Is Assistance
In myths and legends , the knight is always aided in his quest 
to slay the dragon . Providence brings forth a champion whose 
role is to assist the hero . Th eseus had Ariadne when he fought 
the Minotaur . Jason had Medea when he went aft er the Golden 
Fleece . Odysseus had the goddess Athena to guide him home . 
66 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 67
In Native American myths , our totemic ally is oft en an animal—
a magic raven , say , or a talking coyote . In Norse myths , an old 
crone sometimes assists the hero ; in African legends , it ’ s oft en a 
bird . Th e three Wise Men were guided by a star . 
All of these characters or forces represent Assistance . Th ey are 
symbols for the unmanifested . Th ey stand for a dream . 
Th e dream is your project , your 
vision , your symphony , your 
startup . Th e love is the passion 
and enthusiasm that fi ll your heart 
when you envision your 
project ’ s completion . 
Sometimes when Resistance is kicking my butt ( which it does , 
all the time )  , I fl ash on Charles Lindbergh . What symphony 
of Resistance must have been playing in his head when he was 
struggling to raise the funding for his attempt to fl y across the 
Atlantic solo ?  
 “ You ’ re too young , you ’ re too inexperienced ; you ’ ve got no credentials , no credibility . Everyone who ’ s tried this has failed and 
you will , too . It can ’ t be done . Your plane will crash , you ’ re going 
to drown , you ’ re a madman who is attempting the impossible 
and you deserve whatever dire fate befalls you !  ” 
What saw Lindy through ? 
It can only have been the dream . 
Love of the idea . 
How cool would it be , in 1927 , to land at Le Bourget fi eld outside Paris , having fl own from New York , solo and non-stop , before anyone else had ever done it ? 
Th e seventh principle of Resistance is that we can align ourselves 
with these universal forces of Assistance—this dream , this passion to make the unmanifest manifest—and ride them into 
battle against the dragon . 
Resistance ’ s Two Tests
Resistance puts two questions to each and all of us . 
Each question has only one 
correct answer . 
68 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 69
Test Number One 
 “ How bad do you want it ?  ” 
Th is is Resistance ’ s fi rst question . Th e scale below will help you 
answer . Mark the selection that corresponds to how you feel 
about your book / movie / ballet / new business / whatever . 
Dabbling • Interested • Intrigued but Uncertain • Passionate • Totally Committed
If your answer is not the one on the far right , put this book 
down and throw it away . 
Test Number Two 
 “ Why do you want it ?  ” 
1 . For the babes ( or the dudes ) 
2 . Th e money 
3 . For fame 
4 . Because I deserve it 
5 . For power 
6 . To prove my old man ( or ex-spouse , mother , teacher , 
coach ) wrong 
7 . To serve my vision of how life / mankind ought to be 
8 . For fun or beauty 
9 . Because I have no choice
If you checked 8 or 9 , you get to stay on the island .  ( I know I said 
there was only one correct answer . But 8 and 9 are really one .  ) 
If you checked any of the fi rst seven , you can stay , too—but you 
must immediately check yourself into the Attitude Adjustment 
Chamber . 
The Attitude Adjustment Chamber
Did you ever see Cool Hand Luke ? Remember “ the Box ”  ? You 
don ’ t get to keep anything when you enter this space . You must 
check at the door : 
• Your ego
• Your sense of entitlement
• Your impatience
• Your fear
• Your hope
• Your anger
70 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 71
You must also leave behind : 
• All grievances related to aspects of yourself dependent 
on the accident of birth , e . g .  , how neglected / abused / 
mistreated / unloved / poor / ill-favored etc . you were when 
you were born . 
• All sense of personal exceptionalness dependent on the 
accident of birth , e . g .  , how rich / cute / tall / thin / smart / 
charming / loveable you were when you were born . 
• All of the previous two , based on any subsequent ( i . e .  , 
post-birth ) acquisition of any of these qualities , however 
honorably or meritoriously earned . 
Th e only items you get to keep are 
love for the work , will to fi nish , 
and passion to serve the ethical , 
creative Muse . 
Th is ends our special section ,  “ Belly of the Beast .  ” We return 
now to programming already in progress : 
You and me , two-thirds 
through our project and stuck 
in a hell of Resistance . 
2
MIDDLE
72 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 73
The Big Crash
We were doing so great . Our project was in high gear , we were 
almost fi nished ( maybe we actually were fi nished )  . 
Th en inevitably .  .  . 
Everything crashes . 
If our project is a movie , the star checks into rehab . If it ’ s a business venture , the bank pulls our fi nancing . If it ’ s a rodeo , our star 
bull runs away with a heifer . 
Th e Big Crash is so predictable , 
across all fi elds of enterprise , 
that we can practically set our 
watches by it . 
Bank on it . It ’ s gonna happen . 
Th e worst part of the Big Crash is that nothing can prepare us 
for it . Why ? Because the crash arises organically , spawned by 
some act of commission or omission that we ourselves took or 
countenanced back at the project ’ s inception . 
Th e Big Crash just happened to me . My newest book , a novel 
called Th e Profession , was done—aft er two years of work . I was 
proud of it , I was psyched , I was sure I had broken through to a 
level I had never achieved before . 
Th en I showed it to people I trusted . 
Th ey hated it . 
Let me rephrase that . 
Th ey HATED it . 
Th e worst part is , they were right . Th e book didn ’ t work . Its concept was fl awed , and the fl aw was fatal . 
I ’ d love to report that I rallied at once and whipped that sucker 
into shape in a matter of days . Unfortunately , what happened 
was that I crashed just like the book . 
I went into an emotional tailspin . 
I was lost . I was fl oundering . 
Ringing the Bell
Navy SEAL training puts its candidates through probably the 
most intense physical ordeal in the U . S . military . Th e reason 
is they ’ re trying to break you . SEAL trainers want to see if the 
74 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 75
candidate will crack . Better that the aspiring warrior fails here—
at Coronado Island in San Diego—than someplace where a real 
wartime mission and real lives are at stake . 
In SEAL training , they have a bell . When a candidate can ’ t take 
the agony any longer—the 6-mile ocean swims or the 15-mile 
full-load runs or the physical and mental ordeals on no sleep and 
no food .  .  . when he ’ s had enough and he ’ s ready to quit , he walks 
up and rings the bell . 
Th at ’ s it . It ’ s over . 
He has dropped out . 
You and I have a bell hanging over 
us , too , here in the belly of the 
beast . Will we ring it ? 
Th ere ’ s a diff erence between Navy SEAL training and what you 
and I are facing now . 
Our ordeal is harder . 
Because we ’ re alone . 
We ’ ve got no trainers over us , shouting in our ears or kicking our 
butts to keep us going . We ’ ve got no friends , no fellow suff erers , 
no externally imposed structure . No one ’ s feeding us , housing 
us , or clothing us . We have no objective milestones or points 
of validation . We can ’ t tell whether we ’ re doing great or falling 
on our faces . When we fi nish , if we do , no one will be waiting 
to congratulate us . We ’ ll get no champagne , no beach party , no 
diploma , no insignia . Th e battle we ’ re fi ghting , we can ’ t explain 
to anybody or share with anybody or call in anybody to help . 
Th e only thing we have in 
common with the SEAL 
candidates is the bell . 
Will we ring it or won ’ t we ? 
Crashes Are Good 
Crashes are hell , but in the end 
they ’ re good for us . 
A crash means we have failed . We gave it everything we had and 
we came up short . A crash does not mean we are losers . 
A crash means we have to grow . 
A crash means we ’ re at the threshold of learning something , 
which means we ’ re getting better , we ’ re acquiring the wisdom of 
76 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 77
our craft . A crash compels us to fi gure out what works and what 
doesn ’ t work—and to understand the diff erence . 
We got ourselves into this mess by mistakes we made at the start . 
How ? Were we lazy ? Inattentive ? Did we mean well but forget 
to factor in human nature ? Did we assess reality incorrectly ? 
Whatever the cause , the Big Crash 
compels us to go back now and 
solve the problem that we either 
created directly or set into motion 
unwittingly at the outset . 
Sartre said “ Hell is other people ,  ” but in this case , hell is us . 
Panic Is Good
Creative panic is good . Here ’ s why : 
Our greatest fear is fear of success . 
When we are succeeding—that is , when we have begun to overcome our self-doubt and self-sabotage , when we are advancing 
in our craft and evolving to a higher level—that ’ s when panic 
strikes . 
It did for me when my book crashed , and it was the best thing 
that happened to me all year . 
When we experience panic , it 
means that we ’ re about to cross 
a threshold . We ’ re poised on the 
doorstep of a higher plane . 
Have you ever watched a small child take a few bold steps away 
from its mother ? Th e little boy or girl shows great courage . She 
ventures forth , feels exhilaration , and then .  .  . she realizes what 
she has done . She freaks . She bolts back to Mommy . 
Th at ’ s you and me when we ’ re growing . 
Next time , the child won ’ t run back to Mommy so fast . Next 
time , she ’ ll venture farther . 
Her panic was momentary , a 
natural part of the process of 
growth . 
Th at ’ s us as we rally and re-tackle the Big Crash . Th is time we ’ ll 
lick it . We ’ ll fi x this jalopy and get it back on the road . 
Panic is good . It ’ s a sign that we ’ re growing . 
78 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 79
Back to Square One
In the belly of the beast , we go back to our allies : 
• Stupidity
• Stubbornness
• Blind faith
We are too dumb to quit and too mulish to back off . 
In the belly of the beast , we remind ourselves of two axioms : 
1 . Th e problem is not us . Th e problem is the problem . 
2 . Work the problem . 
The Problem Is the Problem
A professional does not take success or failure personally . Th at ’ s 
Priority Number One for us now . 
Th at our project has crashed is 
not a refl ection of our worth as 
human beings . It ’ s just a mistake . 
It ’ s a problem—and a problem 
can be solved . 
Now we go back to our sheet of yellow foolscap . 
Where did we go wrong ? Where 
did this train go off the tracks ? 
Somewhere in the three sections on our sheet of foolscap—beginning , middle , and end—and in the fi nal section , the summation of the theme .  .  . somewhere in there lies the answer . Why is 
it so hard to fi nd ? It ’ s hard because it ’ s hard . 
I ’ m not trying to be cryptic or facetious . We went wrong at the 
start because the problem was so hard ( and the act of solving it 
was so painful ) that we ducked and dodged and bypassed . We 
hoped it would go away . We hoped it would solve itself . A little 
voice warned us then , but we were too smart to listen . 
Th e bad news is , the problem is hell . 
Th e good news is it ’ s 
just a problem . 
It ’ s not us . We are not worthless or evil or crazy . We ’ re just us , 
facing a problem . 
Work the Problem
Here ’ s what crashed in my book—and how I solved it : 
80 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 81
Th e book , as I said , is called 
Th e Profession . It ’ s a military / political thriller set a few years in the future , when mercenary armies 
have replaced conventional ones . 
Scene aft er scene almost worked . But they all ran onto the same 
rocks : the events were so proximate time-wise that they could 
be doubted and second-guessed . Th e reader could say ,  “ Th at ’ s 
bullshit , I was there and it didn ’ t happen like that .  ” And the 
events were too emotionally charged ( 9 / 11 played a role and 
so did fi ctional withdrawals from Iraq and Afghanistan ) and 
involved such painful real-world issues ( did our troops die in 
vain ?  ) that they overwhelmed the basically simple story and 
pulled it off its politically speculative-future theme . 
Remember what we said before about friends and family ? Th e 
answer came from there , from two people very close to me ( they 
know who they are ) who thrashed in and banged around inside 
the problem . Th ey couldn ’ t see the full solution , but the ideas 
that they stirred up helped me see it . 
Th e answer was to move the book out farther into the future . 
Th at was the stroke that 
split the diamond . 
In other words , nothing mystical , nothing New Age-y , nothing 
involving the Law of Attraction . 
Th e solution was mechanical . 
It was like saying “ Get the drive-wheel back on the pavement ; 
then the car will come out of the ditch .  ” Or “ put the ship-date 
off one month to give us time to repair the glitches fi rst .  ” 
It worked . It took an extra year , 
but it solved the problem . 
And yes , the book did crash a second time aft er that , requiring a 
second trip back to Square One . 
What else is new ? 
Moby Dick When It Crashes
Just for fun , let ’ s imagine that Moby Dick crashed 9 / 10ths of the 
way through and Herman Melville texted us in a panic , pleading 
for help . What would the rescue operation look like ? 
We hurry over to HM ’ s house and read the manuscript . Mel already has feedback from other friends and colleagues . All agree 
the book isn ’ t working . We ask our Big Question :  “ What ’ s missing ?  ” Th e consensus focuses on the captain . 
One comment :  “ He ’ s kinda like Captain Queeg , an unbalanced 
neurotic .  ” Another :  “ He reminded me of Captain Bligh—an 
autocratic prick .  ” 
82 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 83
Let ’ s go to the foolscap . What does it say about the skipper ? 
Next : a mortal to challenge the monster . He must be monstrous 
himself . Obsessed , arrogant , monomaniacal . Ahab . 
Hmmm . Let ’ s dig deeper . What does the foolscap say about the 
theme ?  
.  .  . the clash between human will and the elemental malice of 
nature . 
Melville is freaking a little ; he ’ s too close to the material , he has 
identifi ed his hopes with it too much . Plus he ’ s broke and the rent 
is due . We ’ ve given him a couple of stiff tots of rum ; he ’ s lying 
down in the bedroom . But still , the Problem . What exactly is it ? 
Two things . 
First , Ahab as he stands now is weak ; he ’ s not a worthy opponent for the White Whale . We have to beef him up . 
Second , the theme is incomplete . 
Again we ask ,  “ What ’ s missing ?  ” 
Ahab needs to be more monstrous , more monomaniacal . How 
can we accomplish that ? 
1 . Give him a peg leg .  ( Remember , this wasn ’ t a cliché in the 
1850s .  ) 
2 . Not just any peg leg , but one made of whale ivory . 
3 . Add that Ahab lost the leg , fi ghting a whale . 
4 . Not just any whale , but Moby Dick himself . 
5 . Let Ahab tramp the quarterdeck nightlong , obsessed 
with vengeance—and let the echo of that whale-ivory leg 
resound through the crew ’ s quarters below like a knell of 
madness . 
6 . Add a crazed white streak running through Ahab ’ s hair 
and beard , as if metaphysical hatred-lightning had carved 
a scar upon his soul .  
7 . Add beats to heighten Ahab ’ s obsession . Here ’ s one : 
When the Pequod passes another whaling vessel , the 
Rachel , which has just seen and fought Moby Dick and 
lost beloved members of the crew , including the captain ’ s 
son , for whom they ’ re searching now , let Ahab spurn all 
appeals for help and drive his own ship faster in pursuit 
of the white whale . 
8 . Let Ahab renounce his whaling contract and denounce 
the for-profi t nature of the voyage . Th e hell with killing 
other whales for their oil ! Ahab will hunt Moby Dick for 
vengeance alone ! 
Th ese changes are helping . Ahab is much better than he was 
before , with two good legs and regular hair . But we need more . 
We need to take the theme one level deeper .  .  . 
Th e story can ’ t just be about “ the clash between man ’ s will and 
the malice of nature .  ” Th at ’ s not enough . It must add the element 
84 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 85
of man-as-part-of-nature-himself . So that Man is dueling the 
evil inside himself and being consumed by it . 
Again ,  “ What ’ s missing ?  ” 
Th e involvement of the crew ! If Ahab is the only crazy person 
aboard and the crew meekly follows him , that ’ s no good . Th e 
men must become as obsessed as their captain . 
A new scene . Ahab assembles the crew and forges new harpoons , 
made not for other whales but only to kill Moby Dick .  
 “ Advance , ye mates ! Cross your lances full before me . Well done ! Let me touch 
the axis .  ”  [ Ahab pours the full voltage of his own electric hate , by the medium 
of his hand , into the lances of his three harpooneers .  ]  “ Drink , ye harpooneers ! 
drink and swear .  .  . Death to Moby Dick ! God hunt us all , if we do not hunt Moby 
Dick to his death !  ” 
That ’ s Why They Call It Rewriting , Part Two
Does the prior Ahab scenario sound far-fetched ? Melville was a 
genius , you say ; he could never fail to realize a character to the 
fullest on his fi rst try . 
Maybe . Probably . But if this didn ’ t happen to HM then , I promise you it happened to him other times . And it happened to a 
million other guys and gals , over and over and over . 
No matter how great a writer , 
artist , or entrepreneur , he is a 
mortal , he is fallible . He is not 
proof against Resistance . He will 
drop the ball ; he will crash . 
Th at ’ s why they call it rewriting . 
The Point for Us
Th e point for you and me is that we have passed through hell . 
We have worked our problem . 
We have solved it . 
We have escaped from the belly of the beast . 
86 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 87
Killer Instinct
Why does Seth Godin place so much emphasis on “ shipping ”  ? 
Because fi nishing is the critical 
part of any project . If we can ’ t 
fi nish , all our work is for nothing . 
When we ship , we declare our stuff ready for prime time . We 
pack it in a FedEx box and send it out into the world . Our movie 
hits the screens , our smart phone arrives in the stores , our musical opens on Broadway . 
It takes balls of steel to ship . 
Here ’ s a true nugget from 
Th e War of Art : 
I had a good friend who had labored for years and had produced an excellent 
and deeply personal novel . It was done . He had it in its mailing box , complete 
with cover letter to his agent . But he couldn ’ t make himself send it off . Fear of 
rejection unmanned him . 
Shipping is not for the squeamish or the faint of heart . It requires killer instinct . We ’ ve got the monster down ; now we have 
3
END to drive a stake through its heart . 
88 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 89
He knew that Resistance was 
strongest at the fi nish . He did 
what he had to do , no matter how 
nutty or unorthodox , to fi nish and 
be ready to ship . 
Fear of Success
I ’ ve never read anything better on the subject than this from 
Marianne Williamson : 
Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate . Our deepest fear is that we are 
powerful beyond measure . It is our light , not our darkness , that most frightens 
us . We ask ourselves , Who am I to be brilliant , gorgeous , talented , fabulous ? 
Actually , who are you not to be ? You are a child of God . Your playing small does 
not serve the world . There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other 
people won ’ t feel insecure around you . We are all meant to shine , as children do . 
We were born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us . It ’ s not just in 
some of us ; it ’ s in everyone . And as we let our own light shine , we unconsciously 
give other people permission to do the same . As we are liberated from our own 
fear , our presence automatically liberates others . 
Hamlet and Michael Crichton
How hard is it to fi nish something ? Th e greatest drama in the 
English language was written on this very subject . Hamlet knows 
he must kill his uncle for murdering his father . But then he starts 
to think—and the next thing you know , the poor prince is so 
self-befuddled , he ’ s ready to waste himself with a bare bodkin . 
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all , 
And thus the native hue of resolution 
Is sicklied o ’ er with the pale cast of thought , 
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry , 
And lose the name of action . 
When Michael Crichton approached the end of a novel ( so I ’ ve 
read )  , he used to start getting up earlier and earlier in the morning . He was desperate to keep his mojo going . He ’ d get up at six , 
then fi ve , then three-thirty and two-thirty , till he was driving his 
wife insane . 
Finally he had to move out of the house . He checked into a hotel 
( the Kona Village , which ain ’ t so bad ) and worked around the 
clock till he ’ d fi nished the book . 
Michael Crichton was a pro . 
90 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 91
In the belly of the beast , 
you and I chose HEAVEN . 
We ’ ve learned and we ’ re stronger . 
Now we face the fi nal test . 
Exposure
In mountaineering , there ’ s a technical term called “ exposure .  ” A 
climber is exposed when there is nothing but thin air beneath her . 
She can be a hundred feet from the summit of Everest and not 
be exposed , if there ’ s a ledge or a shelf below . Conversely , she can 
be in shorts and a tank top down at the beach , practice-climbing 
on a boulder ten feet tall , and be completely exposed—if there ’ s 
a fall beneath her . 
When we ship , we ’ re exposed . 
Th at ’ s why we ’ re so afraid of it . When we ship , we ’ ll be judged . 
Th e real world will pronounce upon our work and upon us . 
When we ship , we can fail . When we ship , we can be humiliated . 
Here ’ s another true story : 
Th e fi rst professional writing job I ever had , aft er seventeen 
years of trying , was on a movie called King Kong Lives . I and 
Heaven and Books About Heaven
Have you seen this great New Yorker cartoon : 
A perplexed person stands 
before two doors . One door 
says HEAVEN . Th e other says 
BOOKS ABOUT HEAVEN . 
What makes us laugh , I suspect , is that all of us feel the pull to 
pick BOOKS ABOUT HEAVEN . 
Are we that timid ? Are our huevos
that pocito ? 
When we ’ re off ered a chance at heaven , what diabolically craven 
force makes us want to back off —just for now , we promise ourselves—and choose instead heaven ’ s pale refl ection ? 
Fear of success is the 
essence of Resistance . 
It ’ s silent , covert , invisible .  .  . but it permeates every aspect of our 
lives and poisons them in ways we ’ re either blind to or in denial 
about . 
92 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 93
I was forty-two years old , having 
given up everything normal in 
life to pursue the dream of being 
a writer ; now I ’ ve fi nally got my 
name on a big-time Hollywood 
production starring Linda 
Hamilton , and what happens ? 
I ’ m a loser , a phony ; my life is 
worthless and so am I . 
My friend Tony Keppelman snapped me out of it by asking if I was 
going to quit . Hell , no !  “ Th en be happy ,  ” he said .  “ You ’ re where 
you wanted to be , aren ’ t you ? So you ’ re taking a few blows . Th at ’ s 
the price for being in the arena and not on the sidelines . Stop complaining and be grateful .  ” 
Th at was when I realized I had 
become a pro . I had not yet had a 
success . But I had had a 
real failure . 
my partner-at-the-time , Ron Shusett ( a brilliant writer and 
producer who also did Alien and Total Recall )  , hammered out 
the screenplay for Dino De Laurentiis . We were certain it was 
going to be a blockbuster . We invited everyone we knew to the 
premiere ; we even rented out the joint next door for a posttriumph blowout . 
Nobody showed . Th ere was only one guy in line beside our guests , 
and he was muttering something about spare change . In the theater , our friends endured the movie in mute stupefaction . When 
the lights came up , they fl ed like cockroaches into the night . 
Next day came the review in Variety :  
 “  .  .  . Ronald Shusett and 
Steven Pressfi eld , we hope these 
are not their real names , for their 
parents ’ sake .  ” 
When the fi rst week ’ s grosses came in , the fl ick barely registered . 
Still I clung to hope . Maybe it ’ s only tanking in urban areas ; maybe 
it ’ s playing better in the ’ burbs . I motored to an Edge City multiplex . A youth manned the popcorn booth .  “ How ’ s King Kong 
Lives ?  ” I asked . He fl ashed thumbs-down .  “ Miss it , man . It sucks .  ” 
I was crushed . 
94 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 95
Yeah , he ’ ll still be there . Yeah , you ’ ll still have to duel him every 
morning . And yeah , he ’ ll still fi ght just as hard and use just as 
many nasty tricks as he ever did . 
But you will have beaten him 
once , and you ’ ll know you can beat 
him again . Th at ’ s a game-changer . 
Th at will transform your life . 
From the day I fi nally fi nished something , I ’ ve never had trouble 
fi nishing anything again . 
I always deliver . I always ship . 
Be Careful
Just because you ’ ve shipped doesn ’ t mean Resistance is fi nished . 
Like the Terminator , it ’ s morphing into an even crueler and 
more diabolical form . It ’ ll be back . 
Th is is a topic for another book : the level of maturity , professionalism , and personal involvement demanded by the tectonic 
overthrows happening today in positioning , branding , marketing—not to mention pure art and soul-authenticity . But that ’ s 
for the future . 
For now : congratulations ! 
When we ship , we open ourselves to judgment in the real world . 
Nothing is more empowering , because it plants us solidly on 
Planet Earth and gets us out of our self-devouring , navel-centered fantasies and self-delusions . 
Ship it . 
One Thing I Can Promise You
My personal bête noire of Resistance was shipping . When I was 
twenty-fi ve , I had fi nished a novel 99 . 9 percent of the way . But I 
couldn ’ t pull the trigger . I lost my nerve . 
At that time , I had no idea there was such a thing as Resistance . 
I believed the voices in my head . I acted out . I blew up my marriage and blew up my life , rather than plunge a sword into the 
heart of that book and ship it . 
It took me seven more years before I found the courage to face 
that dragon again—and another ten years aft er that before I had 
fi nally learned how to lay him out . 
Here ’ s one thing I can tell you—and you can take this to the 
bank : 
Slay that dragon once , and he will 
never have power over you again . 
96 Steven Pressfi eld Do Th e Work ! 97
You have joined an elite fraternity , 
whether you realize it or not . 
By dint of your eff orts and your perseverance , you have initiated yourself into an invisible freemasonry whose members are 
awarded no badges or insignia , share no secret handshake , and 
wear no funny-looking hats . 
But the fellows of this society 
recognize one another . I recognize 
you . I salute you . 
You can be proud of yourself . You ’ ve done something that millions talk about but only a handful actually perform . And if you 
can do it once , you can do it again . 
I don ’ t care if you fail with this project . I don ’ t care if you fail a 
thousand times . 
You have done what only mothers 
and gods do : you have created 
new life . 
You have done it ! 
Kudos to You
You ’ ve wrapped . You ’ ve shipped . You ’ ve licked this sonofabitch . 
Kudos to you ! 
I salute anybody who took this vessel to sea and brought her 
safely again into port . 
I stand in awe of anyone who 
hatches a dream and who shows 
the guts to hang tough , all alone , 
and see it through to reality . 
I tip my hat to you for what you ’ ve done—for losing forty 
pounds , for kicking crack cocaine , for surviving the loss of 
someone you love , for facing any kind of adversity—internal or 
external—and slogging through . I come to attention when you 
walk past . I stand up for you like the spectators in the gallery 
stood up for Atticus Finch in To Kill A Mockingbird . 
If no one has congratulated you , I do that now . 
98 Steven Pressfi eld
Start ( Again ) Before You ’ re Ready
I was living in a little town in northern California when I fi nally , 
aft er seventeen years of trying , fi nished my fi rst novel . I drove 
over to my friend and mentor Paul Rink ’ s house and told him 
what I had done .  “ Good for you ,  ” he said .  “ Now start the next 
one .  ” 
Th at ’ s what I say now to you . 
Take the rest of the day off . Take your wife or husband out to 
dinner . Pop some champagne . Give yourself a standing ovation . 
Th en get back to work . Begin the 
next one tomorrow . 
Stay stupid . 
Trust the soup . 
Start before you ’ re ready . 
About the Cover
In 1885 , Vincent Van Gogh created this cover drawing , Man with Hoe , as a 
part of his life-long pursuit “ to give happiness by creating beauty .  ” We at Th e 
Domino Project were drawn to this image because it represents the quiet 
strength of a person who actually does the work , regardless of glamour or 
crowds or the resistance . Th e drawing is also a reminder that there ’ s an artist 
within each of us , and we must encourage that artist to do the work , to make 
something that matters , regardless of anything else that is going on . 
In a letter to his brother Th eo , Vincent shared this thought ,  “ Blessed is he 
who has found his work .  ” 
Perhaps he was talking about you . 
Acknowledgments
Th anks to Seth , Ishita , Willie , and Michael for being the brains behind this 
project . Th anks to Shawn and Callie for being my comrades in the trenches . 
Th anks to Amazon for supplying the muscle . 
And thanks to you who ’ ve read this , for taking yourself ( and us ) forward . 
About The Domino Project
Books worth buying are books worth sharing . We hope you ’ ll fi nd someone 
to give this copy to . You can fi nd more about what we ’ re up to at www . thedominoproject . com . 
Here are three ways you can spread the ideas in this manifesto : 
1 . Hold a discussion group in your offi ce . Get people to read the book 
and come in and argue about it . How open is your company to 
innovation and failure ? What will you do if your competitors get 
better at it than you are ? 
2 . Give away copies . Lots of them . It turns out that when everyone in a 
group reads the same thing , conversations go diff erently . 
3 . Write the names of some of your peers on the inside back cover of 
this book ( or scrawl them on a Post-it on your Kindle )  . As each 
person reads the book , have them scratch off their name and add 
someone else ’ s . 
We hope you ’ ll share . 
We are now faced with the fact , my friends , that tomorrow is today . 
We are confronted with the fi erce urgency of now . In this unfolding 
conundrum of life and history , there is such a thing as being too late . 
Procrastination is still the thief of time . Life oft en leaves us standing 
bare , naked , and dejected with a lost opportunity . Th e tide in the affairs of men does not remain at fl ood—it ebbs . We may cry out desperately for time to pause in her passage , but time is adamant to every 
plea and rushes on . Over the bleached bones and jumbled residues of 
numerous civilizations are written the pathetic words ,  “ Too late .  " 