Introduction
This book is an essential guide to keep with you, by your desk 
or on your travels. It provides a wealth of answers to help you 
impress.
 Look on it as your introduction to being the best! By the 
time you reach the end, you will be more confident and 
more competent in writing English. You will be developing 
a key transferable skill, because English is the global business 
language of today.
THIS PAGE 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
2
1
Why you need to write
Defining readers, customers and 
audience
Throughout this book I use the terms readers, target readership, customers and audience interchangeably. I use ‘customer’ both in its most common usage as a person who buys 
goods or services from a business, and in the broadest sense 
of signifying a person that you deal with in the course of 
your daily work. So the term applies just as much to internal 
colleagues, suppliers, those in the public sector etc as it does 
to those who are external buying consumers.
4 How to write effective business English
Your audience can be anyone and 
everyone
I use many practical examples and scenarios in this book that 
relate to standard sales or customer pitches. Because we are 
all consumers in our private lives, we can easily relate to and 
understand these examples. What I would like to stress is that 
the concepts apply equally to every scenario in the list that 
follows. Think of lobbying; think of politics; think of charities; think of fundraising; think of promotions.
Why we write in business
People sometimes think of business writing as a ‘soft’ skill. 
In fact, you may see communication generally classified as 
a soft skill, as opposed to the ‘hard’ skills of finance, law, IT 
etc. But I think this description is misleading. After all, people 
drive processes. And how do they do this? By communication. 
The label ‘soft’ can give the impression that business writing 
is an easy option, which it certainly is not. Business writing 
can impact on the whole business cycle; it can win business, it 
can lose business and it can communicate the framework by 
which results can be achieved.
 This is why, at the outset of my training workshops, I always 
take time to ask people why they actually write in their job 
and what outcomes they seek, individually and as teams. I 
ask my clients to write down why they need to write in their 
businesses. And the following aspects of business writing 
always come top of the list:
 to inform or record;
 to cascade information;
Why you need to write 5
 for compliance;
 to seek information;
 to write specifications;
 to achieve a standard;
 to write reports with recommendations;
 to persuade;
 to promote services.
Usually far lower on the list (and sometimes only when 
prompted by me, on the lines of ‘Aren’t there any other reasons?’), they record such things as:
 to engage interest and involve;
 to get the right results;
 to sell;
 to support customers;
 to improve life for customers;
 to eat, breathe and live our vision.
Notice how the most inspirational aspects of writing are the 
ones that are listed as an afterthought.
 Why is this? Maybe companies need to focus more on how 
powerful business writing can be and how their employees 
need to think creatively about how best to harness this virtually 
free resource. Think about what writing really means for your 
company and which aspects of your business it covers.
6 How to write effective business English
Readers judge writing for what it is
There is no doubt: the written word is unforgiving. When I 
read, I judge what I see written for what it is. If I am looking 
for products or services, what I see can be what I think I get. 
If it is your writing, I will judge both you as an individual and 
your company on the basis of how you expressed yourself at 
that point in time.
 It is amazing how many written messages can lead to confusion and misunderstanding – even when a company is writing in its native language. Poor writing can also lead to customer complaints. At the least, these complicate relations with 
customers – even though we may still be able to convert a 
complaint to a positive experience.
 The worst scenarios are where customers walk away from 
the companies concerned, and tell others about the bad experience they have received or think they have received. That 
is the impact that ineffective writing can have. It becomes 
quite clear that if, as customers, we do not understand or like 
what supplier A is writing, we prefer to buy from supplier B, 
who cares enough about our needs to get the message right. 
And if this takes less time, so much the better.
No body language signals in writing
When we communicate face to face, people around us attach 
a lot of importance to the signals given by our body language. 
These are said to account for 55 per cent of the impact we 
make when giving a talk. Our voice can account for perhaps 
38 per cent – and our words just 7 per cent.
 This is because, in face to face communication, unlike writing, we do not need to focus just on words. We can ask if we 
are not sure what is being said. We can look for clues from the 
Why you need to write 7
speaker’s facial expression or tone as to the gravity or levity 
of the subject matter. These will help our understanding and 
focus our attention (or not!).
 But with writing, unless the writer is there in front of you, 
time will elapse before you can get the answers to any questions you have. That is, if you have the time or inclination to 
ask questions. At the very least, it means that writers need 
to think twice, spellcheck – in fact, double-check – that their 
words are saying what they mean them to say.
A state of flux
Business writing is in a state of flux. So is the way English is 
used in business, as I discuss in Chapter 3. One thing you will 
notice as a direct result is that business writing in English is 
becoming increasingly diverse in style. Different styles may 
even coexist within the same company. It can be bewildering 
for reader and writer alike. Generally speaking, the move in 
business English writing is not only towards more ‘people’ 
words, but also towards more informality.
 This can be a special challenge for cultures that place great 
emphasis on hierarchy, where people of senior grades are 
treated with noticeably more deference and respect than those 
in junior grades. Informality can also be a challenge for nationalities where there is a distinction between a familiar and a 
formal form of the pronoun ‘you’. As an example, French 
makes a distinction between ‘tu’ (informal) and ‘vous’ (formal), as does German with ‘du’ and ‘Sie’. Such cultures can 
try to compensate for this lack of distinction by writing more 
elaborately for what they see as the ‘formal you’ as opposed 
to the ‘informal you’. This does not necessarily work.
8 How to write effective business English
Your checklist for action
 Recognize writing as a fundamental skill for you as an 
individual and for your business.
 Develop and improve your writing at every opportunity 
throughout your career.
 Remember that English business writing – in its many 
forms – is your most common route to market. Be the 
best.
2
Defining business 
English
English is a major language of commercial communication. 
It is also the world’s language of the internet and of global 
access to knowledge. Business English is the name given to 
the English used for dealing with business communication in 
English – though you will find many variants, as I will shortly 
explain. This can present unexpected problems unless you 
understand how to design your communication to give you 
the best chance of success, whatever the variety of business 
English used by your target audience.
‘Standard’ and ‘variant’ English
A particularly interesting fact is that there are more non-native 
speakers of English than native English speakers. As I write, 
the UK government estimates that more than 1 billion people 
10 How to write effective business English
speak English, and projections indicate that by 2020 2 billion 
people worldwide will be learning or teaching English. So we 
can see that English is certainly no longer the preserve of the 
nation that gives the language its name. It belongs to no single 
culture; instead it is something that acts as a bridge across 
borders and cultures.
 Years ago when I first worked abroad, I saw the commercial need to help multinationals seize the competitive edge 
in their use of English as a global business language. It was 
then that I realized how puzzled both foreigners and native 
English speakers can be by the way English is used. Often it is 
because non-native English speakers use it in unconventional 
ways. It is also often because people do not realize that UK 
or British English is not exactly the same as the many other 
variations of business English that exist. These include US or 
American English, Australian English, Caribbean English, 
Indian English, Irish English, Singapore English and South 
African English. You can see how extensive the list is.
 Business communication is crucial to success. So if people 
are puzzled by that communication, this will have an adverse 
effect on results. We cannot pretend this does not matter, 
because getting the right messages out and receiving the right 
answers are the lifeblood of commercial success. I found it 
helped my clients communicate effectively cross-culturally 
when I showed them how to follow some norms of commonly 
accepted ‘standard’ English. This not only helped mutual 
comprehension but also secured buy-in to their business 
objectives, from internal as well as external customers.
 So what is meant by ‘standard’ English? I use the expression to mean the English routinely described in mainstream 
English dictionaries and grammar books. To describe the 
many variants of English, such as those I have mentioned, is 
clearly outside the remit of this series. Naturally you and your 
company will know which you will wish to use at any one 
time. By and large, it is true to say that the standard English I 
Defining business English 11
use throughout this book is likely to be intelligible to users of 
the other variants.
 I do need to mention at the outset that, unless I indicate 
otherwise, the spelling and grammar used in the series are the 
UK English variety requested by my publishers, to follow their 
house style. One of the challenges in writing UK English is that 
there can be more than one correct way of spelling certain 
words. Just to list a few examples: recognize and recognise, 
minimize and minimise, judgment and judgement, e-mail and 
email can all be used correctly in UK English. Some people 
give explanations for these differences that are too simplistic, 
saying that ‘recognize’ indicates an American English spelling. 
But this is only part of the picture – and you will find more on 
variant spellings later in the book.
 So there are times when I may refer to US English as well, 
where there are clearly divergent spellings or meanings. It is, 
however, beyond the remit of this series to highlight spelling 
and grammatical differences between UK and US English in 
comprehensive detail.
 This observation takes me to my next point. Whenever we 
write and whatever we write, we must understand the conventions we need to follow, if we are to please our target readers. 
This has to be the best starting point from a business perspective. If necessary, explain at the outset the convention you 
are following, so that you avoid unfounded or unnecessary 
criticism. One thing is sure: if someone can find grounds for 
criticizing writing, they will. So steal their thunder and, if you 
are asked, be able to name not only which variant you are 
using but also why.
 Do try to be consistent in this, because consistency in approach underpins a strong, quality-conscious corporate image. You undermine this if some people in your company use 
UK English spellcheck and grammar check and others use US 
English versions. It happens all the time, often without people 
realizing. Active decisions are needed here.
12 How to write effective business English
 This series gives you practical help to succeed in opening 
doors to international trade by means of your writing. I 
focus on the successful experiences of companies who have 
used the methods I show. These users are both native and 
non-native speakers of English. This is because both groups 
share common problems when writing English for business. 
This may perhaps surprise you, as will the fact that the same 
solutions can apply.
 Just as the series is not about ‘taking you back to school’, 
it is not even necessarily about gaining the proficiency of a 
native English speaker. As you have seen, I have already hinted 
that not all native speakers are proficient! Instead, the series is 
all about reaching the level of competence you need in order 
to succeed in everything you write. The objective is that you 
never need to feel insecure again. Quite the reverse: you will 
feel confident, simply by knowing what to do and how to do 
it. A large part of this new-found confidence will come from 
understanding how simply expressed facts are understood 
best and impress the most, even with complex subject matter.
 The whole series reinforces messages (a proven way to help 
you learn) and uses a building-block approach. So if a topic 
is introduced in one book of the series, it may be approached 
from a different angle in another. It really is as simple as that. 
All you need is a systematic approach and willingness to 
succeed. If you are ready, let’s go!
Defining native and non-native 
English speakers
For ease of reference, when I refer to native English speakers 
I mean anyone who speaks any variety of English as their first 
language.
Defining business English 13
 The ways in which non-native English speakers learn 
English can be categorized broadly as: English as an acquired 
language (EAL), English as a foreign language (EFL), English 
for speakers of other languages (ESOL), all of which are selfexplanatory, and English as a second language (ESL). In the 
ESL category, learners are likely to be in a setting where the 
main or official language is English but their native tongue is 
not. It can be a confusing term when used to describe someone 
who is actually learning English as a third or fourth language, 
as can be the case.
 There is some debate within academic circles as to which 
expression (or others) should be used. As this is not an academic but business-oriented book, I choose to use a different 
convention here. So throughout this book you will find that I 
use:
 the term native English (NE) speaker or writer to denote a 
person whose first language is English, and native English 
(NE) writing to refer to their writing;
 the term non-native English (non-NE) speaker or writer 
to denote a person whose first language is not English, 
and non-native English (non-NE) writing to refer to their 
writing.
Common problems with English for 
global business
The fact that English is used so extensively for global business 
yields quite a surprising result. It means that written business English will ultimately be directed more at a non-native 
English (non-NE) audience than at a native English audience. 
As well as there being different varieties of English, there are, 
in effect, sub-varieties directly caused by mixing English with 
14 How to write effective business English
the language patterns of the native country. Examples are 
Chinglish (Chinese-English), Manglish (Malaysian-English) 
and Singlish (Singapore-English). The same phenomenon can 
happen in any language mix.
 Sometimes this can lead to out-and-out mistranslations and 
although users may understand what they mean, these can be 
unintelligible to the foreign reader. Indeed, to take Chinglish 
as an example, during the planning stage for the 2008 Beijing 
Olympics, the Chinese authorities saw a need to try to root 
out the problem that they realized existed. Anticipating a huge 
influx of foreign visitors, they realized that mistranslations 
appeared in the public places where visitors would go: on 
menus in restaurants and on road signs, and also in writing 
connected with exporting, including labels on products. As 
one municipal spokesman acknowledged, ‘the misinformation 
had become a headache for foreigners’, so they asked people 
to help them address the problem and unearthed examples 
such as:
‘To take notice of safe, the slippery are very crafty’ = Warning: 
slippery path.
In a gym: ‘The treadmill is in the middle of repairing’ = The 
treadmill is being repaired.
In another assessment, the Singapore government has discouraged the use of Singlish in favour of Singapore Standard 
English. Though many feel that Singlish is a valid marker of 
Singaporean identity, the government believes that a standard 
English improves Singaporeans’ ability to communicate effectively with other English users throughout the world.
 So problems can arise when we take a global perspective. 
Even if I just look at a sample of anglicized words used in West-
Defining business English 15
ern Europe, similar problems can be apparent. I see expressions 
such as ‘a parking’ (UK English: a car park; US English: a 
parking lot) or ‘presentation charts’ used predominantly in 
Germany (UK English and US English: presentation slides) or 
‘handy’ in continental Europe (UK English: mobile phone; US 
English: cellphone) or ‘beamer’ in France and elsewhere (UK 
English: projector). But if we are writing globally, by definition 
we have to realize that we are not just writing for readers in 
one country.
 Let’s look again at that word ‘charts’ used by many German 
companies for presentation slides. To a native English reader, 
the word refers to graphs or tables. If someone says they are 
preparing some charts to include in their presentation and 
then e-mails over some slides without any graphs or tables, 
what am I am likely to assume? That the presentation is 
complete or incomplete? It will probably be the latter – and 
valuable time may be lost before I e-mail or telephone that 
person to ask when I am going to receive the ‘missing’ items. 
So here is an instance where quirky use of English can slow 
down business results simply because it attempts to redefine a 
standard meaning – and confuses the wider, global audience.
 Let’s also look again at the words ‘handy’ for mobile phone 
or ‘beamer’ for projector. In these cases, the vast majority of 
native English speakers are unlikely to have any idea what 
these words mean. You need to think about how the whole 
issue impacts on your company, as we will now see.
Define business English within your 
company
My suggestion is this. Carry out some sort of survey to evaluate whether the terms you are using really are understood by 
your target audience. Terms that are understood in Western 
16 How to write effective business English
Europe may not have the same currency in Asian markets and 
so on. Just because English-sounding words and expressions 
have crept into your company usage, this does not mean they 
are internationally recognized.
 Then share your findings throughout your company, to gain 
consensus on how to describe the business English you plan to 
use. If you have just started your career, you can impress your 
boss by doing this. You can make a difference, boost your 
prospects and help your organization shine.
 One important point to note is that any variety of business 
English will be in state of flux. You will find more about this 
in Chapter 3.
Your checklist for action
Answer the following questions to help you decide what you 
could do better:
 Do you communicate with a specific group of English users? 
Or are you likely to be communicating worldwide?
 Do you identify and then use a single type of English 
every time you write in English? Or do you need to vary 
it according to your target audience each time?
 Do you set your computer spellcheck and grammar check 
to the type(s) of English you use?
 If so, do you check that it does not default to US English 
spelling (unless that is your preferred variety)?
 Do you regularly check that the words you use are understood by your readers?
 When you do not understand a word, do you feel confident enough to ask its meaning, in order both to understand it and give feedback to the writer?
3
Writing English for 
global business
Looking at how you use English at 
work
It is useful for you and your colleagues (where this applies) 
to hold up a figurative mirror, in order to evaluate as far as is 
possible:
 How your readers see themselves.
 How you see yourselves.
 How you see your readers.
 How your readers may see you through your writing.
It is amazing how the images may diverge, and successful 
writing will take this into account. Its aim will be to remove 
18 How to write effective business English
distortions, bringing the four equally important images together into sharp, correct focus. You cannot achieve this 
focus without appreciating and also embracing the fact that 
different cultures communicate differently. If you are dealing 
with a particular country, you will naturally want and need 
to carry out more detailed research as to the right way to 
communicate with their culture.
 In outline, though, it is true to say that a typical North 
European style of writing comes over as structured and fairly 
direct. If we specifically look at a typical British style, there 
can be a tendency to waffle – even though people largely know 
that plain, simple English is preferable. Is it perhaps because 
English has such a rich vocabulary and a wealth of words is 
available to native speakers?
 If we look at Asian cultures, we can find extremely polite, 
formal, self-effacing communication. It can be considered bad 
style to get to the point too quickly and rude to make points 
too directly. So these cultures are less likely to default to a 
structure considered normal by many: namely, main points, 
discussion of impact, then further information. Instead they 
are likely to have a stronger focus on introduction, setting a 
respectful tone, developing rapport, and then ending on the 
main points (which may be implied rather than enumerated).
 Do take time to think about your cultural writing style and 
how you may need to adapt according to the cultures with 
which you do business.
Do your words say what you think they say?
You might be surprised to hear that major UK companies and 
government agencies call me in to be a troubleshooter to check 
over their English business writing for the UK market too. 
They ask me to look at the words they use (to internal and 
external customers, suppliers and so on) in order to help them 
Writing English for global business 19
evaluate whether these words really say what the companies 
want them to say. You see, using business English at work is 
not just about learning how to write words in English. It is as 
much about adopting the right frame of mind to be able to 
make the right connections with readers. You need to stand 
back and see your writing from all angles. The moment you 
say ‘I did not mean that!’ is the moment you realize that no, 
your writing does not add up as you intended. It is not saying 
the right things.
 Throughout this series you will see that writing business 
English is about reducing verbosity, avoiding misunderstandings and crafting clear, concise messages. But the fewer words 
you write, the more important it is that you get them right.
Writing problems faced by non-native 
English writers
Everybody faces a very real challenge when communicating. 
This challenge is about how to succeed in conveying our precise 
meaning to those with whom we wish to communicate. We all 
have to work out how to convert what we are thinking into 
words. When we have to write, we face additional problems. 
Are these the right words to put down on paper, when we may 
not be there to explain them to readers?
 There are so many factors that can distort our intended 
meanings, and this book will show you how to avoid many 
of them. This challenge can be far greater for non-native 
speakers of English. They have an extra step to overcome: to 
translate their words from their native language into English 
before they then write them down.
 So if as a non-native English speaker you are to write effectively in English, it will be helpful for you to be systematic 
in approach. A sequence that should help you is this:
20 How to write effective business English
1. Identify the thought effectively in your own language.
2. Translate it correctly from your own language into 
English.
3. You may then need to convert the thought captured in 
English into the correct written English word.
4. Then make sure that the ‘correct written English word’ is 
actually the one that your readers can interpret correctly.
5. Having done all this, your English writing should enable 
readers to respond the way you want. And that is what 
you are in business for!
So let’s work together to see how you can minimize any distortions. You don’t want them interrupting this very important 
sequence. It’s really important to get it right, from the planning stage through to delivery.
Use plain English when you can
When writing for global business, it is best to express the gist 
of what you are saying in really accessible, plain English. As 
I have just mentioned, do not focus on just translating from 
your own language into English. The more you do this, the 
worse things can get. Why? Because simply translating can 
result in:
 over-complicated or incorrect messages;
 focusing on the specific words rather than the overall 
meaning;
 losing sight of the normal business need to write a call to 
action.
Writing English for global business 21
So regularly ask yourself questions such as the following. Will 
my readers recognize the words I use? Will they understand 
their meaning? Am I enabling the response I need? Will my 
business achieve its desired goals as a result?
Problems with non-native English 
writing for native English speakers
The problems that can arise from non-native English (nonNE) writing do not affect only non-NE readers. Native English 
speakers and readers can be affected too. Let me list some of 
these effects:
 We cannot entirely understand the non-NE writer’s 
writing.
 We cannot understand one or more aspects of the 
writing.
 We almost understand what is meant but do not ask 
questions as we should (either out of goodwill or because 
we cannot be bothered).
 This can lead to the wrong meaning continuing to be 
communicated, which can lead to all sorts of problems.
Reading a non-NE writer’s approximation to a real English 
word can, over time, make the native reader begin to accept 
that word as correct. As an example, I have seen ‘automisation’ 
written by so many foreign companies over the years that I 
almost begin to accept it as real English, even though you will 
not find it in a dictionary. The trouble is, its inferred meaning 
is not as clear as it might seem. Native English speakers may 
assume it is used for ‘automation’, which can be the case. But 
very often non-NE writers use it to mean ‘computerization’.
22 How to write effective business English
 Other problems can be:
 Strangely enough (and wrongly, in my opinion), native 
English speakers can get defensive if their English is corrected by non-NE writers, who can have a very good 
grasp of English grammar.
 Native English writers and speakers can be unsure whether 
they should correct non-NE writers who make spelling or 
grammatical mistakes or whose meanings are unclear.
 Native English writers and speakers can be supremely 
irritated by one-word or one-line messages that some 
non-NE writers see as supremely efficient.
 Native English writers and speakers can be equally irritated by over-complicated non-NE writing that has 
unclear meanings and requires implied rather than stated 
action.
I give examples of these throughout this series of books.
 Knowing that these reactions occur is instrumental in 
helping you understand not only how to write but also how to 
seek readers’ feedback, to judge how well you are doing. If we 
are failing our readers, we need to re-design our writing. We 
need to know the problems first, in order that we can work on 
the solutions to get it right each time.
Problems posed for native and 
non-native English writers alike
Let’s look at some features that can perplex both native 
English and non-NE writers alike.
Writing English for global business 23
Idioms, clichés and nuances
Idioms are expressions that are peculiar to a language, where 
simply by translating the words, non-natives may be unable 
to work out what their meanings are. It is true that you can 
feel great when you master some idioms in a foreign language. 
I feel like I am the ‘bee’s knees’; I am ‘over the moon’ about it. 
Do you get the drift of what I am saying, or am I pulling the 
wool over your eyes? Are you completely puzzled? You could 
reach for your dictionary but it will take you precious time, 
so let me explain:
 ‘To be the bee’s knees’ means to be really good, to be 
excellent.
 ‘Over the moon’ means delighted.
 ‘To get the drift’ of something means to get the general 
meaning.
 ‘To pull the wool over someone’s eyes’ means to deceive 
them or obscure something from them.
In actual fact, native speakers may also misunderstand idioms, 
particularly as some are quite obscure. Do approach them 
with caution in business. However competent you may feel 
in using them, the odds are they will lead to confusion and 
misunderstanding.
 Let’s consider clichés now. ‘Cliché’ has been imported from 
French into many languages, but, interestingly, it does not 
always mean the same thing in each. In German, for example, 
it means a stereotype, whereas in UK English it has a different 
meaning. It signifies a stale expression: something that has 
been overused to the point that it is ineffective. A cliché can 
even undermine a person’s writing. Why should readers be 
impressed by writing that seems tired and boring?
24 How to write effective business English
 Here are some examples of clichés, with their meanings 
shown in brackets:
‘In this day and age’ (now);
‘It will fall on deaf ears’ (it will be ignored);
‘Not to put too fine a point on it’ (this means).
‘Nuance’ is another word that English has imported from 
French. It means shade or subtlety in language. Unsurprisingly, even native writers can have difficulty understanding 
nuances. As an example, in one online discussion forum I 
noticed some English-speaking artists engaged in debate. 
They were questioning what the differences were between the 
words tint, hue, shade and so on, when describing aspects 
of colour. There were many conflicting suggestions and very 
little consensus. So nuances can be tricky things.
 In a business context, let’s look at how the subtlety in meaning between ‘quite proud’ and ‘proud’ can actually lead to 
problems. First of all, are you aware that there is a difference 
in meaning? To a British speaker ‘proud’ usually has a stronger 
emphasis than ‘quite proud’. If I tell someone I am proud of 
their work achievements, it’s an absolute. They have done 
very well and I’m telling them that. The moment I say that 
I am ‘quite proud’, the perception can be that I’m diluting 
my pride: I am less proud than I could be. The nuance then 
implies that the person could have done better.
 But very confusingly, I have heard an American boss tell a 
member of staff that he was ‘quite proud’ of his achievements. 
I could hear his intonation in the spoken words. This distinctly 
told me that he was using ‘quite proud’ to mean ‘very proud’. 
But we cannot hear intonation in writing (except when we 
SHOUT through capital letters). So if we use nuances whereby the words persist in meaning different things to different 
people, these words will not ultimately make commercial 
Writing English for global business 25
sense. So if you can avoid nuances, then why not make life 
easier, and matters clearer, by doing so?
Standard and online dictionaries; and the lure 
of cut and paste
Everyone should check the meanings and spellings of words 
when unsure. And, whatever you do, do not feel you have 
to use the most complicated word that your dictionary may 
offer.
 Let’s say you are a non-NE writer, you are online and you 
type a word in your own language for ‘outcome’. You click 
on the dictionary for a selection of English translation words. 
I tried this in German once and the online dictionary offered, 
amongst other words: corollary and consecution. Corollary 
is a word that people may know but would use only in a 
very specific context. Consecution, though? That is definitely 
online dictionary-speak.
 Non-NE writers can wrongly feel they must choose the most 
complicated ‘intelligent-sounding’ choice – which is often the 
longest – when they come face to face with a bewildering 
selection of words to choose from. So out goes ‘outcome’, that 
almost everyone will understand, and in comes ‘consecution’. 
Is it really an ‘intelligent choice’ if your readers do not know 
what you mean?
 So we can see how just one wrong word can cause chaos 
with your meaning. But online dictionaries also ensnare users 
to use whole phrases where one word would suffice. ‘Wow,’ 
you may say. ‘This is easy, isn’t it? And it looks good!’ But it 
will not look good if you have not taken context into account 
– and a very possible need to adjust your grammar. Some 
phrases are so specific that if you put them in the wrong place 
(and this can be a danger with ‘cut and paste’) your writing 
becomes gibberish: nonsense, in short.
26 How to write effective business English
 I keyed the word ‘profits’ into one online dictionary and 
was really amused when it suggested I could use a related 
phrase: ‘the profits of doom’! All right, there may be a global 
recession, but this is ridiculous. The reference should have 
been ‘prophets of doom’, which means people who predict the 
future and identify hazards ahead. If I were a non-NE writer, 
I could easily have accepted that this expression exists. Might 
I not look silly otherwise? I might be seen as not belonging 
to the club of seasoned professionals who reel off the latest 
English buzz words. Why put ‘my head above the parapet’ in 
order to be ‘shot down’?
 I think it is rather like the story of the Emperor’s new clothes. 
Someone has to stand up and say ‘That’s not right!’ And it 
does take self-confidence to do this, which I hope this book 
will give you in abundance. So if you can, do look for the word 
that is in common usage (that is, the word that people really 
use). Do not be disappointed if this is likely to be more prosaic 
than the language of Shakespeare. You write intelligently in 
English for business when your readers understand you.
Business writing as communication
There are two main routes whereby we transmit a series of 
thoughts from our brains to other people’s brains. These are 
speech and writing. Each transmission can be broken down 
into a sequence of steps, each of which carries an associate 
risk of distortion.
 Here is a very clear example of a distorted message:
Identifying business writing has to be about messages. Present 
them you should then in a key that will engage readers’ attention – and make them want way to read more.
Writing English for global business 27
How did you react to this piece of writing? Did you try to 
make any sense of it? Did you manage to decode it? Because 
that is what you would have had to do. And often we find 
ourselves reading writing that, although not as jumbled as 
this example, is not far off.
 Here is the decoded message:
Business writing has to be about identifying key messages. You 
should then present them in a way that will engage readers’ 
attention – and make them want to read more.
You can see how distortion makes a mockery of good advice. 
So let’s now work on identifying the differing ways business 
readers can react to muddled messages. Write down any ideas 
of your own. My findings include these:
 The readers might not be bothered to work out the 
meaning. Unimpressed, they might walk away from the 
‘message’ – and from the business that it belongs to.
 Such readers might also tell others the bad news.
 Readers might try to work out a meaning: they might 
decipher it wrongly and do nothing.
 Or they might take the wrong action.
 Readers cannot understand and they need to ask for 
clarification.
 Readers might be offended and not tell you.
 Readers might complain to you.
Can you see the commercial implications involved in these 
scenarios? Let’s list them here:
28 How to write effective business English
 Inaction from readers, or their failure to react the desired 
way, is bad news.
 Lost custom and goodwill speak for themselves and affect 
your profits.
 A bad reputation (spread by unhappy readers telling 
others) can undermine your success and damage your 
business.
 Being on the receiving end of wrong action is clearly 
appalling for any business.
 Clarifying messages involves doing the same job twice or 
more.
 Insulting readers is never going to be good for any 
business.
 Complaints may be good news in one sense (you get to 
hear what your customer thinks, and you can change) but 
they are also bad news – and they cost you.
English continues to evolve
I mentioned in Chapter 1 how business writing is in a state 
of flux and how writing in English also continues to change. 
Indeed, modern English has evolved from so many influences: 
most words in English are of Anglo-Saxon origin (linked to 
the language spoken by tribes from Denmark and northern 
Germany who settled in England in the fifth and sixth 
centuries). Many other words originate from Latin, Greek, 
French, Celtic and Dutch; others have been adopted from 
a colonial past. The list goes on. It makes the English very 
proud of their extremely rich vocabulary, even though they 
may not have the 22 words for different types of snow that 
the Eskimos apparently have!
Writing English for global business 29
The English used in business today can seem surprisingly 
informal to many. In France there is an academy dedicated to 
‘upholding standards’ in the way the French language is used. 
One of its objectives is to keep the language as uncorrupted 
by outside influences as possible. There is no such English 
equivalent. However, there is ongoing debate between factions, which I will summarize very broadly. On one side are 
those who believe in prescribing rules of traditional grammar 
etc. On the other are those who believe it is more about examining how language evolves and which usages prevail.
 That is why you may be puzzled when some English 
teachers tell you that you can, for example, write ‘to boldly 
go’ – thereby splitting the infinitive form of the verb ‘to go’. 
(Some will even dispute whether there is such a thing as an 
infinitive form in English, as it is not a Latinate language.)
More traditional, prescriptive teachers will take a contrary 
view. They are likely to say you can never split the infinitive, 
so you would have to write ‘to go boldly’.
 You will also find that feelings can run strongly regarding 
which of the following is correct:
Understand who are you writing for.
Understand for whom you are writing.
Most people will accept either version (and looking at modern business writing, most would probably write the first), 
though the prescriptive school will opt for the second. This 
would be on the basis that (i) ‘who’ can only be the subject 
of the sentence (and it isn’t here) and (ii) you cannot end a 
sentence with ‘for’, as it is a preposition.
 So what can you do in view of this dilemma? The advice 
I constantly give is: reflect the expectations of your target 
readership. One size will not fit all. Because both English and 
business writing itself are in a state of flux, sometimes you will 
30 How to write effective business English
find that a middle course is the route to success. Each chapter 
in this book contains many practical tips to help you.
An advantage you can have as a 
non-native English writer
The most forward-thinking, successful companies where 
English is not the first language often actively encourage and 
train employees to perfect the English writing skills they need. 
In a positive learning culture such as this, great importance 
can also be attached to customers’ perception of quality 
and professionalism. Ironically, it can result in non-NE staff 
making more effort than native speakers in avoiding confusion 
and misunderstandings.
 The very fact that you are reading this book suggests that, 
far from being daunted and overwhelmed by the task in hand, 
you have a winning attitude. You are seeking solutions.
How complacency can disadvantage native 
writers
Native speakers of any language can assume they are proficient 
in their own language, so ‘of course people understand what 
we say and write’. But it is not necessarily true. Every company 
should really assess writing ability when recruiting and/or promoting employees into jobs that need this skill. Otherwise 
complacency sets in – and complacency drains the lifeblood 
of any organization. It is how companies lose the competitive 
edge.
 So let me show you some practical examples where native 
English writers got it wrong and paid the price.
 An upmarket hotel opened its new restaurant, meant to 
be called The Brasserie. Unfortunately, nobody checked the 
Writing English for global business 31
correct spelling of this French word. The restaurant opened 
to great fanfare. The trouble was, it was called The Brassiere.
It was not long before it was ridiculed in the national press 
– but it was long enough for it to lose face (and money on 
the signage, menus and advertising, all of which had to be 
redone).
 Another unfortunate piece of writing by a native English 
speaker was this: ‘I feel I have become a prawn in the game.’ 
He actually meant to write ‘pawn in the game’ (using a chess 
analogy) but the extra letter made a nonsense of this.
 So you see it is not just foreigners who make mistakes. But 
the uplifting fact is that, whatever the nationality, it is virtually 
always the good who strive to be better!
Your checklist for action
To use business English at work, your words and the framework 
that surround them have to be perfect. This is achievable, so 
why set the bar lower? Maybe it will help to list the stark 
consequences of getting it wrong:
Business writing mistakes (including unclear, confusing or 
alienating messages) can equal lost cash + lost custom + lost 
goodwill.
For these reasons:
 Make sure that your message is not subordinate to your 
translation.
 You may be unable to explain things as precisely as you 
would like, so may have to focus on the main messages 
that are essential for readers to know (except for contracts, 
technical documents etc, where every detail matters!).
32 How to write effective business English
 Make sure that you get your message right for your recipient: more complicated text can be counterproductive 
and confusing for you and your reader.
 If you are preoccupied with correctly describing what you 
do, you can lose sight of the bigger picture (eg the need 
to express how you do it better than the rest, to win and 
retain custom).
 Do the work for your readers: make sure your messages 
are not losing you (or them) time or money.
 No matter how good our English language skills are, we 
all need to take the time to check our written English.
4
Business writing for 
today
Winning business through English
Years ago, it often took longer to do deals than it does today. 
The ritual involved in the initial telephone enquiries or formal 
letters of introduction, preliminary and follow-up meetings 
and the like could almost mask the true point of why two or 
more parties were ‘sounding each other out’.
 Incidentally, did you notice the deliberately long-winded 
style of that last sentence? It mimics how writing in English 
used to be, when life was perhaps less pressured. Business 
writing develops as language changes, and it continues to 
evolve in other ways too. There are cultural differences that 
I have mentioned. In addition, the layer of detailed introductions and small talk has partly given way to addressing the 
real purpose: to drive business success.
34 How to write effective business English
 Once again there may be a gap between how you were 
taught to write English at school and how you need to write 
it for business. English for business today is very much about 
‘how to win business through English’.
Academic writing compared with 
writing for business
These are two almost entirely different genres. The goals are 
different and they require different approaches, which I will 
outline now.
Academic writing requirements
Students are generally required to write structured essays, research papers and theses. These are largely marked on the 
basis of how well students have managed to access the right 
information, process this, show prose-composition skills and 
accuracy, and conform to a fairly standard presentation format. By and large, the structure involves a beginning (topic 
and purpose), a middle (evidence and argument, or thesis) 
and an end (conclusion). The words and tone used must be 
relevant for the world of academe. This can often require a 
formal, passive style (objectivity rather than subjectivity); an 
extensive, specialized vocabulary can gain marks.
Business writing requirements
In the workplace, you certainly need to know how to access 
the right information and process this when you write. You 
need to be accurate too. Some companies require you to follow a standard house style. However, even then you may 
Business writing for today 35
be allowed to make suggestions about how the house style 
could evolve, in view of changing business circumstances and 
customers’ needs.
 But here is one very interesting recent evolution in writing 
business English. There are definitely fewer occasions now 
when business writing is seen to have the academic-style beginning, middle and end structure (other than in certain formal 
reports). You will find that you need to develop new literacy 
skills that your teachers may not have taught you and that 
you may not have come across previously. This can present a 
dilemma to businesses, as I will now show you.
You can use ‘I’ when you write in 
business
People may need to shed the shackles of school-driven writing 
when they enter the workplace. For example, time after time I 
hear people say, ‘We were taught at school that we cannot use 
“I” and “we” in the same sentence in a letter,’ or ‘You cannot 
write “I” in business; it must always be “we”.’ People can go 
for years unable to free themselves from this constraint.
 Many companies feel that a key driver of business success 
is empowerment of the individual. It is about everyone being 
given the power and encouragement to make a difference 
within their organization. There may be ‘no I in team’ (I am 
using this management-speak ironically here!) but to embrace 
the concept of ‘I/me’ is surely crucial. Surely we have to be 
allowed to write ‘I’. Surely we should also be allowed to write 
‘we’ (even within the same piece of writing), to demonstrate 
that each of us is an integral part of the total company. You 
will certainly find plenty of evidence from companies worldwide that yes, you can indeed use ‘I’ and ‘we’ within your 
sentences.
36 How to write effective business English
Other things that you may wish to ‘unlearn’
You may have been taught that you cannot begin a sentence 
with ‘And’ or ‘But’. Actually you can – and many acclaimed 
writers do. For traditionalists, let me mention the famous 
English novelist Jane Austen as one example. I often begin 
sentences with these words throughout this series, as the 
style seems relevant for today. This is largely because e-mail 
is today’s predominant business writing and globally people 
write for it in a style that is halfway between conversation 
and formal writing. What’s more, it is having a noticeable 
effect on the way people write other documentation. This is 
not about ‘dumbing down’; it is about expressing facts simply, 
in accessible writing that speaks to people.
 Now it is true to say that if I had a specific customer or line 
manager who hated sentences beginning with ‘And’ or ‘But’, I 
would not use that style with them. Similarly, if my publishers 
did not accept the style, I would also avoid it – but they 
agree it is appropriate for standard business English writing. 
Naturally, it is essential to be reader-driven when you write. 
As I cannot have the advantage of knowing each of you, my 
readers, I will have to use a generic style.
 If you believe in being practical, you could keep a list of 
expressions you know some people do not like. It can become 
almost immaterial whether these expressions are strictly correct or not, if our readers have an aversion to them. There are 
always alternatives you can choose that are less likely to lead 
you into controversy. Here are some examples that regularly 
crop up in my training workshops. Where at all possible, 
people prefer to read:
‘For this to work, you/we need to. . .’ rather than ‘It must be 
done.’
‘Yes, I’ve done that’ rather than ‘Done.’
Business writing for today 37
‘Thank you for bringing this to our attention’ rather than ‘We 
note. . .’
‘So that we can reach our targets, please could I have 
these figures tomorrow?’ rather than ‘I need these figures 
tomorrow.’
‘We regret we are unable to help’ rather than ‘We cannot 
help.’
Can you see the pattern that is emerging? People tend not to 
like terseness and they like to be given reasons why things 
have to be done. If you expressly ask for their assistance, their 
help is more likely to be forthcoming.
Listen to readers’ feedback
It is a very good idea to ask readers for feedback on your business English writing. We can learn so much from this. Companies who take the time to do so find that readers routinely 
comment that:
 They feel patronized by poorly written letters.
 They can feel insulted by writers’ lack of attention to the 
right detail.
 They don’t sense the ‘human touch’ in much of the language used in business writing.
 They can feel so angered by correspondence that, where 
they can do so, they will walk away from the business 
concerned.
 They dislike excessive use of jargon (words or expressions used by a particular profession or group that are 
38 How to write effective business English
sometimes unnecessarily difficult – and certainly difficult 
for others to understand), over-complicated sentences and 
confusing use of words.
 They are offended when their personal details are written 
incorrectly.
I suggest that you reread this list from time to time. Never lose 
sight of how readers may react. I will be dealing with all these 
aspects of writing in this book but will just highlight one of 
them now, as it is one of the most common. It is this: what 
do you think the lack of the ‘human touch’ in writing could 
mean? Is it the fact that business writers actively avoid using 
‘people’ words such as ‘you’ and ‘we’? Failing to use people 
words often happened in the past and, unfortunately, it can 
still be seen today. Let me demonstrate. A company writes to 
a client on the following lines:
Dear Sir
Re: Policy XYZ
It has come to the company’s attention that the aforementioned 
policy that is about to expire has not yet been renewed. I enclose 
a renewal form, which you need to return within seven days, 
otherwise you will no longer be afforded cover.
Yours faithfully
John Smith
Smith and Co
Some companies still use stilted, old-fashioned English to 
write this way and I cannot imagine why. Especially not now, 
as we live in a world where customers increasingly expect to 
feel valued. So how can this depersonalized approach make 
Business writing for today 39
Choosing the right style
More examples follow, showing how writers and readers alike 
can be confused when faced with differing styles of written 
English within their own company.
1. Therefore, although obviously we cannot make any 
assessment about the matter in hand on this occasion, we 
will nevertheless take cognizance of the contents of your 
letter and will forthwith forward a copy thereof to the 
managing director who has the appropriate responsibility 
for investigating any issues raised.
2. Done.
3. Thanks loads .
Dear (client’s name)
Invitation to renew your policy
We would like to invite you to renew your policy, which is shortly 
due to expire on (date) and would like to ensure that you continue 
to have the cover you need.
 So please could you read, then complete as necessary, the 
enclosed renewal form, and return it to us by (date)?
 If you have any further queries in relation to this letter, please 
do not hesitate to contact me on (telephone number and/or email address).
With thanks.
Yours sincerely
John Smith
Smith and Co
the client feel valued? I will redesign the message, using people 
words and more modern English.
40 How to write effective business English
The style in the first example is extremely formal English and 
quite old-fashioned in feel. You can see what I term barrier 
words: ‘therefore’, ‘obviously’, ‘nevertheless’ and ‘forthwith’. 
They are all correct English, but they can make readers feel 
distanced. The majority of readers will probably view the 
writer as condescending towards an ‘inferior’ reader, rather 
than communicating with a valued customer.
 The one word ‘Done’ in the second example is a common 
e-mail response these days, when someone has asked a question 
such as ‘Have you completed this action?’ Those who write 
the one-word reply usually feel they are very effective workers 
and communicators. What they do not see is the irritation 
that the one-word e-mail reply can cause. It is so often seen 
as discourteous. Just by adding three words and changing the 
reply to ‘I have done that’ can improve readers’ perception. 
The writing becomes less curt and more polite. As people 
comment on this in so many training workshops that I run, it 
is well worth a mention here.
 The third example is informal in the extreme, yet you will 
see it a lot in business today. It does convey goodwill. But many 
will find it unprofessional and do not feel it is appropriate 
for corporate communication. Some writers may argue that 
they are only that informal when writing for a known internal 
recipient. But the problem is, e-mails can so often continue in 
threads – and may be forwarded in time to external recipients 
too.
 In short, you are quite likely to see these contrasts in business 
English writing in your company. Do consider whether taking 
a middle course, a median between an overly formal or overly 
informal style, is going to work best, to avoid unnecessarily 
confusing styles – and even offence.
Business writing for today 41
Ideal communication
It is hard to define ideal business communication but this 
summary may help:
Effective written communication is when the correct, concise, 
current message is sent out to the primary receiver(s), then onwards without distortion to further receivers to generate the 
required response.
Let me amplify what I mean. Sometimes we write to someone 
simply to inform them of something. They may not need to 
do anything other than note what we have said. They then 
remain the primary receiver. The only response we require is 
one that favours the way we have delivered the message (both 
on a personal and a company level).
 Probably more often our aim when we write is to do more 
than simply inform. We are looking for the receiver(s) to respond not just favourably to our style but to act in response, 
in the way and at the time we desire. Our writing should 
actively enable this through the formula we design. So it is 
crucial that it can be understood by all who read it (directly 
or indirectly), in order to achieve our objectives and cover our 
readers’ needs.
 Why have I included the word ‘current’ in the formula? 
This is because so often people systematically address the first 
three points I list, but then forget to update the information. 
So the best-laid plans can get messed up.
 Here is an example. An external trainer is going to deliver a 
course for 10 members of a company’s staff. One week earlier, 
their manager issues joining instructions to all attending. The 
course is scheduled to be held in the Byfield Room in a hotel 
the company uses. The trainer has been sent the full list of 
42 How to write effective business English
names and has asked the company to notify any changes 
before the day.
 By the day of the training no changes have been communicated and the trainer arrives for set-up. He finds that the hotel 
has changed the venue to the Smithson Room, which has not 
been laid out as requested. There are no flipcharts and no 
projector screen.
 By the 9 am start of the course only seven attendees turn up. 
The trainer calls the company to check but the relevant manager is not available. So the trainer puts back the start time, in 
case the missing delegates are held up in traffic. He later finds 
out that the company were aware that three delegates would 
be unable to attend on the day.
 Can you see why the failures to relay changes cost money 
and impede performance? Both the hotel and the client company were at fault here. Although the course went ahead, there 
was unnecessary hassle and a distinct lack of professionalism. It also made for a chaotic scene which is likely to undermine delegates’ perception of the day in total. This kind of 
thing happens all too frequently. It comes as a direct result 
of people not reading and responding, not making calls or 
writing e-mails to update and inform others of changing or 
changed circumstances. A minor series of events can turn a 
well-organized programme into an unprofessional shambles.
The Word Power Skills system: four 
easy steps to success
This series of books is here to guide and help you succeed in 
every aspect of writing English for business, from the simplest 
to the most complex tasks you will have to deal with. The 
system I now introduce appears in each book in the series.
Business writing for today 43
A guide to premier business writing
The system uses the idea of ‘a ladder of success’, in which 
you start at the bottom (Step 1) and systematically climb to 
success (beyond Step 4) as follows:
Step 1
Be correct:
 Know what your writing needs to achieve, alongside what 
your company needs to achieve.
 At the very least, match readers’ minimum expectations.
 Ensure that your writing is free of mistakes.
Your business communication will fail if you get your basics 
wrong.
Step 2
Be clear:
 Use plain English and express facts as simply as possible.
 Edit so that your main points are easily understood.
Confused messages undermine your objectives. They can lose 
you custom too.
Step 3
Make the right impact:
 Use the right words and layout to get noticed for the right 
reasons.
44 How to write effective business English
 Use the right style to present yourself and your company 
well.
 Create opportunities.
The right impact differentiates you from competitors and 
helps bring about the responses you need.
Step 4
Focus on readers as your customers:
 Write from their perspective.
 Empathize with them.
 Favour positive, proactive words.
 Avoid words that put up barriers, and avoid jargon 
wherever you can.
Use your written words to satisfy and, if possible, delight your 
customers.
Your checklist for action
 Be aware that your readers and customers are likely 
to have a negative impression of (or reject) ineffective 
writing.
 Evaluate feedback on your own specific business English 
writing. You can do this simply by checking your answers 
to questions such as the following:
 – When you send a memo, do people often not bother 
to read it?
Business writing for today 45
 – Do you have to send out the same message more than 
once?
 – Do people ever congratulate you or complain about 
the tone of your message?
 – Are your letters, reports or e-mails significantly longer 
than those of your colleagues?
 – When you receive new details, do you always update 
people who need to know?
 Bear in mind that there are differences between academic 
English writing and business English writing.
 Be aware that academic writing often has a formal structure and objective slant. Business writing is tending to 
become more informal, especially because of the rise in 
e-mail and web writing, where material is presented in 
bite-sized chunks.
 Be prepared to unlearn some of the rules you may have 
learnt at school.
THIS PAGE 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
46
5
Quality matters
Why it really matters to get your 
writing right
You need to get your business English writing right, first time 
and every time. Contribute to your own success by understanding that each bit of business writing you send out can be 
(indeed, should be) viewed as a personal as well as a company 
advertisement. Written words are ‘frozen’ in the point of time 
in which they were written. They are likely to be judged for 
what they are, when we may not be there to explain them.
 To succeed they have to be the right words for our commercial purpose at the time, or we will fall at the first hurdle. 
Yet they also have to be right from our readers’ point of view, 
or we will fall at the second hurdle.
48 How to write effective business English
To make mistakes is only human?
The trouble is that whoever we are, whatever we do and 
whatever our proficiency in a language, we are likely to 
make mistakes in our writing. In fact, we are likely to make 
the occasional mistake in most aspects of our business performance, even when we know our subject matter very well. 
Why? Well, ironically, we can be lulled into a false sense of 
security. We can expect our writing to be right – though we 
often achieve better results when we expect it to be wrong. 
This is because, when we think our writing might be wrong, 
we are more likely to:
 identify mistakes;
 eradicate them before we send our writing out;
 as a result of these factors, present a totally professional 
corporate image.
Checking, and even double-checking, your writing before 
you send it can pay great dividends. It may mean you spend 
longer than you would like at the planning stage but this is 
well worthwhile. It raises the odds that each message you send 
out is right.
How readers can react to written 
mistakes
Just take a look at three sentences written by non-native 
English writers. I will identify the problems in each case and 
explain for each how readers might react.
Quality matters 49
1. Thank you for your order. You are demanded to send 
payment within 30 days.
First of all, the expression ‘you are demanded’ is not correct 
English. It would be better to write something on the lines of 
‘Please send payment within 30 days’ or ‘You are requested 
to pay within 30 days.’ In English there is an expression ‘to 
demand payment’ but it has a very strong connotation. It is 
generally used to denote the final notice before a company 
pursues legal action, to collect money owing to it in an overdue 
account. When the expression is used validly, it would be on 
the following lines:
This is a final demand for payment (within 30 days) of your 
outstanding account.
So in our first example we have an outright grammatical mistake. But the wrong tone can also count as a writing mistake. 
Let’s look at the text again: ‘Thank you for your order. You 
are demanded to send payment within 30 days.’ Although the 
reader sees the initial words ‘Thank you,’ the next sentence 
introduces a harsh, accusatory tone. Yet this is clearly one of 
the first points of contact between customer and company. 
The order has just been placed: ‘Thank you for your order’ 
tells us that. So is the customer going to feel that this is a nice 
company to do business with? I do not think so.
 Let’s not forget that, in business, we should try to ensure 
that when new customers place their orders, we make this a 
very positive experience for them. If a company cannot be 
bothered to write well here, then the indicators are not good 
for future business success. Customers usually have a choice: 
there is likely to be an alternative company that is nice to do 
business with.
50 How to write effective business English
2. We can provide the services you outline in principal but 
we request a supplementation.
Homonyms are words that have the same sound and sometimes the same spelling as another but whose meanings are 
different. They can confuse native English and non-NE writers 
alike. You will find more on homonyms in Chapter 8. But 
let’s just take a look here at two words that are frequently 
confused. They are:
Principal: an adjective generally meaning first in importance; 
also a noun meaning a chief or senior person; can also mean 
an original sum of money for investment.
Principle: a noun meaning a fundamental truth or quality; a 
rule or belief governing a person’s morally correct behaviour 
and attitudes.
If we go back to our second example, unfortunately the 
writer has chosen the wrong version of the homonym here. 
The correct word would be ‘principle’. Some readers may 
not mind this; some will not notice. But some will make a 
value judgement: this is wrong. It may be unfair but just one 
wrong word can undermine readers’ perception of a writer’s 
or a company’s professionalism. It can also distract readers’ 
attention away from the writer’s key message.
 Moving along the sentence in our second example, we find 
another confusing word. A ‘supplementation’? What does this 
mean? Is it a request for further information? Is it a request 
for a supplementary fee, that is to say, more money? Or is it a 
deposit (part pre-payment)? Once again, it is the sort of word 
that an online dictionary search would suggest and one which 
a native English writer would not use! Their writing would 
‘ask for more details or further information’.
 A crucial point is this: writing English for business really 
should not be about ‘over-Englishing the English’, as I call it. 
Quality matters 51
This describes a compelling need that many non-native English 
writers feel. It is the mistaken belief that they must choose the 
most complicated vocabulary in any list they see. In today’s 
pressured business environment, readers actually prefer it 
when facts are expressed simply. You can also get your message 
across faster and reduce the chance of misunderstandings.
3. You should benefit us of further informations as we feel 
ourselves unable to help you.
This sentence contains some very common mistakes made by 
non-NE writers. ‘You should benefit us’ is a construction that 
simply does not exist in standard English. Nor does ‘informations’. ‘Information’ exists only in the singular, no matter 
how much information is given (and incidentally, the same 
applies to ‘training,’ though I often see ‘trainings’). The second 
verb phrase, ‘we feel ourselves’, uses the reflexive form that 
English uses far less frequently than many other languages. 
When English does use it, it tends to be in a very physical, 
literal sense. Here it would mean ‘we are actually touching 
ourselves’. It does not imply the state of mind that the writer 
assumes it means – and the sentence simply does not sound 
right.
 How might the reader react to these mistakes? Well, on the 
first level, grammatical mistakes do not impress. On a second 
level, the writer sounds unhelpful: once again the inference is 
that this is not a company that is nice – or indeed easy – to 
do business with. And when we use the very powerful word 
‘benefit’ in business when we communicate with customers, it 
must be directed at them, not us. So the writer has potentially 
made a big mistake here from the reader’s perspective. In 
some ways, I think this has happened because the writer has 
focused on translation, over and above the business purpose 
that should be central.
 If we rewrite the sentence as: ‘Please could you let us have 
some further information so that we can help you?’ then 
52 How to write effective business English
this helps get the message back on track. It is simpler and it 
works.
 Although I have just highlighted some mistakes, I do not 
advocate that you take a ‘red pen’ approach. This can be the 
approach some managers take, when they use a red pen and 
highlight an employee’s written mistakes, in a clearly unsupportive way. This approach really can demotivate staff and is 
best avoided.
 It is true that sometimes you just have to write the way 
your line managers suggest. But it is always better to know the 
reasons why they consider one way better than another. Even 
in UK English you can opt to write certain words in two ways, 
both of which are correct. I mentioned earlier that you can 
write ‘recognize’ or ‘recognise’, or ‘judgement’ or ‘judgment’ 
– and it can be personal or company preference that dictates 
which you use. If you do not understand the reasons why 
you must write a certain way, your manager owes it to you to 
explain why. But you also owe it to yourself to ask why.
 It is in your own interests to know if you are making mistakes. Readers will see mistakes and they may comment on 
them. In business you can never afford ‘to bury your head in the 
sand’ – in other words, just because you do not acknowledge 
something, that does not mean it does not exist. Problems do 
occur and every business needs to identify them. How else can 
we seek solutions and get things right?
 It is true that to make mistakes is human, but routinely 
making mistakes will never make good commercial sense. We 
do need to focus on quality, and it is a good idea to define 
what we mean by this. Does it mean top quality or simply 
acceptable? It is really up to each business to define what 
they expect the quality of their output to be. Alongside this, 
each business should also quantify the quality that customers 
expect of it. This lines up with one aspect of Step 1 on the 
ladder of success, which I described in the previous chapter.
Quality matters 53
Further costs of getting your writing 
wrong
We saw how things can go wrong when we do not update our 
written messages in the light of changed circumstances. The 
following scenario also shows the cost businesses can pay for 
getting writing wrong.
 I submitted a database entry on my business to a company 
that was to include it in a Europe-wide guide. Their fee seemed 
reasonable, given the likely exposure to new business. I had 
to follow a restricted format and limited word count, so my 
entry was as follows:
TQI Word Power Skills Training
Activity: A UK company that provides business support 
services for every type of business. It provides business 
English services to help with marketing literature and 
communication skills training.
Services include editing, text correction or fine tuning, 
quality assurance, proof-reading, group workshops, individual coaching in business English and cross-cultural 
briefing.
These innovative, fully confidential business services are 
designed to help you assure the quality of your service 
or product and help you hit your commercial target first 
and every time.
TQI Word Power Skills training offers businesses of 
all types and sizes expert and affordable solutions for 
their business English needs, together with international 
experience from previous consultancy in the Netherlands.
Co-operation request: TQI Word Power Skills Training 
seeks companies requiring these services.
54 How to write effective business English
A few weeks later I received an invoice from the company 
in charge of the database. Attached to this was a copy of 
the entry as it had actually appeared. Unknown to me, the 
copy had already gone live, Europe-wide, one month before I 
received the invoice. The entry was now the one shown below. 
It includes a number of errors, made when the company inputted my original wording onto the database. Can you spot 
these mistakes?
TQI Word Power Skills training
Activity: UK company that provides business support 
services for every type of business, it provides Business 
english services to help with marketing literature and 
communication skills training.
Services include editing, text correction or fine tuning, 
quality assurance, proof reading, group workshops, 
infividual coaching in Business English and inter cultural 
breifing.
These Innovative fully confidential business services are 
designed to help you assure the quality of your service 
or product and help you hit your commercial target first 
and every time.
TQI Word Power Skills training offers businesses of all 
types and sizes expert and affordable solutions for their 
business English needs, international expereince from 
previous consultancy in the Netherland.
Co-operation request: TQI Word Power Skills Training 
seeks companies that require there servces.
Quality matters 55
Quite understandably, I was not at all happy, especially when 
I was presented with an invoice to pay for this appalling entry. 
Can you see why this would be? If you look closely, you will 
see that there is at least one mistake in each paragraph. Some 
are spelling mistakes, such as ‘infividual’ for ‘individual, ‘breifing’ for ‘briefing’ and ‘expereince’ for ‘experience’. Some are 
inconsistencies, such as business English and Business English. 
Both may be used, but it is better style to keep to a single use, 
certainly within one paragraph. The word innovative suddenly 
has a capital ‘I’, thus we find ‘Innovative’ even though the 
word is mid-sentence. And so on – the list goes on. One thing 
is sure: nobody ran a spellcheck or grammar check.
 What ultimately was the cost of this regrettable incident? 
The answer is that there was a cost to pay on a number of 
different levels. I refused to pay the invoice because the entry 
was incorrect, so the company suffered the loss of that income. 
That company then had to redraft a correct entry, and replace 
the incorrect entry at their own cost. The cost to my company 
was in terms of undermined professional credibility (both in 
the short and long term).
 You can easily see how such an apparently low-key set of 
mistakes can have a disastrous effect on the professional credibility of a company that is operating internationally.
 In the final analysis, although the mistakes were not mine, 
they appeared to be mine. It was my company name and my 
details that appeared . . . which leads me to the next section.
You can never fully outsource your 
writing
This is a topic that merits a lot of discussion, as it crops up 
so much in business. The point I am going to make here is 
56 How to write effective business English
that we need to analyse mistakes, learn from them and try to 
prevent the same errors happening again.
 What the episode in the last section taught me was this: 
not to assume that because the version I sent for publishing 
was correct, the published version would be correct too. I was 
unaware that the advertising company used Apple Macs. This 
meant that they did not just cut and paste my Word document: 
they had to retype the copy themselves. Whether or not this 
was the case, I should have asked to see the final proof before 
publication. Printers often provide this as a matter of course, 
to cover themselves against complaints at a later stage. But 
note that word ‘often’. . . it is not the same as ‘always’!
 If you outsource something and it goes wrong, the backlash 
becomes yours. You cannot outsource responsibility!
Checking for mistakes
It actually helps you to expect there will be mistakes in your 
writing draft. Here is an analogy. When I was learning to drive, 
my teacher gave me invaluable advice. I was told to imagine 
everyone on the road was a maniac. That way, he explained, 
I would always be alert to the fact that mistakes inevitably 
happen. What is more, I would be a better driver as a result. 
Far from being complacent, I would be more likely to respond 
quickly to ever-changing situations and take corrective action. 
Can you see how easily the advice applies to checking for 
mistakes in your English writing too?
Proofreading tips
Check everything you write before you send it out. Choose 
the ways that will help you from the following tips:
Quality matters 57
 Allow sufficient time for your proofreading. If you rush 
you may still overlook the mistakes you are looking for.
 It can be easier to proofread on paper than on a computer 
screen.
 Use a dictionary or grammar book to help you, or your 
computer’s spelling and grammar check (set on the 
correct variant of English for your target audience). Do 
be aware that this is not fail-safe. It may let the wrong 
word(s) through, especially homophones (words which 
sound the same, although the meanings and spellings can 
be different) for example ‘brake’ for ‘break’, ‘there’ for 
‘their’ and so on.
 Try reading your lines backwards (people sometimes 
use a ruler to read one line at a time a time, to avoid distraction). You do not check for meaning this way, you just 
check that the words are written correctly.
 Check for meaning and logical arrangement.
 Make a self-help list of any words that you regularly get 
wrong, so that you can check them quickly and effectively 
next time you write them.
Your checklist for action
 Understand that mistakes can and do happen.
 Make sure that you take steps to minimize this, such as 
running spellcheck and grammar check in the right variety 
of English.
 Understand that mistakes in your English are not just 
about spelling and grammar.
58 How to write effective business English
 They can also be when words are left out, when sentences 
confuse or present facts in a disorderly way that distorts 
the correct message.
 Understand the longer-term impact mistakes may have 
(and how these can in turn impact on you and your 
company).
 Highlight to others the importance of correct English 
writing.
 Always check your writing before you issue it.
 If you are not sure, ask for help from someone who will 
know.
6
Punctuation and 
grammar tips
Why punctuation and grammar 
matter
This extract shows what unpunctuated writing looks like:
mr jones the companys hr director called mrs smith into his 
office for an update on the latest recruitment drive he wanted 
to know whether the online application system was working 
reports had filtered through that all was not going to plan mrs 
smith explained that candidates were certainly experiencing 
problems as the systems had crashed in her opinion it would 
be better to extend the closing date would he be prepared to 
authorize this
60 How to write effective business English
Did you have any problem deciphering this? A lot of people 
will find it difficult. If we write poetry we may actively want 
people to work out meaning. We may even want them to create 
their own meaning; but this should not apply to business 
writing.
 In writing, punctuation is an aid that helps our readers to 
understand our messages. The extract could be punctuated a 
number of ways. I will use one way to show how it becomes 
easier to read:
Mr Jones, the company’s HR director, called Mrs Smith into 
his office for an update on the latest recruitment drive. He 
wanted to know whether the online application system was 
working. Reports had filtered through that all was not going 
to plan.
 Mrs Smith explained that candidates were certainly experiencing problems as the systems had crashed. In her opinion, it 
would be better to extend the closing date.
 Would he be prepared to authorize this?
You see, punctuation and grammar are aids that help writing 
to be understood and help us to communicate clearly. A good 
command of these can give you improved confidence, and you 
can feel more in control of your business English writing. You 
will be pleased about this and so will your readers. You will 
feel secure in the knowledge that your sentences will work 
because you have designed them to work.
Punctuation and other marks
English terms and symbols used to describe punctuation 
marks are:
Punctuation and grammar tips 61
capital letters or upper case: A, B, C
lower case: a, b, c
comma: ,
full stop (UK English) or period (UK and US English) or 
dot: .
speech or double quotation marks or inverted commas: “ ”
speech or single quotation marks or inverted commas: ‘ ’
question mark: ?
exclamation mark: !
apostrophe: ’
hyphen or dash: –
slash or stroke: /
brackets: ( )
square brackets: [ ]
ampersand: &
‘at’ sign: @
colon: :
semicolon: ;
asterisk: *
Nouns and gender in English
Nouns and pronouns in English belong to one of four genders: 
masculine, feminine, common (words denoting either sex) or 
neuter.
62 How to write effective business English
 Examples of masculine nouns and pronouns are:
man, boy, father, brother, heir, lion, him.
Examples of feminine nouns and pronouns are:
woman, girl, mother, heiress, lioness, her.
Examples of common nouns and pronouns are:
child, owner, officer, friend, they, you.
Examples of neuter nouns and pronouns are:
book, office, street, it.
The definite and indefinite article in gender
English differs from many other languages in that:
 The word ‘the’ (referred to as the ‘definite article’) is a 
constant. It does not change according to the gender of 
the word to which it relates.
 The words ‘a’ (referred to as the ‘indefinite article’) or the 
alternative form ‘an’ (used to precede a word that begins 
with a vowel) are also constants. They do not change 
according to the gender of the word to which they relate.
This should make life easy for non-native English writers 
– although they can have a tendency to default to their own 
language’s convention. Some may refer to neuter English 
words as ‘he’ or ‘she’, which can sound very odd to native 
English speakers.
Punctuation and grammar tips 63
 Another problem is the fact that, for almost every rule in 
English grammar, there is an exception. For example, a ship is 
generally referred to in English as ‘she’. Cars can be referred 
to this way too. Yet a cat, dog or other animal can also be 
referred to as ‘it’ – and anything belonging to it would be ‘its’. 
For example: ‘Its feeding bowl is over there.’ Very strangely, 
a baby can be referred to as ‘it’ too! For example: ‘It’s a cute 
baby’, or ‘Its feed is due now’ (meaning ‘The baby’s feed is 
due now.’).
 Although I deal with apostrophes a bit later, I will just 
explain the difference in meaning between ‘it’s’ and ‘its’ in 
the last paragraph. The apostrophe (’) in ‘it’s’ tells you that a 
letter is missing. In this case it is the letter i. So the meaning in 
this case is ‘it is’. Sometimes the apostrophe will signify that 
two letters are missing. In that case the meaning will be ‘it 
has’. The context will help you understand which of the two 
possibilities applies. When you see ‘its’ with no apostrophe (’) 
between the t and the s, this meaning will always be ‘belonging 
to it’, ‘owned by it’, ‘of it’. We call this the possessive or 
genitive case.
Parts of speech and other grammar
Parts of speech
In English grammar, words can be categorized into what 
we term parts of speech. These include nouns, pronouns, 
adjectives, verbs, adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions and 
interjections.
 A noun names a person, place or thing. For example:
girl, London, newspaper;
The man drank his coffee.
64 How to write effective business English
A pronoun is a word that can take the place of a noun and 
functions like it. For example:
I, this, who, he, they;
There’s Peter, who won the lottery.
You will notice how the noun ‘Peter’ became the pronoun 
‘who’ within the same sentence.
 An adjective is a word that describes a noun. For example:
red, lovely, clever;
That is a lovely photo.
A verb is a ‘doing word’ or describes a state of being. For 
example:
write, run, work, be;
She is an assistant who works hard.
Sometimes a verb needs two or three words to complete it. 
For example:
I am working in Moscow this week.
You will be travelling first class.
An adverb is a word that describes a verb. For example:
fast, happily, later, urgently;
The project manager always delivered on time.
In that last example there is an adverb, ‘always’, and 
an adverbial phrase, ‘on time’, which describe the verb 
‘delivered’.
Punctuation and grammar tips 65
 A preposition is a word that links a noun to another noun. 
For example:
to, on, under, in;
Please put the papers on the desk.
A conjunction is a word that joins words or sentences. For 
example:
and, but, or, so;
I need a flipchart and paper, but that is all.
An interjection is a short exclamation, often followed by an 
exclamation mark (!). For example:
hi! oh!
Oh no! I’ve just missed the train.
Some other grammatical points of interest
Commas can separate one group of words in a sentence from 
another so that the meaning is clear. You will see how they 
flag up different meanings in these two sentences:
Sanjay, our vice-president has left the company.
Sanjay, our vice-president, has left the company.
In the first sentence, the writer is telling Sanjay that their 
vice-president (somebody else) has left the company. In the 
second sentence, the writer is telling somebody (whose name 
is unknown to us) that Sanjay (who is the vice-president) has 
left the company.
66 How to write effective business English
 In order to use commas correctly, it helps to know that a 
comma signifies a brief pause. Very often, people wrongly use 
a comma to do the work of a full stop (period). For example:
I examined the computer, it had obviously been damaged.
As there are two complete statements here, not just a pause, 
a full stop is appropriate: ‘I examined the computer. It had 
obviously been damaged.’ However, this sounds rather stilted 
and a native English writer is likely to use a conjunction to add 
fluidity. For example: ‘I examined the computer and found it 
had obviously been damaged.’
 A comma is also used to link lists of items, groups of words, 
adjectives, actions and adverbs. For example:
She listed, there and then, the things she would need for 
her presentation: a laptop, a projector, screen, flipchart and 
marker pens.
Apostrophes show where one or more letters have been left 
out of a word. For example:
I’m = contraction of ‘I am’;
It’s = contraction of ‘it is’ or ‘it has’;
You’ll = contraction of ‘you will’.
Apostrophes can also show possession or ownership. For 
example:
The student’s rights = the rights of one student;
The students’ rights = the rights of students.
Punctuation and grammar tips 67
The general rule is:
apostrophe before the s (’s ) = singular possession;
apostrophe after the s (s’) = plural possession.
Unfortunately, English always has some irregular forms, such 
as:
men = plural of man; but the possessive is men’s;
children = plural of child; but the possessive is children’s;
its = possessive of it – yet takes no apostrophe at all!
Forming plurals of nouns
As you will know, most nouns have a singular form (to 
denote one) and a plural (to denote more than one). There 
are exceptions that I have highlighted earlier, such as training 
and information. The standard way of forming plurals from 
singular nouns is to add ‘s’. However, this does not always 
work, as in the case of ‘child, children’, ‘lady, ladies’, ‘foot, 
feet’, to mention a few. So please do refer to a mainstream 
English grammar book if you need more help with this.
 There is one point that I would like to address here, as it 
arises so often. It concerns the wrong use of an apostrophe 
followed by ‘s’ to signify a plural meaning. For example, 
‘tomato’s’ and ‘company’s’. The correct plurals are ‘tomatoes’ 
and ‘companies’.
Vowels and consonants
In written English, ‘a, e, i, o, u’ are the standard vowels. The 
remaining letters in the alphabet are consonants.
68 How to write effective business English
The definite and indefinite article
The word ‘the’ is known as the definite article and exists in 
the same form in both singular and plural. The words ‘a’ and 
‘an’ are known as the indefinite article and only exist in the 
singular. For the plural, English uses the word ‘some’.
 If as a non-native English writer you are sometimes confused about when to use the definite or indefinite article, you 
are definitely not alone. A general guideline that will help is 
this. When you are referring to something in general, use ‘a’ 
before a word beginning with a consonant or ‘an’ before a 
word beginning with a vowel. (Once again though, true to 
form, English has exceptions: some native English speakers 
would say ‘an hotel’.)
 Here is an example of ‘a’ in this usage:
Cheese for sale: six euros a kilo, not ‘six euros the kilo’, as 
many non-NE writers would expect.
As an interesting aside, note that in English goods are described as being ‘for sale’. Some cultures express it the reverse 
way: ‘to buy’. English speakers would say and write ‘House 
for sale’, not ‘House to buy’.
 Let’s say a company receives an e-mail as follows: ‘Please 
can you let me know how long an order will take to deliver?’ 
The company will view the question posed as tentative – and 
thus non-specific. There is no order, only a general enquiry 
about how long it would take if somebody did place an order. 
Now let’s say the company receives this e-mail enquiry: ‘Please 
can you tell me how long the order will take to deliver?’ The 
word ‘the’ makes this enquiry far more specific. The question 
is more likely to relate to an order that has been placed.
Punctuation and grammar tips 69
Paragraphs
Paragraphs help your reader understand the organization of 
your writing because each paragraph is a group of sentences 
about a topic. Your key messages become easy to identify and 
the format makes it easy for you to develop them. Paragraph 
headings are increasingly used to signpost messages and highlight structure for readers’ ease.
Brackets, bullet points and dashes
Use these to break up text (especially if it is rather lengthy) so 
that your reader is not overwhelmed – you will find they can 
be really useful. Can you see from the last sentence that I used 
a dash (–) for a similar purpose? You can also use commas, as 
I am doing here, to make a longish sentence more manageable. 
It also acts as a point of emphasis: the main message is in the 
main part of the sentence, and the aside is within the commas 
or brackets.
 On the reverse side, too many short sentences can seem 
abrupt. So if you want to keep your writing interesting, try 
mixing and matching these features to vary and enhance your 
style.
Verbs and tenses
You are likely to have been taught the finer points of English 
grammar at school, in college or by self-study. Needless to 
say, entire books are written on this extensive subject and it is 
beyond the scope of this handbook to go into any great detail. 
However, I will give an outline as a refresher.
70 How to write effective business English
 As I have mentioned, a verb is a ‘doing’ or ‘state of being’ 
word. It can consist of one or more words. The infinitive of 
a verb is the base form, for example ‘to work’, ‘to give’, ‘to 
do’.
 The present participle is formed by adding ‘-ing’ to the 
infinitive. The ‘to’ part is dropped. This construction is then 
used with the verb ‘to be’ to form what are known as continuous tenses. For example: ‘They are working.’
 If the infinitive ends in ‘e’ (‘to give’, ‘to come’) the general 
rule is to drop the ‘e’ when adding the ‘-ing’. For example: ‘He 
is giving,’ ‘They are coming.’
 The past participle is normally formed by adding ‘-ed’ to the 
infinitive. Again, the ‘to’ part is dropped. This construction is 
used with the verb ‘to have’ to form perfect (completed past) 
tenses. For example: ‘The train has departed,’ ‘The post has 
arrived.’
 Irregular verbs form the perfect differently. That is why you 
may need to refer to traditional grammar sources if you are 
not sure about these. Examples are: ‘It has grown’ (not growed), ‘The time has flown by’ (not fly-ed).
Tenses
The simple tenses in English are the starting point for global 
business writing today.
 The present tense has the same form as the infinitive (except 
the verb ‘to be’). When the subject is ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’ or a noun, 
English adds ‘-s’ or ‘-es’.
 To form the future tense, English adds ‘will’ (or ‘shall’ – 
though this is less frequently used now).
 To form the past tense, ‘-ed’ is normally added to the infinitive. 
(Once more though, a word of caution: there are many 
irregular verbs where this does not work!)
Punctuation and grammar tips 71
 A regular example is:
verb: to work (regular verb)
simple present tense:
– I work
– you (singular and plural) work
– he, she, it works
– we work
– they work
simple future tense:
– I, you (singular and plural), he, she, it, we, they will work
simple past tense:
– I, you (singular and plural), he, she, it, we, they worked
There are naturally many more tenses that you will need to 
study in depth and dedicated grammar books will help you with 
the necessary detail involved. That said, there is one tense that 
does seem to present a particular problem in the workplace. 
Businesses ask me about this one so often that I think it merits 
a special mention here. It is the present continuous tense.
 This tense is formed by using the present tense of ‘to be’ 
with the present participle of the verb in question. Let’s say 
I want the present continuous tense of ‘to write’. The forms 
are:
I am writing
you (singular and plural) are writing
he, she is writing
72 How to write effective business English
we are writing
they are writing
The question I am often asked is: when do we use the present 
continuous rather than the present tense? The answer is in 
three parts:
 When the action is taking place now (‘I am writing this 
sentence at this very moment.’).
 When the action is taking place now but also is carrying 
on into the future (‘I am writing this book at this very 
moment – but also over the coming months.’).
 When the action is planned for the future (‘I am writing 
another book next year.’).
By the way, with regard to this last sentence, you would be 
right to think that the future tense would also be correct, 
namely: ‘I will write another book next year.’
 We use the present tense for more general actions or states 
that have no particular time reference. For example:
We drink water to survive.
If I find a mistake, I correct it.
Non-native English writers can be confused about when to 
write, for example:
She lives in Tokyo.
She is living in Tokyo.
Both are correct – but the second version often implies to 
a native English speaker that ‘She is living in Tokyo (at the 
moment).’
Punctuation and grammar tips 73
Agreement of subject and verb
When a subject in a sentence is in the singular, then the verb 
must be in the singular too. When the subject is plural, then 
the verb is in the plural, in agreement with it. This is also 
called concord. Examples are:
Paul is at university and so is his brother.
Paul is at university and so are his brother and sister.
They understand the reason why they have to do this.
She understands the reasons why she has to do this and why 
you have to do it too.
These conditions apply now.
This condition applies now.
Non-NE writers can forget to check concord in their writing. 
Two quite typical examples are:
Sara has received our e-mail. Has you received it too? Correct 
version: Sara has received our e-mail. Have you received it 
too?
This kind of topics. Correct version: These kinds of topics.
As a rule of thumb, all you have to do is work out who is 
doing the action and make your verb relate to who or what 
is doing it. In some sentences you may have to refer back to 
check.
 Incidentally, there are certain words in English where it is 
possible to use a singular word in a plural sense too. Examples 
are: government, council, committee, company.
74 How to write effective business English
 So in UK English, you can write:
The government is changing the law on this.
The government are changing the law on this.
The reasoning behind this is that these nouns can be viewed 
as entities by themselves or as bodies of people. On this track, 
another often-used word comes to mind. This is the word 
‘staff’, where it means personnel. It is used as a singular in 
US English but exists only in the plural in UK English. So UK 
English says: ‘The staff are taking a vote on this.’ US English 
says: ‘The staff is taking a vote on this.’
Question tags
These are used a lot in English conversation, and non-NE 
speakers can find them quite hard to master. As they are now 
used in e-mail writing too, here are some tips.
 Speakers and writers use question tags to encourage their 
listeners or readers to respond. It helps check that people agree 
or understand what you are saying or writing.
 Examples are:
It’s a good outcome, isn’t it?
You don’t have a meeting today, do you?
You can make it in time, can’t you?
Examples of incorrect usage would be:
You have got the right files, isn’t it?
He is wrong, doesn’t he?
These kind of things are dealt with in your department, isn’t 
it?
Punctuation and grammar tips 75
Correct versions of these would be:
You have got the right files, haven’t you?
He is wrong, isn’t he?
These kinds of things are dealt with in your department, aren’t 
they?
Tips to help you:
Try balancing the same verb (including whether it is singular 
or plural) on either side of the sentence.
Then use a negative in the end questioning part of the 
sentence.
Comparison
Comparison of adjectives
In English, adjectives can have three degrees: positive, comparative and superlative.
 The positive is just the usual form of the adjective; for example: a happy child, a large book, a comfortable chair.
 The comparative is used in comparing one thing or group 
with another; for example:
the shorter of the two brothers;
ponies are smaller than horses.
If it is a short word, we normally form the comparative by 
adding ‘-er’.
 The superlative is used when comparing one thing or group 
with more than one other; for example:
76 How to write effective business English
She is the oldest of the three sisters.
That is the greatest suggestion yet.
If it is a short word, we normally add ‘-est’ to the positive.
 Adjectives of three syllables or more and most adjectives 
of two syllables form their comparative by placing the word 
‘more’ before the adjective. They form the superlative by 
placing ‘most’ in front of the adjective.
 Some adjectives have quite different words for the comparative or superlative. For example:
good, better, best;
many, more, most;
little, less, least.
Incidentally, a mistake that is very common is where writers 
use the superlative where they should be using the comparative. For example: ‘That is the best of the two offers’ is, 
strictly speaking, wrong. It should be: ‘That is the better of the 
two offers.’ There would have to be three or more offers for 
‘best’ to be correct. Similarly, instead of ‘She is the youngest 
of the two employees’, the correct version would be ‘She is the 
younger of the two employees.’
Comparison of adverbs
Short adverbs are compared in the same way as adjectives:
soon, sooner, soonest;
fast, faster, fastest.
Punctuation and grammar tips 77
With adverbs of two syllables or longer, you usually form the 
comparative and superlative by adding ‘more’ and ‘most’ to 
the positive degree of the word:
carefully, more carefully, most carefully;
easily, more easily, most easily.
Once again, English often comes up with irregular forms:
badly, worse, worst.
well, better, best.
Transitional words and phrases
Let’s now take a look at transitional words and phrases which 
can play a useful part in improving fluidity in writing.
 You may feel you have succeeded in your writing if you 
have included all the points you need to make. You would 
be right, up to a point. But successful outcomes can be very 
much based on whether we get the reactions and replies we 
need from our readers. If our writing is not fluid and well 
thought through, readers may not be bothered to make an 
effort to find out more. This presents at least three further, 
highly undesirable, outcomes:
1. Readers may walk away and go elsewhere for answers 
(this can be either internally or externally. If externally, 
it means lost business and lost goodwill; if internally, it 
means loss of face and goodwill.
2. They may not take the required action.
3. They may take the wrong action.
78 How to write effective business English
Transitional phrases help us show the relationships between 
one idea or statement and subsequent ones. They can link 
paragraphs, point towards a bigger picture and can help lead 
readers to a logical conclusion. Some transitional phrases 
(categorized by heading) are:
Addition:
– and;
– besides;
– in addition;
– also;
– equally important;
– furthermore;
– what’s more;
– similarly;
– first;
– second (etc);
– finally.
Comparison and contrast:
– but;
– yet;
– however;
– on the one hand;
– on the other hand;
– while;
– although;
Punctuation and grammar tips 79
– compared to;
– nevertheless;
– whereas.
Example:
– for example;
– for instance;
– as an illustration;
– take the case of;
– in this situation.
Purpose:
– with this in mind;
– so;
– since;
– clearly;
– for the same reason;
– that is;
– indeed.
Result or conclusion:
– because of this;
– so;
– thus;
– finally;
– in conclusion;
– consequently;
80 How to write effective business English
– as a result;
– summing up.
There are many more categories and it could be really worthwhile for you to research this topic further. Fluidity when 
writing English for business pays great dividends: you provide 
the links so that the reader does not have to work them out. 
This next example illustrates how.
ABC Ltd is a well-established manufacturing company founded in 
1999 that has decided to go for growth in its next five-year plan.
Despite a downturn in the manufacturing sector generally, 
ABC has identified two principal ways of maintaining a successful 
business.
First, management has changed the structure of the business 
by splitting its commercial department into two entities: sales 
and production. Second, it has introduced a new outcome-based 
approach to assessment, which involves staff to a greater degree 
than before.
As a result, the company has significantly improved profits as 
well as winning a prestigious customer service award.
Your checklist for action
 Present facts clearly and present a well-argued, wellsupported business case.
 Write so that readers do not have to make an effort 
to understand you or come back to you for further information, or wait for you to make things clear.
 Write so that readers are more likely to take a favourable 
view of you.
Punctuation and grammar tips 81
 Punctuation serves the useful purpose of helping readers 
read messages; and it highlights where the emphasis needs 
to go.
 Grammar helps you set out business writing into manageable sections that help readers understand your meaning.
 Identify areas of punctuation and grammar to work on.
 Fluidity helps you set out the points in a coherent way. 
All the points you make add up. Two and two are seen to 
make four in your writing, not just in your sums.
THIS PAGE 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
82
7
Writing tips for 
everyday business
Writing a date
Differing conventions
It is important to realize that there are a number of correct 
ways of writing dates in English. The UK English format 
(which most of Europe uses) is:
DD / MM / YY, where D = day, M = month, Y = year.
This is in sharp contrast with the US format, which is:
MM / DD / YY.
And both are in contrast with the format used in Japan, for 
example, which is:
YY / MM / DD.
84 How to write effective business English
Not understanding the different conventions can create immense problems. If you have to book international transport 
or hotel accommodation, or arrange deliveries, meetings and 
so on, you will know how important it is to input the correct 
dates. It can simply be a question of house style regarding the 
format you choose to be your default convention. However, you 
may need to be flexible and understand that customers may be 
using a different convention. Check if there’s any uncertainty. 
Sometimes be prepared to mirror their convention, as long as 
it’s an acceptable version that makes sense. Being in business 
should be about embracing customers’ needs, not about seeing 
them as ‘awkward’ if they do something differently.
 Examples that are all perfectly acceptable in UK English 
are:
21 January 2009;
21st January, 2009;
21 Jan 2009;
21st Jan 2009;
21/01/09.
If your house style uses the format ‘1st, 2nd, 3rd’, you may 
have spotted that the abbreviation is based on the spoken 
or written version of the word in question. So 1st stands for 
‘first’, 2nd for ‘second’, 3rd for ‘third’, and so on – placing the 
final two letters of the abbreviated word behind the number.
 As I mentioned, US English uses a month / day / year format, 
as do some other countries. In this case, you would write:
January 21 2009;
01/21/09.
This particular date is not too problematic because we know 
that there are not 21 months in a year. But where readers 
Writing tips for everyday business 85
do not understand the differences between the UK and US 
conventions, they could have problems with a date such as 
03/06/09. In the UK this denotes 3 June 2009, but in the US it 
denotes 6 March 2009.
International date format
This has been devised to make the way we write dates internationally understandable. It is based on the following format:
YYYY – MM – DD.
In this format, YYYY refers to all the digits (eg 2015), MM 
refers to the month (01 to 12) and DD refers to the day 
(01 to 31).
 When there is any doubt, it is really useful to write your 
dates in English this way.
Reading written dates out loud
If you have to read a written date out loud, I would suggest you 
say, for example, ‘the twenty-first of January, two thousand 
and nine’. But in normal office correspondence, nobody would 
expect me to write ‘the 21st of January 2009’. The place you 
might see this type of writing is in a legal document such as a 
contract.
Days of the week
In English, if you want to indicate the actual day of the week 
you can write either the full word or its abbreviation. For 
example:
86 How to write effective business English
Monday, Mon;
Tuesday, Tues;
Wednesday, Wed;
Thursday, Thurs;
Friday, Fri;
Saturday, Sat;
Sunday, Sun.
The formal convention is always to use a capital letter for the 
first letter of each day of the week. Do note that some writers 
punctuate the abbreviation with an end full stop or period; 
for example, Tues. This convention is optional.
 Take particular care over the spelling of Wednesday. Even 
native writers can have a problem with this one!
Months and their customary abbreviations
January, Jan;
February, Feb;
March, Mar;
April, Apr;
May (never abbreviated);
June, Jun (but rarely abbreviated);
July, Jul (but rarely abbreviated);
August, Aug;
September, Sept;
October, Oct;
Writing tips for everyday business 87
November, Nov;
December, Dec.
Do note:
 The first letter of each month is written as a capital.
 Some writers punctuate the abbreviation with a full stop 
at the end, but modern business practice tends to be to 
omit this.
Some confusions
Days and weeks
If you write ‘next Tuesday’, people can get confused as to 
whether you are referring to the first Tuesday that follows after 
the day you wrote this – or whether you mean a Tuesday in 
another week. So, as an example, if you write it on a Monday, 
is ‘next Tuesday’ the following day (which I would take it to 
mean), or the Tuesday of the following week? If you write 
it on a Friday, it is easier to see that it would have to be the 
Tuesday of the following week.
 ‘This coming Tuesday’ has the same meaning as ‘next 
Tuesday’. So do be careful. I know of instances where misunderstandings about this have led to missed appointments. 
Ironically, the people who misunderstand the correct use of 
the expression are the ones who can get angry. Also, imagine 
the cost if you book foreign travel for the wrong date. The best 
arrangement is always to write the precise date you mean, for 
example: ‘next Tuesday, 4th November’.
 ‘In a couple of weeks’ literally means ‘in two weeks’, as 
‘couple’ means ‘two’ in English. It is true that ‘a couple of 
weeks’ can be used in a looser sense, meaning in about two 
weeks, but it is best to check. As another example, the Dutch 
88 How to write effective business English
expression ‘paar dagen’ means a few days, but the Dutch often 
wrongly translate this into English as ‘a couple’, or ‘two’ days. 
So where orders are concerned, it is best to clarify what is 
meant in these instances.
 ‘Next Monday week’ means ‘a week from next Monday’. 
‘Over a week’ in English means ‘in more than a week’s time’. 
But non-NE writers often use the expression ‘over a week’ 
to mean in a week’s time, that is, one week from now. An 
example would be: ‘The delivery will be over a week.’ Again 
be careful if you are dealing with orders, because you can 
confuse.
 ‘A fortnight’ means two weeks. I find that many nationalities are unaware of this word, so it can be better to avoid it.
 ‘A long weekend’ means a break of three or four days that 
includes a Saturday and Sunday, and may start on a Friday 
and end on the following Monday.
Time off
In UK English, people usually refer to their ‘holidays’ where 
US English uses ‘vacation’. Time off work for holidays is 
referred to as ‘leave’; time off through illness is ‘sick leave’; 
parents’ time off from work when a baby is born is either 
‘maternity leave’ (for the mother) or ‘paternity leave’ (for the 
father).
 Time off work may be ‘paid leave’ or ‘unpaid leave’, depending on circumstances.
Public and Bank holidays
A public holiday is an official holiday for the majority of a 
state or country. In the UK, the term ‘Bank holiday’ is used 
when the public holiday falls on a weekday when banks are 
closed by law.
Writing tips for everyday business 89
 When you write about public holidays or Bank holidays 
globally, be aware that they can vary from country to country, 
usually being cultural in origin.
Time
This is a topic that you absolutely must understand how to 
write correctly in English. Things can go seriously wrong when 
different nationalities fail to understand that they may have 
differing conventions for writing times. People fail to turn up 
to meetings at the right time, they miss flights, deadlines . . . 
in short, if a matter is time bound it can go wrong. And what 
in business is not linked to time? Here are some guidelines to 
help.
UK English
All these written versions are correct in English:
The meeting starts at 09.00.
The meeting starts at 9am (or 9 am or 9 a.m.).
The meeting starts at nine o’clock in the morning.
The meeting starts at nine in the morning.
English usage includes both the 12-hour clock (morning and 
afternoon) and the 24-hour clock (especially for timetables), 
so:
09.00 means nine o’clock in the morning;
21.00 means nine o’clock in the evening.
Strangely enough, 24.00 is also 0.00 hours!
90 How to write effective business English
 If we write in English, ‘The meeting starts at half past eight,’ 
this could mean ‘The meeting starts at 08.30 or 20.30.’
 Often we will know from context which is correct. For example, if meetings are held during normal office hours, then 
half past eight in the morning is the more likely time. But say 
we work in a staggered-hours environment, then it could be a 
morning or an evening meeting. You need to clarify.
Differing conventions in different countries
Mishaps or missed meetings and other appointments all arise 
when we fail to realize that the way different countries express 
time is not standard. For example, the USA does not generally 
use the 24-hour clock (except specifically by some professions: 
for example, the military, the police, the medical profession). 
Some countries (such as Germany and the Netherlands) use a 
format to express half an hour before an hour. This is alien 
to native English writing – where half past six, for example, 
should be expressed as ‘half seven’ to the German or Dutch 
way of thinking.
 Do not underestimate how problematic failing to appreciate 
this source of misunderstanding can be. You need to ensure 
that everyone understands how to write and read times in 
English, for the sake of efficiency.
Numbers
If you are writing numbers in English, also be aware that 
different nationalities may interpret the numbers differently. 
Look how your order books could be affected – and your 
bottom line. For example, the words ‘billion’ and ‘trillion’ 
can have completely different meanings in the UK, Germany, 
France and the USA.
Writing tips for everyday business 91
 But a zillion means a large indeterminate number, so that 
expression at least is standard!
 A fairly old imperial expression you will still find on occasion is dozen. It means 12.
 You use a comma when you write a number comprising 
four or more digits. Counting from right to left, you place the 
comma after each three digits:
1,000;
10,000;
100,000;
100,000,000.
How the decimal point is written in English
‘Decimal point’ is the UK English term for the dot placed 
after the figure that represents units in a decimal fraction: for 
example, 9.6.
 This may differ from the way you express the decimal 
point in your language. You may be used to using a comma 
– for example, 9,6 – or you may express 100,000,000 as 
1000.000.000. It’s not overly confusing but it is best to be 
aware of this difference when you write in English.
Decimal points when writing monetary units 
in English
Some nationalities express their decimal currencies using 
commas where there is a decimal fraction: €1,80.
 If you are writing a tariff in English, you express this amount 
as: €1.80
 Other punctuation differences are apparent in the following 
written representation of the same number. The UK English 
version is the first of these:
92 How to write effective business English
890,123.50
890.123,50
Measurements
Do you have to write measurements in English? If you are 
writing globally, do be aware that different countries use different systems. Broadly speaking, these are called metric and 
imperial.
 The US largely uses imperial and the UK and other countries 
may use a combination. You will need to research if you are 
involved in orders that use either system. To give you an idea, 
some of the differences are as follows:
Metric system:
– length: centimetre, metre, kilometre (US spelling: meter 
etc);
– weight: gram, kilogram, tonne;
– capacity: millilitre (ml), litre (US spelling liter etc);
– temperature: Centigrade or Celsius.
Imperial system:
– length: inch, foot, yard, mile;
– weight: ounce, pound, ton;
– capacity: fluid ounce, pint, gallon;
– temperature: Fahrenheit.
Even within the imperial system, you will find that a US ton 
is not the same as a UK ton, and a US gallon is different to a 
UK gallon.
Writing tips for everyday business 93
 Temperatures are also written using different systems:
Centigrade or Celsius: freezing point of pure water 0° (degrees); 
boiling point 100°;
Fahrenheit: freezing point of pure water 32°; boiling point 
212°.
How to write addresses (general)
I deal with addressing letters and envelopes in Chapter 10. An 
aspect I would like to mention here is that UK English uses the 
expression postcodes (or postal codes) where US English refers 
to zip codes for area codes within a city, county or country. 
These codes are not used in all countries.
Your checklist for action
 When writing dates, times and measurements, one size 
does not fit all.
 Understand the conventions used by the person to whom 
you are writing.
 If you do not do this, you may miss appointments and 
delivery deadlines etc.
 Your order books may be adversely affected if you get 
dates, times and numbers wrong – your profits too.
 Write as precisely as possible to avoid misunderstandings: 
for example, 2nd January 2012.
THIS PAGE 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
94
8
Common confusions 
and how to avoid them
Common confusions for both NE and 
non-NE writers
There are some words that repeatedly cause businesses confusion. In many cases the confusion arises because different 
people within the same company may be setting their computer 
spellcheck to different varieties of English. Other confusions 
can arise from homophones. These are words that have the 
same sound but can have different meanings and spellings.
Words or spellings that commonly confuse
I now list some commonly confused words together with 
examples of correct usage.
96 How to write effective business English
Programme (UK) and program (US)
‘A programme’ is a plan of events, a radio or television broadcast or coded software instructions for a computer or other 
machine. But within the UK you will find many writers using 
‘program’ when referring to computer software.
Receive and recieve
The correct version is ‘receive’. A useful rule in English spelling 
is that after the letter ‘c’ the letter ‘e’ goes before ‘i’.
Stationary and stationery
‘Stationary’ means standing still: for example, ‘The careless 
driver crashed into a stationary car.’
 ‘Stationery’ means writing and printing materials: for 
example, ‘I have ordered new business stationery from my 
printer.’
Licence and license, practice and practise
In UK English, the nouns relating to these words end in ‘-ce’. 
The verbs end in ‘-se’. For example:
Which doctor’s practice do you go to? (practice = noun = the 
doctor’s place of work)
You should practise what you preach. (practise = verb)
In US English this difference does not exist. The ‘-ce’ ending 
can apply to nouns and verbs. For example: ‘He has a valid 
licence, so he is licenced to drive here.’
Common confusions and how to avoid them 97
Remember and remind
‘To remember’ means to be able to bring something or someone back into your mind. For example: ‘I must remember to 
update those details’ (meaning: nobody else is involved).
 ‘To remind’ means to cause or prompt someone to remember 
something. For example: ‘Please remind me to update those 
details.’
Affect and effect
‘Affect’ is a verb. For example: ‘Recession affects spending.’
 ‘Effect’ can be a verb or a noun. For example: ‘Recession 
has a negative effect on spending.’
 ‘We must effect the changes.’
Compliment and complement
‘Compliment’ is a noun or verb meaning praising or admiring.
 ‘Complement’ is a noun or verb meaning a thing that completes something else. For example:
We are always delighted to receive a compliment from a 
customer.
When dining, the right ambience complements the meal.
Loose and lose
‘Loose’ is an adjective that means not tightly packed or 
fixed. For example: ‘There is a loose connection in the wiring 
system.’
 ‘Lose’ is a verb that means cease to have, be unable to find. 
For example: ‘If we lose their parcel we will also lose their 
custom.’
98 How to write effective business English
There and their
‘There’ is an adverb meaning in that place.
 ‘Their’ is an adjective meaning belonging to them. For 
example:
The file you need is over there.
It will be their turn next.
Where, were and we’re
‘Where’ is an adverb, meaning in (or to) which place, direction 
or respect.
 ‘Were’ is a verb, the past tense of ‘to be’.
 ‘We’re’ is a contraction of ‘we are’. For example:
Where are we going on holiday?
You were at home last night and now you are at work.
We’re attending a training course today.
Your and you’re
‘Your’ means belonging to you.
 ‘You’re’ is the contraction of you are. For example:
Your bag is in the other room.
You’re expected in half an hour.
Collect and pick up
In UK English ‘collect’ means to call for and take away, to 
fetch. The verb ‘pick up’ means the same. US English uses 
‘pick up’ rather than ‘collect’ in this context.
Common confusions and how to avoid them 99
Takeaway (or take-away) and carry-out
In UK English ‘takeaway’ (or take-away) is a restaurant or 
shop selling food to be eaten away from the premises. In US 
English the term ‘carry-out’ is used for this.
When and if
Many non-native English (non-NE) writers have difficulty 
understanding the distinction between these two words. 
Generally speaking, ‘when’ means ‘at which time’ or ‘in which 
situation’ or ‘during the time that’. It has a definite feel to it, 
even though it may be in the future.
 ‘If’, on the other hand, is more tentative and hypothetical. 
It introduces a situation that is conditional: it supposes something will happen that is likely to make something else happen. 
Examples are:
If my train is on time, I will be in Paris in two hours. (UK 
English)
When my train is on time, I will be in Paris in two hours.
(Typical non-NE variant)
Native English writers would not tend to write the second 
sentence. They intuitively build in the conditional clause: if 
one thing happens (the train arrives on time), then the second 
thing will result (I will be in Paris in two hours). The second 
thing depends on the first.
 Now see if you can identify which of the following sentences 
is ‘more English’:
If it’s not a problem, I will visit you tomorrow.
When it is not a problem, I will visit you tomorrow.
100 How to write effective business English
It is the first sentence, based on the same reasoning: if the first 
condition is met (that it is not a problem) then the second 
thing will happen (I will visit you tomorrow).
 Native English writers begin sentences with ‘when’ in situations such as: ‘When my train arrives, I need (or I will need) 
to find carriage A.’
Here two situations are in parallel. The meaning is: ‘At the 
same time as the train arrives (or immediately after) I need or 
will need to find carriage A.’
May and can
The verb ‘can’ in English is used to express ability or being 
allowed to do something. It is definite in meaning. For 
example:
I can speak Spanish = I am able to speak Spanish.
Juan’s boss says he can have a day off = Juan’s boss says he is 
allowed to have a day off.
The verb ‘may’ is used to express possibility. For example, ‘I 
may learn Spanish or Mandarin Chinese but haven’t decided 
yet’ tells us that the speaker is not yet able to speak either 
language.
 ‘May’ is also used to ask permission in a polite way: for 
example, ‘May I go with you?’ or ‘May I have a cup of coffee, 
please?’ That said, it is quite normal for business peers to say or 
write ‘Can we talk about this?’ ‘Can I attend the meeting?’
Should, must and have to
‘Should’, ‘must’ and ‘have to’ are verbs that convey obligation. 
In writing ‘should’ can be interpreted as weaker in meaning 
than ‘must’ or ‘have to’. For example, if I write, ‘You should 
Common confusions and how to avoid them 101
always check your spelling before you send an e-mail’ you 
might think I am just recommending this as good practice. 
You could see it as an option, not an obligation. On the other 
hand, if I write, ‘You must always check your spelling before 
you send an e-mail,’ then I am making it very clear that this 
is not an option; it is a directive. ‘Have to’ carries the same 
weight.
Borrow and lend
If you ‘borrow’ something you take and use something that 
belongs to someone else (on the understanding that you will 
return it). For example: ‘As it’s raining, please may I borrow 
your umbrella? I’ll give it back to you tomorrow.’
 If you ‘lend’ something you give something to someone 
else to use (on the understanding that they will return it.) For 
example: ‘Has your pen broken? I’ll lend you mine until you 
get a new one.’ So you would be wrong to write: ‘I need to 
write but my pen has broken. Can I lend yours?’ The pen is 
not yours to give to someone else! You need to borrow it in 
order to use it.
Teach and learn
When someone teaches, they give knowledge or instruction 
about a subject to someone else. For example: ‘I am teaching 
you some tips about writing English for business.’
 When someone learns, they receive knowledge or instruction. 
For example: ‘You are learning how to improve your writing.’ 
So you would be wrong to write: ‘Will you learn me how to 
write?’ You are the only person who can carry out the act 
of learning! I can show you how you will learn, by teaching 
you.
102 How to write effective business English
Abbreviations and acronyms
Acronyms are intended to make business writing easier. They 
make an abbreviated word formed by the initial letters of 
other words or a compound noun. The idea is to make the 
subject easier to refer to and easier to remember.
 When you use abbreviations and acronyms, write them in 
full at the first mention, then follow with the abbreviation in 
brackets: for example, Regional Development Agency (RDA). 
People tend not to do this when an acronym is very likely 
to be recognized internationally. An example would be the 
UN (United Nations). It does depend on your target audience. 
After that first explanation, you may just use the acronym in 
the text that follows.
 By coincidence I have just received an e-mail referring to 
APAC populations. I imagined that the writer was referring 
to Asia Pacific populations . . . but decided to see if there were 
other acronyms for APAC. There certainly are! I will list just 
some:
APAC: Asia and Pacific;
APAC: Asia Pacific Advisory Committee;
APAC: Aboriginal Political Action Committee;
APAC: All People Are Customers;
APAC: Atlantic Pilotage Authority Canada;
APAC: Association Professionnelle des Agents Commerciaux 
de France (Professional Association of Commercial Agents of 
France).
Each of these groups will no doubt have it that their target 
audience will absolutely, one hundred per cent, understand 
Common confusions and how to avoid them 103
their acronym. But my experience as a consultant tells me 
otherwise!
 It does seem to me, and I am not alone, that overuse of 
acronyms can create rather than solve a problem. Also, even 
where you explain an acronym at the outset of a document, 
it can help readers if you repeat the words in full from time 
to time. You will have noticed that although I explain the 
acronym ‘non-NE’ earlier in this book, I still write it in full 
– ‘non-native English’ – on many occasions, to help reinforce 
it for you.
 Also note that overly casual abbreviations in writing – such 
as ‘no probs’ (for ‘no problems’) can annoy readers. They can 
find this sloppy, unprofessional and discourteous.
Incoterms
Some abbreviations and acronyms that you are likely to encounter are ‘incoterms’. These are commonly used trade terms 
in international trade. Two common examples are FOB (free 
on board) and EXW (ex works).
 Incoterms were first published by the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) in 1936 and have been regularly updated since. They were devised because parties to a contract 
were not always aware that terms and abbreviations used 
could have different implications in different countries. If you 
deal with sales and marketing and/or arranging transportation 
of goods to overseas markets, do research this topic further. 
You may care to visit the ICC website, as the terms can be 
subject to copyright, so you need to enquire about their use. 
Sellers and buyers need to know both obligations and risks. 
Using the right standard expressions for each market avoids 
misunderstandings and possible litigation.
104 How to write effective business English
Active and passive
As most companies today favour the active over the passive 
voice in business writing, it is important that you understand 
the difference.
 The active voice is where the subject does the action. Sentences that show this are:
The committee took action as a result.
The secretary handed the notes to the director.
The passive voice is where the subject of the active clause becomes secondary, where it is acted upon or receives the action. 
Often the word ‘by’ is added, as we can see in the following 
sentences:
Action was taken by the committee as a result.
The director was given the notes by the secretary.
In both these examples, we can still see the subjects (the committee and the secretary respectively) but they are easier to 
see in the active sentences, as they appear first. That alone 
is why it is better practice to use the active voice in business 
writing. But there are other reasons why active writing is 
better. The following, very typical, example of passive writing 
demonstrates this: ‘A decision was taken to take the matter 
further.’
 When readers see a sentence such as this, they can be utterly 
confused. Who took the decision? In operational terms, what 
happens next? That is a problem; we cannot know from the 
context. We need more information – yet experience shows 
that people often do not ask for that information.
Common confusions and how to avoid them 105
Nominalization
Another continuing theme in this series concerns a mistaken 
belief held by many business writers. They think they must 
embellish or over-complicate their writing. Even when they 
speak articulately and get to the point effectively, they seem to 
feel that to write simply and clearly is a sign of weakness.
 Sometimes they cannot break away from old habits where 
they correlate high and complex word count with high intellectual performance. Historically, academic writing, for example, uses nominalization, in which nouns are used in place 
of verbs. This can serve a useful purpose in writing about concepts. But in business it can make for pomposity and annoy 
readers. It can obscure messages and use up valuable time for 
writer and reader alike.
 Here are some examples. The nominalization form is first, 
followed by the clearer verb form:
give clarification on this = clarify this;
in recognition of the fact = recognizing that;
during the installation process = when installing;
we are involved with negotiations = we are negotiating.
The verb form gives more energy: we know that something 
is happening in each case and that people are involved. See 
the contrast with nominalization, where users appear to hide 
behind language. That is never a great idea in business.
Your checklist for action
 Be aware of the common confusions described in this 
chapter.
106 How to write effective business English
 Do not assume that your reader knows the common terms 
or abbreviations you use, so write in a way that everyone 
will understand.
 Define the terms you will be using and check that your 
readers use the same ones.
 Make sure you write plain English, using words 
precisely.
 Use active rather than passive writing where appropriate.
9
E-mail
General
E-mail is by far the predominant form of business writing 
today; indeed, inestimable billions of e-mails are sent worldwide each day. Even if we disregard the high percentage of 
spam that may be filtered out, the numbers received far eclipse 
the number of letters sent. Conservative estimates suggest that 
upwards of 75 per cent of our business writing is e-mails – yet 
very few companies offer training (let alone specific advice) 
on how to do this.
Let’s just take a look at your business. How many e-mails in 
English do you write in a week at work? Do you treat them all 
as professional, corporate communication? If you hesitate, the 
chances are that you do not. This then raises the question: if 
not, why not? Your readers (customers) and your competitors 
may be ahead of you on this. Also, do you check each time 
you use e-mail that it is the right medium? Would a phone call 
or face-to-face conversation do the job more effectively?
108 How to write effective business English
 It is apparent that overuse of e-mail creates a great deal of 
inefficiency in the workplace. There is little doubt that we are 
also losing many traditional problem-solving skills as a direct 
result. It is becoming such a pressing business concern that I 
need to mention it here.
 When it comes to writing e-mails in English for global 
business, other factors need to be addressed as well. Nonnative English writers often write over-concisely, to minimize 
the risk of making mistakes, though this can be at the cost of 
not making complete sense. And if your formatted message 
is to be transmitted to a hand-held device (for example, 
Blackberry or smartphone), then it can be indecipherable 
when your chosen features such as font, colours, bullet points, 
italics, underlining or use of bold have all been lost.
 As e-mails are rapidly replacing letters, it is essential to 
maintain standards in these. They are equally important and 
equally part of your corporate communication.
The rise and rise of e-mail
I posed questions in the last section because you need to 
understand how to use and write for this fast-growing medium. 
Two fundamental findings emerge:
 E-mails are written by virtually all levels of staff in all types 
of company. Largely gone are the days of the traditional 
secretary: in a sense we are almost all secretaries while 
we are at work. If we are writing English in business, we 
generally have to design our writing ourselves.
 Looking at the statistics, it’s easy to see how such vast email usage can lead to information overload. Therefore it 
is crucial to maintain quality and make things as easy as 
possible for the reader, so that your e-mails stand out – 
E-mail 109
and for the right reasons rather than because your English 
is wrong.
E-mail scenarios to watch out for
Sending too quickly
We all do it: we type our messages and we click on the send 
button without checking them first. Speed of response can seem 
like a great idea but can create particular problems if you are 
a non-native English writer writing in English. Spelling and 
grammar mistakes, abrupt tone, overreacting or simply not 
answering questions can all make readers judge your e-mails 
in a negative light. Take the time you need to get it right.
Draft folder
So if you are really pressured and know you cannot complete 
your e-mail in English by return, think about drafting a reply. 
Move it into your draft folder until you can complete it, maybe 
after asking someone who is fluent in English for help.
CC or cc
This stands for ‘carbon copy’. Not every non-native English 
speaker knows what it means. The cc field is for copying your 
e-mail to other recipients so that they see the same message 
as the main addressee. If you use a cc internally within your 
company, it’s not generally a problem when those listed in 
the cc field see others’ e-mail addresses. But where your cc 
field includes the e-mail addresses of external recipients, you 
may get into trouble because of privacy and data protection 
laws. Spammers can also use these lists – and forwarded email addresses can harbour viruses.
110 How to write effective business English
BCC or bcc
This stands for ‘blind carbon copy’. It means that the copy of 
the e-mail message is sent to a recipient whose address cannot 
be seen by other recipients. This is useful where confidentiality 
is required.
Multi-lingual and other e-mail threads
When it comes to business communication, there is nothing 
more frustrating, confusing or even downright rude than someone e-mailing you a message you literally cannot understand! 
Just because you are both corresponding in English, it is not 
suddenly going to mean that your recipient understands your 
language. This might seem obvious, yet the widespread use of 
e-mail threads can make a mockery of this need for clarity.
 Read the following e-mail thread starting from bottom to 
top, to see how a multi-lingual thread can lead to confusion.
De: Paul Lederer
À: Harry Brown
Objet : Lead Project A
Hi Harry
Pierre Marceau passed me your request. We’ve contacted Pilar 
Lopez as she’s the project manager for this and you’ll find her 
e-mail on this below.
Kind regards
Paul
E-mail 111
From: Pilar Lopez
To: Paul Lederer
Subject: Lead Project A
Paul,
Consignalo para llamarme.
gracias
Pilar
De: Paul Lederer
À: Pilar Lopez
Objet : Lead Project A
Pilar,
I think you’re probably the best person to deal with the question posed below. Am I right? I know that as you are new to the 
company, you have difficulty writing in English, so feel free to 
reply to this in Spanish as I’ll understand.
Regards,
Paul
De: Pierre Marceau
À: Paul Lederer
Objet: Lead Project A
Paul,
Je n’ai pas les informations dont Harry a besoin. Peux-tu 
l’aider ?
Merci
Pierre
112 How to write effective business English
If I tell you that Harry Brown speaks only English, can you 
see how unhelpful this thread is going to be? First of all, who 
is dealing with Harry’s request? It seems to be being passed 
from one person to another but Harry does not know that. 
The fact that Pilar Lopez has ultimately helpfully suggested 
(in Spanish) that Harry call her, is not something he is going 
to see from the thread. After all, it is Pierre who understands 
Spanish, not Harry. Also, why is Pilar suggesting that he give 
her a call, when he had asked Pierre for details by e-mail?
 How is Harry going to feel? Annoyed? Yes. Alienated? Yes. 
Is the matter resolved? No. Harry will have to make further 
enquiries. To avoid this alienation (of which the sender is 
normally unaware, as it is rarely intentional) you could try 
these alternatives:
 Be both courteous and efficient by summarizing, in 
English, the main facts of the message thread.
 Avoid multi-lingual threads altogether.
 Therefore start each message afresh.
From: Harry Brown
To: Pierre Marceau
Subject: Lead Project A
Hi Pierre,
I understand you have the full brief on this global project and I’m 
wondering if you could e-mail this over to me for familiarization, 
please.
Many thanks,
Harry
E-mail 113
Embedding responses
Whether or not you embed responses can be a question of 
knowing how well this method works both for you and your 
recipients. Some people cannot imagine working any other 
way. For others it is actually stressful, especially where they 
are the people left to weave together perhaps five differing 
views, all embedded into their original e-mail.
 Have you ever had to figure out what the overall picture is, 
at the end of a complicated trail of embedded messages? If you 
are dealing with messages in your native language it can be 
quite a challenge. Imagine then how much worse this will be 
where you have to try to interpret broken or variant English 
too. There comes a point at which embedding messages can 
become ‘hiding messages’. Quit before you get to that point 
– and start a new e-mail!
 This example shows you how tricky it can be to decipher 
embedded text. Let’s say your e-mail asks four people in four 
different countries for their observations. You suggest they 
each embed their comments using a different colour. So Alexei 
in Russia chooses dark blue, Kentaro in Japan chooses teal, 
Cora in the Netherlands chooses red (and chooses to use 
capitals as well), and Carmen in Chile chooses brown.
 Can you already see the problems that this course of action may present? It’s going to become a very complicated 
procedure. I pity the originator who will have to try to draw 
the strands together to make sense. Surely it would be simpler 
to send a separate e-mail to each of the four? Incidentally, can 
you see why Cora’s choice may lead to further complications? 
I know red is an auspicious colour in China and no doubt 
in other countries too. But be aware that in many countries, 
red embedded print is used to correct written mistakes or 
make criticisms. Readers may literally see a comment in red 
as a problem – even if it is actually meant to be helpful and 
positive.
114 How to write effective business English
 Cora has also chosen to use capitals. According to accepted 
e-mail etiquette, capitals throughout an e-mail signify that 
you are SHOUTING. Cora’s comments could then appear 
to be criticisms, although she may never realize this or the 
fact that she might be offending readers as a result. So please 
do evaluate when and how to embed messages and when to 
avoid this writing technique.
Structure your e-mails
E-mail is largely viewed as a form of communication that is 
halfway between conversation and formal business writing. 
Many people feel this means they can type their ideas:
 in the English words that just occur to them;
 in no particular order;
 with no stated objectives;
 with no attention to punctuation, grammar or any other 
quality control;
 with no attention to layout.
Yet feedback repeatedly suggests that readers do not like 
reading solid blocks of text. What’s more, if they don’t like 
the look of a piece of writing, they may intuitively feel they 
are not going to like its content. This feeling can even go so 
far as to prevent them bothering to read it.
 When it comes to our personal e-mail, and to the fastgrowing world of blogging, we can relax to an extent. These 
are areas where we can let our writing just capture our 
thoughts, more or less exactly in the English in which they 
spill out (though we still have to observe the constraints of 
E-mail 115
the law, including libel etc). Readers are more likely to have 
the time and the inclination to read our outpourings – but this 
approach is definitely best avoided for business e-mail.
 So my tips apply even more if you are writing English for a 
cross-cultural audience. Use an easy-to-read font, design good 
layout and enter some carriage returns when you type, so that 
your words are not bunched up and thereby difficult to read.
 Leave some white space by using paragraphs for new topics; 
people will thank you for it because, by and large, people like 
white space. Structure every e-mail to help readers (especially 
those who may not be proficient in English) see exactly what 
your points are and where the e-mail is leading: that is, its 
purpose and who does what and when.
 If you do not make the purpose, the time frame and any 
call to action clear, then people might not respond. And, of 
course, if your e-mail has no purpose, then you should not 
write it!
Designing how you write e-mails
Here are some guidelines to help you structure your e-mails 
well.
Corporate communication
Is there a corporate style regarding layout? Do you have a 
corporate font? Is the font you use easily readable, such as 
Arial, Tahoma, and Verdana? Is the point size you use large 
enough? (12 point or above is often recommended). Don’t 
just use lower case alone: corporate e-mail should still be 
in standardized English. Are you using your spellcheck and 
grammar check – and have you selected the correct variety of 
English?
116 How to write effective business English
Tone and appropriateness
Probably most reader complaints about e-mails relate to poor 
tone and inappropriate subject matter. Regarding the first 
point, be aware that you need to introduce the right tone for 
your target audience in each e-mail, as we have seen earlier.
 Check whether you are using the right style of English:
 Is ‘Hi’ is the right opening salutation?
 Or should you use ‘Hello’ or ‘Dear’ followed by the 
recipient’s first name or title and surname?
 Or is it sufficient simply to use their first name alone; for 
example: ‘Paolo’? (Some would find this approach curt.)
While I find that most companies I work with do use ‘Hi’ as 
the default salutation, this is not a ‘one size fits all’ solution. 
When in doubt, using mirroring techniques can be useful in 
cross-cultural situations. By this I mean that, where feasible, 
you try replying to readers in a similar way to the way they 
address you.
 Always remember that if you are not prepared to say a 
particular thing face to face, or if you would not be happy for 
other people to see your e-mail (including people you may not 
know about), then do not write it!
Use a good subject heading; refresh it 
regularly
Why do people fail to choose meaningful subject headings 
for their e-mails? ‘Update on Project A at end of week 30’ is 
always going to be a better heading than simply ‘Project A’. 
But then what should you do in subsequent e-mails? Refresh 
the headings, so that your messages always reflect the current 
E-mail 117
picture. For example, is it efficient to keep that heading about 
week 30 when you are actually discussing progress at week 
40?
 Yet ineffective writers do this sort of thing time after time. It 
can be because they are preoccupied with writing the correct 
English in the main body of text but overlook the fact that 
subject headings still have to be updated.
Regularly refresh e-mails
I have discussed the problems that can arise from multilingual 
e-mail threads. Let me just reinforce the message now: try to 
get into the habit of stopping e-mail threads, maybe after the 
third message. Start a new e-mail and if you need to carry information over, just recap the key points.
Before you send
 Reread your e-mail and check that your communication 
in English is correct on every level.
 Make sure it does not include previous e-mail threads 
that may not be appropriate to forward on to the new 
reader(s).
 Have you included any attachments? Are they in English 
too?
 If you have copied somebody in, have you explained 
why?
 Is the subject heading good?
 Is the e-mail easy to read (font style and size etc)?
118 How to write effective business English
After sending
Check after the event (a day, two days, a week) that you have 
achieved the outcome you want. Check that the English you 
have written has worked for your needs.
Your checklist for action
Before you press send, ask yourself:
 Is e-mail the right communication medium? Is your English 
fit for purpose? E-mail is corporate communication and 
your English has to be professional.
 If you are not prepared to say your message face to face 
or let it be seen by others, you should not send it.
 Would it be a problem for you or your organization if this 
e-mail is forwarded in its entirety to other people without 
your knowledge?
 Did you systematically read and cover the points in the 
e-mail to which you are replying?
 Have you run a spellcheck and grammar check, using the 
correct variety of English?
 Have you developed the right rapport with your readers 
and met their business and cultural expectations?
 Have you checked your meanings?
10
Letter writing
General
The way companies have to write business English for customers today varies greatly from the way they would have 
written years ago. It is essential to realize how customers’ expectations have changed. As you have seen in earlier chapters 
of this book, you can (and must) innovate and discard some 
of the things you may have been taught years ago. Yet there 
are still certain conventions that you should follow for your 
letters to achieve your objectives.
First of all, identify the purpose of your letter and its possible 
impact on your reader:
 Is it to inform? If so, why?
 Is it to instigate action? If so, what? Who by? How? When 
by?
 How do you want the reader to feel when reading your 
letter? Can your tone assist this?
120 How to write effective business English
Second, identify the format. Do you use templates and a 
standard font? Has this been assessed for readability? For 
example, Arial, Tahoma, Times New Roman and Verdana 
(amongst others) can be more readable than some cursive 
fonts, especially for non-NE readers. How compatible is the 
font you use with other systems? Does the font size fall within 
the routinely used 10–15-point range? Many consider that 12 
point offers optimum readability – though you still need to 
consider the needs of those with visual impairment and other 
needs, and adapt your writing accordingly.
Do you use a subject heading above your main text? Do you 
use a reference or code? An informative subject heading can 
engage your reader’s attention from the start. It also helps you 
identify the point of your letter. Customize it if you can. Even 
the use of the word ‘your’, as in ‘Re: your contract XYZ’, is 
more reader-friendly than ‘Re: contract XYZ’. (Incidentally, 
you do not need to use ‘Re:’ at all; it is a question of house 
style.)
 Third, identify how well your letters work. Try to get in 
the habit of asking yourself questions such as these each time:
 Did I achieve the right result from this letter?
 Or was there a problem? Why was that? Was it because of 
the English I used? What should I have written?
 Did I get no result when I had expected one? Why was 
that? Should I use English differently next time I write?
An example of a letter asking for 
information
This series is not designed to give you writing templates, so 
what follows is just an outline example of writing a letter in 
English. Even within the UK there are differing conventions 
Letter writing 121
as to where to place the date and address on a letter, and what 
salutations and endings to use, amongst other considerations. 
Other countries will naturally have differing conventions too. 
So once again, one size does not fit all and you would need to 
adapt the outline according to your chosen house style.
How to set out a business letter in 
English
Your company name and contact details
Addressee’s name and job title
Addressee’s company or organization name
Number or name of building
Name of street or road
Post town
Postcode (UK addresses)
County, district or state
Area code or zip code (US addresses)
Country
Date
Reference number
Opening salutation (with or without a comma, depending on 
house style)
Heading
Main body of text
Closing salutation (with or without a comma, depending on house 
style)
Name of writer
Position in organization
Enc. (refers to enclosures, if there are any)
122 How to write effective business English
Now let’s look at the outline in practice. This is quite a standard letter from one company to another, asking another for 
some further information regarding a proposed project.
Version 1
This is where the writer does not know the name of the person 
they are writing to:
The Managing Director
Trans-Continent Projects Ltd
21-24 Any Street
Anytown
AB3 4CD
UK
16 September 2009
Your reference: RP/01/1220
Dear Sir or Madam
Your proposed rail projects
We understand that you are launching several rail projects over the 
next 10 years and are looking for companies who can assist you.
 As a company with leading expertise in this area, we would 
be very interested in the concession you propose to award a 
company for the design and implementation of the necessary 
railway tracks. For this reason, we would be grateful if you could 
forward us further details in this connection.
Yours faithfully
Per Smidt
Director
Smidt Holdings
Enc. Please find our company brochure enclosed, as an introduction 
to our company.
Letter writing 123
Note that ‘Yours faithfully’ is the UK English convention. 
In US English you will find such a letter could end with 
‘Sincerely’ or ‘Best regards’ or ‘Yours truly’. Note also that 
‘Yours faithfully’ should be used in UK English only when 
you do not know the name of the addressee; see below for the 
convention to observe when you know their name.
Version 2
If you know the person’s name you should use it in your 
opening salutation: for example, ‘Dear Mr Smith’ (or Mrs 
Smith, Ms Smith, Miss Smith). This is the formal use of their 
surname. Or you can write ‘Dear Yusuf’ (or Sara etc); this is 
the informal use of their first name. When you end the letter 
you write ‘Yours sincerely’ rather than ‘Yours faithfully’.
 Where possible, try to ascertain the name of the person 
to whom you are writing. Naturally, some situations will always stay formal and may even adhere to the ‘Dear sir or 
madam’ formula. But as relationship building can be crucial 
to business success, it is really worthwhile personalizing your 
letter writing.
Open punctuation
You or your company choose whether you use open punctuation in business letters today. This simply means that you 
can have a comma after the opening salutation (‘Dear . . .’), or 
you can omit it. And the same applies to your sign-off (‘Yours 
. . .’). But whichever option you choose, you should ensure 
that your usage is consistent in both the salutation and the 
sign-off.
124 How to write effective business English
Outline letter confirming a booking
The need to use different styles for different letters is highlighted elsewhere in this series. But you may find it helpful to 
see an example, this time just the main body of text of a letter. 
I have used a hotel example, as the language of global tourism 
tends to be predominantly English.
Dear Mrs Smith
We are pleased to confirm your reservation
 Thank you very much for sending us details regarding 
your proposed stay. We are pleased to confirm the following 
reservation:
Guest: Mrs Jane Smith
Arrival date: 14 August 2009
Departure date: 16 August 2009
Number of rooms: 1
Room category: double room, non-smoking, first floor
Room rate: summer special as agreed, inc VAT
Reservation number: 007
Your credit card guarantees the room for you.
 The room will be ready at 3.00 pm on the day of your arrival 
and remains at your disposal until 12.00 noon on the day of your 
departure. It is our policy to charge a 90% cancellation fee for 
no-show guests, but there is no charge where we receive your 
cancellation in writing within 24 hours before the date of your 
arrival.
 We look forward to welcoming you to our hotel and hope you 
will have a very pleasant stay.
Yours sincerely,
Denis Paphides
General Manager
Hotel Beau Rivage
Letter writing 125
Note that in UK English ‘ground floor’ means the floor of a 
building at ground level. The first floor means the level (storey) 
above this. In many countries ‘first floor’ means the ground 
floor (US English observes this convention).
Stay ahead or stay behind
Although I have set out some standard formats, I demonstrate 
throughout this series of books that there is rarely just one 
correct style of writing in English. As circumstances change, 
we need to adapt and create new designs to work for us and 
for our readers.
 Here is an extract from a letter that quite ‘wowed’ me when 
I first received it. It was a mailshot from a design agency.
Dear Mrs Talbot
How can I help?
We value our customers and we make it our duty to understand 
their needs and requirements so that we can help them to make 
their businesses work even better.
Can we do that for you?
Investing a small amount of your valuable time in a brief appointment is all that I ask of you to enable me to understand your 
business needs, and offer you helpful suggestions as to how you 
could reduce costs, at the same time as taking your business 
forward.
Yours sincerely
Signature and company name
126 How to write effective business English
Although there was not a great deal of text, I was impressed 
just by the look and feel of what was there. The simplicity 
of the message and the development of a two-way relationship (between me and them) made impact, especially as most 
companies were not writing that way at that time. This agency 
achieved this by using creative sub-headings and by writing 
‘I’, ‘we’ and ‘you’ – and yes, it worked: I bought from them. 
It is an example of how innovative writing in English can win 
new business.
 As I have said earlier, your teachers of English might have 
said, ‘No, you can’t write like that at work.’ What I am saying is, ‘Yes, actually, you can!’ It can make all the difference 
between staying ahead in business and staying behind!
Specific tips about addressing letters
Always check the spelling of the name of the person you are 
writing to and their correct job title. We know that readers 
are quickly (and justifiably) offended when their personal 
details are incorrect. It can be difficult, though, if you do 
not know whether a foreign or unfamiliar name relates to a 
male or female. Ideally, make enquiries; maybe someone else 
will know. Or you could use the person’s full name at the 
beginning of the letter – for example, ‘Dear Chris Palmer’ – to 
avoid embarrassment or offence.
Titles to use when addressing people
Standard titles used to address people in English are:
Mr (after which you write an adult male’s name, whether 
single or married);
Master (after which you write a male child’s name);
Letter writing 127
Mrs (after which you write a married female’s name);
Ms (after which you write the name of an adult female who 
may or may not be married);
Miss (after which you write the name of a female child or an 
unmarried female).
Years ago, it was the practice to write ‘Mr.’ and ‘Mrs.’ punctuated with a period or full stop. This punctuation highlighted 
the fact that the words were abbreviations of the words 
‘mister’ and ‘mistress’ respectively. Common practice today is 
to write both words with open punctuation: ‘Mr’ and ‘Mrs’ 
– without a full stop.
 Another title in common use is ‘Dr’. It is used for both 
male and female medical doctors, as well as for postgraduates 
with a Doctor of Philosophy degree (PhD or DPhil). So, for 
example, you write ‘Dear Dr Smith’, and there is no indicator 
whether Dr Smith is male or female. Some languages do build 
this in. For example, the German ‘Herr Doktor’ translates as 
‘Mr Doctor’ in English, or ‘Frau Doktor’ translates as ‘Mrs 
Doctor’. For some unknown reason, English does not make 
this distinction.
 Take care to spell names correctly too. Get a name wrong 
and the chances are you will find out the hard way: your 
recipients may complain to you or about you. There may 
also be commercial implications if compliance-related documentation has wrong details. The repercussions can be 
serious and costly on many levels.
Addressing envelopes
When you send a letter, the envelope can be the first point of 
contact with the customer, especially if you mark it ‘Personal’. 
128 How to write effective business English
So be professional in the way you address it. We know people 
can return junk mail unopened. But sometimes there is mail 
that they need to see – yet they send this back unopened too, 
simply because their details are wrong on the envelope. They 
refuse to accept it until the sender corrects the mistakes.
 You normally write addresses as follows:
Addressee’s name and job title
Addressee’s company or organization name
Number or name of building
Name of street or road
Post town
Postcode (UK addresses)
County, district or state
Area code or zip code (US addresses)
Country
CVs and covering letters
It is a good idea to have a regularly updated CV, even if you 
are not actually applying for another job. It helps you see the 
milestones you have achieved and the personal attributes you 
have enhanced. It also helps you see yourself as a brand: that 
is to say, what makes you special over and above the next 
person.
 Here is a CV example you could adapt. It uses the UK and 
US convention, and starts with the person’s current or most 
recent employment. Some countries expect the list to start 
with the earliest employment details and may expect different 
formatting.
 Include only facts that can be verified, and make sure you 
accurately describe your personal attributes. You must be able 
to deliver what you say you can.
Letter writing 129
CV
John Smith
Home address: (ensure you use the correct style)
Telephone: (landline and mobile; include international dialling 
codes if necessary)
E-mail address: (details as appropriate)
Key strengths
Integrity and a strategic, creative thinker;
Logistics expertise at middle-manager level (able to give practical 
guidance covering legal, insurance and health and safety issues);
Strong verbal and written communication skills;
Clear time management and prioritization skills;
Responsive to change: help companies constantly to review 
operations and improve efficiency.
Career summary
October 2009 – present: XYZ Ltd Key Account Manager
Key achievements:
Secured and developed 30 new key accounts;
Successfully led process design, implementation and client relationship management arising from these;
Identified, advised on and managed new distribution business 
opportunities/ services.
July 2002 – September 2009: ABC Inc Project Manager
Key achievements:
Advised on and managed re-engineering services to meet changing 
needs and new service capabilities.
130 How to write effective business English
Professional membership
Affiliate Member of the Institute of Transport and Logistics
Education, training and other qualifications
(Fill in as appropriate, starting with most recent.)
Other skills
Computing: competent in Word, Excel, Outlook, PowerPoint;
Languages: fluent in English, Spanish and Russian;
Driving: clean current driving licence.
References
Available on request.
Note that UK English uses the term ‘mobile’ or ‘mobile 
phone’ where US English uses ‘cell’ or ‘cellphone’. As I mentioned in Chapter 2, the term ‘handy’, which is used in continental Europe, is unlikely to be understood by most English 
speakers.
Covering letter with CV
When applying for a job, send a good covering letter with 
your CV, as this can improve your chances of getting to interview stage. Do not use a standard letter; customize it for your 
prospective employer. Make every effort to send the letter and 
your CV to the correct person, spelling their details and job 
title correctly, and to the right address.
 Incidentally, you may have seen the expression ‘To whom it 
may concern’ and wonder when to use it. It is used where the 
Letter writing 131
writer does not know who the recipient will be. For example, 
if you are a contractor leaving one assignment, the company 
for whom you have worked may give you an open reference 
such as this:
To whom it may concern
Fred Jones designed and successfully implemented a software 
programme company-wide for us from June to September this 
year. He delivered the programme on time and within budget, and 
we found him to be a consummate professional at all times.
Gert Braun
Brunner BV
Once you have correctly addressed your letter, then:
 Say where you saw the job advertised.
 Show how you have done some research on the company 
(refer to something relevant on its website, such as its 
values).
 Answer the question ‘Why should you get the job?’ by 
highlighting the special skills you can bring.
 Mention any special factors that the company should take 
into account.
 Show what you expect from a prospective employer as 
much as what they can expect from you.
 State your availability.
132 How to write effective business English
 Run a final spellcheck and grammar check; after all, if 
English is required in the job, make sure yours is perfect 
in your application!
Depending on culture and personality, people tend even in their 
native language either to understate their suitability for any 
vacancy being advertised or in some cases to over-embellish 
it. The following non-native English writers’ descriptions of 
their suitability as job candidates definitely fall into the second 
category:
An accountant: ‘I dispose of untouchable integrity and 
corresponding success and my brilliance is impressive.’
A marketing manager: ‘My knowledge, ratio and 
outstanding attributions decide that my future will be 
with your company.’
These are examples of what I term ‘over-Englishing’: the 
desire to outdo native English writers with an exaggerated 
use of language that deviates from the original. It is in essence 
an imaginary language – and in the ultimate analysis, it has no 
meaning. I could rewrite what I think they mean to say (and 
this is not at all clear, probably not even in their own minds) 
as follows:
An accountant: ‘A successful professional with integrity, 
I will be pleased to use my expertise in the post 
advertised.’
A marketing manager: ‘I am looking to take my career to 
the next level and have every confidence that my excellent 
credentials, expert knowledge and skills base will deliver 
what you seek in this post.’
Letter writing 133
Your checklist for action
 Know how to design a letter well.
 Know what you want the letter to achieve; enable the 
result you need.
 Write your recipient’s personal details correctly.
 Use the correct salutation and sign-off.
 Edit so that the reader sees your key messages clearly.
 Build in rapport and politeness.
 Represent yourself and your company well.
 Do not make assumptions.
 Use spellcheck and grammar check (in the correct variety 
of English) before issuing your letter.
 Do not embellish or over-complicate your writing to 
create impact. It could work against you.
THIS PAGE 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
134
Conclusion
By now you will be feeling more confident about writing great 
English for today’s business. And you will be more competent 
to do so. You will be closing the skill gap between where you 
were before you read the book and where you are now – and 
where you want to be.
 Writing English for business is a key and – this is crucially 
important – a highly transferable skill. Carry on closing the 
gap, and see how many opportunities you will create for 
yourself. Take these tips on board, so that everything you 
write from now on is likely to be good – and you will actually 
keep on getting better. Congratulations on making a good 
start.
 The Preface to this book explains how the series fits together. 
With this book and the others in the series you will have a 
comprehensive and invaluable reference guide for almost all 
aspects of your business English writing needs.