Acknowledgments 
My thanks for their helpful suggestions go to Eamonn Butler and 
John O'Sullivan. For assistance with the preparation, I thank Tom 
Lees, Steve Masty, Sam Nguyen and Xander Stephenson. I also 
thank all those who have aided and encouraged this work, not 
least the publisher and editor. 
Introduction 
Sound reasoning is the basis of winning at argument. Logical 
fallacies undermine arguments. They are a source of enduring 
fascination, and have been studied for at least two-and-a-half 
millennia. Knowledge of them is useful, both to avoid those used 
inadvertently by others and even to use a few with intent to 
deceive. The fascination and the usefulness which they impart, 
however, should not be allowed to conceal the pleasure which 
identifying them can give. 
I take a very broad view of fallacies. Any trick of logic or language which allows a statement or a claim to be passed off as 
something it is not has an admission card to the enclosure 
reserved for fallacies. Very often it is the case that what appears 
to be a supporting argument for a particular contention does not 
support it at all. Sometimes it might be a deduction drawn from 
evidence which does not sustain it. 
Many of the fallacies are committed by people genuinely 
ignorant of logical reasoning, the nature of evidence, or what 
counts as relevant material. Others, however, might be committed by persons bent on deception. If there is insufficient force 
behind the argument and the evidence, fallacies can add enough 
weight to carry them through. 
This book is intended as a practical guide for those who wish 
to win arguments. It also teaches how to perpetrate fallacies with 
mischief at heart and malice aforethought. I have described each 
X How to Win Every Argument 
fallacy, given examples of it, and shown why it is fallacious. After 
any points of general interest concerning the history or occurrence of the fallacy, I have given the reader recommendations on 
how and where the fallacy may be used to deceive with maximum effect. 
I have listed the fallacies alphabetically, although a full classification into the five major types of fallacy may be found at the 
end of the book. It is well worth the reader's trouble to learn the 
Latin tags wherever possible. When an opponent is accused of 
perpetrating something with a Latin name it sounds as if he is 
suffering from a rare tropical disease. It has the added effect of 
making the accuser seem both erudite and authoritative. 
In the hands of the wrong person this is more of a weapon 
than a book, and it was written with that wrong person in mind. 
It will teach such a person how to argue effectively, even dishonestly at times. In learning how to argue, and in the process of 
practising and polishing each fallacy, the user will learn how to 
identify it and will build up an immunity to it. A working 
knowledge of these fallacies provides a vocabulary for talking 
about politicians and media commentators. Replacing the vague 
suspicion of double-dealing will be the identification of the 
precise crimes against logic which have been committed. 
Knowledge of fallacies can thus provide a defensive as well as 
an offensive capability. Your ability to spot them coming will 
enable you to defend yourself against their use by others, and 
your own dexterity with them will enable you to be both successful and offensive, as you set about the all-important task of 
making arguments go your way. 
Madsen Pirie 
Abusive analogy 
The fallacy of abusive analogy is a highly specialized version of 
the ad hominem argument. Instead of the arguer being insulted 
directly, an analogy is drawn which is calculated to bring him 
into scorn or disrepute. The opponent or his behaviour is compared with something which will elicit an unfavourable response 
toward him from the audience. 
Smith has proposed we should go on a sailing holiday, though he knows 
as much about ships as an Armenian bandleader does. 
(Perhaps you do not need to know all that much for a sailing holiday. 
Smith can always learn. The point here is that the comparison is 
deliberately drawn to make him look ridiculous. There may even be 
several Armenian bandleaders who are highly competent seamen.) 
The analogy may even be a valid one, from the point of view of 
the comparison being made. This makes it more effective, but no 
less fallacious, since the purpose is to introduce additional, 
unargued, material to influence a judgement. 
If science admits no certainties, then a scientist has no more certain 
knowledge of the universe than does a Hottentot running through the 
bush. 
(This is true, but is intended as abuse so that the hearer will be more 
sympathetic to the possibility of certain knowledge.) 
The fallacy is a subtle one because it relies on the associations 
which the audience make from the picture presented. Its perpetrator need not say anything which is untrue; he can rely on 
the associations made by the hearer to fill in the abuse. The 
abusive analogy is a fallacy because it relies on this extraneous 
material to influence the argument. 
2 How to Win Every Argument 
In congratulating my colleague on his new job, let me point out that he 
has no more experience of it than a snivelling boy has on his first day at 
school. 
(Again, true. But look who's doing the snivelling.) 
While politicians delight in both abuse and analogies, there 
are surprisingly few good uses of the abusive analogy from that 
domain. A good one should have an element of truth in its 
comparison, and invite abuse by its other associations. All other 
things being equal, it is easier to be offensive by making a 
comparison which is untrue, than to be clever by using elements 
of truth. Few have reached the memorable heights of Daniel 
O'Connell's description of Sir Robert Peel: 
...a smile like the silver plate on a coffin. 
(True, it has a superficial sparkle, but it invites us to think of something rather cold behind it.) 
The venom-loaded pens of literary and dramatic critics are 
much more promising springs from which abusive analogies can 
trickle forth. 
He moved nervously about the stage, like a virgin awaiting the Sultan. 
(And died after the first night.) 
Abusive analogies take composition. If you go forth without 
preparation, you will find yourself drawing from a well-used 
stock of comparisons which no longer have the freshness to 
conjure up vivid images. Describing your opponents as being like 
'straightlaced schoolmistresses' or 'sleazy strip-club owners' will 
not lift you above the common herd. A carefully composed piece 
of abusive comparison, on the other hand, can pour ridicule on 
Accent 3 
the best-presented case you could find: 'a speech like a Texas 
longhorn; a point here, a point there, but a whole lot of bull in 
between'. 
Accent 
The fallacy of accent depends for its effectiveness on the fact that 
the meaning of statements can change, depending on the stress 
put on the words. The accenting of certain words or phrases can 
give a meaning quite different from that intended, and can add 
implications which are not part of the literal meaning: 
Light your cigarette. 
(Without accent it looks like a simple instruction or invitation.) 
Light your cigarette. 
(Rather than the tablecloth, or whatever else you feel in the mood to 
burn.) 
Light your cigarette. 
(Instead of everyone else's.) 
Light your cigarette. 
(Instead of sticking it in your ear.) 
Even with so simple a phrase, a changed accent can give a 
markedly changed meaning. 
We read that men are born equal, but that is no reason for giving them 
all an equal vote. 
4 How to Win Every Argument 
(Actually, we probably read that men are born equal. Born equal 
carries an implication that they do not remain equal for long.) 
Accent is obviously a verbal fallacy, for the most part. 
Emphasis in print is usually given by italics, and those who supply 
them to a quotation from someone else are supposed to say so. 
In speech, however, unauthorized accents intrude more readily, 
bringing unauthorized implications in their wake. The fallacy lies 
with the additional implications introduced by emphasis. They 
form no part of the statement accepted, and have been brought 
in surreptitiously without supporting argument. 
The fallacy of accent is often used to make a prohibition more 
permissive. By stressing the thing to be excluded, it implies that 
other things are admissible. 
Mother said we shouldn't throw stones or the windows. 
It's all right for us to use these lumps of metal. 
(And mother, who resolved never to lay a hand on them, might well 
respond with a kick.) 
In many traditional stories the intrepid hero wins through to 
glory by using the fallacy of accent to find a loophole in some 
ancient curse or injunction. Perseus knew that anyone who 
looked at the Medusa would be turned to stone. Even villains use 
it: Samson was blinded by the king of the Philistines who had 
promised not to touch him. 
Your most widespread use of the fallacy of accent can be to 
discredit opponents by quoting them with an emphasis they 
never intended. ('He said he would never lie to the American 
people. You will notice all of the things that left him free to do.') 
Richelieu needed six lines by the most honest man in order to 
find something on which to hang him; with skilful use of the 
fallacy of accent you can usually get this down to half a line. 
Accident 5 
It is particularly useful when you are advocating a course of 
action which normally meets with general disapproval. Accent 
can enable you to plead that your proposed action is more 
admissible. ('I know we are pledged not to engage in germ 
warfare against people in far-away lands, but the Irish are not far 
away.') 
When trying to draw up rules and regulations, bear it in mind 
that there are skilled practitioners of the fallacy of accent quite 
prepared to drive a coach and six through your intentions. You 
will then end up with something as tightly worded as the old 
mail monopoly, which actually spelled out that people shouting 
across the street could be construed as a breach of the mail 
monopoly. (They did only say the street, though.) 
Accident 
The fallacy of accident supposes that the freak features of an 
exceptional case are enough to justify rejection of a general rule. 
The features in question may be 'accidental', having no bearing 
on the matter under contention, and may easily be identified as 
an unusual and allowable exception. 
We should reject the idea that it is just to repay what is owed. Supposing 
a man lends you weapons, and then goes insane? Surely it cannot be just 
to put weapons into the hands of a madman? 
(This fallacy, used by Plato, lies in not recognizing that the insanity is 
an 'accident', in that it is a freak circumstance unrelated to the central 
topic, and readily admitted to be a special case.) 
Almost every generalization could be objected to on the 
grounds that one could think of 'accidental' cases it did not 
cover. Most of the general statements about the consequences 
6 How to Win Every Argument 
which follow upon certain actions could be overturned on the 
grounds that they did not cover the case of a meteorite striking 
the perpetrator before the consequences had occurred. To 
maintain this would be to commit the fallacy of accident. 
It is a fallacy to treat a general statement as if it were an 
unqualified universal, admitting no exceptions. To do so is to 
invest it with a significance and a rigour which it was never 
intended to bear. Most of our generalizations carry an implicit 
qualification that they apply, all other things being equal. If other 
things are not equal, such as the presence of insanity or a 
meteorite, the exceptions can be allowed without overturning 
the general claim. 
' You say you have never met this spy. Can you be sure he was never near 
you in a football crowd, for example?' 
'Well, no.' 
'When was this occasion, and what papers passed between you?1 
(If I did meet him, it was an accident.) 
Accident is a fallacy encountered by those in pursuit of universal. If you are trying to establish watertight definitions of 
things like 'truth', justice' and 'meaning', you must not be surprised if others spend as much energy trying to leak the odd 
accident through your seals. 
Plato was searching for justice. John Stuart Mill, trying to 
justify liberty except where there is harm, or serious risk of harm, 
to others, found himself forever meeting objections which 
began, 'But what about the case where ...? ' It is an occupational 
hazard. If you are to avoid accidents, avoid universal. 
Promises should not always be kept. Suppose you were stranded on a 
desert island with an Austrian count who was running an international 
Affirming the consequent 7 
spy-ring. And suppose there was only enough food for one, and you 
promised him... 
(The only amazing feature of these lurid stories is that anyone should 
suppose such freak cases to make the general rule any less 
acceptable.) 
One of the famous examples of the fallacy is a schoolboy joke: 
What you bought yesterday you eat today. You bought raw meat yesterday, so you eat raw meat today. 
(With the generalization referring to the substance, regardless of its 
'accidental' condition.) 
The fallacy of accident is a good one for anarchists because it 
appears to overturn general rules. When it is claimed that you are 
breaking the rules, dig up the freakiest case your imagination will 
allow. If the rule does not apply in this case, why should it apply 
in yours? ('We all agree that it would be right to burn down a tax 
office if this were the only way to release widows and orphans 
trapped in the cellar. So what I did was not inherently wrong...') 
Affirming the consequent 
To those who confuse hopelessly the order of horses and carts, 
affirming the consequent is a fallacy which comes naturally. An 
occupational hazard of those who engage in conditional arguments, this particular fallacy fails to recognize that there is more 
than one way of killing a cat. 
When cats are bitten by rabid hedgehogs they die. Here is a dead cat, so 
obviously there is a rabid hedgehog about. 
8 How to Win Every Argument 
(Before locking up your cats, reflect that the deceased feline might 
have been electrocuted, garrotted, disembowelled, or run over. It is 
possible that a rabid hedgehog got him, but we cannot deduce it as a 
fact.) 
The arguer has mixed up the antecedents and consequents. In 
an 'if... then' construction, the 'if part is the antecedent, and 
the 'then' part is the consequent. It is all right to affirm the 
antecedent in order to prove the consequent, but not vice versa. 
If I drop an egg, it breaks. I dropped the egg, so it broke. 
(This is perfectly valid. It is an argument called the modus ponens 
which we probably use every day of our lives. Compare it with the 
following version.) 
If I drop an egg, it breaks. This egg is broken, so I must have dropped it. 
(This is the fallacy of affirming the consequent. There could be many 
other incidents leading to a broken egg, including something falling 
upon it, someone else dropping it, or a chicken coming out of it.) 
For valid logic we must affirm the first part in order to deduce the 
second. In the fallacy we affirm the second part in an attempt to 
deduce the first. Affirming the consequent is fallacious because 
an event can be produced by different causes. Seeing the event, 
we cannot be certain that only one particular cause was involved. 
If the Chinese wanted peace, they would favour cultural and sporting 
exchanges. Since they do support these exchanges, we know they want 
peace. 
(Maybe. This conclusion might be the most plausible, but there could 
be other, more ominous reasons for their support of international 
exchanges. The cat can be killed in more ways than one.) 
This fallacy receives a plentiful airing in our law-courts, since it is 
the basis of circumstantial evidence. Where we have no 
Amphiboly 9 
eyewitness evidence, we work back from what is known to those 
actions which might have caused it. 
If he had been planning murder, he would have taken out extra insurance on his wife. He did take out extra insurance. 
If he intended poison, he would have bought some. He did buy some 
weedkiller. 
If he had wanted to cut up the body, he would have needed a big saw. 
Such a saw was found in his toolshed. 
(There could be alternative explanations, innocent ones, for all of 
these actions. It would be fallacious to say that any of them proved 
him guilty. But as they mount up, it becomes progressively easier for 
twelve good persons and true to eliminate reasonable doubts about 
coincidence. No doubt they are sometimes wrong and thereby has 
hanged many a tale, together with the occasional innocent man.) 
This is an extremely good fallacy to use when you wish to 
impute base motives to someone. Motives do not show, but the 
actions caused by motives do. You can always gain a hearing for 
your suggestion of less-than-honourable motives, by use of a 
skilfully affirmed consequent. 
She's just a tramp. Girls like that always flaunt themselves before men, 
and she did appear at the office party wearing a dress that was practically transparent! 
(We can all see through this one.) 
Amphiboly 
Amphiboly is the fallacy of ambiguous construction. It occurs 
whenever the whole meaning of a statement can be taken in 
10 How to Win Every Argument 
more than one way, and is usually the fault of careless grammar. 
The Duchess has a fine ship, but she has barnacles on her bottom. 
(This is a duchess who requires especially careful handling.) 
The fallacy is capable of infinite variation. Many excellent 
examples of amphiboly make use of the confused pronoun: does 
the 'she' refer to the ship or to the Duchess? Similar confusion 
may occur with animals. 
/ met the ambassador riding his horse. He was snorting and steaming, so 
I gave him a lump of sugar. 
(Would that all diplomats were so cheaply entertained.) 
Misuse of the word 'which', or its omission for brevity, both 
produce many classic examples. ('On the claim form I have filled 
in details about the injury to my spine which I now enclose.') 
There are innumerable versions of the advertisement: 
FOR SALE: Car by elderly lady with new body and spare tyre. 
The mistake usually consists in the failure to appreciate that an 
alternative reading is possible. Sometimes the punctuation is 
misplaced; sometimes there is not enough of it to eliminate the 
ambiguity. Press headlines, with their need for both punch and 
brevity, are favourite long grasses from which the occasional 
delightful amphiboly will bounce into view. Legendary World 
War II masterpieces include: 
MACARTHUR FLIES BACK TO FRONT 
(With more variations still if the second word is taken to be a noun.) 
The analogical fallacy 11 
FRENCH PUSH BOTTLES UP GERMANS! 
(Hand-to-hand combat, yes. But this is ridiculous.) 
Use of the amphiboly with intent to deceive is a favourite 
resort of oracles and fortune-tellers. A timely amphiboly enables 
the prophet to hedge his bets, having it both ways. After the 
outcome one can always take refuge in the meaning which was 
fulfilled. Croesus asked the oracle what would happen if he 
attacked Persia. The reply 'A mighty empire will be humbled' was 
prophetic indeed. But it was his own. 
To become a skilled perpetrator of amphibolies you must 
acquire a certain nonchalance toward punctuation, especially 
commas. You must learn to toss off lines such as 'I heard 
cathedral bells tripping through the alleyways', as if it mattered 
not a whit whether you or the bells were doing the tripping. You 
should acquire a vocabulary of nouns which can be verbs and a 
grammatical style which easily accommodates misplaced pronouns and confusions over subject and predicate. The astrology 
columns in popular newspapers provide excellent source 
material. 
The analogical fallacy 
The analogical fallacy consists of supposing that things which are 
similar in one respect must be similar in others. It draws a 
comparison on the basis of what is known, and proceeds to 
assume that the unknown parts must also be similar. 
The body politic, like any other body, works best when there is a clear 
brain directing it. This is why authoritarian governments are more 
efficient. 
12 How to Win Every Argument 
(None of these false analogies likening the state to a human body 
ever seem to say much about its liver, pancreas, or waste-disposal 
mechanism.) 
Analogies are a useful way of conveying information. They 
enable us to talk about the new concept in terms which the 
audience already have experience of. The fallacy comes in the 
assumption of further similarities in the future on the basis of the 
ones already identified. 
Babies are like the weather in their unpredictability. 
(They are also wet and full of wind.) 
It is fallacious because analogies are tools of communication 
more than sources of knowledge. An analogy may suggest lines 
of enquiry to us, but it does not provide a basis for establishing 
discoveries. 
She had skin like a million dollars. 
(Green and crinkly?) 
Analogical fallacies abound in the interpretation of history. In 
the attempt to make history mean something, all kinds of 
comparisons emerge. Past civilizations all have it in common that 
they are now past, once were civilizations, and before that were 
not. These three utterly commonplace facts lead many historians 
into a 'life-cycle' analogy. The simple sequence 'not alive, alive, 
no longer alive' irresistibly invites comparison with living 
organisms. Before our defences are ready, there we are with 
civilizations 'blooming' and 'flowering', soon to be engaged in 
the act of 'withering and dying'. 
The analogical fallacy 13 
As our culture ripens, it is only natural that it should, like any organism, 
put out seeds to reproduce itself in distant places. 
(An argument for colonialism which should be nipped in the bud.) 
The fact is that civilizations are not flowers. If you fall into the 
analogical trap, you will soon be having them drawing strength 
from the soil, and perhaps even exhibiting their blooms in turn. 
Hume, in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, has the 
earnest Cleanthes compare the universe to a delicate mechanism, like a watch. And, just as we can deduce from a watch the 
necessary existence of a watchmaker, so from the universe ... 
But the sceptical Philo kills the argument at this point by saying 
that the universe seems to him much more like a cabbage. 
The analogical fallacy is devastatingly effective when used 
against the person who first produced the analogy. Everyone 
uses analogies of sorts; all you have to do is seize upon one used 
by an opponent and continue it in a way more conducive to your 
own line of argument. With luck, your opponent will be forced 
into the admission that his own analogy was not a very good one 
and will lose points with the audience. 
'As we sail forth on our new committee, may I express the hope that we 
can all pull together for a smooth voyage. ' 
'The chairman is right. But remember that rowers were usually put in 
chains and whipped. And if the ship sank, they went down with it. ' 
You will go far in any organization by likening it to a family. 
Family life evokes a pleasant glow, and the analogy will enable 
you in practice to argue for almost anything, including giving 
pocket money to the members and sending the naughty ones 
supperless to bed. 
14 How to Win Every Argument 
Antiquitam, argumentant ad 
Students of political philosophy recognize in the argumentum ad 
antiquitam the central core of the arguments of Edmund Burke. 
Put at its simplest, it is the fallacy of supposing that something is 
good or right simply because it is old. 
This is the way it's always been done, and this is the way we'll continue 
to do it. 
(It brought poverty and misery before, and it will do so again...) 
There is nothing in the age of a belief or an assertion which 
alone makes it right. At its simplest, the ad antiquitam is a habit 
which economizes on thought. It shows the way in which things 
are done, with no need for difficult decision-making. At its most 
elevated, it is a philosophy. Previous generations did it this way 
and they survived; so will we. The fallacy is embellished by talk of 
continuity and our contemplation of the familiar. 
While the age of a belief attests to experience, it does not 
attest to its truth. To equate older with better is to venture into 
the territory of the fallacy. After all, human progress is made by 
replacing the older with the better. Sometimes men do things in 
a particular way, or hold particular beliefs, for thousands of years. 
This does not make it right, any more than it makes it wrong. 
You are not having a car. I never had a car, my father never had one, 
and nor did his father before him. 
(Which is probably why none of them got anywhere.) 
The Conservative Party is the home of the ad antiquitam. They 
raised it and by golly they are going to keep it. The old values 
must be the right ones. Patriotism, national greatness, discipline 
- you name it. If it's old, it must be good. 
Apriorism 15 
The commercial world is sensitive to the prevalence of the 
fallacy, and modifies its actions accordingly. A cigarette brand 
called Woodbine, with a large market share, feared its image was 
becoming dated, but did not wish to shatter the instinctive 
preference for the traditional. A science fiction magazine called 
Astounding feared that its name reflected an earlier era and might 
hold back its development. In both cases the decision was made 
to effect gradual change, with the cigarette-packet design and 
the magazine name both changing imperceptibly over the 
weeks. Astounding made it into Analog, but Woodbines seem to 
have disappeared without trace. Perhaps cigarette customers are 
more conservative than science-fiction readers? 
Skilful use of the ad antiquitam requires a detailed knowledge 
of China. The reason is simple. Chinese civilization has gone on 
for so long, and has covered so many different provinces, that 
almost everything has been tried at one time or another. Your 
knowledge will enable you to point out that what you are 
advocating has a respectable antiquity in the Shin Shan province, 
and there it brought peace, tranquillity of mind and fulfilment for 
centuries. 
We make our furniture in the best way; the old way. 
(And it's every bit as uncomfortable as it always was.) 
Apriorism 
Normally we allow facts to be the test of our principles. When we 
see what the facts are, we can retain or modify our principles. To 
start out with principles from the first (a priori) and to use them 
as the basis for accepting or rejecting facts is to do it the wrong 
way round. It is to commit the fallacy of apriorism. 
16 How to Win Every Argument 
We don't need to look through your telescope, Mr Galileo. We know that 
there cannot be more than seven heavenly bodies. 
(This was a short-sighted view.) 
The relationship between facts and principles is a complicated 
one. We need some kind of principle, otherwise nothing presents 
itself as a fact in the first place. The fallacy consists of giving too 
much primacy to principles, and in not permitting them to be 
modified by what we observe. It makes an unwarranted presumption in favour of a theory unsupported by the evidence, and 
therefore rejects evidence relevant to the case. 
All doctors are in it for themselves. If yours really did give up all that time 
for no payment, then all I can say is that there must have been some 
hidden gain we don't know about. 
(In addition to the less well-hidden fallacy we do know about.) 
Aprioristic reasoning is widely used by those whose beliefs 
have very little to do with reality anyway. The fallacy is the short 
brush which sweeps untidy facts under a carpet of preconception. It is a necessary household appliance for those determined 
to keep their mental rooms clean of the dust of the real world. 
Engraved on the handle, and on the mind of the user, is the 
legend: 'My mind's made up. Don't confuse me with facts.' 
Many of us might be unimpressed with a patent medicine for 
which the claim was made that recovery proved that it worked, 
and lack of recovery was proof that more of it were needed. We 
might point out that the facts were being used to support the 
medicine, whichever way they turned out. Yet every day precisely the same claim is made for overseas development aid to 
poorer countries. If there is development, that shows it works. If 
there is no development, that shows we must give more of it. 
Heads they win, tails logic loses. 
Baculum, argumentum ad 17 
The fallacy of aphorism can also be used to support a preconceived judgement against the evidence. If a politician we 
support is caught cheating in examinations, or in a compromising position with an intern, these are character-improving 
situations. They steel him and test him, making him a fitter 
candidate for office. For anyone else, of course, they would disqualify them from office. 
Since there are no cats in Tibet, this animal here, with the ears of a cat, 
the tail of a cat, the fur of a cat and the whiskers of a cat, shows that 
Tibetan dogs are pretty good actors. 
(Not only that, they also catch mice and drink milk from a saucer.) 
It is generally unproductive, when using apriorism, to dismiss 
the facts out of hand as untrue. After all, your audience might have 
been there to witness them. You will go much further by reinterpreting those facts, showing how they were not what they seemed. 
Far from contradicting your contention, they really support it. 
/ still maintain that the books I recommended were the most popular 
ones. Of course I don't deny that they were the least read ones in the 
entire library; but I take that as a sign of their popularity. You see, when 
a book is really popular, people buy it or borrow it from friends; they 
don't wait to borrow it from a library. 
(At least the fallacy is popular.) 
Baculum, argumentum ad 
When reason fails you, appeal to the rod. The argumentum ad 
baculum introduces force as a means of persuasion, and is often 
resorted to by those who would lose the argument without it. 
18 How to Win Every Argument 
It would be better if you told us what we want to know. After all, we 
wouldn't want your aged mother or your crippled sister to suffer, would 
we? 
(Probably yes.) 
The threatened force does not have to take the form of physical violence. The argumentum ad baculum is committed whenever unpleasant consequences are promised for failing to comply 
with the speaker's wishes. ('If you do not bring us the plans of 
the new missile, I regret I will be forced to send these photographs to the newspapers.') 
The fallacy of the argumentum ad baculum lies in its introduction of irrelevant material into the argument. Strictly speaking, it leaves the argument behind, moving on to force as a 
means of persuasion. While force is undoubtedly effective 
sometimes in directing courteous attention to the speaker's 
wishes, its use represents the breakdown and subversion of 
reason. 
The ad baculum, alas, performs on the public stage of international relations. Powerful countries which fail to get their own 
way by reasoned discussion are not averse to tossing over an ad 
baculum to influence the talks. If even this fails, they toss over 
something a little larger. 
Joseph Stalin was a master of the ad baculum. Indeed, he 
made it his own to such an extent that his name is immortalized 
in a line of Krushchev which sums up its potency: 'When Stalin 
says "dance!" a wise man dances.' Stalin himself appears to have 
taken the view that anyone without force to threaten had no 
business being involved in international affairs. His famous 
question, 'How many divisions has the Pope?', was in response to 
a suggestion that the Pope should take part in an international 
conference. As Stalin's enemies often discovered, argument is 
not a very effective counter to an ad baculum. 
Bifurcation 19 
Political parties founded on an idealized view of human nature 
frequently accuse their rivals of too frequently resorting to ad 
baculum diplomacy. Sir William Browne delivered a well-wrought 
epigram on the subject: 
The King to Oxford sent a troop of horse, 
For Tories own no argument but force: 
With equal skill to Cambridge books he sent, 
For Whigs admit no force but argument. 
(It would be a close thing today to decide whether it would be harder 
to find a Tory at Oxford than a literate man at Cambridge.) 
You can use the ad baculum when you have the force to 
deploy and can escape the consequences of using it. The law is 
there to prevent arguments always being won by the stronger, 
and the many broken bones it would take to determine which 
was he. But your threats need not be strong physical ones to be 
effective. Many a speaker has gained his way by threatening to 
make an intolerable nuisance of himself until his demands were 
met. The Romans probably destroyed Carthage just to shut up 
Cato. 
Bifurcation 
The presentation of only two alternatives where others exist is 
called the fallacy of bifurcation. Sometimes known as the 'black 
and white' fallacy, it presents an 'either/or' situation when in 
reality there is a range of options. 
If you are not with us, you are against us. 
20 How to Win Every Argument 
(Some people might think you partly right. Others might be with you 
on some things, against you on others. The vast majority probably do 
not care enough to have an opinion at all.) 
Some situations in life have infinite gradations; others offer a 
straightforward choice. There are many intermediate shades 
between light and dark, but not all that many things between a 
boy and a girl. The fallacy of bifurcation consists in taking the 
limited choice of the second class into situations more properly 
covered by the first. 
There are two types of people in this world: the rich and the suckers. Do 
you want to get rich, or are you happy to remain a sucker? 
(In fact there are degrees of richness, as there probably are of suckerdom. You can be rich by comparison with some, but poor when set 
alongside others. Suckers, too, seem spread across a continuum.) 
The mistake is made by the denial of extra choices. In limiting 
the field, the perpetrator is leaving out of the discussion material 
which could well influence the outcome. The fallacy this time is 
caused not by the intrusion of irrelevant material, but by the 
exclusion of relevant items. 
Bifurcation is used to limit choice. Large political parties 
employ it to squeeze out smaller ones by denying that they are 
valid options. Fanatics, for and against, use it to flail the vast mass 
in between who cannot be bothered. Ideologues use it to classify 
people into one category or another, rather than admit to the 
vast range of individual opinions. 
One of the more irritating uses of the fallacy of bifurcation 
occurs in the collection of statistical information. Marketing 
research polls, along with official forms, can only work by 
assigning people into broad categories. Information is often 
requested with the answer 'y e s '
 o r
 ' n o ' when the individual 
Bifurcation 21 
concerned knows that neither is correct. Personality tests which 
pose hypothetical situations always grossly underestimate 
human ingenuity. 
Bifurcation often occurs in a dilemma, even though the 
dilemma itself is a sound form of argument. 
If we import goods we send our jobs abroad; if we export goods we send 
our property abroad. Since we must either export or import, we lose 
either our jobs or our property. 
(But it is not a black-and-white choice. We can import some things, 
export others.) 
Lord Nelson uttered the famous cry: 
Westminster Abbey or victory! 
(Overlooking the possibility that he might get both; or the option of 
St Paul's, where he ended up.) 
The greatest use you can make of bifurcation is to offer a 
choice limited to something very unpleasant or the course you 
are advocating. Either the audience does what you suggest, or it 
will be the end of all life on earth as we know it. 
Either we paint the door green, or we will be mocked and ridiculed. 
People will think we have no taste at all, and we'll become the laughing 
stock of the whole neighbourhood. I leave the choice up to you; I'm not 
trying to influence your decision one way or the other. 
You must learn to introduce what you consider to be the only 
possible choice by saying: 'Well, ladies and gentlemen, it seems 
we have two possible choices...' 
22 How to Win Every Argument 
Blinding with science 
Science enjoys an enormous prestige because it has got so many 
things right. In the popular imagination, the dedicated scientist 
in his white coat is a fount of real knowledge as opposed to mere 
opinion. The fact that he is using that knowledge to make 
Frankenstein monsters scarcely diminishes the respect for his 
pronouncements. Many people, anxious to invest their own 
views with the authority of the scientist, don the white coat of 
scientific jargon in an attempt to pass off their own assertions as 
something they are not. 
The fallacy of blinding with science specializes in the use of 
technical jargon to deceive the audience into supposing that 
utterances of a scientific nature are being made, and that 
objective experimental evidence supports them. 
The amotivational syndrome is sustained by peer group pressure except 
where achievement orientation forms a dominant aspect of the educational and social milieu. 
(Which means roughly that people don't work if their friends don't, 
unless they want to get on. Now this may be true or false, but many 
are daunted from challenging what is dressed up to look like an 
expert view.) 
The white coat of technical jargon is so dazzlingly clean (never 
having been tainted by any real scientific work) that it blinds the 
audience to the true merits of what is being said. Instead of 
evaluating contentions on the basis of the evidence marshalled 
for and against them, the audience recoils from the brilliance of 
the jargon. The fallacy is committed because this irrelevant 
material has no place in the argument, just as loaded words try 
to prejudice a case emotionally, so does pseudo-scientific jargon 
try to induce an unearned respect for what is said. The 
Blinding with science 23 
proposition is the same, whatever the language; and use of 
language to make its acceptance easier is fallacious. 
Although blinding with science can be used in any argument, 
many will recognize the special domain of this fallacy as the 
subjects which like to consider themselves as sciences, but are 
not. Science deals with things from atoms to stars at a level 
where individual differences do not matter. The scientist talks of 
'all' rolling bodies or whatever, and formulates general laws to 
test by experiment. The trouble with human beings is that, 
unlike rolling bodies, the individual differences do matter. Often, 
again unlike rolling bodies, they want to do different things. 
Although this might prevent us from being scientific about 
human beings, it does not stop us pretending to be so. What we 
do here is to add the word 'science' onto the study, giving us 
'economic science', 'political science' and 'social science'. Then 
we dress them in that white coat of scientific language, and hope 
that no one will notice the difference. 
The transportation^ flow charts for the period following the postmeridian peak reveal a pattern of décantation of concentrated passenger 
units in cluster formations surrounding the central area. 
(You could spend years formulating laws to predict this, and might 
even be in the running for a Nobel prize. Just remember never to 
mention that people are coming into town to have a bite to eat, 
followed by a movie or a show...) 
The first rule for using this fallacy is to remember to use long 
words. ('When the pie was opened, the birds commenced to 
sing.') Never use a four-letter word, especially if you can think of 
a 24-letter word to take its place. The jargon itself is harder to 
master, but a subscription to New Society is a good investment. 
Remember that the basic function of words is to prevent communication. Their real task is to transform what is banal, trivial 
24 How to Win Every Argument 
and easily refuted into something profound, impressive and hard 
to deny. 
The small, domesticated carnivorous quadruped positioned itself in 
sedentary mode in superior relationship to the coarse-textured rushwoven horizontal surface fabric. 
(With its saucer of milk beside it.) 
The fallacy of blinding with science is well worth the time and 
trouble required to master it. The years of work at it will repay 
you not only with a doctorate in the social sciences, but with the 
ability to deceive an audience utterly into believing that you 
know what you are talking about. 
The bogus dilemma 
Quite apart from the casual use of the term to describe a difficult 
choice, the dilemma is also the name of an intricate argument. In 
a dilemma, we are told the consequences of alternative actions, 
and told that since we must take one of the actions, we must 
accept one of the consequences. A Creek mother told her son 
who was contemplating a career in politics: 
Don't do it. If you tell the truth men will hate you, and if you tell lies the 
gods will hate you. Since you must either tell the truth or tell lies, you 
must be hated either by men or by the gods. 
The dilemma is a valid form of argument. If the consequences 
described are true, and if there really is a straight choice between 
them, then one or other of the consequences must follow. Very 
often, however, the information given is incorrect, and the 
choice is not as limited as is made out. In these cases the 
The bogus dilemma 25 
dilemma is bogus. The bogus dilemma is the fallacy of falsely or 
mistakenly presenting a dilemma where none exists. 
In the above example, the son has several possible replies. He 
can claim that the dilemma is bogus by denying that the consequences follow - this is called 'grasping the dilemma by the 
horns'. He can simply deny that men will hate him if he tells the 
truth: on the contrary, he might claim, they would respect him 
for it. The alternative statements about consequences are called 
the 'conjuncts', and it is enough to show that one or both is false 
to label the dilemma as bogus. As another option, he might 
show that the choice is false. This is called 'going between the 
horns', and consists of showing that other choices are possible. 
Instead of limiting himself to truth or lies, he might be truthful at 
some times, deceitful at others. He might make statements 
which contain elements of both truth and falsehood. The 
dilemma is shown to be bogus if the choice, which is called the 
'disjunct', is not an exhaustive one. A third way of dealing with a 
dilemma is to rebut it. This is an elegant technique which 
requires an equally ferocious beast to be fabricated out of the 
same elements as the original one, but sent charging in the 
opposite direction to meet it head-on. In the above example, the 
youth replied: 
/ shall do it, mother. For if I tell lies, men will love me for it; and if I tell 
truth the gods will love me. Since I must tell truth or lies, I shall be 
beloved of men or gods. 
(This is so pretty that when one sees it done in debate, there is an 
urge to throw money into the ring.) 
Protagoras, who taught law among other things, dealt with a 
poor student by agreeing to waive the fee until the man had won 
his first case. As time went by, and there was no sign of the youth 
26 How to Win Every Argument 
taking on a case, Protagoras sued him. The prosecution was 
simple: 
If the court decides for me, it says he must pay. If it decides for him, he 
wins his first case and must therefore pay me. Since it must decide for me 
or for him, I must receive my money. 
The youth had been a good student, however, and presented 
the following defence: 
On the contrary. If the court decides for me, it says I need not pay. If it 
decides for Protagoras, then I still have not won my first case, and need 
not pay. Since it must decide for me or for him, either way I need not pay. 
(The judge had a nervous breakdown and adjourned the case indefinitely. He thereby proved the disjuncts false, and escaped between 
the horns of both dilemmas.) 
The fallacy in the bogus dilemma consists of presenting false 
consequences or a false choice, and it will be of most use to you 
in situations where decisions which you oppose are being contemplated. Quickly you step in, pointing out that one of two 
things will happen, and that bad results will follow either way: 
If we allow this hostel for problem teenagers to be set up in our area, 
either it will be empty or it will be full. If it is empty it will be a useless 
waste of money; and if it is full it will bring in more trouble-makers than 
the area can cope with. Reluctantly, therefore... 
(Cross your fingers and hope there are no students of Protagoras on 
the committee.) 
Cireulus in probando 27 
Cireulus in probando 
Cireulus in probando is a specialized and very attractive form of 
the petitio principii. It consists of using as evidence a fact which is 
authenticated by the very conclusion it supports. It is thus 
arguing in a circle. 
7 didn't do it, sir. Smith minor will vouch for my honesty.' 
'Why should I trust Smith minor?' 
'Oh, I can guarantee his honesty, sir. ' 
(Any teacher who falls for that one deserves to be suspended by his 
thumbs from two hypotheticals.) 
The cireulus is fallacious for the same reason as is its larger 
cousin, petitio. It fails to relate the unknown or unaccepted to the 
known or accepted. All it gives us is two unknowns so busy 
chasing each other's tails that neither has time to attach itself to 
reality. 
We know about God from the Bible; and we know we can trust the Bible 
because it is the inspired word of Cod. 
(A circle in a spiral, a wheel within a wheel.) 
As with the petitio, its close relative, the cireulus is often found 
building a cosy little nest in religious or political arguments. If 
there really were convincing proofs of particular religions or 
ideologies, it would be much more difficult for intelligent people 
to disagree about them. In place of cast-iron demonstrations, 
petitio and cireulus are often called upon to serve. 
The same could even be said of science. How do we know that 
our so-called scientific knowledge is no more than one giant 
cireulus? When we perform scientific experiments, we are 
assuming that the rest of our knowledge is good. All we are really 
28 How to Win Every Argument 
testing is whether the new theory under examination is consistent with the rest of our theories. At no point can we test any 
of them against some known objective truth. After all, even the 
theories about what our senses tell us are in the same predicament. It all comes down to saying that science gives us a consistent and useful look at the universe through the ring of a giant 
circulus. 
You will find it difficult, however, to use the prestige of science 
in support of your own use of the circulus. He is too easily spotted 
for effective application in argument, being rather less wily than 
his big cousin, petitio. 
7 have the diamond, so I shall be leader. ' 
'Why should you get to keep the diamond?' 
'Because I'm the leader, stupid.' 
The more likely your conclusion is to be acceptable for other 
reasons, the more likely are you to get away with a circulus in 
support of it. When people are already half-disposed to believe 
something, they do not examine the supporting arguments as 
closely. That said, circulus should be reserved for verbal arguments where memories are short. 
'I'm asking you to do this because I respect you. ' 
'How do I know that you respect me?' 
'Would I ask you to do it otherwise?' 
(If you want to do it, you'll believe it.) 
The intelligent reader might suppose that fallacies such as 
circulus are too obvious to be more than debating tricks. Surely 
they could never seriously distort decisions of state by slipping 
through the massed ranks of civil servants, government committees and the cabinet? Not so. A major policy of Britain's 
The complex question (plurium interrogationum) 29 
government in the 1960s, adopted after the most serious public 
debate, was based upon a relatively obvious circulus in probando. 
This was the National Plan, an exercise in (then fashionable) 
national economic planning. Firms were asked to assume a 
national growth-rate of 3.8 per cent, and to estimate on that 
basis what their own plans for expansion would be. These various 
estimates were added up by the government, which concluded 
that the combined plans of British industry suggested a growthrate of 3.8 per cent! 
The National Plan was valueless then and subsequently, 
except to connoisseurs of logical absurdity lucky enough to snap 
up remaindered copies of it in secondhand bookshops. 
The complex question (plurium interrogationum) 
Plurium interrogationum, which translates as 'of many questions', 
is otherwise known as the fallacy of the complex question. When 
several questions are combined into one, in such a way that a 
yes-or-no answer is required, the person they are asked of has no 
chance to give separate replies to each, and the fallacy of the 
complex question is committed. 
Have you stopped beating your wife? 
(If 'yes', you admit you were. If 'no', then you still are.) 
This might seem like an old joke, but there are modern 
versions: 
Did the pollution you caused increase or decrease your profits? 
Did your misleading claims result in you getting promoted? 
Is your stupidity inborn? 
30 How to Win Every Argument 
All of them contain an assumption that the concealed question 
has already been answered affirmatively. It is this unjustified 
presumption which constitutes the fallacy. Many questions may 
be asked, but if the answer to some is assumed before it is given, 
a plurium interrogationum has been committed. 
A common version of the fallacy asks questions beginning 
'who' or 'why' about facts which have not been established. 
Even oldies such as 'Who was the lady I saw you with last night?' 
and 'Why did the chicken cross the road?' are, strictly speaking, 
examples of this fallacy. They preclude answers such as 'There 
was none', or 'It didn't.' 
Why did you make your wife alter her will in your favour? And why did 
you then go along to the chemist to buy rat poison? Why did you then 
put it into her cocoa, and how did you do it without attracting her 
attention? 
(Attempt not more than three questions.) 
The inhabitants of the world of the plurium are a puzzled lot. 
They can never understand why we tolerate television reporters 
who echo anti-patriotic propaganda, how we can curb drug 
abuse in our schools, or why it is that so many unemployable 
people are produced by our universities and colleges. The 
advertisers of that world want to know whether our families are 
worth the extra care that their product brings and if we are glad 
we chose their brand of shampoo. 
In the real world none of these questions would be regarded 
as valid until the facts they depend on had been established. The 
complex question has to be broken into simpler ones; and often 
the denial of the fact presumed invalidates the larger question 
altogether. 
A variety of complicated genetic or evolutionary explanations 
could be advanced to explain why the adult human female has 
Composition 31 
four more teeth than the adult male. None of them would be as 
effective as counting along a few jaws and denying the fact. 
Plurium interrogationum is very effective as a means of introducing the semblance of democracy into the domestic scene. It 
enables you to give children a choice over their destinies: 
Would you prefer to go to bed now, or after you've finished your cocoa? 
Do you want to put your bricks in the box, or on the shelf? 
(Beware, though. After about ten years this will come back to you as: 
Mum, would you prefer to buy me a disco deck or a motorbike for my 
birthday? 
He who sows the wind...) 
Composition 
The fallacy of composition occurs when it is claimed that what is 
true for individual members of a class is also true for the class 
considered as a unit. Some nouns can be taken to refer either to 
the thing as a whole or to the various parts which make it up. It is 
fallacious to suppose that what is true of the parts must also be 
true of the new entity which they collectively make up. 
This must be a good orchestra because each of its members is a talented 
musician. 
(Each individual might be excellent but totally unable to play in 
unison with colleagues. All of these virtuosos might be far too busy 
trying to excel personally to play as an effective team.) 
Many a football manager has similarly transferred in many firstclass players, only to find himself transferred out. Unless they can 
work as a team, it is easier to get the manager out of the ground 
than the ball into the net. 
32 How to Win Every Argument 
/ have gathered into one regiment all of the strongest men in the army. 
This will be my strongest regiment. 
(I doubt it. The strength of a regiment depends on such factors as its 
morale and its teamwork, not to mention its speed, its ability to 
operate with minimal supplies, and similar attributes.) 
The fallacy arises from a failure to recognize that the group is a 
distinct entity of which things can be said which do not apply to 
individual persons. Evidence advanced to attest to the qualities of 
the members is therefore irrelevant to an appraisal of the group. 
Americans are particularly vulnerable to this fallacy because 
their grammar makes no distinction between the collective entity 
and the individuals within it. It seems to be universal in the 
American language to use singular verbs for collective nouns, 
regardless of whether the members or the group are being 
referred to. 
In English we would say 'the crew is a good one', referring to 
it as a separate entity, but 'the crew are tired', if we are speaking 
of its members. In American one uses the singular verb in both 
cases, losing an important distinction. 
If everyone in society looks after themselves, then our society will be one 
that looks after itself. 
(It will certainly be a society of people who look after themselves; but 
maybe society has aspects which need to be looked after by people 
acting in concert.) 
A variant of the fallacy of composition covers cases in which 
things which are true for individuals become untrue if they are 
extrapolated to cover the whole group. 
Concealed quantification 33 
Farmers benefit from price supports on beef; shoemakers gain from price 
supports on shoes, and so on. Obviously the whole economy would 
benefit if all products were subsidized. 
(The point is that farmers and shoemakers only benefit if they are in a 
small group which benefits at the expense of everyone else. If the 
principle is extrapolated, everyone receives the subsidies, everyone 
pays the taxes to fund them, and everyone loses out to the bureaucrats who administer the transfers.) 
Society, indeed, provides the best place to use the fallacy with 
intent to deceive. You should attribute all kinds of sympathetic 
qualities to the people in our country. An audience of your 
countrymen will have no difficulty in attesting to the truth of 
them. When you slide in a surreptitious fallacy of composition to 
urge the same for society as a unit, they will be reluctant to let go 
of the good qualities they just claimed. 
We all know that the average Briton is noted for a warmhearted generosity. That is why our society has to increase the rights of the old, the 
sick, the unemployed, and those in less developed countries. 
(These actions might be worthwhile, but are only generous when 
done by individuals. To take money away from people to give to 
others actually diminishes their opportunity to be generous.) 
You might just as well try: 'Irishmen tend to die young, you 
know. I'm surprised the country is still going.' 
Concealed quantification 
When statements are made about a class, sometimes they are 
about all of the members of it, sometimes about some of them, 
and at other times it is not clear which is referred to. The fallacy 
34 How to Win Every Argument 
of concealed quantification occurs when ambiguity of expression 
permits a misunderstanding of the quantity which is spoken of. 
Garage mechanics are crooks. 
(What, all of them? It does not say, but there is a big difference. If it 
refers to all of them, then to talk to one is to talk to a crook. Although 
many motorists may have their convictions, few of the garage 
mechanics do.) 
Very often the quantification is concealed because it sounds 
rather lame to make bold statements about some of a class. 'All' is 
much better, but probably untrue. Rather than be limited by 
such a technicality, a speaker will often leave out the quantity in 
the hope that 'all' will be understood. Someone might commiserate with a distraught parent by telling them: 'Teenagers are 
troublesome.' This can be accepted as 'some are,' or even 'many 
tend to be so', but it could also be taken to mean that one has 
only to find a teenager to locate a troublesome person. This may 
not have been intended, however plausible it sounds. The fallacy 
comes with the ambiguity. The statement can be accepted with 
one meaning, yet intended with another. Of course, very different conclusions can be drawn from the two meanings. 
It is well known that members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament are communists. 
(It is indeed, but not all of them, as seems to be implied. Even if some 
are communists, there is still room for others motivated by sincerity 
or stupidity.) 
The fallacy is widely used to condemn whole groups on the 
basis of some of their members. 
Subversives teach at the Open University. 
Conclusion which denies premises 35 
(This could mean that some do, but is unlikely to mean that all 
subversives are so employed. It could even be taken as telling us that 
only subversives teach there. The quality of the average BA would 
vary enormously, depending on which were true, as indeed might 
the course content.) 
Concealed quantification can also be a prelude to tarring an 
individual with the characteristics of the group to which he 
belongs by hiding the fact that they apply only to some of that 
group. 
Have you ever noticed that bishops are fat? I suppose now that Johnson 
has been raised to a bishopric he'll expand a bit himself. 
(Weight and see.) 
You should use concealed quantification to make a weak case 
look stronger than it is. If you are trying to sow doubts about a 
person, you can use their membership of some group to cast 
general aspersions about them. Make reasonable-sounding 
statements which are true of some, and allow your audience to 
supply the 'all' or the 'only' which are needed to brand him as 
well. 
/ don't think we should hire Thomson. I see he's a keen fisherman. Idlers 
take up fishing, so I think it's a very bad sign. 
(The audience take the bait, make it 'only idlers', and Thomson is 
already hooked.) 
Conclusion which denies premises 
The conclusion which denies its premises is one of the 'oh-dear-lforgot-what-l-started-to-say' fallacies. It starts by maintaining 
36 How to Win Every Argument 
that certain things must be true, and ends up with a conclusion 
which flatly contradicts them. If the conclusion is not consistent 
with the arguments used to reach it, then somewhere there is a 
hole in the reasoning through which the logic has slipped silently 
away. 
'Son, because nothing is certain in this world we have to hold on to what 
experience tells us. ' 
'Are you sure, Dad?' 
'Yes, son. I'm certain.' 
The fallacy is identified by the inconsistency. If the conclusion 
contradicts the premises, at least one of them must be wrong. 
This means that our conclusion is either false itself, or derived 
from false information. 
The conclusion which denies its premises constantly slips 
uninvited into religious arguments. People are so used to 
thinking of divine beings as exceptions to every rule that they 
tend to use the word 'everything' when they mean 'everything 
except God.' 
Everything must have a cause. That, in turn, must result from a previous 
cause. Since it cannot go back for ever, we know that there must be an 
uncaused causer to start the process. 
(But if everything must have a cause, how can there be such a thing 
as an uncaused causer?) 
The fallacy has a most distinguished history, being used 
(although not identified as such) by Aristotle and Thomas 
Aquinas among many others. It has many faces. The 'uncaused 
causer' can be a 'first cause,' or even a 'first mover'. It can be 
reworded in many ways, but never without fallacy. 
Attempts to make a divine being the allowable exception to 
Conclusion which denies premises 37 
the original claim usually beg the question or subvert the argument, 'Everything in the universe must have a cause outside of 
itself ...' The intention is clearly to establish a cause which is 
outside of the universe and therefore needs no cause to account 
for it. Unfortunately, the rewording admits several faults. 
1 . The new version is more complex and is not obviously true. 
2. The universe is not in the universe, it is the universe. 
3. 'Everything in the universe' is the universe. 
This allows us to translate the opening line as: 'The universe must 
have a cause outside of itself.' Given such an assumption, it is 
hardly surprising that we go on to prove it. 
There are many simpler versions in popular currency, none of 
them free from the basic inconsistency of allowing the preferred 
answer to be the one permitted exception. 
No matter how many stages you take it back, everything must have had 
a beginning somewhere. Cod started it all. 
(He, presumably, did not have a beginning somewhere.) 
Nothing can go on forever. There must have been a god to start it. 
(One who goes on forever, of course.) 
When using the conclusion which denies premises, you 
should bear in mind three things. First, the more distance there is 
between your opening line and your conclusion, the less likely 
are your audience to spot the contradiction. Second, they will 
often allow a speaker to make statements about 'everyone' 
without applying them to the speaker himself. Third, if your 
conclusion is about things which are usually admitted to have 
exceptional properties, your fallacy has a better chance of 
escaping detection. 
38 How to Win Every Argument 
Never believe what people tell you about patent medicine; they are 
always liars. It is because you know that I am truthful about this that you 
will know I am also telling the truth when I tell you that my snake-oil 
here is the most remarkable... 
(Remarkable.) 
Contradictory premises 
No matter how good the logic may be, you cannot rely on an 
argument which has certain falsity built into it. For a sound 
argument true premises are needed, as well as valid logic. The 
problem with contradictory premises is that they cannot both be 
true. If one is true, the other must be false, and vice versa. In 
other words, we can be certain that at least one of them must be 
false, and cannot therefore generate a sound argument. 
Everything is mortal, and Cod is not mortal, so God is not everything. 
(This might look like an argument against pantheism, but it is in fact 
an argument against common sense. Since the premises contradict 
each other, one must be false. This makes any conclusion unreliable.) 
The fallacy is an interesting one because it permits the logic to be 
valid. It usually amazes non-logicians to hear that with inconsistent premises any conclusion, no matter how irrelevant, can be 
validly inferred. Logicians, however, do not use the word 'valid' 
to mean 'sound', If there is known falsity built in, as there must 
be with contradictory premises, then it matters not how good 
the logic is: the argument is not sound. 
This is the fallacy which enables us to prove that the moon is 
made of green cheese. The proof is quite complicated, but quite 
fun: 
Crumenam, argumentum ad 39 
We are given two premises, that milk is white, and milk is not white. 
If 'milk is white' is true, then it is also the case that 'Either milk is white 
or the moon is made of green cheese' is true. (This is correct.) Since 
we are also given that milk is not white, the second alternative must 
be true, namely that 'the moon is made of green cheese'. 
There is nothing wrong with the logic. The known falsity in the 
contradictory premises can be used to establish anything, 
including a rather smelly satellite. 
It is difficult to use the fallacy of contradictory premises in 
everyday argument, because your audience will normally see 
that you are contradicting yourself. What you can do, however, 
is to use contradictions which are normally accepted in loose 
speech, and proceed to wrap them up in tight logic. 
He's a real professional, but a bit of an amateur at times. 
(It sounds acceptable enough, but remember that from it you can 
literally prove that the moon is made of green cheese.) 
Crumenam, argumentum ad 
The argumentum ad crumenam assumes that money is a measure 
of Tightness, and that those with money are more likely to be 
correct. 'If you're so right, why ain't you rich?' is the common 
form, but it translates poetically as the belief that 'truth is booty'. 
There have been branches of Christianity which held that 
worldly success could be taken as a mark of divine favour; and 
there have been constitutions which loaded the franchise to the 
advantage of those with wealth and property. 
/ note that those earning in excess of £100,000 per year tend to agree 
with me. 
40 How to Win Every Argument 
(Maybe so. He might have added that right-handed people disagreed with him, that 6-foot-tall people agreed, and that those with 
hazel eyes were evenly divided. These have about as much to do with 
being right as money does.) 
The fallacy in the argumentum ad crumenam is, of course, that 
wealth has nothing to do with it. It is a sweet and fitting thing to 
make a lot of money. It is also a sweet and fitting thing to be 
right; but only an undistributed middle can relate the two 
because of this. 
Behind the argumentum ad crumenam there lies the vague 
feeling that God would not allow people who were wicked and 
wrong to scoop the pool of life's goodies. We know that money 
isn't everything, but we suspect, deep down, that it is 90 things out 
of 100, that it will buy nine of the remaining ten, and even make 
the absence of the remaining one tolerably comfortable. 
Surely a man who can make £60 million in a year by recording four 
songs cannot be all wrong? 
(He can.) 
The world's most expensive beer... 
(But it makes you no more drunk than does the cheapest.) 
There are limited and artificial situations in which money is the 
measure of right. 
The customer is always right. 
(This is because the customer has the money. It is true in America; but 
in Britain the convenience of the shopkeeper often comes first, and in 
France or Germany it always does.) 
In the field of tipping, money can often bring right in its wake. 
Cum hoc ergo propter hoc 41 
'Cabbie, get me to the airport by ten o'clock!' 
'This cab ain't got wings, mister.' 
'Here's £20 if you make it. ' 
'Stand by for take-off!' 
'My friend wants to know where Big M was last night. ' 
'Who's your friend?' 
'He sent his picture.' [waves banknote] 
'You can tell Sir Edward Elgar that Big M was at Molly's bar. ' 
A version of the argumentum ad crumenam helped in the success 
of the Industrial Revolution. The belief that the virtues of thrift, 
perseverance and hard work are rewarded by wealth led naturally to its converse, that worldly goods were the hallmark of 
virtue. A society in which one needs to make money to be 
respected for moral worth is probably conducive to an expanding economy. 
Your own use of the fallacy is best reserved for situations 
where you personally can ensure that money not only talks, but 
positively monopolizes the conversation. 
7 say we do it this way, and I own 60 per cent of the shares in this 
company. ' 
[chorus] 'You're right, j.G.!' 
This differs only in degree from the junior version: 
7 say it was a goal, and it's my football. ' 
Cum hoc ergo propter hoc 
The cum hoc fallacy assumes that events which occur together 
are causally connected, and leaves no room either for 
42 How to Win Every Argument 
coincidence, or for the operation of an outside factor which 
separately influences those events. 
A tourist met a Spanish peasant and his wife on a train. They had never 
seen bananas before, so he offered one to each of them. As the farmer bit 
into his, the train entered a tunnel. 'Don't eat it, Carmen,' he shouted, 
'They make you blind. ' 
Like the post hoc fallacy which links events because they occur 
consecutively, the cum hoc fallacy links them because they occur 
simultaneously. It is a fallacy because of its unwarranted 
assumption that either of the events would not occur without the 
other one. 
Things are happening all the time. Scarcely a day goes by 
without rain, electricity bills, televised show-jumping, or the 
Guardian newspaper. It is inviting to link these endemic discomforts with simultaneous events, and conclude that they are 
all somehow connected. In primitive societies such assumptions 
are made routinely, and one of the jobs of the witchdoctor is to 
sort out which actions are linked with various consequences. In 
our society, alas, life is more complicated. 
The field of statistics provides a natural habitat for the cum hoc 
fallacy to lurk undetected. Indeed, a whole branch of statistics 
called regression analysis is devoted to measuring the frequency 
and extent of simultaneous events, and to calculating the 
probability of their being linked. Correlation coefficients are 
produced, with percentages attached showing the likelihood 
that mere chance was involved. Statisticians routinely offer us 
relationships with a 95 per cent or a 99 per cent probability that 
'more than chance is involved'. 
A statistician looking over figures for pupil performance was astounded 
to discover in the 7-12 age-group that neatness of handwriting matched 
with size of shoe. He checked the figures for hundreds of children, but it 
Cum hoc ergo propter hoc 43 
was quite clear. Neat handwriting correlated with large feet, with 99 per 
cent probability that this was not mere chance. 
(A teacher later told him that this was because older children tended 
to write more neatly. Being older, they tended to have bigger feet.) 
Most disciplines which involve human measurement, including economics and sociology, find cum hoes scattered liberally on 
their domain. The reason for this is that we do not really know 
what makes human beings act, so we look at their actions after 
the fact and try to relate them to other events. The cum hoc tares 
grow up with the wheat of genuine insights. 
Elections make people spend. The figures are clear. Spending always 
goes up in an election year. 
(Could it be that governments seeking re-election tend to keep taxes 
down in election years, and that people, in consequence, have more 
to spend?) 
Deliberate use of the cum hoc ergo propter hoc is best made 
with the support of reams of statistical information. Your audience, bemused by the figures, rarely have any of their own to set 
against you. They can be made even more disposed to accept 
the link which you are proposing if you cite the authority of 
leading figures in the social sciences. This is easy. There is 
nothing so absurd that it has not been attested to by such 
people. It helps to be selective in your use of information. 
Cun ownership is a major cause of violent crime. The prevalence of guns 
in the US matches the high rates for crimes of violence. When violence is 
contemplated, the guns are all too available. 
(Excellent; but remember not to mention Switzerland, where almost 
every household has a gun as part of military training. Switzerland 
has low rates for violent crime, and the guns are almost never used.) 
44 How to Win Every Argument 
A US legislator recently noted that a high crime-rate correlated 
with a high prison population, and suggested that the prisoners 
be released in order to cut the crime figures. 
For use of the fallacy in print, simply juxtapose articles. Study 
the front pages to see how it is done. 
MARK TWAIN COMES TO TOWN 
ASCOT GOLD CUP STOLEN 
Damning the alternatives 
In cases where there is a fixed and known set of alternatives, it is 
legitimate to establish the superiority of one by showing all of the 
others to be inferior. However, in cases where the alternatives are 
not fixed or known, and where absolutes rather than comparatives are sought, it is a fallacy to suppose that we argue for one 
by denigrating the alternatives. The fallacy is that of damning the 
alternatives. 
Hawkins' theory has to be the right answer. All the others have been 
proved hopelessly wrong. 
(And his may be proved wrong tomorrow.) 
Even where there are only two alternatives, we cannot show that 
one is good by showing that the other one is not. Both might be 
equally bad. The same applies for larger groups. 
Chelsea is a really great team. Look at Liverpool and Manchester United; 
they are both useless. 
(Other teams not taken account of might enter the reckoning. Even 
so, if Liverpool and Manchester United were bad, it would not prove 
Damning the alternatives 45 
Chelsea good. It might be that all football teams are absolutely 
terrible.) 
The fallacy occurs because in leaving out the performance of 
alternatives not referred to, we exclude material which might be 
relevant to a decision. Second, by introducing material which 
denigrates others in cases where a simple judgement is required, 
we bring in irrelevant matter. 
Damning the alternatives is the fallacy of the partisan. Anxious 
to elevate his own village, nation, team, church, occupation, race 
or class, he thinks he does so by running down the others. Rupert 
Brooke used the fallacy for humorous effect in his famous poem, 
The Old Vicarage, Grantchester'.* Amongst the praise for 
Grantchester itself are sandwiched adverse comments on the 
other villages in the area. He tells us: 
For Cambridge people rarely smile, 
Being urban, squat and packed with guile... 
Strong men have run for miles and miles 
When one from Cherry Hinton smiles... 
Strong men have blanched and shot their wives 
Rather than send them to St Ives. 
In British elections it is considered bad form for a candidate to 
promote his own cause by castigating his opponents; he lets his 
election agent do it instead. In the USA there is no such 
compunction: 
You takes your choice: a convicted rapist, an adulterer, a practising 
pervert, an embezzler and me. 
*Rupert Brooke, 'The Old Vicarage, Grantchester', in Brooke, Collected Poems 
(London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1918). 
46 How to Win Every Argument 
(The candidates tend to be more exotic in the USA; this might explain 
it.) 
The fallacy will give you hours of innocent fun (and a fair 
amount of guilty fun) in running down the alternatives to what 
you are proposing. We appear to have a kind of double vision 
which leaves us short-sighted on virtue but hawk-eyed for faults. 
To you this is but opportunity. When you pick on a couple of 
alternatives and expose their imperfections, the audience will be 
turning those defective eyes away from your own proposal. They 
will assume that you would not run down everything else as 
mean, foolish, wrong and wicked if your own ideas were no 
better. They will be mistaken. 
No design for a new building ever meets with universal approval, but 
look at the alternatives: a glass-fronted matchbox, something with all 
the pipes on the outside, or a moulded concrete monstrosity. 
(Whereas the one you approve of lets in water, sheds tiles on passersby and needs a king's ransom to maintain. But they won't see that if 
you keep them focused on the damned alternatives.) 
Definitional retreat 
A definitional retreat takes place when someone changes the 
meaning of the words in order to deal with an objection raised 
against the original wording. By changing the meaning, he turns 
it into a different statement. 
'He's never once been abroad/ 
'As a matter of fact, he has been to Boulogne. ' 
'You cannot call visiting Boulogne going abroad!' 
Definitional retreat 47 
(What can you call it then? How about calling it 'sitting on a deckchair at Blackpool?') 
Words are used with conventional meanings. If we are allowed to 
deal with objections to what we say by claiming that they mean 
something totally unusual, rational discourse breaks down 
altogether. 
The fallacy in a definitional retreat lies in its surreptitious 
substitution of one concept for another, under the guise of 
explaining what the words really mean. The support advanced 
for the one position might not apply to its substitute. ('When I 
said I hadn't been drinking, officer, I meant that I hadn't had more 
than I get through in a normal social evening. 0 
The definitional retreat allows someone beaten in an argument to save face by claiming that he was really putting forward 
a totally different view. It also allows for a possible exception to 
be eliminated by a more restrictive interpretation. 
'You have no experience of dealing with terrorism. ' 
'Well, I did act as anti-terrorist adviser to the governments of Malaysia 
and Singapore, and I spent four years at the US anti-terrorist academy. ' 
'I meant you have no experience of dealing with terrorists in England.' 
(He should have made it Scunthorpe, to be even safer.) 
'When I said that we were ruled by tyrants, I was naturally referring to 
the tax-collectors and administrators, rather than to Your Majesty. ' 
Definitional retreat is a favourite recourse of philosophers. 
Their proposed definitions of 'virtue', 'the good', and even of 
'meaning' itself, are set up like wickets for their colleagues to 
bowl at. When the occasional googly scatters the stumps, 
instead of walking back gracefully to the pavilion, the philosopher is more likely to re-erect the stumps in a slightly different 
48 How to Win Every Argument 
place and show that the ball would not have hit them in that 
position. 
A passage from Lewis Carroll sums it up: 
'There's glory for you!' 
'I don't know what you mean by "glory," Alice said. 
Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. 'Of course you don't -
till I tell you. I meant "there's a nice knock-down argument for you!" ' 
'But "glory" doesn't mean "a nice knock-down argument"/ Alice 
objected. 
'When / use a word,' Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful 
tone, 'it means just what I choose it to mean - neither more nor 
less.'* 
The UK's finance ministers are no less skilled. They have vast 
numbers of Treasury officials whose sole purpose is to redefine 
words like 'growth', 'investment', 'spending' and 'business 
cycle'. 
When you marshal your own arguments into a timely definitional retreat, it is advisable to claim a meaning for the words 
which is at least plausible. It should have some authority behind 
the usage. One good way is to slip into a technical vocabulary 
when you started out using ordinary speech. 
Of course, I was using 'expectation' as statisticians do, multiplying the 
probability of the returns by their size. I didn't mean it in the sense that 
we expected anything to happen. 
(Except, perhaps, for a fish wriggling artfully off a hook.) 
A useful device to provide covering fire for a definitional 
retreat is the presumption that everyone understood your 
*Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Class (London: Macmillan, 1927), pp. 124-5. 
Denying the antecedent 49 
second meaning all along, and only your critic has been so 
finicky as to ignore it: 
Everybody knows that when we talk of trains being punctual, we use the 
railway definition of being within ten minutes of the timetable. 
(They do now, anyway.) 
Denying the antecedent 
As with affirming the consequent, the fallacy of denying the 
antecedent is for those who do not really care if their brain is 
going forwards or backwards. It does not admit the possibility 
that different events can produce similar outcomes. 
If I eat too much, I'll be ill. Since I have not eaten too much, I will not be 
ill. 
(So saying, he downed a whole bottle of whisky, cut his hand on a 
rusty nail and sat out all night in wet clothes.) 
The point is, of course, that other events can bring about the 
same result, even if the event referred to does not take place. 
With these 'if... then' constructions, it is all right to affirm the 
antecedent (the 'if part) and it is all right to deny the consequent 
(the 'then' part). It is the other two which are fallacious, affirming 
the consequent or denying the antecedent. 
If he's slow, he'll lose. 
Since he isn't slow, he won't lose 
(But he might just be stupid.) 
You can affirm the antecedent: 'He is slow; he will lose.' You can 
deny the consequent: 'He didn't lose, so he can't have been 
50 How to Win Every Argument 
slow.' The first of these is a type of argument called the modus 
ponens, the second is called the modus tollens, and both are valid. 
It is the other two which are fallacies, even though they resemble 
the valid forms. 
Denying the antecedent is a fallacy because it assigns only one 
cause to an event for which there might be several. It dismisses 
other possibilities which could occur. 
The fallacy commonly occurs where plans are being laid. It 
engenders the belief that if those things are avoided which bring 
harmful consequences, then a pleasant outcome can be 
expected: 
If I smoke, drink or have sex, it will shorten my life-span. I shall give up 
cigars, booze and women and live another hundred years. 
(No. It will just feel like a hundred years.) 
It occurs to no lesser degree on the international scale. Countries 
may calculate the courses of action which bring unpleasant 
consequences in their wake. What they are not able to do is 
insure themselves against even worse outcomes simply by 
avoiding those actions. 
If we have a strong army, countries which fear it might attack us. So by 
disarming, we remove that risk. 
(Possibly, but they might be more likely to attack because it brings no 
retaliation.) 
You can use the fallacy of denying the antecedent very skilfully 
in support of the status quo. It is a natural conservative fallacy 
because most changes we make do not avert all of the evils of the 
world. By pointing to the likelihood that death and taxes will be 
the result of the proposed actions, you might lull an audience 
Dlcto simpliclter 51 
into rejecting them. The fact that death and taxes will result 
anyway should not impinge on your success. 
Dicto simpliciter 
Dicto simpliciter is the fallacy of sweeping generalization. It consists 
of the application of a broad general rule to an individual case 
whose special features might make it exceptional. To insist that the 
generalization must apply to each and every case, regardless of 
individual differences, is to commit the fallacy of dicto simpliciter. 
Of course you voted for the resolution. You're a dock-worker, and your 
union cast 120,000 votes in favour. 
(Carried unanimously, brothers, and by a clear majority.) 
Many of our general statements are not universals. We make 
them in the full knowledge that there will be cases whose 
accidental features make them exceptions. We are apt to say that 
various things make people healthy, knowing that we do not 
necessarily have to mean 'all' people. We make similar generalizations about foods, even though we recognize that some 
people have allergies to various foodstuffs. 
When we insist on treating a generalization as if it were a 
universal which admitted no exceptions, we commit a dicto 
simpliciter. The fallacy arises because we use information about 
the whole of a class, which has not been established or accepted. 
We bring in outside material, therefore, without justification. 
Everyone knows that hooded teenagers are criminals. Since this hooded 
one isn't breaking any laws, he must be older than he looks. 
(Or maybe he's just having a day off.) 
52 How to Win Every Argument 
Dicto simpliciter arises whenever individuals are made to 
conform to group patterns. If they are treated in tight classes as 
'teenagers', 'Frenchmen', or 'travelling salesmen', and are 
assumed to bear the characteristics of those classes, no opportunity is permitted for their individual qualities to emerge. There 
are political ideologies which attempt to treat people in precisely 
this way, treating them only as members of sub-groups in society 
and allowing them only representation through a group whose 
values they may not, in fact, share. 
Look, you're a civil servant. Your representatives voted for this action 
because they know it will be good for the civil service. It must therefore be 
good for you. 
(He only imagined those lost wages.) 
In discussing people of whom we have a little knowledge, we 
often use dicto simpliciter in the attempt to fix onto them the 
attributes of the groups they belong to. Knowing only that a 
neighbour is civil to us and drives a better car, we try to deduce 
things from the fact that he is a Catholic or a squash-player. Our 
assumption of ancillary properties may, in fact, be correct; the 
mistake is to suppose that it must be: 'We all know that children are 
smaller than their parents. Well, now that I'm 50 and Dad is 80, I've 
noticed that I'm quite a bit taller. Maybe he isn't my real father.' 
Dicto simpliciter can be used to fit people into stereotypical 
moulds. Since they belong to the class of Frenchmen, balletdancers and horseriders, they must be great lovers, effeminate 
and bow-legged. You must appeal to generally accepted truisms 
in order to fill in details about individual cases which would 
otherwise be resisted. 
You should as a parent use dicto simpliciter to trick your child 
into doing what you want instead of what they want: 
Division 53 
Spinach is good for growing children. Eat it up. 
(But beware of the construction which says that 'all good children do 
such and such'. Your progeny might slip out of the group in question 
by recognizing themselves as bad.) 
Division 
The doppelgànger of the fallacy of composition is that of division. 
When we attribute to the individuals in a group something which 
is only true of the group as a unit, we fall into the fallacy of division: 
Welsh-speakers are disappearing. Dafydd Williams is a Welsh-speaker, 
therefore Dafydd Williams is disappearing. 
(No such luck. Only the class of Welsh-speakers is disappearing, not 
the individuals who make it up.) 
We commit the fallacy by sliding our adjectives to describe the 
whole over onto the individuals who comprise it: 
The Icelanders are the oldest nation on earth. This means that Bjork 
must be older than other pop stars. 
(And before you go to her house, remember that the Icelandic people 
live surrounded by hot mud and active volcanoes.) 
As with composition, the source of the error in the fallacy of 
division lies in the ambiguity of collective nouns. Both of these 
are a form of the fallacy of equivocation, in that it is the different 
meanings of the noun which upset the validity of the argument. 
It would only be valid if the same meaning were retained 
throughout. (The gospels are four in number. St Mark's is a 
gospel, so St Mark's is four in number.) 
Division is often used fallaciously to confer upon an individual 
54 How to Win Every Argument 
some of the prestige attached to the group or class to which he 
belongs. 
The French are tops at rugby; Marcel is French; obviously he must be tops 
at rugby. 
(But, since the French produce a lot of low-fat milk, Marcel probably 
has some other strange qualities.) 
California is a very wealthy state, so if he comes from there he must be 
worth quite a bit. 
We often commit the fallacy unconsciously, typecasting 
people according to the groups from which they emanate. This 
can work to their advantage: The teaching at Edinburgh University is brilliant; Johnson lectures there, so he must be really 
first-class, or to their disadvantage: Switzerland is a very passive 
nation, so I don't think we can expect too much initiative from 
our Swiss directors. 
An entertaining version of the fallacy is called the fallacy of 
complex division, and assumes that subclasses of the whole share 
the same properties as the entire class. In this version, we meet 
the average British couple with their 2.2 children, out walking 
their 0.7 of a cat with a quarter of a dog. They have 1.15 cars, 
which they somehow manage to fit into only a third of a garage. 
In the world of complex division, an expectant couple with 
two children are very nervous, because they know that every 
third child born is Chinese. In the real world, of course, it is 
different subclasses which produce the overall figures for the 
class as a whole. (Test-pilots occasionally get killed, so I imagine 
that Flight-Lieutenant Robinson will get killed now and again 
himself.') 
Division can be used to bring unearned credit upon yourself 
by virtue of your membership of meritorious classes: 
Emotional appeals 55 
Let me settle this. We British have a longer experience of settling disputes 
than anyone else in the world. 
(Most of it acquired long before any of us were born.) 
It can also be used to heap odium upon adversaries by pointing 
similarly to their involvement in groups which command no 
respect. 
My opponent comes from Glasgow, not a city noted for high intelligence. 
(If it were true, it would probably be because the bright ones had, like 
your opponent, come from it.) 
Emotional appeals 
It would be a strange world if none of us were influenced by 
emotions. This influence steps over the boundary into the territory of logical fallacy, however, when it becomes the means of 
deciding the soundness of an argument. The emotions which 
influence our behaviour should not influence our judgement on 
questions of fact. While it might be appropriate to show pity to a 
convicted criminal, it is certainly not sound procedure to let pity 
affect our judgement of whether or not he committed the crime. 
Recognition that reason and emotion have separate spheres of 
influence is as old as Plato's division of the soul. David Hume put 
it succinctly, telling us that passion moves us to act, whereas 
reason directs the course of those actions. Emotion, in other 
words, motivates us to do things, but reason enables us to calculate what to do. 
Separate spheres they may inhabit, but sophists and tricksters 
have long known ways of making emotions invade the territory 
of reason. Once whipped up, the emotions can be set at such a 
gallop that they easily clear the gulf between their domain and 
56 How to Win Every Argument 
that of reason. A complete range of fallacies is available, with as 
many names as there are emotions to draw on. 
In addition to the ones important enough or common 
enough to be covered by separate treatment, there is a list of 
assorted and miscellaneous emotions, complete with Latin tags, 
which can be drawn upon at one time or another to lead reason 
astray from its intended course. The unwary sailor is entranced 
by the alluring calls of the appeal to fear (argumentum ad 
metum), to envy (ad invidiam), to hatred (ad odium), to superstition (ad superstitionem) and to pride (ad superbiam). There is 
even more to tempt our preference for a quiet time with an 
appeal to a just proportion of everything (ad modum), and one 
which actually says straight out that sentiment is a better guide 
than reason (sentimens superior). Unless one deliberately blocks 
out the pull of these emotions, as the sailors of Odysseus blocked 
up their ears to the allure of the Sirens' call, it is difficult not to be 
influenced. Therein lies their enduring effectiveness as fallacies. 
Those who still oppose nuclear disarmament should study the effects of a 
thermonuclear blast. It can melt the eyeballs and vapourize human flesh 
from great distances. 
(This argumentum ad metum can be intensified by the use of photographs and films and simulated burns, and anything else which 
might distract the audience from asking whether nuclear disarmament will make it more or less likely.) 
There is no way in which Robinson could have solved the problem. That 
would make him better than we are. 
(Right. Envy will not affect the outcome, though a timely ad invidiam 
might persuade people not to believe it.) 
The secret of using these fallacies is a simple one. Take the 
trouble to discover the emotional disposition of your audience 
Emotional appeals 57 
and use language calculated to arouse that emotion. When you 
have built it up assiduously by means of graphic descriptions, you 
turn it to bear on the question of fact. Very few audiences are able 
to turn it off abruptly; most will allow it to flood out onto the area 
normally reserved for reasoned assessment. Whether your appeal 
is to fear, envy, hatred, pride or superstition makes no difference. 
Indeed, you can use them alternately. Pride in one's own race, 
class or nation can be appealed to, even as envy of others is built 
up, perhaps to the point where an ad odium becomes possible. 
The argumentum ad modum deserves a special mention 
because its appeal is to the audience's desire for gradualism. An 
audience is most vulnerable to it when they are trying to be 
reasonable. They equate reason with a quiet life, thinking that 
something admitted in due measure is more likely to be right. 
Like the argumentum ad temperantiam, which urges the middle 
course between extremes, the ad modum appeals to that most 
ancient of maxims which recommends moderation in all things. 
You should always introduce your subtle appeal to lure them 
away from reason by urging your audience: 
Let's be reasonable about this. 
(A strong emotional appeal for the quiet life.) 
Sentimens is a clever fallacy. Its idiotic claim, that emotion is a 
better guide, is most alluring to an intelligent audience. Intelligent people are often afraid of being thought rather cold because 
they use reason so much. They do not want to appear to be 
emotionally deficient, and are easy prey to a speaker who assures 
them that they are just as sensitive, loving and compassionate as 
the next person, who is also a bit of a bore. This permits them the 
delusion that they are welcome into the common fold, instead of 
remaining aloof from it. They happily abandon reason as the 
price of their admission ticket to the human race. 
58 How to Win Every Argument 
An individual can be ensnared with sentimens, and led to drop 
a carefully thought-out position after being assured that he or 
she cares just as much about humanity as the rest of us. A denial 
would hardly count as a good response. A crowd is even easier to 
lead by the nose on a sentimental string. I have rarely seen an 
international gathering which did not give a standing ovation to 
any gaga idiot who urged them to forget reason and concentrate 
on loving each other. 
'Most of the troubles of this world are caused by people thinking 
things out, instead of responding naturally with warmth and 
humanity. We should ignore these facts about Third World dictatorships, and reach out with love in our hearts and ...' 
(And yuk.) 
Equivocation 
Equivocation means using words ambiguously. Often done with 
intent to deceive, it can even deceive the perpetrator. The fallacy 
of equivocation occurs when words are used with more than one 
meaning, even though the soundness of the reasoning requires 
the same use to be sustained throughout. 
Happiness is the end of life. 
The end of life is death; 
So happiness is death. 
(The form of the argument is valid, but 'the end of life' refers to its 
aim in the first line, and to its termination in the second. With this 
discovery, out go a million schoolboy conundrums.) 
Half a loaf is better than nothing. 
Nothing is better than good health; 
Equivocation 59 
So half a loaf is better than good health. 
Equivocal use of words is fallacious because it invites us to 
transfer what we are prepared to accept about one concept onto 
another one which happens to have the same name. Logic, 
which processes the relationship between concepts, is useless if 
the concepts themselves change. 
Elephants are not found in Britain, so if you have one, don't lose it or you 
will never find it again. 
(The word 'found' represents two different concepts here.) 
Many of the equivocal uses are easy to spot. Many more of 
them are not. Clairvoyants specialize in equivocal expressions to 
give them cover in the event of quite different outcomes. Politics 
would be a totally different art if it had to forego the fallacy of 
equivocation. So would business correspondence: 
You can rest assured that your letter will receive the attention it fully 
deserves. 
(As it executes a gentle parabola towards the bin.) 
'Anyone who gets Mr Smith to work for him will indeed be 
fortunate.' 
Puns and music-hall jokes often depend on this fallacy. 
'My dog's got no nose. ' 
'How does he smell?' 
'Terrible!' 
Calvin Coolidge was asked: 
60 How to Win Every Argument 
What do you think of the singer's execution? 
(He replied: 'I'm all for it.') 
The advice given to a political candidate facing a selection 
committee is 'When in doubt, equivocate.' The blunt fact is that 
you cannot please all of the people all of the time, but you can 
have a good shot at fooling most of them for much of it. The 
candidate assures those in favour of capital punishment that he 
wants 'realistic' penalties for murder. To those against, he wants 
'humane consideration'. But he could be in favour of realistic 
light sentences or humane killing. 
Equivocation is a particularly tough paste for pouring into the 
cracks of international discord. It joins irreconcilable differences 
with a smooth and undetectable finish. Many full and frank 
discussions are terminated happily by the appearance of a joint 
treaty whose wording is carefully chosen to mean entirely different things to each of the signatories. 
The vocabulary of equivocation may be learned from the 
strangers' gallery of the House of Commons. If you have a seat in 
the chamber, there is nothing you have to learn about it. 
Once you have acquired the knack, and are fluent in phrases 
such as 'having due regard for', you can move on to the more 
subtle manifestations of the fallacy. 
Well, it all depends on what you mean by full-hearted consent. 
(You might have thought it obvious. You'd be wrong.) 
Every schoolboy knows 
You would be amazed what every schoolboy knows. Anxious to 
secure acquiescence in their controversial claims, disputants 
solemnly assure their audiences that every schoolboy knows the 
Every schoolboy knows 61 
truth of what they are saying. The audience, not wishing to be 
ignorant of matters so widely understood by children, are supposed to keep silent about their doubts. Thus complex and 
dubious assertions are passed off unquestioned. 
Every schoolboy knows that the rate of gene loss from a closed reproductive system is expressed by a simple and well-known formula. 
(Indeed, this is the main topic of conversation over catapults and 
conkers.) 
The tactic is fallacious. Its basic purpose is to appeal beyond the 
evidence to secure acceptance. The audience is invited to assent 
not from conviction but out of shame and fear of being thought 
less knowledgeable than a mere child. The merits of the point are 
meanwhile overlooked. 
So widely used is the tactic that the hapless youth is now 
encumbered with several encyclopaedias of knowledge. There is 
scarcely anything which he does not know. 
As my learned colleague is doubtless aware, every schoolboy knows that 
it was Rex v. Swanson which established in 1749 the precedents governing the use of coaching horns on the public highway. 
(And you can be sure that the same gifted, if youthful, legal scholar is 
also aware of the judgment in Higgins v. Matthews 1807.) 
The aforementioned schoolboy has an intuitive grasp of the 
obvious, and has been widely praised for this ability: 
Why, it is obvious even to a mere child that interstellar dust clouds would 
long ago have been excited to incandescence and be emitting black-body 
radiation were it not for the expansion of the universe. 
62 How to Win Every Argument 
(It is not quite clear whether the mere child finds this obvious even 
before he becomes every schoolboy, or whether he picks it up after a 
few lessons.) 
The fallacy is a special case of the more general fallacy of false 
advertisement, which consists of advance praising of your own 
views. Since you precede them by the information that they are 
known to every schoolboy and obvious to a mere child, you are 
scattering roses in their path. The fallacy may be perpetrated no 
less effectively by opening with 'Obviously' contentions which 
are by no means obvious. 
We hold these truths to be self-evident. 
(So anyone who doesn't agree must be really stupid.) 
To use the fallacy effectively, you should never enter an 
argument without taking half the kindergarten class along for the 
walk. As well as the mere child and every schoolboy, you will 
need even a half-wit, albeit a very knowledgeable one. Every 
beginner should be in your posse to instruct the experts, and for 
sheer range of vision you will need everyone. 
'Everyone can see that...' 
(Even where no one else but you has such sharp eyes.) 
When putting across a really controversial point, you might as 
well send the whole team into action: 
Every schoolboy knows the description of the visitors in Ezekiel; and even 
a half-wit realizes that ancient disasters were caused by cosmic disturbances. A mere child could work out that extraterrestrial forces are 
involved, so it is obvious to everyone that Earth has been under attack for 
The exception that proves the rule 63 
centuries. Now as even beginners to the study of UFOs know only too 
well... 
(By this time your schoolchildren and half-wits should have cleared 
everyone else off the field.) 
Do beware of actual schoolboys though. If there is one in your 
audience, the smart alec is quite likely to step forward and 
contradict you with the facts. Some of them are too good. 
The exception that proves the rule 
Exceptions, of course, disprove rules. Despite this, many people 
confronted by a counter-example to their claim will dismiss it as 
'the exception that proves the rule'. The fallacy consists in the 
dismissal of a valid objection to the argument. 
'You never find songs written about any towns in Britain apart from 
London. ' 
'What about "Scarborough Fair?" ' 
'That's the exception that proves the rule. ' 
(If one leaves Liverpool and Old Durham Town out of it.) 
The origin of the fallacy lies in the changing uses of language. 
The word 'prove', which is now taken to refer to establishing 
something beyond doubt, used to mean 'test'. Something would 
be 'proved' to establish its quality, and this is the sense which has 
passed down to us in this fallacy. The exception puts the rule to 
the test and, if it is found to be a valid exception, refutes it 
instead of proving it in the modern sense of the word: 
64 How to Win Every Argument 
No fictional character ever attracted fan clubs in distant countries like 
pop stars do. Sherlock Holmes does, of course, but he's simply the 
exception that proves the rule. 
(An elementary fallacy, dear Watson.) 
There is a very loose way in which an exception can help to 
point to an otherwise general truth. If we all recognize an 
exception as remarkable, and identify it as such, then it does 
show that we accept that the rule which it counters does usually 
apply. In this sense, the one case we recognize as a freak points 
to the otherwise general truth: 
Medical advances are made by painstaking research, not by chance. I 
know there was penicillin, but everyone knows that was a chance in a 
million. 
(Whether true or not, this is a legitimate line of argument provided 
the rule is not claimed as universal. Everyone's acknowledgement of 
the unique exception points to a rule which says the opposite, with 
this one exception.) 
Even in this specialized case, the exception disproves the universal rule. The trouble with sweeping statements is that it really 
does take only one exception to negate them. The medieval 
world abounded with universal which assured people that the 
sun would always rise and set each day, and that there could be 
no such thing as a black swan. A visit to the land of the midnight 
sun scuppered the first one, and the discovery of black swans in 
Australia polished off the second. It would be pleasant for many 
people if they could live in a world of certainties, surrounded by 
huge general truths. Exceptions come baying at that cosy world 
like wolves at the fringes of a camp-fire. They introduce uncertainties and doubts, and the temptation there is to use the 
Exclusive premises 65 
fallacy quickly to get rid of them so that we can continue as 
before. 
The exception that proves the rule is a fallacy beloved of those 
who are emphatic in their judgements. They have the world 
neatly divided into categories, and do not intend the irritant sand 
of exceptions to intrude into the well-oiled machinery of their 
worldview. In their smooth-running world, all pop stars are drug 
addicts, all feminists are lesbians and all young people are 
weirdos. Any honourable exceptions to the above categories are 
ejected with equal smoothness as 'exceptions that prove the 
rule'. The great thing about this particular fallacy is that it renders 
your argument invulnerable to factual correction. The most 
embarrassing proofs that you are just plain wrong can be swallowed whole as 'exceptions that prove the rule', and need 
occasion no more than a slight pause in your declamation. 
'Lend us a fiver. I've always paid you back before.' 
'What about last week?' 
'That was the exception that proves the rule. You know you'll get it back 
in the long run. ' 
(Put on your trainers.) 
Exclusive premises 
The standard three-line argument called a syllogism has two 
premises and a conclusion; the premises are the evidence and 
the conclusion is deduced from them. If both of the premises are 
negative, no conclusion can be validly drawn from them and the 
fallacy is called the fallacy of exclusive premises. 
No handymen are bakers, and no bakers are fishermen, so no handymen 
are fishermen. 
66 How to Win Every Argument 
(It seems innocent enough, but the logic is fishier than the handymen. If we had used 'tax-dodgers' instead of fishermen, we would 
have ended up saying 'no handymen are tax-dodgers', which 
everyone knows is untrue. The fault lies with the two negative 
premises.) 
The source of the fallacy is fairly clear. The three-liner relates two 
things to each other by means of the relationship which each has 
with a third. When both premises are negative, all we are told is 
that two things lie wholly or partly outside the class of a third 
thing. They could do this however they were related to each 
other, and so no conclusion about that relationship can be 
drawn: 
Some brewers are not idiots, and some idiots are not rich, so some 
brewers are not rich. 
(Did you ever hear of a poor one? With two negative statements, the 
idiots who are not rich do not need to be the same ones who don't 
include the brewers among their number. If this sounds confusing, 
remember two things: two negative premises do not prove anything, 
and all brewers are rich.) 
The fallacy tends to occur because some people genuinely 
believe that if a group is excluded from something, and that 
group in turn is excluded from something else, then the first 
group is also excluded from it. If John cannot get into the 
Masons, and the Masons cannot get into the country club, it 
seems plausible to assume that John doesn't stand a chance for 
the country club. Of course, since the Masons cannot get in, 
John might stand a better chance because he isn't one of them. 
No pudding-eaters are thin, and some smokers are not pudding-eaters, 
so some smokers are thin. 
The existential fallacy 67 
(Many of us are negative about puddings, but two negative statements about them will not tell us anything about smokers. If smokers 
are thin, it might well be from worrying about the health warnings, 
and a lack of money to eat puddings after paying for the cigarettes.) 
When you want to use the fallacy of exclusive premises, you 
should try to make your negative statements ones which the 
audience will accept the truth of. When you slip in a conclusion 
which seems plausible, they will assume that you have proved it. 
You will not get very far if you start out with statements such as 
'No council workers are lazy', but should try instead to keep 
within the bounds of your audience's experience. Use obvious 
truisms such as 'No removal men are careful.' 
The existential fallacy 
It is a curious feature of logic that statements which refer to the 
whole of a class do not actually tell us whether there are any 
members of that class. 
All cats are selfish. 
(This tells us that //there are such things as cats, then they are selfish. 
It does not imply that there are cats, any more than the existence of 
unicorns could be deduced from a similar statement about them.) 
Statements which tell us about some of a class, however, do 
imply the existence of members of the class. 
Some cats are selfish. 
(This tells us that there are such things as cats, and that some of them 
are selfish.) 
68 How to Win Every Argument 
The existential fallacy occurs when we draw a conclusion 
which implies existence from premises which do not imply that. 
If our premises are universal telling us about 'all' or 'none', and 
our conclusion is a particular one telling us about 'some', we 
have committed the fallacy. 
All UFOs are spaceships, and all spaceships are extraterrestrial, so some 
UFOs are extraterrestrial. 
(This seems harmless enough, but it is not valid. We could have said 
all UFOs were extraterrestrial, but by limiting it to some we imply that 
they exist.) 
It seems puzzling that we can be more entitled to say that all 
are, than to claim that only some are. We can console ourselves 
with the thought that perhaps we have to know some of them to 
start talking about the features which apply to some but not the 
others. The universal statements, by not sorting any out, carry no 
such implication. 
The fallacy consists of putting into the conclusion something 
for which no evidence was offered, namely the presumption that 
what is being talked about actually exists. By going beyond the 
evidence, we enter into the territory of the fallacy. 
All policemen are tall people, and no honest Welshmen are tall people, so 
some honest Welshmen are not policemen. 
(Alas, no evidence has been produced to show that there is such a 
thing as an honest Welshman.) 
A conclusion about all honest Welshmen would have been 
acceptable, because it would refer only to any who might exist. 
The existential fallacy is clearly the domain of those who wish 
to engage in rational discourse about astral forces and demonic 
entities but who suffer from the minor disadvantage that there is 
Ex-post-facto statistics 69 
no evidence that any of these things exist at all. Statements are 
made telling what the things must be like if they do exist, and 
somehow we begin to encounter claims made about some of 
them. At that point, unknown to the audience, the assumption 
of real existence has been slipped in without evidence, like an 
ace dropped furtively from the sleeve. 
All psychic entities are affected by human emotions, but some of them 
are more sensitive than others, and tend to be aroused by fear and 
hatred. 
(And the same is true of invisible frogs, spotted Saturnians and warmhearted Swedes. Before you can start sorting them out, you must first 
catch your hare.) 
Use of the existential fallacy is surprisingly easy. Most audiences will respect your modest claims if you move down from 
assertions about all things to claims made for only some of them. 
This readiness is the gate through which you can drive a coach 
and six loaded with fairies and hobbits, ectoplasm and dementals. The malleability of human nature and the perfectibility 
of man went through the same gate long ago. 
Ex-post-facto statistics 
A statistician has been described as someone who draws a 
mathematically precise line from an unwarranted assumption to 
a foregone conclusion. It is not quite as bad as that, but there are 
innumerable statistical fallacies ready to trap the unwary and aid 
the unethical. The fallacy of ex-post-facto statistics is perpetrated 
when we apply probability laws to past events. 
I drew the ace of spades. It was only a 1 in 52 chance, but it came up. 
(The same applied to all the cards, but one had to come up.) 
70 How to Win Every Argument 
We cannot draw too many conclusions from the low 'probability' of certain past events. Something has to happen, and if 
the range of possibilities is large, the probability of each one 
occurring is small. Whichever one occurs thus has a low probability. The fallacy is committed when we go on to suppose, from 
the occurrence of events of low probability, that something 
supernatural was operating: 
/ met my aunt in Trafalgar Square on Wednesday. Think of the hundreds 
of thousands going through the square that day, and you'll realize how 
unlikely it was that we should meet there. Maybe we are telepathic. 
(And the same applies to the thousands of others you met.) 
The probability of heads coming up four times in a row is only 1 
in 16. The same is true of every other combination which might 
come up; only one thing is certain, that a 1 in 16 chance will 
come up if you make four tosses. The fallacy goes beyond the 
evidence, using statistics in an inapplicable way to point to 
mysterious influences where none are needed. Ex-post-facto 
statistics often appear in speculations concerning the origins of 
life and the universe. Exotic calculations are trotted out showing 
the incredible unlikelihood that things could ever have happened 
as they did: 
How lucky we are that our planet has just the right temperature range 
for us, and just the right atmosphere for us to breathe. It has to be more 
than luck. 
(Ten-legged blue things breathing ammonia on the third planet of 
70-Ophiuchi are even now saying the same thing.) 
Similar claims are made of the probability of the right 
chemicals coming together to form life. The fact is that in our 
universe chemicals combine in certain ways. If they were 
Ex-post-facto statistics 71 
different, no doubt different beings in a different universe would 
be congratulating themselves on their good fortune. 
The fallacy is a great prop for those who suppose themselves 
the children of destiny. Looking at the unlikely events which have 
led to their present position, they see the unseen but inexorable 
hand of fate behind them, never realizing that had things been 
different they could have said the same. 
just think, if we hadn't happened to be staying in the same hotel, we 
might never have met and never have married. 
(But they might have met and married other people, and thought 
themselves just as fortunate.) 
Your use of this fallacy will depend a great deal on your 
temperament. It can be deployed at short range to convince 
others that you are a favoured child of the universe and entitled 
to receive special consideration: 
/ believe I was meant to get this job. I saw the advertisement for it in a 
paper the wind blew against my face in Oxford Street. I feel that 
something put me in that place at that time so that I would get this job. 
I'm not saying that should influence your decision, but... 
(But it should. Few of us like to confront the remorseless hand of 
destiny by stamping on its fingers.) 
If you have the other temperament, you can always use the 
fallacy to gain some sympathy: 
just my luck! Of all the parking meters in London she could have been 
checking, it had to be mine. And just at the worst possible time! 
72 How to Win Every Argument 
(If you can fit going to the pub in between being used as a punchbag 
by the universe, lines like this should be good for the odd sympathetic pint.) 
Extensional pruning 
We are guilty of extensional pruning if we use words in their 
commonly accepted meaning, but retreat when challenged into 
a strictly literal definition. The fallacy becomes possible because 
there are two ways of understanding what words mean. We can 
describe the properties of what we refer to, or we can give 
examples. The first is called the 'intension', and the second is the 
'extension' of the word. We could convey the sense of an 
expression such as 'movie star', for example, either by describing 
the role of lead actors and actresses in films, or by listing several 
well-known stars. 
Words carry nuances of meaning by their associations. Little 
tendrils of thought ripple around them, evoking all kinds of ideas 
dependent on past associations. These nuances are part of the 
meaning of the word, provided they are understood by user and 
hearer alike. The fallacy of extensional pruning takes place when 
the user subsequently retreats from that meaning by insisting 
upon only a literal 'intentional' definition. 
While I said I would accept an inquiry, I at no time said that it would be 
independent, that it would be a public one, or that its findings would be 
published. 
(He might be correct in a limited, technical definition of the word. 
But this is not what most people normally understand from the 
associations they make with previous inquiries.) 
The fallacy is committed by saying one thing, but permitting 
another to be understood. A contention must be the same to 
Extensional pruning 73 
both user and hearer, or no reasoned discussion is possible. 
There are two ways of committing this fallacy: one is to mislead 
at the outset, the other is to retreat to a restricted definition in 
order to escape weaknesses in the position. 
All we said was that we'd install a switchboard. We didn't say it would 
work. 
(Nor did they.) 
Advertisers often take pruning shears over the extravagant 
claims they have made. 
We'll take your one-year-old car as trade-in, at whatever you paid for it. 
(Strictly speaking, you paid one sum for the car, and another sum for 
the tax. They are not offering to give you the tax back as well, 
whatever you might have thought.) 
Friends who are free with advice often cut back the meaning in a 
similar way, after the consequences have emerged. 
Look, I know I said you'd feel like a millionaire. I know lots of millionaires 
who feel pretty miserable. Stop complaining. 
(You would feel like a swine if you hit him, but you probably know 
lots of swine who'd enjoy it.) 
The extensional pruner announces his activity. Like the bow 
wave of an advancing ship, his utterances mark his passage. The 
inevitable 'all I said was ...' and 'if you examine my exact words 
...' show him to be a man of great qualifications. You recognize 
him as the man who never really said at all what most people 
took him to be saying. The fine print one always watches for is in 
this case in the dictionary. 
74 How to Win Every Argument 
You can add extensional pruning to your repertoire once you 
are adept at making a limited statement pass itself off as a wider 
one. Gather yourself a collection of phrases whose meaning is 
understood by everyone, even though the words themselves are 
more restricted. 
/ said I'd get you another drink if I was wrong: water is another drink. 
I said I wouldn't have any more cigarettes until later in the week. Five 
minutes afterwards was later in the week. 
(Speak softly, and carry a big dictionary.) 
False conversion 
False conversion takes place when we deduce from the fact that 
all cats are animals the additional information that all animals are 
cats. The converse of a statement, made by exchanging the 
subject and predicate, is true in some cases, false in others. When 
it is performed for one of the invalid cases, it is called false 
conversion. 
All rats are four-legged animals, so obviously all four-legged animals are 
rats. 
(This one is obviously false. Others are less so.) 
Some mortal beings are not cats, therefore some cats are not mortal 
beings. 
(It would be remarkable if the existence of beings other than cats 
were sufficient to establish the existence of an immortal strain of 
cats.) 
The rule is intricate, but worth learning. We can make statements about all or some, and we can make positive or negative 
assertions. This gives us four types of statement: 
False conversion 75 
1 . All are 
2. Some are 
3. None are 
4. Some are not 
The rule is that only types 2 and 3 give valid conversions. If you 
exchange subject and predicate for types 1 and 4 you commit 
the fallacy of false conversion. The reason for the fallacy is that 
you cannot swap a distributed term (covering the whole of its 
class) for an undistributed one. In type 2, both subject and 
predicate cover only part of the class, and in type 3 they both 
cover all of it. Types 1 and 4 cannot be swapped around because 
they mix distributed with undistributed terms. What the rule 
means in practice is that you can swap around statements of the 
form 
Some As are Bs and 
No As are Bs 
but you cannot swap those which tell us 
All As are Bs or 
Some As are not Bs 
If we know that no innovative people are bureaucrats, we can 
deduce perfectly correctly that no bureaucrats are innovative 
people. What we cannot do is deduce from the knowledge that 
some journalists are not drunks the alternative statement that 
some drunks are not journalists. It may happen to be true, but we 
cannot deduce it from a false conversion. 
In practice, most people can spot the obvious falsity of 
converting statements about all animals or all cats. The fallacy 
76 How to Win Every Argument 
tends to be more common, and more deceptive, when it appears 
in the 'some are not' form. 
Since we know that some Marxists are not school-teachers, it follows that 
some school-teachers are not Marxists. 
(No it doesn't.) 
Your own wilful use of this fallacy requires careful planning. It 
is a short-range tactical fallacy, and is best concealed by not 
letting the audience know if you are talking about 'some' or 'all'. 
The claim that 'Texas rabbits are animals which grow to more 
than a metre long' is skilfully ambiguous. It is not clear whether it 
refers to some Texas rabbits or all of them. Your surreptitious 
false conversion would then leave your audience convinced that 
any animal in Texas more than a metre in length must be a 
rabbit. It would also leave any Texans hopping mad. 
False precision 
False precision is incurred when exact numbers are used for 
inexact notions. When straightforward statements about 
experience are decked out in numbers well beyond the accuracy 
of possible measurement, the precision is false and can mislead 
an audience into supposing that the information is more detailed 
than is really the case. 
People say the Scots are mean, but they have been shown in surveys to 
be 63 per cent more generous than the Welsh. 
(What measurement of generosity allows for that kind of a figure to 
be put on it?) 
False precision 77 
Both mathematics and science make widespread use of 
numbers, and both have prestige as sources of authority. The 
extension of exact numbers into areas quite inappropriate to 
them is often little more than the attempt to invest certain 
statements with the aura and prestige attaching to mathematics 
and science. 
The fallacy derives from the use of unjustified material, and 
from the attempt to impart more confidence in the assertions 
than the evidence for them actually merits. 
Our mouthwash is twice as good, yes two times as good, as its leading 
competitor. 
(On what instrument, do you suppose, can one read off the quality of 
a mouthwash; and in what units?) 
There are several versions of this fallacy, all of which have it in 
common that the numbers used give a misleading impression of 
the confidence one can place in the claim. 
Four out of five people can't tell margarine from butter. 
(It may be true, but how is it established? If large numbers on a oneagainst-one test repeatedly fail to distinguish them, we might be 
impressed. If smaller numbers fail to pick out the one margarine 
sample from a plateful of crackers covered with different types of 
butter, we might be rather less impressed.) 
Yet another version might talk about quantity, where quality was 
a highly important factor. 
Kills 99 per cent of all household germs. 
(A worthy claim, unless the rest happen to be typhoid.) 
78 How to Win Every Argument 
False precision is as necessary to the continued happiness of 
many academics as are public money and whisky. Whole 
departments float upon it, just as some do on the other two 
ingredients. Those who are engaged in the study of human 
beings, for example, find few measuring rods scattered about. 
Because the real qualities of people cannot be measured, indices 
are constructed which can be measured, and then the indices are 
passed off as the real thing. 
Birmingham children are more racist than their London counterparts. A 
study of essays written by 10-year-olds showed that the London group 
used 15 per cent less racial epithets than their peer group in 
Birmingham. 
(The assumptions here are manifold. Maybe one can identify and 
agree upon what constitutes a racial epithet. Maybe their appearance 
in essays reflects their importance in the lives of children. Maybe the 
use of them by children is evidence of racism. Maybe the cultural 
differences between Birmingham and London are not important etc., 
etc. None of these doubts qualify the opening line.) 
Macroeconomists happily report that growth-rates were only 
1.4 per cent, instead of the predicted 1.7 per cent, without 
telling us that some measurements of GDP cannot be taken 
within 5 per cent accuracy. Some figures for growth of GDP 
could be out by up to 10 per cent. 
Psychologists measure the ability of children to solve set 
problems and call their answers intelligence. Social scientists 
measure how people respond to questions and describe the 
answers as a measurement of attitudes. False precision is like a 
hastily erected and flimsy bridge to carry our knowledge over 
from reality into the world of our desire. The load is more than it 
will bear. 
Always use the fallacy when you need more authority for your 
claims. Behind the figures you quote, your audience will conjure 
The gambler's fallacy 79 
up an army of white-coated scientists with horn-rimmed spectacles, and dedicated doctors with stethoscopes draped in 
careless urgency. The invisible army will nod sagely in support of 
each precise statement you make, and if the audience might 
have doubted you they will be reassured by the phantom legions 
who underwrite your figures. 
Whatever the academic merits, single-stream schooling certainly produces more balanced children. Surveys have revealed 43 per cent fewer 
psychological abnormalities among groups which... 
(Just don't tell them that the abnormalities included self-esteem, 
competitiveness and the desire to learn.) 
Remember to be exact, especially when you are being vague. 
We can be 90 per cent certain that Bloggs is the guilty man. 
(And 100 per cent certain that you cannot prove it.) 
The gambler's fallacy 
Few fallacies are more persistent in gambling circles than the 
belief that the next toss (or spin, or draw) will somehow be 
influenced by the last one. Gamblers, and others, are led into this 
fallacy by confusing the odds against a whole sequence with the 
odds against any event in that sequence. 
The odds against a tossed coin coming down heads five times 
in a row are easy to calculate. The answer is 
1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2, or 1 in 32 
If the first four tosses, despite the odds, come down heads, the 
chance of the fifth toss being heads is not 1 in 32, but 1 in 2, as it 
80 How to Win Every Argument 
was for each of the other tosses. The previous tosses do not affect 
the odds for the next one. In random or chance events, each go 
is separate from previous or future ones. Most casual gamblers, 
seeing four heads in a row, would bet on tails for the fifth toss 
because five in a row is unlikely. The professional gambler would 
probably bet on heads again, suspecting a crooked coin. 
Red has come up 73 times out of the last 20. 
That means we are due for a run of blacks. I am betting on black. 
(If the table is honest, the odds on black remain, as before, the same 
as the odds on red.) 
There is widespread belief in everyday life that luck will 
somehow even out. The phrase 'third time lucky' is indicative of 
a general feeling that after two failures the odds for success 
improve. Not so. If the events are genuinely random, there is no 
reason for supposing that two losses improve the chances of a 
win. If, as is more common, the results reflect on the character 
and competence of the performer, the two losses begin to 
establish a basis for judgement. 
I'm backing Hillary Clinton on this one. She can't be wrong all the time. 
(Oh yes she can.) 
One area where previous events do influence subsequent ones 
is in the draw of cards from a limited pack. Obviously, if one ace 
is drawn from a pack of 52 cards containing four aces, the 
chances of another ace being drawn are correspondingly 
reduced. Professional gamblers are very good at remembering 
which cards have been drawn already, and how this bears upon 
forthcoming draws. Still other gamblers are very good at making 
up from their sleeves what the laws of chance and probability 
have denied them from the deck. 
The gambler's fallacy 81 
Many so-called 'systems' of gambling are based on the gambler's fallacy. If betting on a 1 in 2 chance, you double the stake 
after each loss, then when you do win you will recover your losses 
and make a modest gain. The trouble with this is that the rules of 
maximum stake, if not your own resources, will soon stop you 
doubling up. (Try the trick of doubling up ears of wheat on each 
square of a chessboard, and see how quickly you reach the world's 
total harvest.) Furthermore, the odds are that the sequence which 
it takes to beat such a system will occur with a frequency sufficient 
to wipe out all of the winnings you made waiting for it. Only one 
rule is worth betting on: the house always wins. 
You can use the gambler's fallacy by appealing to a quite 
unfounded general belief that the universe is somehow fair. 
My argument for avoiding the west of Scotland is that it has rained there 
on about half the summers this century. Since it was fine for the last two 
years, the odds are that it will rain this year. 
(Things change, even in the west of Scotland.) 
You may find the gambler's fallacy particularly useful in persuading people to go along with you, despite a previous record 
which indicates that luck was not involved. 
/ propose this candidate for our new secretary. I know that the last three I 
chose were pretty useless, but that's all the more reason to suppose I've 
had my share of the bad luck and will be right this time. 
(This sounds like bad judgement disguised as bad luck. The odds are 
that the new choice will be both pretty and useless.) 
The last four lawyers I had dealings with were all crooks. Surely this one 
must be better. 
(No chance.) 
82 How to Win Every Argument 
The genetic fallacy 
The genetic fallacy has nothing to do with Darwin or Mendel, 
but a great deal to do with not liking where an argument comes 
from. People give less credence to views which emanate from 
those they detest, regardless of the actual merit of the views 
themselves. Every time you dismiss an argument or opinion 
because you dislike its source, you commit the genetic fallacy. 
The fallacy is sometimes called 'damning the origin', and we can 
take it that the argument is sent to hell along with its source. 
Don't be obsessed with punctuality. It was Mussolini who wanted the 
trains to run on time. 
(Mussolini's views on trains, whatever they were, are hardly an 
argument on punctuality. Bad men, especially verbose ones, are 
almost bound to say something right occasionally, much as a chimpanzee typing at random might produce Hamlet. No doubt Hitler 
favoured road safety and disapproved of cancer. Mussolini might 
have hit it lucky on the subject of trains.) 
The genetic fallacy makes the mistake of supposing that the 
source of an argument affects its validity. Utterly wicked people 
sometimes utter worthy arguments, while saints are not immune 
from silliness. The argument stands alone, drawing neither 
strength nor weakness from its source. 
This particular fallacy is often found basking in the hothouse 
world of fashionable ideas. A view from a currently fashionable 
source is given credence, but the same view would be rejected if 
it emanated from someone less modish. 
The objections to the Council's new bus timetable come only from private 
property developers, and can be ignored. 
(Why? Private developers might well have legitimate opinions or 
insights on such matters. They are, alas, still bêtes noires in the world 
Half-concealed qualification 83 
of local politics. Had the same objections come from Friends of the 
Earth they might have found more sympathetic ears.) 
The genetic fallacy is nowhere more widely seen than in 
connection with the alleged views of a few universally detested 
figures. The association of Adolf Hitler with a viewpoint is generally sufficient to damn it. His predecessors, Genghis Khan and 
Attila the Hun, left fewer writings, but have many views attributed to them. In rare cases the hated name becomes adjectival, 
with the simple epithet Machiavellian or Hitlerian being sufficient 
to remove an idea from consideration by decent people. 
Tinkering with genes is fascist talk. That's what Hitler tried to do. 
(Actually, he did favour breeding from what he saw as superior stock, 
which is not necessarily the same as trying to eliminate certain disorders by gene-splicing. In view of his known association, one is 
surprised that the bloodstock industry and dog-breeding have gone 
as far as they have. For that matter, Volkswagens and autobahns 
seem to have caught on quite well, too.) 
To use the genetic fallacy with devastating effect, all you need 
do is point out that your opponent is echoing arguments first put 
forward in Nazi Germany, then subsequently taken up by 
Augusto Pinochet and Saddam Hussein. You, on the other hand, 
are advocating points of view put forward by Mother Teresa, 
Princess Diana and Mary Poppins... 
Half-concealed qualification 
In a half-concealed qualification, the words themselves express a 
limited claim, but the stress and construction is such that the 
qualifications are glossed over. Although the limits are stated, the 
84 How to Win Every Argument 
audience barely notice them on the way to a discussion about a 
more general statement. 
Practically every single case of monetary expansion is followed within 16 
months by an attendant general price rise of the same proportions. 
(This is the classic statement of sado-monetarism. Note the first word 
- nobody else does.) 
In this example the qualifying word 'practically' is half-concealed 
by the stress given to 'every single case'. Should embarrassing 
cases turn up which do not follow the rule, one can always 
retreat to the qualification and point out that the assertion did 
not claim to cover all instances. 
There is a fallacy inherent in making a restricted claim and 
then engaging in discussion as if it were a general claim. The 
important information that the assertion does not apply to all 
cases is omitted from consideration. The fact that the limitation is 
expressed does not remove the fallacy. It is the fact that the 
qualification is half-concealed which causes it to be unnoticed, 
and which excludes relevant information. 
The link between poltergeist phenomena and psychological troubles is 
now clearly established. In almost every case of unexplained breakages 
and moving objects, there is a disturbed youngster in the household. 
(And since no one noticed the 'almost', we don't need to talk about 
the other cases.) 
Half-concealed qualification is widely used to support half a 
case. When there is a gap in the evidence supporting a complete 
link, the fallacy papers over the crack. Science and philosophy do 
not admit unexplained exceptions. Newton would not have got 
very far by telling us that objects are usually attracted towards 
each other by a force which varies inversely with the square of 
Half-concealed qualification 85 
the distance between them. In daily life, however, we are less 
rigorous, and the fallacy finds room to make a partial case seem 
like a complete one. 
Palm trees don't normally grow in England, so it must be something else. 
(Normally he'd be right; but there are exceptions.) 
Social engineering is often proposed on the basis of incomplete assertions governing how humans generally behave. 
Most crime is caused by juveniles, and nearly all young offenders come 
from broken homes. The answer to rising crime is not more police, but 
more family counselling centres. 
(Maybe it is. Let's hope the staff have as many qualifications as the 
argument does.) 
There is a common character trait which will help you to get 
away with half-concealed qualifications. It expresses itself in a 
readiness to think of cases which do fit, rather than of cases 
which do not. On being given a limited statement, such as 'Most 
bosses flirt with their secretaries', many people will find themselves thinking of cases which they have known. Few find their 
thoughts led immediately to bosses who do not do this. You can 
use this propensity to have more read into your assertions than 
they are really claiming. 
Just about every Cambridge man working in the Foreign Office or security 
services in the late 7940s has turned out to be a spy and a traitor. Why 
don't we cut our losses, fire the rest, and not hire any more? 
('Just about every' seems in this case to mean a handful, or maybe 
three; but everyone will think of the ones they have read about who 
were exposed, rather than about the others who were not.) 
86 How to Win Every Argument 
Hedging 
Hedging is put around arguments, as it is around fields of crops, 
to prevent them from being trampled. Hedging in argument 
means sheltering behind ambiguous meanings so that the sense 
can be changed later. ('I said the last thing we wanted in the 
Middle East was an all-out war, and I stand by that. What we 
have embarked upon is a limited war...') 
Hedging involves the advance preparation for a definitional 
retreat. The words and phrases are so carefully chosen that the 
option is retained to do a switch in definitions. Opposing arguments and examples bearing down on the arguer suddenly find a 
hedge barring their advance, while their quarry may be sighted 
in a different field. ('All I said was that I'd be home at a reasonable hour. I think that three o'clock in the morning is a reasonable hour in view of what I've been doing.') 
Hedging is fallacious because it puts forward two or more 
different statements under the guise of one. The alternative 
interpretations are smuggled, like the companions of Odysseus, 
clinging to the undersides of the sheep which they appear to be. 
The hope is that the hearer, like the blinded Cyclops, will not 
know the difference. The effect of hedging is to render useless 
the information it purports to convey. 
Soothsayers would be sorrier souls without hedging to give 
them more than one chance. Just as you hedge bets in a race by 
backing more than one horse, so in prophecy you can bet on 
more than one outcome. 
Be bloody, bold and resolute; laugh to scorn / The power of man, for 
none of woman born / Shall harm Macbeth* 
(The hedge was that the witches failed to tell Macbeth that this 
description did not apply to those such as Macduff, born by 
*William Shakespeare, Macbeth, iv, i, 79-81. 
Hedging 87 
Caesarian section. He found this out after a very large hedge had 
moved from Birnam to Dunsinane.) 
Most oracles and insurance agents are notorious for their use 
of hedging: some take it to unimagined lengths. The centuries of 
Nostradamus are so obscure, and can be translated in so many 
ways, that they can be used to predict literally anything. People 
have claimed to find in them the most astonishingly detailed, 
and astonishingly accurate, foretelling of the future. Not only 
Napoleon and Hitler, but even recent popes and politicians 
emerge from his pages. As with all hedged prophecies, however, 
there are tell-tale signals. People are very good at finding references in the writings of Nostradamus to what has already happened. They are not successful at finding accurate accounts of 
what will happen. There is also a remarkable consistency to the 
way in which subsequent ages have found that many of his 
prophecies made sense for their own time. 
Dishonesty is an essential aspect of hedging. The ambiguity is 
inserted deliberately with intent to deceive, and for the purpose 
of proving the perpetrator correct, whatever the outcome. The 
fairground fortune-teller shelters harmlessly behind her hedge by 
telling you that you are destined to travel (even if only on the No. 
36 bus home). The economist hides rather more wilfully behind 
the hedge that things will get worse, barring a major change in 
the world economy; (when they get better, it is because there 
was a major change in the world economy.) 
Hedging requires planning. Few people can toss off 
ambiguous phrases on the spur of the moment; we expect to 
find them in the prepared statement which is issued, rather than 
in the off-the-cuff remark. You should accumulate a stock of 
phrases which look plain enough from one angle, but are 
bedecked with hedges as you approach them. 
You will find the cheque paid directly into your bank account. 
(When?) 
88 How to Win Every Argument 
Hominem (abusive), argumentum ad 
If you cannot attack the argument, attack the arguer. While an 
insult itself is not fallacious, it is if made in a way calculated to 
undermine an opponent's argument, and to encourage an 
audience to give it less weight than it merits. When this is done, 
the famous argumentum ad hominem abusive is committed. 
Dr Green argues very plausibly for fluoridation. What he does not tell us 
is that he is the same Dr Green who ten years ago published articles in 
favour of both euthanasia and infanticide. 
(Unless his argument is that fluoride will kill off the old people and 
infants more effectively, it is hard to see how this bears on the 
arguments for or against fluoride.) 
The fallacy here, as with most fallacies of relevance, is that the 
argument is not treated on its merit. Arguments should stand or 
fall by their own qualities. Strictly speaking, the merits of the 
arguer do not come into it. Even the public relations industry is 
not always in error. It is only because we are reluctant to suppose 
that a good and sensible argument can come from a bad and 
stupid source that the ad hominem abusive has any effect. 
Now I come to Professor Robinson's argument in favour of amalgamating the two colleges. Far be it from me to reopen old wounds by 
referring to the Professor's conviction three years ago for drunk driving, 
but we have to ask ourselves... 
(Note the ritual denial. It is usually the signal for an ad hominem 
abusive, 'I don't wish to be catty, but - miaow.') 
There are many forms of this fallacy, some so specialized that 
they are identified and named as separate fallacies. Effective use 
demands a bold attempt to make the abuse appear to have some 
Hominem (abusive), argumentum ad 89 
bearing on the issue under consideration. The use of personal 
attacks to cast doubt on the arguer's judgement gives one possible avenue. 
Lawyers when cross-examining hostile witnesses tread a fine 
line between 'establishing the character of a witness' and a 
simple ad hominem abusive to discredit the testimony. Similarly, 
the use of witnesses on the character of the accused can often 
venture over the line into the territory of the fallacy. 
The political arena is fertile territory in which some fallacies 
grow like weeds and others like carefully cultivated blossoms. 
The ad hominem abusive is one of the staples of parliamentary 
question-time. 
/ would remind the House that when my questioner was in office 
unemployment and inflation doubled, and wages went down almost as 
fast as prices went up. And he has the temerity to ask me about the 
future of the mining industry. 
(No comment, which is what he is saying in a more circumlocutious 
form.) 
Some of the poor quality of parliamentary debate can be laid 
at the door of the press. So long as there are sycophantic journalists prepared to praise an ordinary ad hominem abusive as a 
'splendid riposte' there will be politicians labouring through the 
midnight hours to compose such gems as 'like being savaged by 
a dead sheep'. They perform to their audience. 
The rules to remember when committing this fallacy are that 
the hostile material should, wherever possible, be introduced 
with apparent reluctance, and it should be made to bear on the 
question of whether your opponent deserves consideration by 
such a worthy and serious audience as you are both addressing. 
90 How to Win Every Argument 
It is with a heavy heart that I release copies of these photographs and 
letters. I ask you whether this council can be seen to be influenced in its 
policy toward the new suspension bridge by a man whose behaviour 
with an 11 -year-old girl flouts every standard of public and private 
behaviour which we, as a council, have a sacred duty to uphold. 
(Look out below.) 
Hominem (circumstantial), argumentum ad 
In the argumentum ad hominem circumstantial, the appeal is to 
the special circumstances of the person with whom one is 
arguing. Instead of trying to prove the contention true or false on 
the evidence, its acceptance is urged because of the position and 
interests of those appealed to. 
You can't accept the legitimacy of lending for profit. You are a Christian, 
and Christ drove the money-lenders from the temple. 
(This is not a general argument. It might not do much for a Hindu or 
a Jew, for example. The listener is invited to assent because of his 
Christian convictions.) 
In a similar way people can be asked to accept a view because 
of their circumstances as members of the political party which 
supports it. In this version of the fallacy the error comes in by 
bringing the particular position of the audience into what is 
urged as a generally accepted truth. While such tactics might 
indeed convince that specific audience, they would not establish 
the Tightness or wrongness of what is urged, nor the truth or 
falsity of a statement. 
Hominem (circumstantial), argumentum ad 91 
No one in this university audience can be opposed to handing out state 
money to subsidize services, otherwise you would not be here, occupying 
a subsidized place. 
(Actually, it is other state handouts which students oppose.) 
A variant of the fallacy dismisses a person's views as representing only their special circumstances. It assumes that an oil 
company executive can reflect only his corporation's interest 
when he voices an opinion on the future of energy supplies. In 
the first place, the executive may well have independent views 
which differ from those of his company. In the second place, 
there is nothing to say that the corporation view is not the correct one, self-interested though it may be. The fallacy arises in 
this version by the wanton dismissal of possibly relevant material 
as much as by bringing in irrelevant matters such as the circumstances of the audience. Even if it can be shown why an 
opponent thinks as he does, it still does not show him to be 
wrong. ('As an opera-lover, you will be the first to agree that we 
need more subsidy for the arts.') 
The appeal to special circumstances occurs in arguments 
addressed to specialist audiences. The American expression 
'building a constituency' refers quite often to the process of 
adding together enough interest groups, all of which give support on account of their special circumstances. An adept, if 
unscrupulous, politician might build a power-base by directing 
argument not to the general good of society but to the special 
circumstances of public-sector employees, trade unions, welfare 
recipients, ethnic minorities and groups involved in sexual politics. The Tightness or wrongness of the programme need not 
come into it if enough special circumstances can be appealed to. 
Both versions of the argumentum ad hominem circumstantial 
can be used to advantage. You should employ the first version 
with respect to circumstances which are broad enough to 
92 How to Win Every Argument 
include fairly large audiences. ('You, as members of the working 
class, will appreciate ...') Especially useful to you will be the 
nominal membership of the Christian Church. Many people like 
to think of themselves as Christians, although they do not like the 
obligations which serious Christianity would impose. Thus when 
you appeal to them that as Christians they can hardly oppose 
your views, they will be forced into a reluctant and resentful 
acquiescence you could never have gained otherwise. 
The second version is spectacular in the rejection of expert 
evidence against you. An expert is someone in the field, and as 
such his views represent only his circumstances as one who is 
involved. Thus, when the town-planner refutes your claims on 
town-planning; when the oil company expert shows what nonsense you have uttered on energy; and when the businessman 
exposes your cockeyed views about business, you smile sweetly 
in each case and observe: 'Well he would say that, wouldn't he?' 
Ignorantiam, argumentum ad 
Socrates was thought by the oracle to be the wisest man because 
he alone knew how ignorant he was. The knowledge of ignorance might have been good at keeping Socrates modest, but it 
forms a poor basis for deduction. The argumentum ad ignorantiam is committed when we use our lack of knowledge about 
something in order to infer that its opposite is the case. 
Ghosts exist all right. Research teams have spent many years and millions of pounds attempting to prove that they don't; and they have never 
succeeded. 
(The same could probably be said of Aladdin's lamp and the prospects for world peace.) 
Ignorantiam, argumentent ad 93 
The positive version of ad ignorantiam asserts that what has not 
been disproved must happen. There is, in addition, a negative 
form which claims that what has not been proved cannot occur. 
Talk of extraterrestrial life-forms is nonsense. We know there are none 
because every single attempt to establish their existence has failed 
utterly. 
(Also true of the Yeti, Bigfoot, the Loch Ness monster and editorial 
integrity.) 
In both versions of the fallacy, the appeal is to ignorance. It is 
called upon to supply support for an assertion, even though our 
own state of knowledge does not normally bear on the truth or 
falsity of that statement. The fallacy consists of the intervention 
of irrelevant material, in the shape of our own ignorance, into an 
argument which is about something else. It is notoriously difficult 
to prove that something exists, especially if it is a shy creature 
which hides coyly in the deep of a Scottish loch, on the slopes of 
a mountain wilderness, or in the mists of the third planet of 61 -
Cygni. You practically have to meet one. Even then, a wealth of 
recorded evidence would be required to convince others. 
To establish non-existence is even more difficult. You have to 
look at the whole universe simultaneously to make sure that your 
quarry is not lurking in any part of it. Not surprisingly, this feat is 
rarely accomplished, and thus leaves us with boundless spaces 
thickly populated with ad ignorantiams and the other products of 
our imagination. 
Kid, I've flown from one side of the galaxy to the other. I've seen a lot of 
strange stuff, but I've never seen anything that could make me believe 
there's one all-powerful force controlling everything. 
Of course there are cases in which our lack of knowledge does 
influence our judgement; they occur where we would expect to 
94 How to Win Every Argument 
have that knowledge if the thing were true. One would rightly 
reject a report that Camden Town Hall had been swallowed 
whole by a slime monster if there were no reports of it in the 
newspapers, no eyewitness accounts on television, no street 
celebrations, or any of the evidence we would expect to 
accompany such an event. 
The ad ignorantiam forms the semblance of a cloak to cover 
the otherwise naked beliefs of those who are predisposed to give 
credence to extraordinary things. Under its comforting warmth 
shelters a widespread popular belief in telepathy, poltergeists, 
demonic possession, magic pyramids, Bermuda triangles and the 
innocence of tobacco. (Television violence doesn't do any harm. 
None of the surveys has ever managed to prove that it does.') 
The argumentum ad ignorantiam is useful if your own views do 
not follow received opinion. You can persuade others to share 
these bizarre notions by appealing to the lack of evidence to the 
contrary. Only slight difficulty is occasioned by the abundance of 
evidence in many cases to prove you wrong: you reject the 
evidence, deploying further ad ignorantiams to show that no one 
has ever proved the evidence to be reliable. In this way you will 
be able to sustain a preconceived view of things in the teeth of all 
sense and experience. When you are expert at it, you can add the 
letters 'ad ign.' after those denoting your degree in sociology. 
After all, no one can prove that you shouldn't. 
Ignoratio elenchi 
Ignoratio elenchi is one of the oldest fallacies known to us, being 
first identified by Aristotle. When someone believes himself to be 
proving one thing, but succeeds in proving something else 
instead, he commits ignoratio elenchi. He not only argues beside 
the point, but directly to a different conclusion. 
Ignoratlo elenchl 95 
/ shall oppose this measure to permit people to leave school earlier by 
proving once again the value of education. 
(Proving the value of education does not prove the case against 
permitting earlier leaving. Perhaps it takes education, as opposed to 
schooling, to see the difference.) 
The thesis which is proved is not relevant to the one which the 
arguer sought to prove, which is why this is sometimes known as 
the fallacy of irrelevant thesis. The fallacy consists of supposing 
that the one conclusion equates with the other, when in fact they 
make separate points. The arguments which would support the 
first conclusion are omitted, and those which support the irrelevant conclusion are brought in instead. 
How could my client have ordered the murder? I have proved 
beyond a shadow of doubt that he was not even in the country at the 
time. 
(Well done. Does that show he didn't order it before he left, or 
arrange it by telephone?) 
Ignoratio elenchi has a subtle appeal. Its strength lies in the fact 
that a conclusion is validly proved, even though it is the wrong 
one. Anyone who concentrates on the argument may well find 
that its soundness diverts his attention away from the irrelevant 
conclusion. 
Is gambling a worthwhile occupation? Believe me, we not only work 
as hard as anyone else, but harder. It takes hours of study every day, 
quite apart from the time spent doing it. 
(OK, it's hard work. Now, is it worthwhile?) 
Ignoratio elenchi makes its brief, but usually successful, 
appearance wherever someone accused of doing something he 
96 How to Win Every Argument 
did do is quite prepared to deny something else. It is a central 
feature of all points where journalistic and political circles touch. 
The use of the fallacy has an almost ritual quality to it. Whether it 
is under the steady beam of studio lights, or the staccato illumination of flash cameras in the streets, the little tableau is 
enacted. The eager pressmen solemnly charge the great man 
with one thing, and he, with equal solemnity, shows that he has 
not done another. 
'Isn't it true, Minister, that you have allowed the living standards of the 
poor to fall in real terms?' 
'What we have done is to increase by 3.7 per cent the allowance to 
childless dependent females, and by 3.9 per cent the allowance to 
widows with two children, these increases both being larger than our 
opponents ever managed in a single year of their term of office. ' 
In the more relaxed atmosphere of a studio interview, the 
great man will often brazen it out, with royal trumpeters 
announcing his ignoratio elenchi: 
Well, John, that's not really the point, is it? What we have done is to... 
(And you can bet that this certainly isn't the point.) 
Obviously you can use the fallacy for close-quarters defensive 
work. Your audience will be so impressed by all the things which 
you can prove you have not done, that their attention might 
wander away from those you have. The more laborious and 
detailed your proofs, the less chance there is of anyone 
remembering what it was you were actually accused of. 
You can also use it in an attacking role, proving all kinds of 
things except the ones that matter. There are many things which 
can be demonstrated about nuclear power, hunting animals and 
refined white sugar which are not relevant to the central topic of 
Illicit process 97 
whether others should be banned from doing things you do not 
approve of. 
Jogging in public should be banned. There are studies which show it can 
increase the risks to health, rather than decrease them. 
(Even if it were true, would it be an argument for banning public 
jogging? It sounds as though the major adverse effect is not on the 
jogger's health, but the speaker's conscience.) 
Illicit process 
There is a rule about arguments which tells us that if a term in the 
conclusion refers to the whole of its class, then the evidence 
pointing to that conclusion must also have told us about the 
whole class. We cannot reach a conclusion about 'all estate 
agents', for example, unless we start with some knowledge 
which applies to all of them. To know that some estate agents 
are guilty of this or that practice will not justify us reaching 
conclusions about all of them. Arguments which break this rule 
are said to commit the fallacy of illicit process. 
All tax-collectors are civil servants, and all tax-collectors are bullies, so all 
civil servants are bullies. 
(Too harsh. There may be some somewhere who are just a little 
overbearing. The fallacy is that we refer to all civil servants in the 
conclusion, but the premise only tells us that tax-collectors are some 
of them.) 
The argument which uses illicit process has to be fallacious 
because it makes unsupported claims. Although the premises 
talk only about some of a class, the conclusion introduces for the 
first time the rest of that class. In other words, we try to reach 
98 How to Win Every Argument 
conclusions about things we have no evidence on, and commit a 
fallacy by doing so. 
There is another version of illicit process which is harder to 
spot: 
All cyclists are economical people, and no farmers are cyclists, so no 
farmers are economical people. 
(This appears to fit the observed facts, but there is a fallacy. We could 
just as easily have said 'All cyclists are mortals'. This would give the 
distinct impression that big fat farmers would be driving their big fat 
cars for ever.) 
The source of the fallacy in this example is that the premise tells 
us that cyclists are some of the class of economical people. The 
conclusion, on the other hand, tells us that the entire class has 
not a single farmer in it. Again, the fallacy is illicit process. 
These terms which cover the whole of their class are called 
'distributed terms', and there is a rule for finding them. Universal, which talk about 'all' or 'none', have distributed subjects; 
negatives, which tell us what is not the case, have distributed 
predicates. In the example above, the term 'economical people' 
is distributed in the conclusion, since it is the predicate of a 
negative statement. In the premise, however, it is undistributed, 
being neither the subject of a universal nor the predicate of a 
negative. It sounds complicated, but the rule makes it simple. 
You will soon be seeing which conclusions try to cover all of a 
class without any information to justify it. To dazzle your friends 
totally, you should call the fallacy illicit minor when the subject of 
the conclusion is unjustifiably distributed, and illicit major when 
the predicate of the conclusion is so treated. 
To use illicit process requires a good deal of homework. You 
should deploy it in support of conclusions which look plausible 
but have the minor technical drawback that you cannot prove 
Irrelevant humour 99 
them. Your expertise at illicit process will enable you to construct 
arguments based on what some of the class do, and slide 
smoothly into conclusions about all of them. 
Some Australians are pleasant fellows, and some con-men are not 
pleasant fellows, so some Australians are not conmen. 
(Who knows? It may even be true; but it takes a lot more than this to 
prove it.) 
Irrelevant humour 
The fallacy of irrelevant humour is committed when jocular 
material irrelevant to the subject under review is introduced in 
order to divert attention away from the argument. 
My opponent's position reminds me of a story... 
(Which will not remind the audience of the argument.) 
While humour entertains and enlivens discussion, it also distracts. 
The fallacy does not lie in the use of humour but in its employment to direct attention away from the rights and wrongs of the 
matter in hand. A joke might win an audience, but it does not 
win an argument. 
A member of parliament, Thomas Massey-Massey, was introducing a 
motion to change the name of Christmas to Christ-tide, on the grounds 
that mass is a Catholic festival, inappropriate to a Protestant country. He 
was interrupted by a member opposite who asked him how he would like 
to be called 'Thotide Tidey-Tidey'. The bill was forgotten in the uproar. 
The hustings heckler is the great exponent of this fallacy. His 
warblings accompany parliamentary election meetings, often 
100 How to Win Every Argument 
drowning out any reasoned argument for the very good reason 
that they are a lot more interesting and quite often of a higher 
intellectual level. A few of them achieve the immortality of the 
book of quotations as 'anonymous heckler', especially if their 
interjection has prompted an even better reply from the candidate. Lloyd George, Winston Churchill and Harold Wilson all 
showed adroitness at turning a diversionary joke back upon its 
user. 
QUESTIONER: What do you know about agriculture? How many toes has a 
pig? 
NANCY ASTOR: Why don't you take off your shoes and count them? 
Often cited as a classic of irrelevant humour is the joke by 
Bishop Wilberforce when debating evolution against Thomas 
Huxley. Pouring scorn on evolution, the bishop asked Huxley: 
You claim descent from a monkey; was it on your grandfather's or 
grandmother's side? 
(Huxley's reply is also considered to be a classic put-down. He saw no 
shame in being descended from a monkey, but described the man he 
would be ashamed to have as an ancestor; a man who despite his 
learning sought to obscure by means of aimless rhetoric and appeals 
to prejudice...) 
The problem for the user of rational argument is that a guffaw 
is as difficult to refute as a sneer. The audience enjoys the 
entertainment more than the argument. A speaker for a religious 
sect would regularly invite his audience to supply any biblical 
quotation which conflicted with his view of things. When 
members of the audience obliged, as they often did, he would 
always reply: 
Lapident, argumentum ad 101 
That sounds more like Guinesses talking than Genesis. 
(The volunteer was invariably discomfited by the gale of laughter.) 
Those who set out upon the trail of public debate should carry 
a knapsack full of custom-built jokes ready to toss before an 
audience in times of need. At the very least, the wave of mirth 
washing over your victim slightly lowers his authority, even while 
it gives you time to think. 
The ability to produce irrelevant humour on the spur of the 
moment is a product of wit and experience. Many years spent in 
the debating chamber of a university will sharpen your ability to 
think on your feet. The joke need not even be a clever one if 
delivered with style. I once saw a speaker making a perfectly valid 
point about sales to authoritarian states of airplanes which could 
carry nuclear weapons. He was floored by an interjection which 
suggested that wheelbarrows could do the same. 
An undergraduate in the process of being censured for high 
crimes and misdemeanours took all of the force out of the attack 
by facing his audience solemnly and saying: 
/ wish to accept censure, and to couple with it the name of my mother, 
who also thinks I've been a very naughty boy. 
(Collapse, amid uproar, of prosecution case.) 
Lapidem, argumentum ad 
Bishop Berkeley expressed the view that matter does not exist 
separately from the perception of it. When Boswell told Dr 
Johnson that this was an idea impossible to refute, the good 
doctor's response was to kick against a stone so that his foot 
rebounded. 'I refute it thus', he said. He was not so much 
refuting it as ignoring it, because the evidence for the existence 
102 How to Win Every Argument 
of the stone, including the sight, sound and feel of a kick against 
it, is all perceived by the senses. 
Dr Johnson's treatment has given us the name of the argumentum ad lapidem, the appeal to the stone. It consists of 
ignoring the argument altogether, refusing to discuss its central 
claim. 
He's a friend of mine. I won't hear a word spoken against him. 
(Top marks for loyalty; none for knowledge.) 
An argument or piece of evidence cannot be dismissed 
because it fails to conform to an existing opinion. Much as we 
might like to toss out material which offends our ordered view of 
things, it is a fallacy to suppose that we can do so without cost. 
By refusing to admit material which may be relevant to a sound 
conclusion, we proceed in ignorance. Ignorance is more reliable 
as a source of bliss than of correctness. 
The argumentum ad lapidem is most appropriately named 
after Dr Johnson's use of it, for it was one of his favourites. His 
reasoned and balanced view on the freedom of the will, for 
example, came out as: 
We know our will is free, and there's an end on't. 
(It does tend to finish an argument, as it is meant to.) 
Jeremy Bentham described all talk of natural rights as nonsense, and talk of inalienable natural rights as 'nonsense on stilts'. 
So much for the American Declaration of Independence. 
There are always plenty of stones to kick in fields where proof 
has no footing. Wherever a belief is indemonstrable, its adherents can use the ad lapidem. 
Lapident, argumentum ad 103 
Reason is no guide; you must open your heart... and you will know. 
(This is not terribly useful to outsiders looking for the truth of a thing, 
comforting though it may be to those who know.) 
This fallacy occurs in a university setting far more than one might 
suppose. It is often argued quite seriously in quasi-academic 
circles that certain books should not be allowed on campus 
because they propagate error. Speakers are quite frequently 
shouted down because their audience know they are speaking 
falsehoods, and do not need to hear the argument. Some student unions actually make a policy of the ad lapidem, refusing to 
allow a platform on campus for known error - a category which 
can even include members of the elected government of the 
country. 
A charming version of the fallacy emerged from the pen of 
Herbert Marcuse. Now forgotten, although he was a high priest 
of student radicals in the 1960s, his Critique of Pure Tolerance 
made the interesting point that tolerance can be repressive 
because it permits the propagation of error. How could we 
recognize error in order to stop it? Easy. Guess who was going to 
tell us. 
When you yourself employ the ad lapidem, you must do so 
with a total assurance which suggests that the person who raised 
the offending fact or argument is totally beyond the pale. Like 
the judge who once convicted a jury for 'going against plain 
evidence', you should make it clear that he is going against all 
reason. Your opponent, by going beyond every received opinion 
and every canon of decency, has rendered his opinion totally 
unworthy of discussion. 
Liberty of expression is one thing; but this is licence! 
('Licence' means liberty you don't approve of.) 
104 How to Win Every Argument 
Where you have control of events, you can afford to be less 
subtle: 'I don't care what time it is. Get to bed this minute.' 
Lazarutn, argumentant ad 
The poor may indeed be blessed; but they are not necessarily 
right. It is a fallacy to suppose that because someone is poor that 
they must be sounder or more virtuous than one who is rich. The 
argumentum ad Lazarum, after the poor man, Lazarus, takes it 
that the poverty of the arguer enhances the case he or she is 
making. 
The guru has nothing to gain by lying or fooling anyone; all he has are 
the nuts that he lives on. 
(And the ones that he teaches.) 
Poverty does not contribute to the soundness of an argument, 
any more than riches do. The fallacy consists of giving attention 
to the person instead of to the contentions which he or she is 
putting forward. It may well be that the poor are less exposed to 
the temptations of affluence, but it may equally be that the rich 
are less distracted by disease, hunger and degrading toil, and the 
temptations to escape them. Even if we take it that a person who 
eschews wealth is not acting for material gain, we should 
remember that there are other ways of achieving satisfaction. 'All 
power is delightful', we are told, 'and absolute power is absolutely delightful.' 
Although we should not take account of the circumstances of 
the arguer, the ad Lazarum is deeply engrained into our thinking. 
We tend to suppose that the poor have less opportunities for 
error, having less opportunity, full stop. The literature of our 
Lazarum, argumentum ad 105 
culture compensates them for their poverty with extra measures 
of wisdom and virtue, sometimes of beauty. 
With her clogs and shawl she stood out from the others. 
(It could just have been malnutrition, though.) 
The poor are probably more likely to prefer the means of 
acquiring real education, health and respite from an arduous life 
than to want the phantoms wished on them in the rose-tinted 
imaginations of detached observers. 
The politician who astutely recognizes that most of his constituents are poor will often go to extraordinary lengths to feign a 
similar poverty, thereby hoping to command respect. His 
limousine is left at the frontier with his well-cut suit, as he 
changes down to the car and clothes of his constituents. Those 
self-same electors, did he but know it, probably regard him as no 
better than themselves, and reserve their admiration for the guy 
with the flash car and the swanky outfit. The point is that the 
argumentum ad Lazarum is a fallacy which appeals to the well-todo. The real poor have no time for it. 
The best view I ever heard on this was told to me by a simple, honest 
woodcutter... 
(Who was probably smart enough not to depend on the views of 
woodcutters...) 
Woodcutters, like aged peasants with weatherbeaten faces, 
should be lined up in orderly squadrons in support of your 
arguments. A few simple fishermen should act as outriders, with 
a score or two of wise old washerwomen in reserve. Their faces, 
lined by experience, should nonetheless reflect an inner placidity 
and acceptance of life. The views which you put forward were, of 
course, gained from sources such as these. 
106 How to Win Every Argument 
He puffed reflectively on his pipe, then looked at me with those strangely 
quiet eyes. He told me that, although poor himself and honest, he had 
always reckoned that deficit spending by government could stimulate 
production by priming demand, and similarly... 
(If he's so sincere, how can he be wrong?) 
Loaded words 
It is possible to influence the outcome of a judgement by the 
deliberate use of prejudiced terms. When the words used are 
calculated to conjure up an attitude more favourable or more 
hostile than the unadorned facts would elicit, the fallacy used is 
that of loaded words. 
HITLER SUMMONS WAR LORDS! 
M.DALADIER CONSULTS DEFENCE CHIEFS 
(The two headlines tell us the same thing: that the leaders of Germany and France had seen the heads of their armed forces. In Germany these are 'war lords', but in France they are 'defence chiefs'. 
The German leader is simply 'Hitler', without title, and he summons 
his men imperiously. Daladier, however, is a monsieur, and being a 
good democrat, 'consults'.) 
Near synonyms carry subtle nuances of meaning which can 
be used to influence attitudes to the statement which bears 
them. The fallacy derives from the fact that these attitudes are 
not part of the argument. They were conjured up illicitly to 
achieve more effect than could the argument alone. The extra 
nuances and the response to them are both strictly irrelevant to 
establishing the truth or falsehood of what is being said. Language abounds with ways of putting our own attitudes into a 
description in order to elicit a response from others. People may 
Loaded words 107 
be forgetful or negligent; they may be steadfast or unyielding; 
they may be confident or arrogant. Many of these terms are 
subjective: they depend for their accuracy on the feelings of the 
observer and on how he or she interprets the situation. A fair 
argument requires a conscious effort to put forward the case in 
terms which are reasonably neutral. 
Once again Britain has been found sucking up to dictatorships. 
(Or maintaining friendly relations with strong governments. Note 
how 'found' implies that they were discovered in a guilty secret.) 
The judge's bench, as he directs the jury, is good territory for 
loaded words to roam on. English law, through a tiresome 
oversight, gives the jury the right to decide the verdict. Many a 
judge will help to fill this gap in legal procedure by choosing 
words to help the unfortunates in their deliberations. 
Are we to believe the word of this snivelling, self-confessed pervert, or 
that of a man whose reputation is a byword for honour and integrity? 
(If you had thought of doing so, this is a good point at which to 
change your mind.) 
There is a series of verb conjugations which brings out the 
different loading a speaker will apply to words describing him, 
the person he speaks to, or an absent third party. Thus: 'I am 
firm; you are stubborn; he is a pig-headed fool.' 
Descriptions of contests can invite us to take sides by the 
choice of terms, rather than by the events they report. 
Scotland stole a goal in the first half, but England's efforts were well 
rewarded in the second half when... 
108 How to Win Every Argument 
(Guess which side of the border the reporter comes from?) 
What goes for the sports section applies even more to the leader 
page. 
The public can distinguish Labour bribes from Tory pledges. 
(They can certainly distinguish whose side the writer is on.) 
Public affairs programmes on television are great fun for the 
connoisseur of loaded words. There is an unfortunate conflict of 
interests. They want to present material to make you share their 
prejudices; their authority requires at least some semblance of 
objectivity and balance. While blatant bias does occur, the 
satisfaction comes in spotting the loaded words at a slightly 
more insidious level. Which side has 'terrorists', for example, and 
which has 'freedom-fighters?' Which countries have a government and which a regime? 
When you are in the situation of trying to persuade people, 
you will find loaded words most useful. Your verbal picture 
shows the bleak outlook of one alternative, and contrasts it with 
the rosy setting which results from the other. Your listeners need 
never know that you could have done it just as easily the other 
way round. 
Would you rather believe the careful words of an internationally 
respected columnist, or the incoherent ramblings of a well-known hack? 
Are you not moved by the just case which is even now being voiced by 
thousands of concerned demonstrators outside this very building? 
I'm not going to be taken in by the bleatings of a mob. 
When describing actions, remember to load your words in 
such a way that even to observers who know nothing of the 
Mlsericordiam, argumentum ad 109 
facts, there will be an obvious distinction between your prudent 
investments and the reckless spending of others, between the 
modest perquisites to which you were entitled and the wholesale 
embezzlement in which they have engaged. Your dispassionate 
testimony should contrast well with their frenzied diatribe. 
Miserkordiam, argumentum ad 
While pity is an admirable human quality, it does not provide the 
best basis for argument. When we turn to pity instead of reasoned discourse to support a particular contention, we commit 
the argumentum ad misericordiam. 
In asking yourself if this man is to be convicted, ask yourself what it will 
mean for him to be locked up in prison, deprived of his liberty, and 
turned into an outcast from humanity. 
(The question is whether he is guilty or not, not what conviction will 
do to him.) 
When we are called upon to settle questions of fact, we should 
be weighing up the evidence on each side and attempting to 
arrive at the truth. The introduction of pity does nothing for the 
argument. While it might reasonably influence our actions, it 
should not influence our judgement. The consequences to various parties of the truth or falsehood of a statement does not 
bear on that truth or falsehood. Whether a man is sent to prison 
or to the South Seas for a holiday does not alter the fact itself. An 
ad misericordiam is committed if pity is appealed to in the settlement of questions of truth and falsehood. 
Can we continue to afford Jeeves as our groundsman? Look what will 
happen if we don't. Imagine the state of his wife and his children with 
110 How to Wîn Every Argument 
Christmas coming up and the cold snows of winter about to descend. I 
ask instead, 'can we afford not to employ Jeeves?' 
(Yes we can. Of course, we might decide to afford him, which is quite 
a different thing.) 
Quite apart from its use in courts of law - where no selfrespecting defence lawyer will venture without his handkerchief 
- the ad misericordiam pokes its head into any argument where 
facts have consequences. No one would allow the possible fate 
of an individual to influence our conviction about so obvious a 
fact as 2 + 2 = 4, but where there is less certainty we might be 
tempted to allow our pity to give the benefit of the doubt. 
Hearts and flowers are a prerequisite of public policy. No 
question of simple fact can be settled without consideration of 
the effect it might have on the sick, the old, the feeble, the blind 
and the lame. 
If we decide that foreign aid is ineffective, and does not raise living 
standards, then we are condemning people in the poorer countries to a 
life of degrading poverty, squalor and disease. 
(If foreign aid is ineffective, the fact condemns them to these consequences. Maybe we should do something else about it.) 
The appeal of the ad misericordiam is in our recognition that 
pity should have a place in guiding our actions. The point of the 
fallacy is that it has no place in our determination of truth and 
falsehood. When it steps from one territory to the other, reason 
changes place with it. 
Its allure is hard to resist. The whole of Dickens' A Christmas 
Carol is one giant argumentum ad misericordiam. Here is Scrooge, 
making an honest living, assailed (along with the reader) by the 
appeal to pity. Bob Cratchit commands a skill as a clerk and 
scribe, and is perfectly free to seek employment elsewhere at 
Nauseam, argumentum ad 111 
market rates if he is dissatisfied with what Scrooge offers. But no; 
ghosts rise up to torment his employer with the ad misericordiam, 
and the hapless Scrooge is morally compelled to reach a decision 
quite contrary to economic reality. A more valid response to this 
treatment would have been 'Bah! Humbug!' 
You will have a great time making your opponents squirm 
under the ad misericordiam. Your audience is not too interested 
in the fine distinction between fact and fiction, so you can easily 
make those who reach different conclusions about the truth of 
things seem like the most hard-hearted of Victorian landlords for 
doing so. 
If you really believe that high wages keep teenagers from getting jobs, 
then all I can say is that you will have on your conscience the thousands 
of poor families who struggle to find the means for life's necessities. May 
Cod have mercy on your soul! 
(Even if he does, the audience won't. When faced with this treatment, turn it right back. What about the suffering and humiliation of 
those poor teenagers, unable to find work because of your heartless 
opponent? You can't expect to win with duelling pistols when your 
opponent is using a howitzer.) 
Nauseam, argumentum ad 
Simple repetition of a point of view does nothing by way of 
supplying additional evidence or support. Yet it can erode the 
critical faculty. There is a completely mistaken supposition that a 
thing is more likely to be true if it is often heard. The argumentum 
ad nauseam uses constant repetition, often in the face of massive 
evidence against a contention, to make it more likely to be 
accepted. 
112 How to Win Every Argument 
Just the place for a Snark! I have said it thrice; what I tell you three times 
is true. 
(Whereas in fact if someone repeats the same thing three times it is 
because he has nothing else to say.) 
The point is that repetition adds nothing at all to the logic. It is 
done in an attempt to persuade an audience, either by wearing 
down their resistance, or by deceiving them into supposing that 
objections have somehow been dealt with. Since they add 
nothing, the extra versions are irrelevant to the consideration, 
and fallaciously appeal to psychological factors rather than to 
reason. 
'Please sir, it wasn't me!' 
'But this is your catapult, Smith Minor. ' 
'Please sir, it wasn't me!' 
'And witnesses saw you pick up the stone. ' 
'Please sir, it wasn't me!' 
(This could go on indefinitely, unless the heavy hand of an ad 
baculum cuts it short. We can all spot that Smith Minor would have 
done his case more good if he had been able to find anything else to 
say. Would we spot it if he simply kept saying 'Socialism means rule 
by the workers', however?) 
Utterly discredited political credos, which adherents cling to 
for other than intellectual reasons, are supported by the ad 
nauseam fallacy. If an economic system brings general prosperity 
and gives ordinary people access to the things which were once 
the prerogative of the rich, it is quite difficult to make out a case 
that this is exploitation. Fortunately, one does not have to. The 
ad nauseam effect means that the charge can simply be repeated 
over and over again without argument or evidence. Eventually, 
some people will fall for it. 
Nauseam, argumentum ad 113 
Advertisers have long been life members of the ad nauseam 
society. They know that a specious claim acquires credibility and 
force if it is repeated often enough. They know the importance of 
building up not a rational conviction but a habit of association. 
It washes whiter than bleach; that's whiter than bleach; yes, whiter than 
bleach. 
(What they tell us three times is true.) 
Many of the proverbs we hear in childhood are dinned into us 
so many times that we often come to suppose that there must be 
truth in them. This assumption seems able to survive all of the 
contrary evidence which life thrusts before us, and in some cases 
survives a simultaneous belief in contradictory proverbs. It is 
quite hard to look before you leap without being lost through 
hesitation, and while many hands make light work, they do tend 
to spoil the broth. All of which shows the power of the simple ad 
nauseam. 
To use the argumentum ad nauseam is easy enough: all you 
have to do is to repeat yourself. It is harder to recognize the 
situations where it might succeed. The general rule is that constant repetition over a long period of time is more effective than 
short bursts. You must be totally impervious to arguments 
against you, always reiterating the same point. This not only 
bores your audience to tears, it also instils in them the futility of 
opposing you. And when they give up in total weariness, 
observers will begin to suppose that they can no longer counter 
your claims. 
The civil servant advising his minister provides a case-study of 
the argumentum ad nauseam: 
But Minister, as I have been explaining for two years, there is no way in 
which we can cut the administrative costs of this department. Every 
114 How to Win Every Argument 
single job is vital to our efficiency. The man we hire to scour the building 
picking up used paper-clips, for example... 
(And the ad nauseam cracks the minister before the minister cracks 
the problem.) 
If you aspire to expert rank, however, study closely the form 
exhibited by the minister himself at the dispatch-box: 
/ responded to charges of ministerial dereliction of duty on 9 November 
by saying that I had nothing to add to my statement of 4 June. I would 
not care to expand on that at this time. 
(Please sir, it wasn't me!) 
Non-anticipation 
The fallacy of non-anticipation consists of supposing that 
everything worth doing or saying has already been done or said. 
Any new idea is rejected on the grounds that if it were any good, 
it would already be part of current wisdom. Proposals are 
rejected because they have not been anticipated. 
If tobacco really is so harmful, how come people didn't ban it years ago? 
(They didn't know. Nowadays more people live long enough to 
experience the adverse effects, and we now have more techniques for 
measuring such things.) 
The central assumption of the fallacy is unwarranted. Progress is 
made on several fronts, including the scientific and the social. 
New ideas are constantly being adopted, and there is no justification for supposing that our ancestors would have found them 
all. The presumption that they did intrudes irrelevant material 
into the argument. 
Non-anticipation 115 
Wise though the sages of old probably were, we can no more 
presume in them the totality of wisdom than we can assume 
complete stupidity. 
If breakfast television is all that good, why has it taken so long for it to 
appear? 
(Because we didn't realize that people wanted even more pap with 
their morning milk.) 
It is not just products and processes which are revolutionized 
by invention; the same is true of changes in our living patterns. 
People didn't need these long Christmas holidays years ago, why should 
they now? 
(They probably did need them years ago; they just couldn't afford 
them. The same fallacy would have supported, and no doubt did, the 
continuance of child labour in mines and factories.) 
The fallacy of non-anticipation is a great comfort to those 
who, while possessing a conservative disposition, cannot actually 
think of any arguments against the changes which are put 
forward. 
Mr Chairman, this proposal has been kicked around for more than 
twenty years. If there were any merit in the idea at all, it would have 
been implemented long before now. 
(The beauty of this is that your current rejection will serve as extra 
'evidence' against it in the future. Perhaps the reasons for past 
rejection were equally frivolous.) 
To give added effect to the fallacy, you can enumerate some 
of the phantom legions who could have taken up the idea but 
did not. Their numbers appear to be ranged against the idea, like 
116 How to Win Every Argument 
yourself, even though they might simply never have thought of 
it. 
Are we to assume that we are cleverer than the thousands of the very 
learned and competent people over the years who could have acted on a 
proposal such as this, but wisely refrained from doing so? 
(Any more than Beethoven was cleverer than the millions who could 
have written his symphonies but did not do so?) 
You will find the fallacy extraordinarily useful in resisting 
trends towards emancipation. After all, if there were any merit in 
having women and children participate in decisions, would it not 
have been discovered long ago? The same approach will help 
you to stand up against independent holidays, dining out, taking 
exercise or eating courgettes. 
If there were any connection between drinking eight pints of beer a day 
and obesity, don't you think that countless beer drinkers would have 
seen it before now? 
(Why should they? They cannot even see their own toes.) 
Novitam, argumentum ad 
If it is a fallacy to suppose that age is a guide to correctness, it is 
also fallacious to suppose something to be more right simply 
because it is new. The argumentum ad novitam makes the mistake of thinking that the newness of something is a factor contributing to its soundness. To hear support urged for something 
because it is new is to hear the ad novitam being used. 
These new tower-blocks are the coming thing. We should build some 
ourselves. 
Novitam, argumentum ad 117 
(Their newness did not stop them brutalizing the landscape of cities 
or the lives of their tenants.) 
Some people are surprised to find that both newness and 
oldness can be used fallaciously in support of a contention. In fact 
they appeal to contradictory traits in all of us. We like the security 
of the traditional, and we like to be fashionable and up-to-date. 
Either of these can be used as fallacies if we try to make them 
support claims which should stand or fall on their merits. The ad 
novitam, like its antiquitam counterpart, introduces the irrelevant 
fact of the age of the proposition as a means of influencing its 
acceptance. Because the newness does not, in fact, contribute to 
its Tightness, a fallacy is committed by appealing to it. 
There was a time when the ad novitam found as welcome a 
home with progressive reformers as its sibling, ad antiquitam, did 
with conservatives. Those were the days of constructing a brave 
new world. Times change, however, and the ad novitam now 
builds its nest amongst conservatives. It settles down comfortably amid calls for the rejection of 'the old ways which have 
failed' and for 'looking truly fit for the twenty-first century'. 
Meanwhile the argumentum ad antiquitam stirs uneasily as it sees 
progressives looking back to the good old days of social reform. 
Advertisers have used the word 'new' as a reflex appeal to the 
ad novitam for many years. Assuming that the public equated 
new products with new progress, everything from washingpowder to toothpaste has been 'new, improved'. Breakfast cereals were forever new, with the main innovation being the 
increasing resemblance of the contents to the cardboard of the 
packet. Great were the shock-waves in the advertising world 
when cereals started to appear which were positively old in style. 
In faded brown packets, they promised old-fashioned goodness, 
and rapidly gained sales. The bold attack of the ad antiquitam 
sent the ad novitams back on the ropes. All kinds of products 
came out with old-fashioned presentation, 'just as it used to be' 
118 How to Win Every Argument 
was the slogan, with sleepy scenes and pictures of cobwebs on 
the packets. In Britain, Hovis bread, instead of being new and 
improved, featured sepia-tinted ads of rural simplicity. 
Both fallacies have powerful appeal, but ad novitam had gone 
too far. Now there is a balance between the two. The simplest 
country boy wears clothes looking roughly like a space-suit, 
while those brought up in Glasgow tenements now look back on 
entirely false childhood memories of country smells and fresh 
brown eggs. 
When using the ad novitam, remember the conflicting appeal 
of the two fallacies, and confine it to areas where the ad antiquitam is unwelcome. You cannot support housing because it is 
new, since people will prefer the old. But you can support economic theories because they are new. After all, what good ever 
came of the old ones? 
Just as yours is the 'new economies', so are your social and 
moral convictions part of the 'new awareness'. An audience 
would much prefer to be brought up-to-date and given new 
information, rather than being hectored to change their minds. 
Are we to continue in the ways of the old acquisitiveness by allowing 
commercial development on the site, or are we to respond to a new 
awareness of social needs by building a modern community centre for 
the unemployed? 
(With arguments like this, you'll win easily. You'll get a community 
centre for those who would have been employed by the commercial 
development.) 
Numeram, argumentum ad 
Not many people like to be out on a limb. Many prefer instead 
the comfort of solid numbers behind them, feeling there is less 
Numeram, argumentum ad 119 
possibility that so many others could be mistaken. The argumentum ad numeram wrongly equates the numbers in support of 
a contention with the correctness of it. Ideas which have mass 
support are not necessarily more likely to be right; but the ad 
numeram supposes that they are. 
Fifty million Frenchmen can't be wrong! 
(A glance at the history of that nation will show that they very often 
have been.) 
The fallacy lies in the fact that the Tightness or wrongness of a 
contention is neither helped nor hindered by the numbers in 
support. Many people are quite often wrong about even simple 
things, and received wisdom is not to be equated with factual 
knowledge. Simple observation, such as that which shows planets and stars turning across the skies, can be an unreliable 
guide, no matter how many millions attest to its truth. 
Everybody's smoking Whifters, why don't you? 
(Because he thinks everybody is stupid.) 
The ad numeram can appeal to general numbers, or more 
insidiously, to the numbers of those you respect. You might be 
more impressed by the proportion of top people taking The 
Times, than by the numbers backing Britain's biggest daily sale. 
The question to ask yourself is whether the numbers add anything to the claim. 
We have an argument here about whether Ballasteros ever captained a 
European golf team. Let's settle it democratically. 
(And before you jump off a building, make sure you have enough 
votes to carry repeal of the law of gravity.) 
120 How to Win Every Argument 
If ideas were decided by numbers, no new ones would ever be 
admitted. Every new idea starts out as a minority viewpoint and 
gains acceptance only if the evidence for it wins converts over 
from the prevailing view. If numbers are the test, then Giordano 
Bruno was wrong when he said the earth moved around the sun, 
and the authorities were right to burn him at the stake. 
We have to give him a fair trial before we string him up. All those who 
say he did it shout 'aye!' 
(Amazing proof! Sounds kinda unanimous to me.) 
The ad numeram provides an excellent defence of established 
attitudes. 
If it's not true, then why have so many millions of people believed in it for 
so many centuries? 
(Easy. We all make mistakes.) 
The ad numeram is the special fallacy of the demagogue and 
the mob orator. Those who govern us tend to form a special class 
whose outlook and assumptions are not commonly shared. They 
often come from a milieu in which the pressures of poverty, 
overcrowding and crime bear rather less upon them than they 
do upon most. This gives the demagogue the opportunity to 
appeal to numbers in support of ideas which find little echo in 
government. On subjects such as capital punishment or race 
relations, he can appeal to the agreement of large numbers on 
his side as evidence of a conspiracy of silence by the governing 
elite. 
Every opinion poll shows that public whipping is the best remedy for 
those who commit crimes of violence. 
One-sided assessment 121 
(And if you asked them, they'd probably say the same about garotting and disembowelment. They could be just as wrong or, indeed, 
right.) 
The ad numeram is a fallacy to be used with passion. In its 
ideal setting you would be haranguing a rabble of 600 people 
armed with blazing torches outside a corn merchant's house 
during a famine. Even in print, you should not turn an ad 
numeram into a clinical counting of heads, but conjure up outrage that the obviously correct view of so many should be 
ignored. 
When your side is in an unfortunate minority, the technique is 
to quote from the past, when your lot were on top, or from 
foreign countries where you do have a majority to back you. 
Sweden is an excellent source for majorities in favour of the most 
bizarre things. 
Are we to say that all Swedes are fools? That the people of the world's 
most enlightened country don't know what they are talking about? 
(Yes.) 
One-sided assessment 
Many of the decisions we are called upon to weigh up have both 
advantages and drawbacks. The fallacy of one-sided assessment is 
fallen into when only one side of the case is taken into consideration. Decisions usually require both pros and cons to be taken 
account of, and a preference made for the side that wins on balance. To look at one side only is to avoid judgement of that balance: 
I'm not going to get married. There would be all that extra responsibility, 
not to mention the loss of my freedom. Think of the costs of raising 
122 How to Win Every Argument 
children and putting them through college. Then there are the increased 
insurance premiums... 
(If that really were all, no one would ever do it.) 
It is equally possible to look only at the positive side. 
This encyclopedia is one you will be proud to own. Your friends will 
admire it. Your children will benefit. You will learn from it. It will complement your bookshelf! 
(On the other hand, it will cost you a LOT of money.) 
Either way, the fallacy of one-sided assessment is committed. By 
looking only at the objections, or only at the advantages, we are 
excluding material which bears on the decision, and which 
should be taken account of. The omission of this relevant 
material from the argument is what is fallacious about one-sided 
assessment. 
One-sided assessment is not a fallacy when space is allocated 
for the other side to be presented similarly. There is in AngloAmerican culture an adversarial tradition, which has it that if 
each side has the strongest case put forward, then a dispassionate observer is likely to arrive at a fair judgement. We 
therefore expect a counsel to put only the evidence for acquittal, 
and a trade union negotiator to put only the case for an increase, 
because we know that there will be someone else putting the 
other side. It would be one-sided assessment if those making the 
judgement considered one side only. 
Let's not go to Ibiza. Think of the heat, the mosquitoes and the crowds. 
(On the other hand, what about the lovely sunshine, the cheap wine, 
the excellent food and the low prices?) 
Petitio princlpll 123 
Life's judgements often call for trade-offs. Those who have 
made their balance and come down in favour are apt to try to 
persuade others by emphasizing only the positive side. The 
unwary should remember that their own scale of values might call 
for a different judgement, once they consider all of the factors. 
All of the arguments support the new road. It means progress; it means 
prosperity; it means a future for our town! 
(And it really is rather unfortunate that they have to pull your house 
down to build it.) 
There is a clever version of one-sided assessment which you 
should use when persuading others to agree with your judgement. This involves making a purely token concession to the case 
against you, by referring to one of the weaker arguments on the 
other side before you launch into the overwhelming arguments 
in favour. This polishes your case by adding to it the gloss of 
apparent objectivity. 
Of course, if we bought a bigger car, we'd need to make new seat covers. 
But think of the convenience! All the shopping would go in the back; we 
could use it for holidays; you could pick up the children in comfort; and 
its extra speed would cut down our journey times. 
(Sold, to the gentleman with the fallacy.) 
Petitio principii 
The fallacy of petitio principii, otherwise known as 'begging the 
question', occurs whenever use is made in the argument of 
something which the conclusion seeks to establish. The petitio is 
a master of disguise and is capable of assuming many strange 
124 How to Win Every Argument 
forms. One of its commonest appearances has it using a 
reworded conclusion as an argument to support that conclusion. 
Justice requires higher wages because it is right that people should earn 
more. 
(Which amounts to saying that justice requires higher wages because 
justice requires higher wages.) 
It might seem to the novice that petitio is not a fallacy to take 
for a long walk; it seems too frail to go any distance. Yet a short 
look at the world of political discourse reveals petitios in profusion, some still running strongly after several hundred years. It is 
quite difficult to advance arguments for a commitment which is 
in essence emotional. This is why politicians deceive themselves 
accidentally, and others deliberately, with a plethora of petitios. 
The political petitio usually appears as a general assumption put 
forward to support a particular case, when the particular case is 
no more than a part of that same assumption. 
The British government should prohibit the sale of the Constable 
painting to an American museum because it should prevent the export of 
all works of art. 
(It looks like an argument, but the same reason could be advanced 
for each particular work of art. Adding them up would tell us no more 
than that the government should prevent the export of all works of 
art because it should prevent the export of all works of art.) 
Argument is supposed to appeal to things which are known or 
accepted, in order that things which are not yet known or 
accepted may become so. The fallacy of the petitio principii lies in 
its dependence on the unestablished conclusion. Its conclusion is 
used, albeit often in a disguised form, in the premises which 
support it. 
Petitlo prindpii 125 
All arguments which purport to prove the unprovable should 
be carefully scrutinized for hidden petitios. Arguments in support 
of ideologies, religions or moral values all have it in common that 
they attempt to convince sceptics. They also have it in common 
that petitios proliferate in the proofs. 
Everything can be defined in terms of its purpose. 
(Never be surprised when a discussion starting like this ends up 
'proving' the existence of a purposive being. If things are admitted at 
the outset to have a purpose, then a being whose purpose that is has 
already been admitted. This is a petitio prindpii disguised as a proof.) 
When using the petitio yourself, you should take great care to 
conceal the assumption of the conclusion by skilful choice of 
words. Particularly useful are the words which already have a 
hidden assumption built into them. Words such as 'purpose' fall 
into this group. Philosophers always go into battle with a huge 
stockpile of these words, especially when they try to tell us how 
to behave. The obligations they wish to impose upon us are 
hidden away in words like 'promise'. It looks like a straight, 
factual thing, but it has an 'ought' tucked away in its meaning. 
The important thing to remember about the petitio is that it is 
supposed to look like an argument in support of a case. You 
should therefore spatter it with argument link words such as 
'because' and 'therefore', even if it is no more than a simple 
rewording. 
When pushed into a corner you can often effect a dramatic 
escape with a well-chosen petitio by combining both the 
assumption of a general truth, and a rewording of the 
conclusion. 
We should not sell arms to Malaysia because it would be wrong for us to 
equip other nations with the means of taking human life. 
126 How to Win Every Argument 
(This looks and sounds like an argument, but it is really just a clever 
way of saying that we should not sell arms to Malaysia because we 
should not sell arms to anyone.) 
Poisoning the well 
The most attractive feature of poisoning the well is that the 
opposition is discredited before they have uttered a single word. 
At its crudest, the fallacy consists in making unpleasant remarks 
about anyone who might disagree with a chosen position. When 
some willing victim steps forward to dispute that position, he 
only shows that the unpleasant remarks apply to him, 
Everyone except an idiot knows that not enough money is spent on 
education. 
(When someone comes forward to suggest that enough money is 
being spent he identifies himself to the audience as the idiot in 
question.) 
The whole discussion is fallacious because it invites acceptance or 
rejection of the proposition on the basis of evidence which has 
nothing to do with it. The claim is only an insult, offered without 
evidence, and does not have to be accepted. Even if it were true, 
we would still have to examine the argument on its merits. 
Closer inspection shows that poisoning the well is a highly 
specialized version of the ad hominem abusive. Instead of 
insulting the arguer in the hope that the audience will be led to 
reject his argument the well-poisoner sets up the insult for anyone who might argue. It is cleverer than simple abuse because it 
invites the victim to insult himself by drinking from the poisoned 
well. In doing so, it discourages opposition. 
Poisoning the well 127 
Of course, there may be those with defective judgement who prefer buses 
to trains. 
(There may be those who take into account such factors as price, 
cleanliness, convenience, and running on time. To admit the preference now, however, would be owning up to defective 
judgement.) 
In its crude and simple form, poisoning the well is seen to be 
great fun and can engender spectacular coups of withering 
scorn. A version which is only slightly more subtle appears in a 
game called 'sociology of knowledge'. To play the game, one 
player starts by asserting that everyone else's view about society 
and politics is only the unconscious expression of their class 
interest. Next, he shows that for specialized reasons this analysis 
does not apply to him because he is unprejudiced and can see 
things objectively. When another player disagrees with any of his 
views, the first player triumphantly shows that the opinion of his 
opponent can be ignored as the mere expression of class interest. 
Choice in education is only a device by which the middle classes can buy 
advantage for their children. 
(There is no point now in pointing to any role which competition might 
play in improving standards, or to the advantages of allowing parents 
some say in the type of education given to their children. You have 
already been convicted of trying to buy advantage; the rest is just cover.) 
Skilful use of poisoning the well should employ both of its 
main characteristics. The poison should not only incite ridicule 
from the audience, it should also act as a deterrent to anyone 
tempted to disagree with you. 'Only an idiot' will put off some, 
but there will be others who think they could shrug it off. A 
better poison would be one sufficiently dreadful or embarrassing 
to deter anyone from drinking willingly. 
128 How to Win Every Argument 
Only those who are sexually inadequate themselves now advocate 
single-sex teaching in our schools. 
(Any volunteers?) 
Well-poisoning is recommended whenever your claim might 
not survive sustained scrutiny. It is also useful for dealing with an 
opponent whose point goes against received opinion but is, 
unfortunately, valid. Judicious poisoning will make such an 
opponent look so foolish that people will ignore the validity. It 
will also make you look witty and confident, and may even serve 
to conceal the fact that you are wrong. 
Populum, argumentum ad 
The argumentum ad populum appeals to popular attitudes 
instead of presenting relevant material. In other words, it is based 
on prejudice. It exploits the known propensity of people to 
accept that which fits in comfortably with their preconceptions. 
The popular prejudices may or may not be justified, but the 
speaker who makes his case depend solely upon them is guilty of 
an ad populum fallacy. 
In recommending Higginbottom, I'd point out that the smart money is 
on him. 
(Few people think they belong with the stupid guys.) 
The ad populum is often equated with mob appeal, with 
inflaming passions and prejudices more appropriate to mass 
hysteria than to rational discourse. Mob orators make a career of 
the ad populum, choosing words calculated to raise the emotional temperature. 
Populum, argumentant ad 129 
Are we to see the streets of this ancient land of ours given over to strange 
faces? 
(The prejudice is xenophobia and the implication is that the 'strange 
faces' do not fit in our streets; but no argument is advanced.) 
Those who commit the fallacy take the easy way out. Instead 
of building up a case which carries conviction, they resort to 
playing on the emotions of the multitude. This is not sound logic, 
although it may be very successful. Conceivably Mark Anthony 
might have developed a case for punishing Brutus and the other 
assassins, and restoring Caesar's system of government. What he 
did was more effective. By appealing to popular rejection of 
disloyalty and ingratitude, and to popular support for public 
benefactors, he turned a funeral crowd into a rampaging mob. 
For several centuries the traditional villains of the ad populum 
appeal were landlords and corn merchants. Although they play a 
negligible role in society nowadays, so powerful was their hold 
on popular prejudice that I expect you could still raise a lusty 
cheer by castigating opponents as profiteering landlords and 
corn merchants. Their disappearance has left a gap in the ad 
populum only partly filled by the mysterious 'speculators'. They 
are somewhat more nebulous because whereas letting property 
and dealing in corn were respectable occupations which could 
be identified, few people would write 'speculator' in the space 
for their occupation. Still, their elusiveness imparts a shadowy 
and sinister quality to enhance their evil. 
/ oppose enterprise zones because they will become sleazy red-light 
areas, characterized by sharp dealers and speculators. 
(You have to be careful, though. Some audiences would like the 
sound of this.) 
130 How to Win Every Argument 
Your own ad populums will come naturally, since you are 
basically in support of the little man, the underdog, the local 
boy. The people against you are the big bosses, the money-men 
of the financial district and the bureaucrats on their index-linked 
pensions. 'Rich bankers' has lost its effect these days; most 
people equate it with their local bank manager who is not all that 
rich. Remember to use code-words where people feel the prejudice is not respectable. Racial minorities, for example, should 
be referred to as 'newcomers' or 'strangers', even when they 
have been here longer than you have. 
If we allow the corner shop to close, it will mean hard-earned money 
going out of the community to rich businessmen in flash cars. The corner 
shop is part of our locality; it's a friendly presence in the neighbourhood; 
it's the focal point of the community we grew up in. 
(People will do anything for it, except shop there.) 
Positive conclusion from negative premise 
An argument which draws a conclusion from two premises is not 
allowed to have two negative premises, but it is allowed one, 
provided the conclusion is also negative. A fallacy is committed 
whenever a positive conclusion follows from two premises which 
include a negative one. 
Some cats are not stupid, and all cats are animals, so some animals are 
stupid. 
(Even though some of them are smart enough not to be cats, the 
conclusion does not follow. One premise is negative, so any valid 
conclusion would also have to be so.) 
Although two things can be related to each other by means of 
the relationship which each has with a third, if one of the 
Post hoc ergo propter hoc 131 
relationships is concerned with what is not true for one, the 
deduction must show that the other one is also wholly or partly 
excluded from some class. In other words, if they each enjoy a 
different relationship with a third thing, they cannot both be in 
the same class. The fallacy of drawing a positive conclusion from 
negative premises persuades us that things do belong to a class 
by telling of things which do not. 
The trouble with this fallacy is that it can be seen coming a 
mile away. You can try persuading an audience that rats are 
sheep by telling them what rats are and what sheep are not. You 
are unlikely to succeed for the simple reason that people smell 
the rat before the wool is pulled over their eyes. It is just too easy 
to spot that you cannot claim that things are the same simply 
because they are different. 
The only time you stand a chance of getting away with this 
one is when you are calling up a radio phone-in show. And that is 
only because anything goes on a radio phone-in show. 
Post hoc ergo propter hoc 
The Latin translates as 'after this, therefore on account of this', 
and it is the fallacy of supposing that because one event follows 
another, then the second has been caused by the first. 
Immediately after the introduction of canned peas, the illegitimate 
birthrate shot up to a new high from which it did not decline until frozen 
peas edged canned peas out of the market. The link is all too obvious. 
(Too obvious to be true, perhaps. If your thoughts turn to feeding 
your daughters beans instead, remember to keep them clear of 
everything else which preceded the rise in illegitimacy. They should 
stay away from television, jet aircraft, polythene and chewing-gum, 
to name but a few of the more obvious hazards.) 
132 How to Win Every Argument 
Although two events might be consecutive, we cannot simply 
assume that the one would not have occurred without the other. 
The second might have happened anyway. The two events 
might both be linked by a factor common to both. Increased 
prosperity might influence our propensity to consume canned 
peas, and also to engage in activities which increase the rate of 
illegitimacy. Small children at gaming machines provide vivid 
illustrations of the post hoc fallacy. They may often be seen with 
crossed fingers, eyes closed, hopping on one leg, or in whatever 
physical contortion once preceded a win. They link their random 
preparations with the outcome of their luck; and in this they 
differ in no wise from more adult gamblers, whose concealed 
rabbits' feet and clenched-teeth incantations betray the same 
supposition. If it worked once, it can work again. 
Unfortunately for our predictive ability, every event is preceded by an infinite number of other events. Before we can 
assign the idea of cause, we need rather more than simple succession in time. The philosopher David Hume pointed to regularity as the chief requirement, with some contiguity in time 
and space. We are more likely to describe a germ as the cause of 
an infection in a man if its presence has regularly preceded the 
infection, and if it is found in the body which is infected. 
The charm of the post hoc fallacy emerges when we leave 
behind the everyday idea of cause and effect. Although we 
suppose we understand the mechanisms by which one event 
leads to another, Hume showed that it boils down to our 
expectation of regularity. The candle flame on the finger and the 
subsequent pain are called cause and effect because we expect 
the one to follow on regularly from the other. Of course, we 
concoct all kinds of explanations as invisible threads to link the 
two, but they come down to interposing unseen events between 
our first and second. How do we know that these unseen events 
really are the cause? Easy. They always follow from one another. 
This gap in our knowledge provides a vacant lot in which 
Quatemlo terminorum 133 
fallacies can park at will. Greek historians regularly discussed 
natural disasters in terms of human actions. In looking for the 
cause of an earthquake, for example, we are likely to find Herodotus, or even Thucydides, gravely discussing the events which 
preceded it before concluding that a massacre perpetrated by 
the inhabitants of the stricken town was probably the cause. 
The determined fallacist will see this as a field of opportunity. 
Whatever your opponent is urging is bound to have been tried 
somewhere, in some form, at some time. All you need do is 
attribute the unpleasant things which followed it to the operation of that factor. We know that unpleasant things followed it 
because unpleasant things are happening all the time; there are 
always plenty of earthquakes, sex offences and political broadcasts on TV which you can lay at your adversary's door. 
'Imprisonment is barbaric. We should try to understand criminals and 
cure them using open prisons and occupational therapy. ' 
'They have been trying that in Sweden since 1955, and look what's 
happened: suicides, moral degeneracy and drunks everywhere. Do we 
want that here?' 
(A term such as 'moral degeneracy' is the hallmark of the sterling 
fallacist, being more or less impossible to disprove.) 
Quaternio terminorum 
Quaternio terminorum is the fallacy of four terms. The standard 
three-line argument requires that one term be repeated in the 
first two lines, and eliminated from the conclusion. This is 
because it works by relating two things to each other by first 
relating each of them to a third thing. This 'syllogistic' reasoning 
depends on one term, the 'middle term', being repeated in the 
premises but disappearing from the conclusion. Where there are 
134 How to Win Every Argument 
instead four separate terms, we cannot validly draw the conclusion, and the quaternio terminorum is committed. 
John is to the right of Peter, and Peter is to the right of Paul, so John is to 
the right of Paul. 
(This looks reasonable, but one line has 'to the right of Peter' where 
the other one simply has 'Peter'. These are two separate terms, and 
the four-terms fallacy is involved. The conclusion is not validly 
established. After all, they could be sitting round a table.) 
We might just as easily have said: 
John is in awe of Peter, and Peter is in awe of Paul, so John is in awe of 
Paul. 
(The error is more obvious. John might respect Peter for his intellect, 
and Peter could respect Paul for his Mercedes. Since John has a 
Bentley, he might not transfer his awe from Peter to the other cheap 
upstart.) 
The fallacy arises because, strictly speaking, the terms in this 
type of argument are separated by the verb 'to be'. Whatever 
comes after it is the term. It can be 'the father of, or 'in debt to', 
or many other things. Unless the whole term appears in the next 
line, there is a quaternio terminorum. Of course, with four terms 
we cannot deduce new relationships between terms by using a 
middle term common to both - there isn't one. 
John is the father of Peter, and Peter is the father of Paul, so John is the 
father of Paul. 
(Even your grandfather can see this is wrong.) 
Now look at the example where there is a middle term repeated: 
Quaternlo terminorum 135 
John is the father of Peter, and the father of Peter is the father of Paul, so 
John is the father of Paul. 
(There are three terms, and this is valid.) 
Quaternio terminorum can result is endless confusion in daily 
relationships. If John is in debt to Peter to the tune of 45 dollars, 
and Peter is in debt to Paul (who saved him from drowning), 
John might be very surprised to find Paul on his doorstep 
demanding money with menaces. On the other hand, if John is 
in love with Mary, and Mary is in love with Paul, no one except a 
theatre dramatist would attempt to complete the fallacious 
deduction. 
The four-terms fallacy is more likely to appear as a source of 
genuine error than of deliberate deception. People may fool 
themselves with arguments constructed around it, but they are 
unlikely to fool others. There is something about the odd look of 
it which alerts the unwary; it is like a cheque without the amount 
filled in. No date perhaps; maybe even no signature; but 
everyone looks at the amount. 
China is peaceful towards France, and France is peaceful towards the 
USA, so China must be peaceful towards the USA. 
(You do not even need to know anything about China to know this is 
wrong. Just remember not to trust any relationship with France in it.) 
One way to use the fallacy with a fair chance of success is to 
smuggle it in amongst a group of comparatives. Comparatives, 
such as 'bigger than', 'better than', 'stronger than', or 'fatter 
than', do work because they are transitive, despite the four 
terms. After a few of these, slip in the non-transitive relationship 
and it might get by. 
136 How to Win Every Argument 
Darling, I'm bigger than you are, stronger, and richer; yet I respect you. 
You stand in the same relationship to your mother, so I, in turn must 
respect your mother. 
(I just don't want her in the house.) 
The red herring 
When the hounds are intent on following a scent of their own 
choosing, in preference to that selected by the master of the 
hunt, a red herring is used to effect the transfer. Tied to a length 
of string, it is led across the trail the hounds are following. Its 
powerful aroma is sufficient to make them forget what they were 
following, and to take up its trail instead. The red herring is then 
skilfully drawn onto the trail which the hunt-master prefers. 
In logic the red herring is drawn across the trail of an argument. It is so smelly and so strong that the participants are led 
irresistibly in its wake, forgetting their original goal. The fallacy of 
the red herring is committed whenever irrelevant material is used 
to divert people away from the point being made, and to proceed towards a different conclusion. 
'The police should stop environmental demonstrators from inconveniencing the general public. We pay our taxes. ' 
'Surely global meltdown is infinitely worse than a little inconvenience?' 
(It may well be, but that particularly ripe and smelly fish is not the one 
we were following.) 
The use of the red herring is fallacious because it uses irrelevant material to prevent a conclusion being reached in its 
absence. If the argument leads in a particular direction because 
reason and evidence are taking it there, it is not valid to divert it 
The red herring 137 
by means of extraneous material, however attractive that new 
material may be. 
'Excuse me, sir. What are you doing with that diamond necklace hanging 
out of your pocket?' 
'I say, isn't that a purebred German shepherd dog you have with you?' 
(Even if the policeman is put off the scent, the dog won't be.) 
The more the red herring appears to follow the original trail 
for a little way, the more attractive it is to follow, and the more 
effective it will be at diverting attention. 
'Publicans always try to promote whatever makes them most profit. ' 
7 think these fashions come and go. One time they will promote light 
beer because they think that is where the demand is; but a year or two 
later it might be cask-conditioned ale. ' 
(The attraction here is that it smells a little like the original trail. It talks 
about what publicans promote, but after following this one for an 
hour or two, the talkers will be as much fuddled by the argument as 
by the beer.) 
Red herrings are used by those who have a bad case, and can 
feel the hounds getting uncomfortably close to it. Politicians 
under pressure will toss out so tempting a red herring that the 
dogs will turn after it, even in the act of leaping for the kill. 
Lawyers scatter them at the feet of juries to divert attention away 
from crooked clients. Every famous attorney has been credited 
with the trick of putting a wire through his cigar so that, instead 
of listening to the details of his weak case, the jurors watch with 
bated breath as the ash grows longer and longer. The red herring 
in this case is a visual one, like the salesman's illuminated bow tie 
which diverts attention away from his inferior product. 
138 How to Win Every Argument 
'You never remember my birthday.' 
'Did I ever tell you what beautiful eyes you have?' 
You should never set out upon a weak argument without a 
pocketful of red herrings to sustain you through the course of it. 
As your intellectual energies begin to fail, your supply of them 
will give you breathing space. If you aspire to the ranks of the 
experts you should select your red herrings on the basis of the 
known interests of your audience. Every pack has its favourite 
aroma; and your red herrings should be chosen with that in 
mind. As you toss them out as needed, the audience will be 
unable to resist their favourite bait. You can gain respite in the 
most difficult situations by skilfully introducing the subject of the 
arguer's bad back, or even his summer holidays. In real desperation you can bring up his pet cat. 
Refuting the example 
Examples are often adduced in support of an argument. When 
attention is focused on showing the example to be a false one, 
but leaving the central thesis unchallenged, the fallacy is known 
as 'refuting the example'. 
'Teenagers are very bad-mannered these days. That boy from next door 
nearly knocked me over in the street yesterday, and didn't even stay to 
apologize. ' 
'You're wrong. Simon is no longer a teenager.' 
(None of which knocks over the original assertion, only one 
example.) 
While an example can illustrate and reinforce an argument, 
the discrediting of it does not discredit the argument itself. There 
Refuting the example 139 
may be many other instances which support the thesis, and 
which are genuine cases. 
There is a fine distinction between the quite legitimate activity 
of casting doubt on an opponent's evidence, and concentrating 
criticism on the example instead of on the thesis which it supports. If the rejection of the central claim is urged only because a 
bad example was used to support it, the fallacy is committed. 
/ can show that there is no truth at all in the allegation that hunting is 
cruel to animals. In the case of the Berkshire hunt described to us, what 
we were not told was that a post-mortem showed that this particular fox 
had died of natural causes. So much for charges of cruelty. 
(The argument has less life in it than the fox.) 
A case of this fallacy occurred in a general election. One party 
featured a poster showing a happy family to illustrate the slogan 
that life was better with them. Their opponents devoted an 
extraordinary amount of time and attention to the actual model 
who appeared in the photograph, and to publicizing the fact 
that his was not a happy marriage. The effort was presumably 
expended in the belief that the public would be less likely to 
believe the fact once the example was refuted. 
For some reason this fallacy is very prevalent in discussion 
about sport. In support of a generalized claim, such as 'Spain 
produces the best strikers', an example will be produced. This 
seems to be the cue for lengthy and dull evaluation of the merits 
of the individual concerned. The assumption throughout the 
discussion seems to be that the case for or against the original 
general statement will be won or lost with that of the example. 
You can set up situations for using this fallacy by prodding 
your opponents with a demand for examples. Your heavy scepticism as you respond to their claims with 'such as?' will prompt 
them into bringing forward a case in point. Immediately they do 
140 How to Win Every Argument 
so, you attack the case, showing how it could not possibly be 
valid. The case of a family produced to show that bus drivers' pay 
is too low can be attacked with great merriment by asking 
whether they have a colour television and how much the husband spends on beer. Even if you cannot undermine the example 
in apparent destruction of the assertion it supports, you can 
probably widen the talk to a more general discussion about what 
constitutes poverty, and cast doubt on whether the original 
statement means anything at all. This is called 'linguistic analysis'. 
Reification 
The fallacy of reification, also called hypostatization, consists in the 
supposition that words must denote real things. Because we can 
admire the redness of a sunset, we must not be led by the existence of the word into supposing that redness is a thing. When we 
see a red ball, a red table, a red pen and a red hat, we commit the 
fallacy of reification if we suppose that a fifth object, redness, is 
present along with the ball, the table, the pen and the hat. 
In SKYROS we have extracted the blueness of the summer sky and 
inserted it in a bar of heavenly soap. 
(Since the 'blueness' of the summer sky is not an object, it cannot be 
processed like a material thing.) 
Turning descriptive qualities into things is only one form of 
reification. We can also make the mistake of supposing that 
abstract nouns are real objects. 
He realized that he had thrown away his future, and spent the rest of the 
afternoon trying to find it again. 
(If you think that sounds silly, you should watch Plato searching for 
justice.) 
Reification 141 
Sometimes objects have consequential attributes, in their 
arrangement, perhaps. We commit reification if we suppose that 
these attributes are as real as the objects they depend upon. 
It [the Cheshire Cat] vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end of 
the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained some time after the 
rest of it had gone. 
(Alice could see it because she had sharp eyes. After all, she had seen 
nobody on the road, while the Duchess had difficulty enough seeing 
somebody.) 
The fallacy occurs because our words have not the power to 
conjure up real existence. We can talk about things which do not 
exist at all, and we can talk of things in one form which actually 
might exist in another. 'Redness entered the sky' says roughly 
the same as 'the sky reddened', but the words denote different 
activities. Our words are not evidence for the existence of things; 
they are devices for talking about what we experience. 
There is a school of philosophers which believes that if we can 
talk about things they must, in a sense, exist. Because we can 
make sentences about unicorns and the present king of France, 
they claim that there must actually be unicorns and a present 
king of France (with the latter presumably riding on the back of 
the former). 
Yet another school elevates the fallacy into an art form, by 
talking about the 'essences' of things. They claim that what 
makes an egg into an egg and nothing else is its 'eggness', or the 
essence of egg. This essence is more real and more durable than 
the actual egg, for ordinary eggs disappear into quiche lorraine, 
but the idea of an egg goes on. The obvious objection, that this is 
just silly, is a commanding one. We use words like labels, to tie 
onto things so we do not have to keep pointing at them and 
communicating in sign language. Little can be inferred from this 
142 How to Win Every Argument 
except that we have agreed to use words in a certain way. If 
someone brings out the 'essences' behind your words to show 
you what you really believe in, change the words. 
'You claim to support freedom, but the whole liberal democratic system 
has the essence of slavery. ' 
'All right. We'll call it slavery, then. And let it be clear that by "slavery" 
we mean people voting as they wish in elections, having a free press and 
an independent judiciary, etc. ' 
(This is an upsetting tactic. The accuser had expected the old image 
of slaves being whipped on plantations to be carried over into the 
new use describing the Western democracies.) 
Your own use of reification can be directed toward showing 
that what people say they support involves them in supporting 
your position. You simply take all of the abstract concepts, turn 
them into real entities, and start demonstrating that their real 
natures are in line with what you were saying. 
You say that Cod exists, but let us look at this idea of existence. We can 
talk about tables which have existence, chairs which have existence and 
so on, but for pure existence you have to take away the tables and chairs 
and all of the things which exist, to be left with existence itself. In taking 
away everything which exists, you are left with nothing existing, so you 
see the existence of your God is the same as non-existence. 
(He'll never spot that existence doesn't exist. After all, Hegel didn't.) 
The runaway train 
A runaway train takes you speeding into the distance, but 
unfortunately does not stop. This means that when you reach 
The runaway train 143 
your required destination you cannot leave it, but are compelled 
to be taken further than you wished. The runaway-train fallacy is 
committed when an argument used to support a course of action 
would also support more of it. If you wish to stop at a particular 
point, you need an argument to do so. 
It might well be true that lowering a highway speed-limit from 
70 mph to 60 mph would save lives. That is not a sufficient 
argument for choosing 60 mph, however, because lowering the 
speed-limit to 50 mph would save even more lives. And more still 
would be saved at 40 mph. The obvious conclusion of this runaway train is that if saving lives is the sole aim, the speed-limit 
should be set at the level which saves the most, and this is 0 mph. 
In practice the lives at risk for each proposed speed-limit have 
to be measured against what is achieved by the ability to travel 
and to transport goods rapidly. Most of our daily activities 
involve a degree of risk which could be reduced if we limited our 
actions. In practice we trade off risks against convenience and 
comfort. If the case for making the speed-limit 60 mph is based 
solely on the lives which could be saved, the arguer will need 
additional reasons to stop at 60 mph before the runaway train of 
his own argument takes him to 50 mph, then 40 mph, and 
finally crashes into the buffers when it reaches 0 mph. 
People argue that since, in the UK, everyone has to pay for the 
country's National Health Service, this gives the state a sufficient 
justification to ban smoking, because smokers suffer more illnesses. There may be good reasons to ban smoking, but the 
argument that the costs of the smoker's behaviour should be 
imposed on others is a runaway train. Why stop there? The same 
argument applies to all behaviour which affects health adversely. 
It could be applied to the eating of saturated fats such as butter, 
or refined white sugar. The state could require people to exercise 
in order to prevent the health costs of their laziness from falling 
on others. If this argument is to apply only to smoking, there 
have to be reasons why the train stops there. 
144 How to Win Every Argument 
Someone boards a runaway train when they are so concerned 
about direction that they forget to attend to distance. They can 
continue happily on their journey until their reverie is broken by 
someone calling 'Why stop there?' 
The state should subsidize opera because it would be too expensive to 
mount productions without the extra support from public funds. 
(And as the train heads off into the distance, wait for the stations 
marked son et lumière concerts, civil war re-enactments, and gladiatorial displays. If opera is different, we need to know why.) 
The fallacy is often committed when someone advances a 
general argument for something he regards as a special case. If 
the argument has any merit, the listener immediately wonders 
why it should be limited to that case. To combat a runaway train, 
it is usually sufficient to point to some of the absurd stations 
further down the same line. If good schools are to be banned 
because they give children an 'unfair' advantage, why not prevent rich parents from doing the same by buying their children 
books, or taking them on foreign holidays? 
To lure people on board the runaway train, simply appeal to 
things which most people favour, like saving lives, aiding widows 
and orphans and having better-behaved children. Use the general support which such things enjoy to urge support for the one 
proposal you favour which might help to achieve them, even as 
you carefully ignore the others. 
In a very specialized use of the fallacy, you should gain 
acceptance of the principles to support a reasonable objective, 
and only when that point has been reached, reveal the unreasonable objective also supported by the same principles. 
You agreed to allow a bingo hall in the town because people should have 
the choice to gamble if they want to. I'm now proposing to have gaming 
machines on every street corner for precisely the same reasons. 
Secundum quid 145 
Secundum quid 
The fallacy of secundum quid is otherwise known as the hasty 
generalization. Whenever a generalization is reached on the basis 
of a very few and possibly unrepresentative cases, the fallacy is 
committed. It takes the argument from particular cases to a 
general rule on the basis of inadequate evidence. 
/ was in Cambridge for ten minutes and I met three people, all drunk. 
The whole place must be in a state of perpetual inebriation. 
(Not necessarily so. Saturday night outside Trinity College might be 
quite different from King's on Sunday. A similar conclusion about 
London might have been drawn by a visitor who saw three people at 
midday outside a newspaper office.) 
The fallacy lies in the assumption of material which ought to 
be established. There should be an attempt to establish that the 
sample is sufficiently large and sufficiently representative. One or 
two cases in particular circumstances do not justify the presumption of a general rule, any more than the sight of a 
penny coming down heads can justify a claim that it will always 
do so. 
Behind our identification of the fallacy lies our recognition 
that the few cases observed might be exceptional to any general 
rule which prevails. 
Don't shop there. I once bought some cheese and it was mouldy. 
(This smells like a broad condemnation placed on a narrow base.) 
Clearly there is fine judgement required to distinguish 
between a secundum quid and a case where one or two instances 
do enable a valid judgement to be made. When assessing the 
146 How to Win Every Argument 
fitness of a candidate for foster-parent, for example, it would be 
prudent to make a judgement on the basis of only one previous 
incident of child-molesting. In the film Dr Strangelove, when a 
psychotic commander sends his wing on a nuclear attack against 
the USSR, the General reassures the President: 'You can't condemn the whole system just because of one let-down.' Both of 
these cases deal with systems which seek 100 per cent safety 
coverage, and in which one exception does validate a judgement. Secundum quid covers the more general circumstance in 
which it does not. 
A visitor who assesses the population of London from his 
experience of a royal wedding day is likely to be as wrong as one 
who makes a similar judgement about Aberdeen on a charitycollection day. The basic rule is 'don't jump to conclusions'. 
Opinion pollsters try to be very careful to avoid secundum 
quids. A famous American poll once wrongly predicted a 
Republican victory because it surveyed by telephone, not realizing that fewer Democrats owned telephones. Political parties 
everywhere are not averse to 'talking up' their support by 
quoting obviously unrepresentative poll-findings. 
Scientific knowledge is like a battlefield mined with secundum 
quids. Scientific theories are often put forward with only a very 
few examples to back them up. The problem is one of knowing 
when there are enough case-histories to be sure about the general rule put forward to explain them. Astonishingly, the answer is 
never. Science proceeds with the knowledge that a new case 
could suddenly appear to show that even its most solid theories 
are no good. A billion apples might have hit a billion heads since 
Newton's, but it would still take only one apple going upward to 
force at least a modification to the general theory. 
Secundum quids will be very useful to you in persuading 
audiences to pass judgements which coincide with your own. 
You should appeal to one or two cases, well-known ones if 
possible, as proof of a general judgement. 
Shifting ground 147 
All actors are left-wing subversives. Let me give you a couple of 
examples... 
(You then spread over the entire profession the tar which your brush 
collected from two of them.) 
Shifting ground 
People may employ hedging to make their contentions ambiguous, or they may use a definitional retreat to claim that their 
words meant something else. In the third version of this defensive type of operation, they may actually change the whole 
ground they were maintaining, while still claiming continuity. 
When people do shift the substance of what they were saying, 
they commit the fallacy of shifting ground. 
/ said I liked the project and thought it a good one. However, I share the 
objections you have all voiced, and can only say how much this reinforces a view I have long held that it is not enough for a project to be 
likeable and good. 
(A leap from one bank to the other with the grace of a ballet dancer 
superimposed on the desperation of a stranded man.) 
The deception is the source of the fallacy. Criticism of the 
original stance is avoided by shifting to a different one. In that 
the argument has taken place about the position as understood, 
it is irrelevant to the new position which is now claimed. Similarly 
a critique now has to start all over again on the new position 
because what has passed so far has not been centred upon it. 
/ said we'd come out stronger after this election. Look, we both know 
that many things can strengthen a party. I have always thought it a 
148 How to Win Every Argument 
source of strength if a party can respond to criticism. Now, with our 
share of the poll down to 9 per cent, I think that...' 
(This can be seen in every election by every party except the winner. 
It is roughly equivalent to 'I don't think that a score of five goals to 
one against us should be seen as a defeat for Scottish football. It is 
more of a challenge which...') 
The shifting sands of political fortune often coincide with the 
shifting ground of the fallacy. This is because of a patently absurd 
rule that no politician must ever change his mind about anything. To do so would be to admit he was wrong before, and 
could, by implication, be wrong now. Infallibility must, therefore, be sustained. Shifting ground, insecure though it might 
look to us, provides a solid foundation for political continuity. 
There is a certain class of religious argument in which anything at all whose existence is assented to can be called divine. 
Here the base of discussion seems to slide quite happily across 
several continents, as what started out as a discussion about a 
man in the sky with a white beard ends up in consideration of 
some abstract principle of the universe. 
Shifting ground is for defensive use. You cannot convince 
others of a new point with it, but you can use it to avoid it being 
known that you were wrong. As the victorious armies march into 
your territory after the struggle, they are surprised to find you at 
the head of them, leading the invasion. They had quite mistakenly supposed that you were head of the defence forces. 
After hearing his point of view, I feel that Mr Smith's amendment to 
insert the word 'not' into my motion expresses the spirit of what I was 
trying to say. I therefore accept his amendment as an improvement to 
my motion. 
Shifting the burden of proof 149 
There are muscular exercises which you should practise every 
day in front of a mirror, and which assist the mental contortions 
needed to shift ground rapidly. 
Yes, I walked through the green line, customs officer, and I can explain 
that extra bottle of scotch. 
(Does anyone spot the slight tremor in his feet?) 
Shifting the burden of proof 
Shifting the burden of proof is a specialized form of the argumentum ad ignorantiam. It consists of putting forward an assertion without justification, on the basis that the audience must 
disprove it if it is to be rejected. 
Normally we take it that the new position must have supporting evidence or reason adduced in its favour by the person 
who introduces it. When we are required instead to produce 
arguments against it, he commits the fallacy of shifting the 
burden of proof. 
'Schoolchildren should be given a major say in the hiring of their 
teachers. ' 
'Why should they?' 
'Give me one good reason why they should not. ' 
(It always looks more reasonable than it is. You could equally ask that 
the janitor, the dinner-ladies and the local bookie be given a say. 
Come to think of it, they might do a better job.) 
It is the proposal itself which has to be justified, not the 
resistance to it. The source of the fallacy is the implicit presumption that something is acceptable unless it is proved 
150 How to Win Every Argument 
otherwise. In fact the onus is upon the person who wishes to 
change the status quo to supply reasons. He has to show why our 
present practices and beliefs are somehow inadequate, and why 
his proposals would be superior. 
/ believe that a secret conspiracy of llluminati has clandestinely directed 
world events for several hundred years. Prove to me that it isn't so. 
(We don't have to, anymore than we have to prove that it isn't done 
by invisible elves or Andromedans living in pyramids under the Bermuda triangle.) 
The maxim of William of Occam, usually shortened to 'entities 
should not be multiplied beyond necessity', tells us not to 
introduce more by way of explanation than is needed to explain. 
World events are already explained by divine purpose, evolutionary progress or sheer random chaos. We do not need 
llluminati added to the brew, and he who would introduce them 
must show what evidence requires them to explain it. 
Shifting the burden is a very widespread and common fallacy. 
Popular conception has it that he who says 'prove it' and he who 
says 'prove it isn't' are on equal ground. It is a misconception. 
The one who asks for proof is simply declaring an intention not 
to accept more than the evidence requires. The other is declaring 
his intent to assume more than that. 
This particular fallacy is the frail prop on which rests the entire 
weight of unidentified flying objects, extrasensory perception, 
monsters, demons and bending spoons. Advocates of these, and 
many other, ethereal phenomena try to make us accept the 
burden of establishing falsity. That burden, once taken up, would 
be infinite. Not only is it extraordinarily difficult to show that 
something does not exist, but there is also an infinite load of 
possibilities to test. 
The slippery slope 151 
You will need shifting the burden of proof if you intend to 
foray into the world of metaphysical entities. Instead of resorting 
to the simple 'you prove it isn't', you should clothe your fallacy in 
more circumlocutious form, 
Can you show me one convincing piece of evidence which actually disproves that... ? 
(This tempts the audience into supplying instances, giving you a 
chance to slide into 'refuting the example' instead of giving any 
arguments in favour of your case.) 
The popular misconception about the onus of proof will 
enable you to put forward views for which there is not a shred of 
evidence. You can back gryphons, the perfectibility of man, or 
the peaceful intentions of religious fundamentalists. 
The slippery slope 
Slippery slopes are so tricky to negotiate that even the first timid 
step upon them sets you sliding all the way to the bottom. No one 
ever goes up a slippery slope; they are strictly for the descent to 
disaster. The fallacy is that of supposing that a single step in a 
particular direction must inevitably and irresistibly lead to the 
whole distance being covered. There are cases in which one step 
leads to another, and cases where it does not. It is not a fallacy to 
suppose that after the first stride, further steps might be taken 
towards unpleasant consequences, but it is usually an error to 
suppose that they must. 
There is a limited class of cases in which someone is doomed 
after the first step; stepping off a skyscraper is one of them. But in 
most life situations there is a choice about whether or not to go 
further. Those who oppose progress, however, often use the 
152 How to Win Every Argument 
slippery-slope argument to suggest that any reform will lead 
inexorably to unacceptable results. 
/ oppose lowering the drinking age from 21 to 18. This will only lead to 
further demands to lower it to 16. Then it will be 14, and before we know 
it our new-boms will be suckled on wine rather than mother's milk. 
The point is that the factors which lead to the arbitrary drinking 
age of 21 might change. There is nothing which suggests that 
they must keep on changing, or that society must keep on 
responding. 
The slippery slope basically argues that you cannot do anything without going too far. This belies human progress, which 
has often been made by taking short steps successfully where 
longer ones might have been ruinous. 
If we allow French ideas on food to influence us, we'll soon be eating 
nothing but snails and garlic and teaching our children to sing the 
Marseillaise. 
(It might beat pizza and chips, though.) 
In some cases there is a point of principle at stake which, once 
yielded, allows anything. This is not so much a slippery slope, 
however, as a vertical drop. The story is told of a dinner-table 
conversation between the dramatist George Bernard Shaw and a 
pretty lady: 
'Would you sleep with me for a million pounds?' 
'Why yes, I would. ' 
'Here's five pounds, then. ' 
'Five pounds! What do you think I am?' 
'We've established that. Now we're talking about price.' 
(Shaw was correct, but this is not a slippery-slope argument which 
would have led the lady to immorality in stages. Once the principle 
was conceded, the rest was bargaining.) 
Special pleading 153 
On a slippery slope ruin is reached in stages. The fallacy 
introduces the irrelevant material of the consequences of more 
far-reaching action in order to oppose the more limited proposal 
actually made. 
Use the fallacy yourself to oppose change. There is scarcely 
any proposal which would not lead to disaster if taken too far. 
They want to charge people for admission to the church bazaar, 
but you point out that if this is conceded they will charge more 
next year, and more after that, until poorer people will be unable 
to afford to get in. The fallacy works best on pessimists, who are 
always ready to believe that things will turn out for the worse. 
Just assure them that if they do anything at all, this is almost 
certain to happen. 
Special pleading 
Special pleading involves the application of a double standard. 
Although the normal rules of evidence and argument are applied 
to other cases, the fallacy of special pleading stipulates that some 
are exceptions, to be judged differently. It normally occurs when 
a speaker demands less strict treatment for the cause which he 
espouses than he seeks to apply elsewhere. 
Our attempt to engage in conversation was totally spoiled by all the 
chattering that other people were doing. 
(Look who's talking.) 
Special pleading is a source of error. If different standards are 
to be applied to certain cases, we need rather more evidence to 
justify this than the fact that we would like better treatment. The 
same standards which would throw out someone else's claim will 
154 How to Win Every Argument 
also throw out our own. If we were to receive special treatment, 
how could we justify withholding it from others? Argument 
proceeds by general rules, and exceptions must be justified. 
While it is not normally right to invade someone's privacy, it is all right 
for us, as journalists, to do so because we serve a public need. 
(Even though we make private money.) 
Special pleading is sometimes described as 'benefit of clergy', 
because of the right which the medieval Church established to 
have clerical offenders tried in church courts even for civil crimes. 
This right, which was called 'benefit of clergy', is really what the 
special pleader seeks - the right to be tried in a different court. 
Capitalism has always left areas of poverty and hardship, and misallocated resources. Socialism, on the other hand, has never been 
properly tried. 
(Can you spot the special pleading? We are invited to compare 
capitalism in practice, as applied, with theoretical socialism. This is 
sometimes called 'real' socialism, to conceal the fact that it is the 
opposite of real. Of course, if we look at capitalist countries for the 
record of capitalism, then we should look at socialist countries for the 
record of socialism. Theory with theory, or practice with practice.) 
Special pleading is normally resorted to by those whose case 
would not fare well in the general courts. Faced with a clash 
between their ideas and the evidence, scientists change their 
ideas. The special pleaders, like social scientists, prefer to change 
the evidence and show why normal judgements cannot be made 
in their particular case. Very often it is the supreme importance of 
the cause which is called upon to justify the special standards. 
The straw man 155 
Normally I would object to spitting at public figures, but the threat of 
global warming is so awful... 
(As is the threat of fluoridation, Sunday trading and canine nudity. It 
depends on how strongly you feel about it.) 
On a personal level, we are all apt to be more tolerant of 
ourselves than we are of others. For behaviour we would universally condemn from others, we invent excuses to forgive it in 
ourselves. Our queue-jumping is excused by urgency, but not 
that of anyone else. Our impulse buying is justified by need; 
others who do it are spendthrift. The same standards which 
excuse ourselves also excuse our team, our group, our town and 
our country. 
When using special pleading in support of your own side, take 
care that you always supply some specious justification to 
account for the exception from the general rule. It is never just 
because it is your side which is involved; always there are special 
circumstances of public interest. 
With any other boy I'd be the first to admit that burning down the school 
was wrong, but Michael is very highly strung, as talented people tend to 
be... 
(Talented people get away with arson, it seems, as well as murder.) 
The straw man 
The straw man of logic does not scare anyone. No self-respecting 
crow would even rustle a feather at him; he is too easy to knock 
down. Precisely. The straw man is made incredibly easy to knock 
down so that when you are unable to refute your opponent's 
argument, you can topple the straw man instead. The straw man 
156 How to Win Every Argument 
is, in short, a misrepresentation of your opponent's position, 
created by you for the express purpose of being knocked down. 
We should liberalize the laws on marijuana. 
'No. Any society with unrestricted access to drugs loses its work ethic and 
goes only for immediate gratification. ' 
(Down he goes! The proposal was to liberalize marijuana laws, but 
'unrestricted access to drugs' makes a much less stable target.) 
Traditionally, the straw man is set up as a deliberate overstatement of an opponent's position. Many views are easier to 
argue against if they are taken to extremes. If your opponent will 
not make himself an extremist, you can oblige with a straw man. 
Any easily opposed misrepresentation will serve as your dummy. 
The straw man is fallacious because he says nothing about the 
real argument. Like the ignorati elenchi society he belongs to, he 
is totally beside the point. His function is to elicit, by the ease of 
his demolition, a scorn which can be directed at the real figure he 
represents. 
Aficionados of the straw man ploy reserve their loudest olés for 
those whose straw construction is concealed by a layer of flesh. 
The point is that the straw man does not always have to be 
created specially. By deliberately picking on a weak or absurd 
supporter of the opposition, and choosing to refute him instead 
of the main protagonist, you indulge in the true connoisseur's 
use of the straw man. 
Even today, applause can be gained for 'refuting' the theory 
of evolution, so long as one is careful to refute Darwin. Modern 
evolutionary theory is more advanced, having knowledge of 
things such as genetics to help it along. But you can set up 
Darwin as a straw man and, by knocking him down, give the 
impression you have 'refuted' the theory of evolution. 
Temperantlam, argumentum ad 157 
It is standard practice at elections to choose the most foolish 
or ignorant spokesman for the other side to deal with, as well as 
to fabricate extremists who can be felled with a scornful half-line. 
How can we support the Democrats when one of their own union backers 
publicly advocates a 'worker state' like Soviet Russia was? 
(Biff! Bam! And another straw man bites the dust. Union leaders on one 
side, like businessmen on the other side, can be politically naïve, and 
make much better targets than the slippery eels who lead the parties.) 
Historically, the role of the straw man has been to show the 
dangers of change. A handful of reformers or radicals advocating 
greater liberty or greater tolerance have been trampled to death 
by legion upon legion of straw men in serried ranks calling for 
anarchy, licence, the destruction of society and the slaughter of 
the innocents. 
Use of the straw man is fun. Everyone needs a victory or two 
for purposes of morale. If real ones are nowhere to be had, then 
walloping the occasional straw man can be most invigorating. In 
addition to the advice already given, you would be wise to construct and demolish your straw man, wherever possible, after your 
opponent has uttered his last word on the subject. Your straw 
man looks pretty silly lying in the dust if your adversary is there to 
disown him. If your opponent is absent, or has finished his piece, 
there will be no one to deny that the crumpled figure lying at 
your feet is indeed the opponent you were facing, rather than a 
dried-grass dummy, hastily fabricated to take the fall in his place. 
Temperantlam, argumentum ad 
If fallacies were assigned to the nations of the world, the argumentum ad temperantlam would be allocated to England. It is the 
158 How to Win Every Argument 
Englishman's fallacy. The argumentum ad temperantiam suggests 
that the moderate view is the correct one, regardless of its other 
merits, it takes moderation to be a mark of the soundness of a 
position. 
The unions have asked for 6 per cent, the management have offered 2 
per cent. Couldn't we avoid all the hardship and waste of a lengthy 
strike, and agree on 4 per cent? 
(If we did, next time the unions would demand 20 per cent and the 
management would offer minus 4 per cent.) 
The argumentum ad temperantiam appeals to a common 
instinct that everything is all right in moderation. Moderate 
eating, moderate drinking and moderate pleasures have been 
widely praised by cloistered philosophers without any extreme 
desires of their own. The ad temperantiam appeals to that upperclass English feeling that any kind of enthusiasm is a mark of bad 
manners or bad breeding. One shouldn't be too keen. It helps to 
explain why none of them are particularly good at anything, and 
accounts for their steady, but moderate, decline. 
The fallacy enters in because, while moderation may be a 
useful maxim to regulate our desires, it has no specific merit in 
argument. Where one view is correct, there is no rule that it will 
be found by taking the average or mean of all of the views 
expressed. 
If two groups are locked in argument, one maintaining that 
2+2 = 4 and the other claiming that 2+2 = 6, sure enough, an 
Englishman will walk in and settle on 2+2 = 5, denouncing both 
groups as extremists. He is correct to describe them as extremists, but incorrect to suppose that this proves them wrong. 
/ have tried, during my term of office, to steer a middle course between 
partiality on the one hand and impartiality on the other. 
Temperantlam, argumentum ad 159 
(He might have added: between truth and falsehood, between vice 
and virtue, between falling asleep and staying awake, between sense 
and nonsense.) 
In countries and situations where bargaining is more common 
than fixed price transactions, people routinely manipulate the 
extremes in order to influence the idea of a 'fair' average. Exactly 
the same procedure can be used in public life, advocating an 
extreme position in order to pull the eventual settlement closer 
to your way of thinking. 
Only in England do people write books with titles like The 
Middle Way, elevating the argumentum ad temperantiam into a 
guide for public policy. The Liberal Party used to make a career of 
the fallacy, regularly taking up a position midway between those 
of the two main parties, and ritually denouncing them for 
extremism. The main parties, in their turn, contained this threat 
by bidding for 'the middle ground' themselves. This led the 
Liberals to become extremists in order to attract attention. In 
Britain New Labour was built upon the temperantiam. They 
called it the Third Way. 
One side represents capitalism; the other stands for socialism. We offer 
instead a policy of co-partnership to replace the old politics of conflict 
and extremism. 
(So alluring is this type of thing to the ad temperantiam mind, that the 
other parties hastily produce versions of it.) 
When you use the argumentum ad temperantiam yourself, you 
should try to cultivate that air of smug righteousness which 
shows it to best advantage. Remember that your opponents are 
extremists, probably dangerous ones. They are divisive and 
destructive. Only you, taking the middle course, tread the virtuous path of moderation. 
160 How to Win Every Argument 
You will find it useful to invent extreme positions on one side, 
in order to cast the opposing views as extremist also. 
Councillor Watson has urged free travel for senior citizens. Others have 
suggested we should charge them 50 pence per journey. Surely the 
sensible course would be to reject these extremes and opt for a moderate 
charge of 25 pence? 
(Of course, the debate was between 25 pence and zero. The 50 
pence advocates are conjured up in support of your ad 
temperantiam.) 
Try to cultivate the company of Foreign Office officials. It 
comes so naturally to them when someone makes a claim 
against Britain to concede half of it that you will learn to commit 
the fallacy at speed with apparent ease. You will need to be quick 
off the mark because the fallacy has a large following. 
When two countries are disputing the ownership of a couple 
of islands for example, you should be the first to leap in with the 
'one each' suggestion. There will be plenty of British diplomats 
trying to beat you to it. 
Thatcher's blame 
When the round black hat first appeared it was dubbed a bowler. 
This was because it looked like a bowl, and because it was made 
by the Bowler brothers. The term 'Thatcher's blame' might 
similarly catch on for two reasons: it was regularly used against 
the lady herself, and it covers all cases, just as a thatcher covers all 
of a roof. 
In her first few years in office, Lady Thatcher was blamed for 
poverty and unemployment in Britain. Seamlessly this switched 
to blame for the culture of shameless affluence as the emerging 
Thatcher's blame 161 
class of yuppies flaunted their new-found wealth. She was 
deemed to be at fault in both cases. 
The fallacy of Thatcher's blame' is committed when blame is 
attached no matter what outcome ensues. The fallacy occurs 
because the evidence is irrelevant when the determination of 
guilt precedes the outcome of their actions. Indeed, the point 
about 'Thatcher's blame' is that it covers all the conceivable 
outcomes. 
If a policy is introduced first in Scotland, ahead of its application in England, the accusation is that the Scots are being used 
as guinea-pigs, and put at risk simply to test it. On the other 
hand, if the policy is introduced in England before being 
extended to Scotland, the charge will be made that the Scots are 
being left out yet again. Finally, if the policy is introduced at 
exactly the same time in both countries, this will be taken as 
evidence that the policy-makers are failing to appreciate the 
essential differences between England and Scotland. Heads you 
lose, tails you lose, and if the coin lands on its edge you also lose. 
The fallacy works well in parliament because the official 
opposition is supposed to oppose. 'Thatcher's blame' allows 
them to be against whatever the government decides to do, no 
matter what the outcome might be. Thus anything done quickly 
is being 'rushed through recklessly', while measures which take 
time are tagged with 'intolerable delays'. 
The fallacy falsely pretends that a judgement is being made 
based on the outcome, when that negative judgement would 
have been applied to any outcome. It regularly appears in Britain's tabloid press, where once a celebrity has fallen from favour 
any action they take is deemed to deserve condemnation. Since 
the opprobrium comes anyway, it expresses no real judgement 
on the morality or merits of the actions themselves. 
I've been asked to a christening, but I'm sure they'll give the child some 
outlandish name that will make it a laughing-stock. Either that or some 
162 How to Win Every Argument 
unbelievably tedious and commonplace name which will make the child 
seem like a faceless conformist. 
The fallacy is easy to use because it preys upon an instinct 
which would rather hear ill than good about people. After all, 
gossips don't go round praising people for their righteous 
actions. To use it effectively, you should pour scorn on some 
proposed action, predicting an adverse outcome. You then 
introduce an alternative consequence with the words 'And even 
if ...' This allows you to predict more dire consequences. Your 
audience will never spot that you have, like the fallacy, covered 
every conceivable case. If you think this too obvious, reflect that 
for over a century the followers of Marxism predicted disaster for 
capitalism, whatever outcomes it produced. 
Trivial objections 
The problem with trivial objections is that they leave the central 
thesis largely untouched. It is fallacious to oppose a contention 
on the basis of minor and incidental aspects, rather than giving 
an answer to the main claim which it makes. 
/ am totally opposed to the new road around the town. It will make all of 
our town maps out of date. 
(It is rare for the fate of a new road to be decided on the basis of what 
it does to the maps. That said, however, one cannot help noticing 
that the maps show that towns reach very strange decisions on such 
matters.) 
The fallacy is akin to that of the straw man. Instead of facing 
the main opponent, in this case it is only a few aspects of it which 
are confronted. The trivial objections are possibly valid; the point 
is that they are also trivial, and not adequate to the work of 
Trivial objections 163 
demolishing the case which is presented. The fallacy is committed because they are not up to the task to which they are 
assigned, not because they are erroneous. 
We cannot countenance any involvement in a land war in Europe. Think 
of what it might do to the supply of long-life milk from the continent. 
(Integrity, honour and glory sometimes seem pretty trivial reasons -
but long-life milk...) 
Associate membership of the European Union, when it was 
known as the European Economic Community, was, however, 
rejected by a British prime minister as 'beneath our dignity'. 
Trivial objections tend to appear when the central thrust of 
the argument is difficult to oppose. Very often they make their 
appearance as practical difficulties put in the way of a popular 
proposal. 
Although banning cars from the High Street will severely hit trade at my 
own store, I would still go along with the majority but for one thing. We 
do not have a single sign-writer in the area who could make up the 
necessary road signs. 
It is often difficult to oppose the democratic process without 
appearing to be undemocratic. The fallacy of trivial objections 
permits a combination of readiness to accept the idea with 
hostility to any practical proposal. Elections can be opposed 
because of the paperwork involved. Referenda, while good in 
principle, can be opposed on grounds of cost. 
Of course we, as teachers, would like the parents to have the final say on 
this; but there just isn't a hall big enough for such a meeting. 
(A meeting of teachers who really favoured the proposal could 
meanwhile be held in the store-cupboard.) 
164 How to Win Every Argument 
When you are searching for trivial objections with which to do 
down ideas which are difficult to oppose head-on, you can 
always drag up objections from highly unlikely hypothetical 
situations. 
Yes, vicar, I would like to come to church more regularly. But suppose the 
house caught fire one Sunday morning while I was away? 
(Why, it would then become another flaming excuse, like this one.) 
If you dwell on your objections, listing them and showing how 
each one is valid, your audience will be impressed more by their 
weight of numbers than by their lack of substance. 
/ too like the idea of extending choice by having vending machines in 
trains, but there are eight objections. First, how would passengers 
manage to get the right coins for them? Second... 
(Very good, so long as you never mention the real objection, which is 
that they would enable people to bypass failures in the existing service. Stick to the trivia; it's safer ground.) 
Tu quoque 
Tu quoque means 'you also', and is committed when a case is 
undermined by the claim that its proponent is himself guilty of 
what he talks of. It is a change of subject from a claim made by a 
proponent to one made against him. ('You accuse me of abusing 
my position, but you're the one whose company car is seen 
propping up the rails at the local race-course!') 
With a little more subtlety, the tu quoque can be used to 
undermine an accusation by discrediting the accuser. 
Tu quoque 165 
And now I turn to Mrs Green's charge that I deliberately misled this 
society over my personal interest in the firm concerned. May I remind you 
that this charge comes from the same Mrs Green who kept very quiet 
when her son-in-law benefited from our decision over the surplus land. 
Hardly a source entitled to make such charges, you must agree. 
(I reckon he did it.) 
The fallacy of the tu quoque occurs because it makes no 
attempt to deal with the subject under discussion. A new subject 
is introduced, namely the record of someone involved. The truth 
or falsehood of an assertion has nothing to do with the background of the person who makes it. Evidence for or against that 
assertion is not altered by details of the previous actions of the 
one who is putting it forward. 
Another version of the tu quoque seeks to undermine what is 
being said by showing it to be inconsistent with the previous 
views of its proposer. 
Why should we listen to Brown's support for the new carpark when only 
last year he opposed the whole idea? 
(For one thing, if the arguments changed his mind they might be 
worth listening to. For another, there might be more cars around.) 
Because someone once opposed an idea it does not preclude 
their arguments in favour from being good ones. Despite this, 
the fallacy is supported by a strong tendency in us to appear 
consistent whenever we can. The new mayor finds it difficult to 
argue with sincerity this year in favour of the same official 
limousine which he opposed so vociferously for his predecessor. 
The UK's parliamentary question-time is the home of the tu 
quoque. Indeed, skill at handling questions is often measured 
exclusively in terms of the performer's dexterity with this 
166 How to Win Every Argument 
particular fallacy. This is why answers to questions about the 
present or the future invariably begin with the phrase: 
May I remind my honourable colleagues... 
(He is, of course, reminding those opposite that they did it sooner, 
longer, deeper, louder and worse. This is why their specious charges 
can be rejected.) 
A parliamentary question is always known in the House as a 'PQ'. 
There is a good case to be made for having the reply to one of 
them called a 'TQ'. 
The tu quoque is easy to use because everyone is inconsistent 
some of the time, and few people have a blameless past. You can 
argue that anyone who has changed their mind has thereby 
proved that they must be wrong at least some of the time, and 
that this occasion could well be one of those times. If you can 
find nothing at all to your opponent's discredit, even this fact can 
be used in an attempt to undermine what he is saying. The rest 
of us have weaknesses, why doesn't he? 
As for the charges that I may just occasionally have helped myself out of 
difficulty to a small extent, all I can say is look at Mr High-and-mighty 
Holier-than-thou. 
(And he is probably quite a lot holier than thou.) 
Unaccepted enthyrnemes 
An enthymeme is an argument with one of its stages understood 
rather than stated. This is all right as long as both parties accept 
the tacit assumption. When the unstated element is not accepted, we move into the territory of the fallacy. 
Unaccepted enthymemes 167 
Bill must be stupid. You have to be stupid to fail a driving-test. 
(While the average listener might nod sagely at this point, he would 
be somewhat put out if he later discovered that Bill hadn't failed his 
driving test. The argument only works if that is assumed.) 
In this case a fallacy is committed because an important element 
of the argument is omitted. If both parties agree on the 
assumption, then it is present although unstated. If only the listener makes the assumption, he may think the argument has 
more support that it really does. We often leave out important 
stages because they are generally understood, but we have to 
recognize that there can be disagreements about what we are 
entitled to assume. 
/ hope to repay the bank soon, Mr Smith. My late aunt said she would 
leave a reward to everyone who had looked after her. 
(The bank manager, surprised by the non-payment of the debt, will 
be even more surprised when you tell him how you had always 
neglected your aunt.) 
It is because we use enthymemes routinely to avoid laboriously filling in the details that opportunities for the fallacy arise. 
The earnest caller who wishes to discuss the Bible with you will 
be satisfied if told 'I'm a Buddhist', because both parties accept 
the implicit fact that Buddhists do not discuss the Bible. If, 
however, you were to reply instead: 'Buddhists don't discuss the 
Bible', your caller might still be satisfied, making the obvious 
assumption that you were a Buddhist. (Make sure though that 
you have a very good answer ready should you happen to meet 
him in church next Sunday.) 
Unaccepted enthymemes form ready crutches for lame 
excuses. The listener will generously clothe them with the 
168 How to Win Every Argument 
unstated part necessary to complete the argument, instead of 
leaving them to blush naked. 
Darling, I'm sorry. Busy people tend to forget such things as anniversaries. 
(This is fine until your colleagues mention that you've done nothing 
for two months except the Telegraph crossword.) 
The fallacy is easy to use, and will get you off the hook in a wide 
variety of situations. The procedure is simple. Give a general 
statement as the answer to an individual situation. Your audience 
will automatically assume the missing premise: that the general 
situation applies to this particular case. What people normally do 
in certain circumstances is only relevant to the charges against you 
if it is assumed that you were indeed in those circumstances. The 
unaccepted enthymeme will slide in as smoothly as vintage port. 
Yes, I am rather late. One simply cannot depend on buses and trains any 
more. 
(True, but you walked from just around the corner.) 
You can equally well make general assertions during a discussion about someone in particular. Your audience's delight at gossip 
and determination to believe the worst in everyone will help the 
unaccepted enthymeme to mingle with the invited guests. 
I'm not happy with the choice of Smith. One can never be happy with 
those who prey on rich widows. 
(Or on unjustified implications.) 
The undistributed middle 
Classic among schoolboy fallacies is the argument that because 
all horses have four legs and all dogs have four legs, so all horses 
The undistributed middle 169 
are dogs. This is the simplest version of the notorious fallacy of 
the undistributed middle. Both horses and dogs are indeed fourlegged, but neither of them occupies the whole of the class of 
four-legged beings. This leaves convenient room for horses and 
dogs to be different from each other, and from other beings 
which might also without any overlap be in the four-legged class. 
The 'middle' which carelessly omitted to get itself distributed 
is the term which appears in the first two lines of a three-line 
argument, but which disappears in the conclusion. The classic 
three-liner requires that this middle term must cover the whole 
of its class at least once. If not, it is undistributed. 
All men are mammals. Some mammals are rabbits, therefore some men 
are rabbits. 
(Even though the first two lines are correct, the middle term 'mammals' never once refers to all mammals. The middle term is thus 
undistributed and the deduction invalid.) 
Common sense shows why the undistributed middle is fallacious. 
The standard three-liner (called a 'syllogism') works by relating 
one thing to another by means of a relationship they both have 
with a third. Only if at least one of those relationships applies to 
all the third thing do we know that it is certain to include the 
other relationship. 
We cannot say that bureaucrats are petty tyrants just because 
bureaucrats are meddlesome and petty tyrants are meddlesome. 
It is quite possible that gin-sodden drunks are meddlesome too, 
but that does not mean that bureaucrats are gin-sodden drunks. 
(Life might be more interesting if they were.) This fallacy commonly appears in the form of 'tarring with the same brush.' 
The worst oppressors of the working class are landlords. Jones is a 
landlord, so Jones is one of the worst oppressors of the working classes. 
170 How to Win Every Argument 
(Exit Jones, hurriedly, before it is pointed out that the worst 
oppressors of the working classes are human. Since Jones is 
human...) 
The great thing about undistributed middles is that you can 
undistribute new ones as further 'evidence' in support of your 
previously undistributed ones. (The worst oppressors of the 
working class wear shoes; Jones wears shoes...) 
The expert user will take the trouble to find out which terms 
are distributed or undistributed. He will learn the simple rule: 
'Universals have distributed subjects, negatives have distributed 
predicates.' Universals are statements which tell us about all or 
none of a class, and negatives tell us what isn't so. Armed with 
this technical information, the expert is able to inflict upon his 
audience such monstrosities as: 
All nurses are really great people, but it happens that some really great 
people are not properly rewarded. So some nurses are not properly 
rewarded. 
(It may be true, but has he given an argument? Since the middle 
term 'really great people' is neither the subject of a universal, nor the 
predicate of a negative, it is not distributed. We have here, therefore, 
a very complex fallacy of the undistributed middle.) 
Leaving aside these technical uses, the fallacy in its simple 
form will give hours of pleasurable success if applied systematically. You should use it to gain approval for what you favour by 
pointing out how it shares qualities with something universally 
admired. Similarly, opposing ideas can be discredited by showing what qualities they share with universally detested things. 
The union closed shop is the will of the majority; and democracy is the 
will of the majority. The union closed shop is only democratic. 
(Where do I sign? [You did.]) 
Unobtainable perfection 171 
Elitism is something only a few benefit from, and tennis is something only 
a few benefit from, so tennis is clearly elitist. 
(Fault!) 
Unobtainable perfection 
When the arguments for and against courses of action are assessed, it is important to remember that the choice has to be made 
from the available alternatives. All of them might be criticized for 
their imperfections, as might the status quo. Unless one of the 
options is perfect, the imperfections of the others are insufficient 
grounds for rejection. The fallacy of unobtainable perfection is 
committed when lack of perfection is urged as a basis for rejection, even though none of the alternatives is perfect either. 
We should ban the generation of nuclear power because it can never be 
made completely safe. 
(Also coal, oil and hydro-electric, all of which kill people every year in 
production and use. The question should be whether nuclear power 
would be better or worse than they are.) 
If none of the alternatives, including making no change at all, is 
perfect, then imperfection is not grounds for a decision between 
them. To the matter of that choice it is irrelevant. If used to 
criticize only one option, it unfairly loads the case against that 
choice because it could be applied to all of them. 
I'm against going to the Greek islands because we cannot guarantee we 
would enjoy ourselves there. 
(When you do find a place for which this is guaranteed, let me know.) 
172 How to Win Every Argument 
The fallacy is very often used to reject changes to the status 
quo, even though the status quo itself might not be perfect. 
We must ban the new heart drug because it has been occasionally 
associated with neurological disorders. 
(This looks all right, but what if there are presently 15,000 patients 
dying each year of heart disease who could be saved by the new 
drug? Neither is the status quo perfect.) 
Television documentaries and public affairs programmes are 
excellent source material for the unobtainable perfection fallacy. 
Any new proposal of government, any government, will be 
subjected to detailed analysis of its imperfections. Frail widows 
and struggling mothers will relate to cameras the hardships 
which will be caused, and the audience will be left with the 
uneasy feeling that the government is being too hasty. Exactly 
the same treatment could be given to the present situation. 
The fallacy haunts the polished halls of committee meetings. 
On every committee is one person, usually a long-serving 
member, whose mission in life is to hold back the tide of anarchy 
and destruction which change represents. He castigates every 
new proposal with its own imperfections. 
/ don't think banning cars from Park Street will prevent old people being 
hurt. There will still be children on roller-blades and bicycles, and 
shopping trolleys and baby carriages. 
(The question is not 'is it perfect?' The issue is whether the new proposal will cut down accidents as the status quo cuts down old people.) 
While you can use the general version of this fallacy to 
undermine any proposals you disapprove of, it will also repay 
you if you take the time and trouble to learn two specialist and 
very clever versions of it. The first of these calls for a particular 
Verecundiam, argumentum ad 173 
suggestion to be opposed because it does not go far enough. 
You show its imperfections, and suggest that something more 
drastic is needed. This idea, therefore, should be rejected. 
/ approve in principle of the proposal to have the benefits allocated by 
lot, rather than by my personal decision, but this will still leave many 
areas of patronage and influence untouched. I suggest that a much 
wider measure is needed, looking at the whole field, and therefore I 
propose that we refer this suggestion back... 
(It was never seen again.) 
The second variant you can use has you calling for something 
totally beyond the powers of those making the decision, and 
thus sets something they cannot do in opposition to something 
they can. 
It's all very well to suggest stiffer penalties for cheating, Headmaster, but 
that will not eradicate the problem. What we need instead is to win over 
these boys and girls, to effect a change in their hearts and minds... 
(The original proposal now exits amid a crescendo of violins.) 
Verecundiam, argumentum ad 
This is the appeal to false authority. While it is perfectly in order 
to cite as a supporting witness someone who has specialized 
knowledge of the field concerned, it is a fallacy to suppose that 
an expert in one field can lend support in another. Unless he has 
special expertise, he is a false authority. 
Hundreds of leading scientists reject evolution. 
(Close examination shows few, if any, whose expertise is in evolutionary biology.) 
174 How to Win Every Argument 
Knowledge is specialized, and we have to accept the view of 
authorities to some extent. There is a general reluctance to 
challenge the view of someone who appears much more qualified than ordinary people. When support for a position is urged 
on account of the opinion of someone who appears to be more 
qualified but is not, the fallacy of argumentum ad verecundiam is 
committed. 
The fallacy lies in the introduction of material that has no 
bearing on the matter under discussion. We have no reason to 
suppose that the opinion of a qualified person is worth any more 
than our own. The attempt to make our own opinions yield 
before such spurious authority is trading on our respect for 
position and achievement, and trying to use this instead of 
argument and evidence. 
The cologne of the stars. 
(Since few of us are lucky enough actually to smell our heroes and 
heroines, their opinions on this subject are probably less interesting 
than those of ordinary people closer at hand.) 
The argumentum ad verecundiam dominates the world of 
advertising. Those who are thought worthy of admiration and 
esteem because of their achievements frequently descend to our 
level to give advice on more humdrum matters. Those whose 
excellence is in acting are only too ready to share with us their 
vast experience of instant coffee and dog-food. The winning of 
an Oscar for excellence in motion pictures is widely recognized 
as a qualification to speak on such matters as world poverty and 
American foreign policy. 
One can admit the current young hopeful some authority on 
tennis rackets after a Wimbledon success; but razor blades? (One 
is surprised to find that he shaves.) In a similar way we see 
famous faces eating yoghurt or buying life assurance. Those who 
Verecundiam, argumentum ad 175 
have proved their worth as presenters of radio or television 
programmes readily share with us their detailed expertise on 
enzyme-action washing powders or the virtues of a margarine 
which is high in polyunsaturates. 
A variant of the argumentum ad verecundiam has the appeal to 
unidentified authorities, albeit those in the right field. In this 
world we are confronted by the opinions of 'leading scientists', 
'top dog-breeders' and 'choosy mums'. Since we do not know 
who they are, all we can do is to accept the apparent authority 
they have. We never hear from the mediocre scientists, the 
average-to-poor dog-breeders or the indifferent mothers. 
There is also the visual ad verecundiam, instanced by the sports 
team wearing the sponsor's name or slogan, even if unconnected with the sport. 
Winning the world slalom championships gives me a real thirst. That's 
why... 
(And the logic is as frothy as the stuff he's selling.) 
Your own use of the ad verecundiam is made easier by the 
desire of many eminent people to be thought of as compassionate people with wide-ranging concerns. No matter how dotty 
the cause, you will always be able to assemble a panel of distinguished names to act as honorary patrons to it. The fact that 
they have achieved eminence as actors, writers and singing stars 
will in no ways diminish their authority to lend weight to your 
campaign. 
In demanding a ban on Spanish imports until bullfighting is outlawed, I 
am joined by distinguished international scientists, top scholars and 
leading figures from the worlds of communication and the arts. 
(They should know. After all, they are also experts on wars, whales 
and windmills.) 
176 How to Win Every Argument 
Wishful thinking 
While many of us engage quite happily in wishful thinking, we 
elevate it to the status of a fallacy when we use it in place of 
argument. If we accept a contention because we would like it to 
be true, rather than because of the arguments or evidence which 
support it, we move into fallacy. Similarly, we also commit the 
fallacy of wishful thinking if we reject something solely because 
we do not wish it to be true. 
Going to work in this awful weather would do no good for anyone. I 
think I'll take the day off and stay in bed. 
(Everyone must have felt the force of this argument at some time. 
Unfortunately, while there may be reasons for and against going into 
work, not wanting to is one which lacks persuasive force over 
everyone except ourselves.) 
Our wishes rarely bear directly on the question of whether a 
thing is true or false. We commit a fallacy by intruding them into 
a discussion of the pros and cons. To suppose that the world is as 
we would want it to be is good solipsism but bad logic. 
Of course the environment talks will succeed. Otherwise it means mankind is on the way out. 
(The fact that we want them to succeed does not mean that they will. 
It could be that mankind is on the way out; in which case you might 
just as well be packing as hoping.) 
Wishful thinking often appears to colour our judgement of 
outcomes we are unable to influence. 
He can't die. We couldn't manage without him. 
(He did. They could.) 
Wishful thinking 177 
Death, in fact, is a subject especially prone to the fallacy of 
wishful thinking. Its abrupt and inconsiderate nature is softened 
by the fallacy into something we would find more acceptable, 
although our wishes hardly afford valid grounds for our supposition. Boswell, on a visit to the dying Hume, asked the philosopher about a possible afterlife: 
Would it not be agreeable to have hopes of seeing our friends again? 
(He mentioned three recently deceased friends of Hume, but the 
latter firmly rejected the fallacy. 'He owned it would be agreeable', 
Boswell reported, 'but added that none of them entertained so 
absurd a notion.') 
Time, like death, is a field in which our wishes replace our 
ability to influence. 
It can't be Friday already! I've not done nearly enough work to pass the 
exam! 
(Wrong about the day; right about the exam.) 
The problem about all wishful thinking is that if you want one 
thing and the laws of the universe dictate another there is a 
conflict of interests which is not going to be resolved in your 
favour. This being true, you might as well spend time working 
out how to deal with the outcome, instead of wishing that 
something else would happen. 
The bank will extend our overdraft; otherwise we just cannot survive. 
(Bank managers are not interested in your survival. They care about 
only two things: making money for the bank and grinding the faces 
of the poor.) 
178 How to Win Every Argument 
Most of us are already fairly adept at using the fallacy of 
wishful thinking to persuade ourselves. When using it to convince others, bear in mind that it must be their wishes, rather 
than your own, which are appealed to. 
The business will succeed. You'll get a huge return on your investment. 
(This is more effective than 'The business will succeed. I'll be rich for 
life!') 
Classification of fallacies 
There are five broad categories into which fallacies fall. The most 
important division is between the formal fallacies and the informal ones, although there are important distinctions between the 
various types of informal fallacy. 
Formal fallacies have some error in the structure of the logic. 
Although they often resemble valid forms of argument, the 
staircase only takes us from A to B by way of cracked or missing 
steps. In brief, the fallacy occurs because the chain of reasoning 
itself is defective. 
Informal fallacies, on the other hand, often use valid reasoning 
on terms which are not of sufficient quality to merit such treatment. They can be linguistic, allowing ambiguities of language 
to admit error; or they can be fallacies of relevance which omit 
something needed to sustain the argument, permit irrelevant 
factors to weigh on the conclusion, or allow unwarranted presumptions to alter the conclusion reached. 
The five categories of fallacy are: 
1 . formal 
2. informal (linguistic) 
3. informal (relevance - omission) 
4. informal (relevance - intrusion) 
5. informal (relevance - presumption) 
180 How to Win Every Argument 
The formal fallacies 
Affirming the consequent 
Conclusion which denies premises 
Contradictory premises 
Denying the antecedent 
Exclusive premises 
Existential fallacy 
False conversion 
Illicit process (minor) 
Illicit process (major) 
Positive conclusion/negative premises 
Quaternio terminorum 
Undistributed middle 
The informal linguistic fallacies 
Accent 
Amphiboly 
Composition 
Division 
Equivocation 
Reification 
The informal fallacies of relevance (omission) 
Bogus dilemma 
Concealed quantification 
Damning the alternatives 
Definitional retreat 
Extensional pruning 
Hedging 
Classification of fallacies 181 
Ignorantiam, argumentum ad 
Lapidem, argumentum ad 
Nauseam, argumentum ad 
One-sided assessment 
Refuting the example 
Shifting ground 
Shifting the burden of proof 
Special pleading 
Straw man 
The exception that proves the rule 
Trivial objections 
Unaccepted enthymemes 
Unobtainable perfection 
The informal fallacies of relevance (intrusion) 
Blinding with science 
Crumenam, argumentum ad 
Emotional appeals 
(argumentum ad invidiam) 
(argumentum ad metum) 
(argumentum ad modum) 
(argumentum ad odium) 
(argumentum ad superbiam) 
(argumentum ad superstitionem) 
(sentimens superior) 
Every schoolboy knows 
Genetic fallacy 
Hominem (abusive) argumentum ad 
Hominem (circumstantial) argumentum ad 
Ignoratio elenchi 
Irrelevant humour 
Lazarum, argumentum ad 
182 How to Win Every Argument 
Loaded words 
Misericordiam, argumentum ad 
Poisoning the well 
Populum, argumentum ad 
The red herring 
The runaway train 
The slippery slope 
Tu quoque 
Verecundiam, argumentum ad 
Wishful thinking 
The informal fallacies of relevance (presumption) 
Abusive analogy 
Accident 
Analogical fallacy 
Antiquitam, argumentum ad 
Apriorism 
Bifurcation 
Circulus in probando 
Complex questions 
Cum hoc ergo propter hoc 
Dicto simpliciter 
Ex-post-facto statistics 
The gambler's fallacy 
Non-anticipation 
Novitam, argumentum ad 
Petitio principii 
Post hoc ergo propter hoc 
Secundum quid 
Temperantiam, argumentum ad 
Thatcher's blame