Most of us (I’m guessing here) want to do our jobs well. Most of us
(still guessing) want more important jobs, bigger salaries, greater
security, higher status, and a bright future. So we try to do our jobs
so well that we will be rewarded, respected, and promoted.
And that is where we go wrong. (I’m not guessing anymore.)
Of course, we have to do our jobs really well. There’s no future for
the screw-up, the bum, or the sociopath. But Richard Templar puts
his finger on the flaw in the implied logic that concludes that the
better we do our job, the faster we will rise up the organization. He
points out that we are all doing two jobs, but most of us are only
conscious of one of them—the job in hand: meeting our sales targets, reducing machine downtime, speeding up monthly
management accounts, whatever. The other job is both larger and
vaguer: making the organization work. If people think you have it in
you to solve the problems of the organization itself, not just your
small part of it, you’ve broken away from the pack. But how do you
do that? There’s an easy answer: read this book. Follow the Rules.
I realized when I read this book that I have always been half conscious of the Rules, though I never managed to formulate and
analyze them with the clarity and detail that Richard Templar brings
to the task. There was a time when I had to interview a lot of promotion candidates in the BBC, and with most of them I had this feeling
that somehow they didn’t look like top management material. Was it
how they dressed, how they walked, how they talked? Bits of all of
those, but most of all their attitude, their frame of mind, which
somehow affected all the others.
Most of them stressed how well they did their present job, which
was quite unnecessary. We knew that; that’s why they were there. It
was their entrance ticket to the interview, and there was no point in
constantly waving it at us. Amazingly few of them had given any real
thought to the problems of the job they were applying for, as
opposed to the job they were doing, let alone the problems that
viii THE RULES OF WORK
FOREWORD ix
faced the BBC as an organization. They were oblivious of the Rules.
The American management guru Peter Drucker makes a useful distinction between efficiency and effectiveness: efficiency is doing the
job right, effectiveness is doing the right job. Your boss will tell you
how to do the job right, but you have to work out for yourself what
the right job is. It means looking at the world outside the organization: what it needs, and how its needs are changing, and what the
organization must do (and stop doing) to survive and prosper.
I remember interviewing two chief executives of great corporations.
Both had joined from college with hundreds of other bright ambitious graduates, and I asked them why it was they had gotten to the
top of the heap and not any of the others. One said he didn’t know,
but what he could tell me was that every job he’d ever done was
abolished after he left it. The other didn’t know either, but said that
no job he’d ever done existed until he started doing it. Both of them
were striking examples of people who focused on doing the right
job, of thinking like the chairman even when they were junior or
middle managers. And I have no doubt they followed all the other
rules as well, always somehow looking and sounding like someone
who should be in a higher job. And as Richard Templar stresses—
they were popular and respected throughout the organization. You
can’t be a successful chief executive if you’re surrounded by embittered, resentful, and demoralized colleagues.
The Rules of Work is first and foremost a guide for the individual
manager, an eye-opener for all those who would like to rise to the
top but don’t seem to be able to find the map. But it is also very
much a book for the organization itself; the great danger is fossilization, becoming preoccupied with its internal tasks and systems and
procedures, and losing touch with the world outside. And this will
happen if everyone is concentrating on being efficient rather than
being effective—in other words, if they don’t follow the Rules.
Sir Antony Jay 
Author, Yes Minister and creator of Sir Humphrey 
Founder, Video Arts
x THE RULES OF WORK
Introduction
I first started formulating The Rules of Work many, many years
ago when I was an assistant manager. There was a promotion
going for the next step up—manager. There were two possible
candidates, myself and Rob. On paper I had more experience,
more expertise, most of the staff wanted me as their manager,
and I generally knew the new job better. Rob, to be honest,
was useless.
I was chatting with an outside consultant the company used
and asked him what he thought my chances were. “Slim,” he
replied. I was indignant. I explained all about my experience,
my expertise, my superior abilities. “Yep,” he replied, “but you
don’t walk like a manager.” “And Rob does?” “Yep, that’s about
the strength of it.” Needless to say he was quite right, and Rob
got the job. I had to work under a moron. But a moron who
walked right. I studied that walk very carefully.
The consultant was spot on—there was a manager’s walk. I
began to notice that every employee, every job, everyone in
fact, had their walk. Receptionists walked in a particular way,
as did the cashiers, the catering staff, the office workers, the
admin, the security staff—and the managers, of course.
Secretly, I began to practice the walk.
Looking the Part
As I spent a lot of time watching the walk, I realized that there
was also a manager’s style of attire, of speaking, of behavior. It
wasn’t enough that I was good at my job and had the experience. I had to look as if I was better than anyone else. It wasn’t
just a walk—it was an entire makeover. And gradually, as I
INTRODUCTION xi
watched, I noticed that what newspaper was read was important, as was what pen was used, how you wrote, how you
talked to colleagues, what you said at meetings—everything,
in fact, was being judged, evaluated, acted upon. It wasn’t
enough to be able to do the job. If you wanted to get on, you
had to be seen to be the Right Type. The Rules of Work is about
creating that type—of course, you’ve got to be able to do the
job in the first place. But a lot of people can do that. What
makes you stand out? What makes you a suitable candidate
for promotion? What makes the difference?
Act One Step Ahead
I noticed that among the managers there were some who had
mastered the walk, but there were others who were practicing,
unconsciously, for the next walk—the general manager’s walk.
I happened at that time to be travelling around a lot between
different branches and noticed that among the general managers there were some who were going to stay right where
they were for a long time. But there were others already practicing for their next step ahead—the regional director’s walk.
And style and image.
I switched from practicing the manager’s walk and leapt ahead
to the general manager’s walk. Three months later I was promoted from assistant manager to general manager in one swift
move. I was now the moron’s manager.
Walk Your Talk
Rob had the walk (Rule 18: Develop a Style That Gets You
Noticed), but unfortunately he didn’t adhere sufficiently to the
xii THE RULES OF WORK
number one rule—he didn’t know the job well enough. He
looked right, sounded right, but the bottom line was—he
couldn’t do the job as well as he should have done. I was
brought in over his head because they couldn’t sack him—
having just promoted him it would have looked bad—and
they needed someone to oversee his work so that his errors
could be rectified quickly. Rob had reached the level of his
own incompetence and stayed there for several years neither
improving nor particularly getting worse—just looking good
and walking right. He eventually shuffled himself off sideways
into running his own business—a restaurant. This failed
shortly afterward because he forgot Rule 2: Never Stand Still—
or maybe he never actually knew it. He carried on walking like
a manager instead of a restaurateur. His customers never really
took to him.
By practicing the general manager’s walk, I got the promotion,
but I also got it because I paid great attention to doing my job
well—Rule 1. Once in this new job I was, of course, completely out of my depth. I had to quickly learn not only my
new role and all its responsibilities, but also the position
below, which I had not really held. I had stood in for managers
but I had never been a manager—now I was the manager’s
manager. I was in great danger of falling flat on my face.
Never Let Anyone Know How Hard
You Work
But I was, by now, a dedicated Rules Player. There was only
one recourse—secret learning. I spent every spare second
available—evenings, weekends, lunch breaks—studying
everything I could that would help me. But I told no one—
Rule 13.
Within a short time I had mastered enough to be able to do the
job well enough. And the embryonic Rules of Work were born.
INTRODUCTION xiii
Have a Plan
Being a general manager was both fun and pain. It was 50 percent more work but only 20 percent more pay. My next step,
logically, was regional director. But it didn’t appeal. More
work—much more work but for not that much more money. I
began to develop a plan (Rules 24–34). Where did I want to go
next? What did I want to do? I was getting bored being stuck
in the office all the time and all those endless dreary meetings.
And all that time spent at head office. Not for me. I wanted to
have fun again. I wanted to practice the Rules. I formulated
my plan.
What the company didn’t have was a roving troubleshooter—a
sort of general manager’s general manager. I put Rule 4: Carve
Out a Niche for Yourself into play. I suggested to the chairman
that a report was needed. I never suggested that this was the
job I wanted, but the agenda was obvious, I suppose. I got it,
of course, and became a peripatetic general manager, answerable directly only to the chairman and with a job description I
wrote myself. And pay? A lot more than the regional directors
were on, but they didn’t know and I didn’t let on (Part V: Look
After Yourself). I cultivated their support and friendship; I was
never a threat because it was obvious I wasn’t after their job.
They may have wanted the money I was making if they had
known, but they didn’t want the little niche I had carved out
for myself.
And I did this without being ruthless, dishonest, or unpleasant. In fact, I was always diplomatic when dealing with the
general managers. I treated them with courtesy and politeness,
even when I had to confront them on some aspect of their job.
I added If you can’t say anything nice—shut up and learned the
rules in Part VIII: Cultivate Diplomacy.
xiv THE RULES OF WORK
Knowing the People Who Count
And I quickly learned that if I wanted to know what was going
on in a branch, it was best to speak to the people who really
knew—the maintenence staff, the receptionists, the cashiers,
the elevator attendant, and the drivers. It was important both
to identify these people and to be on the right side of them—
Rule 94. They supplied me with more information than anyone
would have believed—and all for the price of a simple “Hello
Bob, how’s your daughter doing at college these days?”
The Rules of Work took shape. Over the next few years I
watched them grow up and gain maturity and experience. I
left the corporation and founded my own consultancy. I
trained managers in The Rules of Work and watched them go
out into the world and conquer their destiny with charm and
courtesy, confidence and authority.
But I see you have questions. How do these Rules work—are
they manipulative? No, you don’t make anyone else do anything; it is you that is changing and improving.
• Do I have to become someone else? No, you may need to
change your behavior a bit, but not your personality or
values.You’ll go on being you, but a slicker, quicker you, a
more successful you.
• Are they hard to learn? No, you can learn them in a week
or two—but it does take a long time to really master
them. But we are learning all the time and even practicing
one Rule is better than none at all.
• Is it easy to spot others doing them? Yes, sometimes, but
the really good Rules Players will never let you see what
they are doing; they’re too good for that. But once you
become a Rules Player too, it does become easier to see
what Rule people are using at any particular time.
INTRODUCTION xv
• Will I notice benefits right away? Oh yes, you betcha—
immediately.
• Do I still do them? I wouldn’t even admit to doing them
in the first place—I’m a Rules Player after all.
• Is it ethical to use the Rules? Yes. You aren’t doing anything wrong, merely utilizing your own natural skills and
talents and adapting them, using them consciously. This
is a key area for understanding the Rules—consciously.
Everything you do will have been decided beforehand—
you’ll still appear spontaneous, of course, you decided
that as well—but you will be a conscious controller of
any situation rather than an unconscious victim. You will
be awake and aware, living in the moment and taking
advantage of your own abilities. The bottom line is that
you must be able to do your job—and do it well in the
first place. The Rules are not for slackers. You think 
you work hard now? It’s nothing to doing the Rules 
successfully—now that really does take work.
And let’s face it, you love to work. You love doing your job.
You have to, to be wanting to read the Rules and to want to be
moving up. What I am suggesting is that you consciously
think about every area of that work and make changes to
improve
• The way you do it
• How people perceive you to be doing it
If you don’t practice the Rules, you will muddle along, get by,
maybe find what it is you are looking for. You may already
know a lot of these Rules—and be practicing them—
instinctively and intuitively. Now we will do them consciously.
If you do you will
• Get promoted 
• Get along better with your colleagues
• Feel better about yourself
• Enjoy your work more
• Understand your job better
• Understand your boss’s point of view better
• Take more pride in both yourself and your work
• Set a good example for junior staff
• Contribute more to your company
• Be valued and respected
• Spread an aura of goodwill and cooperation around you
• Be successful if you leave to start your own business.
These Rules are simple and effective, safe and practical. They
are your 10 steps to building confidence and creating a new
and more powerful you. And building that new you morally
and ethically. You aren’t going to do anything that you wouldn’t
expect—and appreciate—others doing to you. These Rules
enhance personal standards and elevate your individual principles. They are my gift to you. They’re yours. Keep them safe,
keep them secret.
xvi THE RULES OF WORK
PART I
WALK YOUR
TALK
This page intentionally left blank 
These first Rules are the underlying ones that govern all the
others—know your job well, do it well, and be better than
anyone else at doing it. It’s that simple. The secret part is to
make sure nobody knows how hard you have to work to do it
so well. You can do all your learning in secret, in private—
don’t let on, and don’t let anyone know you do this—and
never ever let anyone know you’ve read this book; it is your
secret bible. The important thing is to look calm and efficient,
on top of everything and totally in control. You glide through
your daily work with ease and confidence. You are unflappable
and unstoppable. Bottom line is, however, you must be really
good at your basic job.
WALK YOUR TALK 3
It’s all too easy for your work to get overlooked in the busy
hurly-burly of office life. You’re slaving away, and it can be
hard to remember that you need to put in some effort to boost
your individual status and personal kudos for your work. But
it’s important. You have to make your mark so you stand out
and your promotional potential will be realized.
The best way to do this is to step outside the normal working
routine. If you have to process so many widgets each day—
and so does everyone else—then processing more won’t do
you that much good. But if you submit a report to your boss of
how everyone could process more widgets, then you’ll get
noticed. The unsolicited report is a brilliant way to stand out
from the crowd. It shows you’re thinking on your feet and
using your initiative. But it mustn’t be used too often. If you
subject your boss to a barrage of unsolicited reports, you’ll get
noticed but in completely the wrong way. You have to stick to
certain Rules:
• Only submit a report occasionally.
• Make really sure that your report will actually work—that it
will do good or provide benefits.
• Make sure your name is prominently displayed.
• Make sure the report will be seen not only by your boss,
but by his boss as well.
• It doesn’t have to be a report—it can be an article in the
company newsletter.
RULE 1
4 THE RULES OF WORK
Get Your Work Noticed
Of course, the very best way to get your work noticed is to be
very, very good at your job. And the best way to be good at
your job is to be totally dedicated to doing the job and ignoring all the rest. There is a vast amount of politics, gossip,
gamesmanship, time wasting, and socializing that goes on in
the name of work. It isn’t work. Keep your eye on the ball, and
you’ll already be playing with a vast advantage over your colleagues. The Rules Player stays focused. Keep your mind on
the task at hand—being very good at your job—and don’t get
distracted.
RULE 1
WALK YOUR TALK 5
THE UNSOLICITED REPORT
IS A BRILLIANT WAY TO
STAND OUT FROM 
THE CROWD.
Never Stand Still
RULE 2
6 THE RULES OF WORK
Most people go into work each day with only one thought—
getting through to going home time. During their day they
will do whatever they have to, to arrive at that magic time. You
won’t. You won’t stand still. Having gotten the job seems
enough for most people that they will just do it and thus
remain static. But doing the job isn’t the end game for you—it
is merely a means to the end. And the end for you is promotion, more money, success, amassing the contacts and
experience to set out on your own, whatever it is that is on
your wish list. The job, in a way, is an irrelevance.
Yes, you have to do the work. And yes, you have to do it
supremely well. But your eye should already be on the next
step, and every activity you indulge in at work should be
merely a step in your plan to move up.
While others are thinking of their next coffee break or how to
get through the afternoon without actually having to do any
work, you will be busy planning and executing your next
maneuver. In an ideal world, the Rules Players will have
gotten their work done by lunchtime so that they have the
afternoon free to study for the next promotion, to assess the
competition among close colleagues, to write the unsolicited
reports to get their work noticed, to research ways to improve
the work process for everyone, to further their knowledge of
company procedures and history.
If you can’t get your work done by lunchtime, then you will
have to fit all these things into and around the work. What the
competition will be doing is not doing them. But you don’t
stand still. Never accept that doing the job is enough. That’s
for the others. You will be moving right along preparing,
studying, analyzing, and learning.
We talked earlier about the manager’s walk; well, that’s what
you’ll be doing, practicing the manager’s walk—or whoever’s
walk it is you need to master. You have to see promotion—or
whatever else it is you want—as a movement. You keep
moving or you grow moss. You have to have movement or you
grow stagnant. You have to like movement or you grow roots.
Movement requires of you that you don’t sit on your backside
and do nothing—don’t stand still.
RULE 2
WALK YOUR TALK 7
IN AN IDEAL WORLD, THE
RULES PLAYERS WILL
HAVE GOTTEN THEIR WORK
DONE BY LUNCHTIME SO
THAT THEY HAVE THE
AFTERNOON FREE.
Volunteer Carefully
RULE 3
8 THE RULES OF WORK
A lot of people think that if they say “yes” to everything, they
will get noticed, get praised, and get promoted. Not true. The
clever manager above them will use this “I’ll do it” mentality,
and you will end up overworked, undervalued, and abused.
Before you put your hand up to volunteer for anything, think
very carefully. You have to ask yourself various questions:
• Why is this person asking for volunteers?
• How will this further my plan?
• How will I look to senior management if I volunteer?
• How will I look if I don’t volunteer?
• Is this a dirty job that no one else wants?
• Or is this person genuinely, desperately overburdened and
really in need of my help?
It might well be a dirty job that no one else wants, and by volunteering you might look very good in the eyes of senior
management—they think you capable of rising to a challenge,
being useful, and being prepared to get your sleeves rolled up
and stuck in. On the other hand, they might think you are an
idiot. Or if you volunteer to do the filing, they’ll see you as a
mere filing clerk. Or you might generate a load of goodwill for
helping out someone in real need of support. Be careful and
choose your moments. There’s no point sticking your hand up
if it means you’re going to be seen as a monkey. Only take that
one step forward when you are confident you will look good,
gain benefit, or make a difference to someone who needs help.
Also be aware that sometimes you seem to have volunteered
without putting your hand up or stepping forward. It just happens that sometimes all your colleagues take a collective step
backward, leaving you there out in the open seemingly volunteering when you really had no intention of doing so. The first
time this happens, you will have to ride with it and do the
job—but make sure it doesn’t happen again—not to a Rules
Player, not twice. Keep your ear better attuned next time and
feel out the collective approach. Make sure you’re stepping
backward with the rest of them.
RULE 3
WALK YOUR TALK 9
BEFORE YOU PUT YOUR
HAND UP TO VOLUNTEER
FOR ANYTHING, THINK
VERY CAREFULLY.
Carve Out a Niche for Yourself
RULE 4
10 THE RULES OF WORK
I once worked with a colleague who made it a great personal
skill to find out stuff about customers that we couldn’t. It
seemed he always knew the names of their children, where
they went on vacation, their birthdays—and their spouses’—
their favorite music and restaurants. Consequently, if you had
to deal with a particular customer you went to Mike and
asked, politely and humbly, if he could give you some little
titbit that would get you well in with the customer. Mike had
carved out a niche for himself. No one asked him to become a
walking encyclopedia of customer likes and dislikes. It wasn’t
part of his job description. It took a lot of work and unseen
effort. And it was a very valuable asset. It didn’t take long for
the regional director to hear of this extra effort Mike had put
in, and his rise up the corporate ladder was swift, meteoric,
unprecedented. That’s all it took. I say “all,” but it was in fact a
lot of work and immensely clever.
Carving out a niche means spotting a useful area that no one
else has spotted. It might be as simple as being great at spreadsheets or report writing. It might be, like Mike, knowing
something no one else does. It might be being brilliant with
company software or budgets or understanding the system.
Make sure you don’t make yourself indispensable, or this rule
backfires.
Carving out a niche for yourself often takes you out of the
normal range of office activities. You get to move around
more, be out of the office more often without having to
explain to anyone where you are or what you are doing. This
makes you stand out from the herd and gives you independence and a superior quality. I once volunteered to edit the
company newsletter—bearing in mind the previous rule—and
could wander about between our seven branches at will.
Obviously, I always made sure my work was done on time and
supremely well.
Carving out a niche for yourself frequently means you get
noticed by people other than your boss—other people’s
bosses. These bosses get together and they talk. If they bring
your name up it will be in a good way—“I see Rich has been
busy doing some really original market analysis.” This makes
it difficult for your boss not to promote you if she wants to
win her peer group approval. If the other bosses think you are
a good idea, then your boss really has to go along with it.
RULE 4
WALK YOUR TALK 11
IF THE OTHER BOSSES
THINK YOU ARE A GOOD
IDEA, THEN YOUR BOSS
REALLY HAS TO GO ALONG
WITH IT.
Under Promise and Over Deliver
RULE 5
12 THE RULES OF WORK
If you know you can do it by Wednesday, always say Friday. If
you know it will take your department a week, say two. If you
know it will cost an extra two people to get the new machine
installed and up and running, then say three.
This isn’t dishonest, merely prudent. If it gets spotted that this
is what you do, then openly and honestly admit it and say you
always build a contingency percentage into your calculations.
They can’t kill you for that.
That’s the first bit. Under promise. And just because you have
said Friday or two weeks or whatever doesn’t mean you can
coast and use up that allowance. Oh, no. What you have to do
is make sure you deliver early, on budget, and better than
promised. And that’s the second part. Over deliver. This means
if you promised to have the report finished by Monday first
thing, it is finished, but not only is it a report it also contains
the full implementation plans for the new premises. Or if you
said you’d have the exhibition stand up and running by
Sunday night with only two extra members of staff, you
have—and you’ve managed to get your major competitor to
pull out of the show. Or if you said you’d have a rough proposal written for the new company brochure by the next
meeting, you not only have this but also a full color mock-up,
the complete text written and proofread, all the photos taken,
and full printing costs and quotes for distribution. Obviously,
you’ve got to be careful that you don’t overstep the mark and
assume responsibilities you haven’t been given, but I’m sure
you get the idea.
Again, it might be stating the obvious, but don’t be too blatant
when you do this or your boss will get to expect it—it should
be a pleasant surprise, not a frequently used tactic.
It also helps sometimes to act dumb. You can pretend you
don’t really understand some new technique or software when
in reality you know it back to front. Then when you suddenly
do all the budgets on the spreadsheets that no one else could,
you look good. If, in advance, you had said “Oh, yes, I know
that, I worked with these spreadsheets at my last place,” there
is no surprise, and you’ve given the game away—and your
advantage.
When you under promise and over deliver, you have to have a
bottom line—in your case, as a Rules Player, it is simply that
you will never deliver late or deliver short. That’s it. If you
have to sweat blood and work all night, then so be it. You will
deliver when you said you would—or earlier if you can—
without exception. It is better to negotiate a longer delivery
time in the first place than to have to let someone down. A lot
of people are so keen to be liked, or approved of, or praised
that they will agree to the first delivery time offered to them—
“Oh yes, I can do that,” and then they fail. They look like
pushovers in the first place and incompetent in the last.
RULE 5
WALK YOUR TALK 13
YOU WILL NEVER DELIVER
LATE OR DELIVER SHORT.
Learn to Ask Why
RULE 6
14 THE RULES OF WORK
You won’t be able to do your best for your employer if you
can’t see the big picture. You may be only a humble cog in a
huge grinding machine, but if you can’t step back and see
what the whole machine is up to, you won’t be able to do your
little coggy things as well as you could. What’s more, if you
only ever talk in terms of your cog and your immediate neighboring cogs and bolts and shafts and pistons, everyone around
you will see you as belonging neatly in that little part of the
machine.
But you have aspirations to move into bigger and more important parts of the machine, don’t you? Of course you
do—you’re a Rules Player. You want to grow and develop and
make a bigger contribution. And to do that—and be seen as a
suitable candidate to do that—you need to understand what
drives the whole thing and what its purpose is.
The way you do that is to ask questions. When your boss
briefs you on any new task or project, ask how it fits into the
big picture. Why are you shifting focus to selling by phone? Is
this a standard market trend, or is your company trying to do
something innovative? Why is the accounts department splitting into two—is this to benefit customers or to help the
internal structure? And so on.
I’m not talking about plaguing your boss with questions about
what color paper clip you should use for the pink triplicate
sheets and whether it’s OK to put your vacation request in via
email. I’m talking about taking an interest in the whole organization and not just your corner of it, and letting your boss see
that you have your eye on the big picture.
One of the reasons for this is, of course, that your boss will
start to see you as someone who is capable of working at a
higher level with a bigger overview, and someone who has a
loyalty and concern for the whole company. But you’ll also
find that your own job makes far more sense when you can
see the wider view, and that you’re more motivated when you
understand the reasons behind changes, new directives, extra
work, or special projects.
RULE 6
WALK YOUR TALK 15
I’M TALKING ABOUT
TAKING AN INTEREST IN
THE WHOLE ORGANIZATION
AND NOT JUST YOUR
CORNER OF IT.
Be 100 Percent Committed
RULE 7
16 THE RULES OF WORK
Being a Rules Player means you are going to have to work a
whole lot harder than any of your colleagues. They can coast;
you can’t. They can afford to lighten up and put their feet up;
you can’t. To move up, you have to be 100 percent committed.
You can’t afford to lose sight of your long-term goal for a
second. For you there is no time off, no downtime, no lounging around time, no slipups, no mistakes, no accidental
deviations from the script. 
You have to become like a master criminal—they lead incredibly law-abiding lives because they can’t risk breaking a tiny
law in case it draws attention to themselves and the really big
crimes get revealed—and watch what you say and what you
do.
If any of this seems too much, then bow out now. I only want
committed Rules Players on this team. You are going to have
to sign an oath in blood if you want to make this grade. You
are going to have to be vigilant, dedicated, watchful, keen,
ready, prepared, cautious, alert, and on the ball. Tall order.
Is it worth it? You bet. In the land of the blind, you will be the
only one with both eyes open and seeing. You will be powerful—and most importantly you will be having fun. There is no
greater buzz than seeing the games that are going on around
you and being completely uninvolved, utterly objective, and
supremely detached.
You will find that you won’t have to do very much once you
start observing. You will be able to give people a tiny nudge to
get them to change direction rather than a huge big shove.
Your dealings will become incredibly delicate and gentle. 
But you really do have to be 100 percent committed. If you try
this stuff without such dedication, you will go off half-cocked
and run the risk of looking foolish instead of cool and in control. But the beauty of total commitment is that you no longer
have any decisions to make. You know your path exactly and
in any situation you only have to ask, “Does this further my
Rule playing or not?”—and then the decision is made for you.
Easy.
RULE 7
WALK YOUR TALK 17
YOU ARE GOING TO HAVE
TO BE VIGILANT,
DEDICATED, WATCHFUL,
KEEN, READY, PREPARED,
CAUTIOUS, ALERT, AND 
ON THE BALL.
Learn from Others’ Mistakes
RULE 8
18 THE RULES OF WORK
A clever man learns from his own mistakes, but a wise man
learns from others’ mistakes. That’s what they say, and any
Rules Player with sense follows this principle. We all make
some mistakes, but the fewer you make the better.
It sounds good, doesn’t it? However, you can’t just have the
odd catchy quote up your sleeve. You have to really do this
stuff. That means that every time someone near you messes
up, you need to know all about it. You’ll have to do your
detective work, subtly mind you. No one wants to be crossexamined by a colleague about where they went wrong, and
there’s a danger of coming across as smug and self-satisfied
and nosy and condescending because it wasn’t you who made
the mistake, and that is definitely non-Rules behavior.
So when a colleague gets himself in hot water, find out what
went wrong without getting spotted. One of the best ways to
do this is to offer to help him put things right. After all, this
isn’t a competition, and we don’t actually want our teammates
to mess up. It’s just that if they do it anyway, we might as well
get some benefit from it. Helping them remedy things can be a
great way of finding out exactly what happened.
Once you’ve found out just what went wrong, work out how
and why it happened. Then be brutally honest with yourself
about whether you could have made the same mistake. Have
you ever been in a hurry and failed to double-check the paperwork? Or forgotten to check your voice mail at the end of the
day? Or negotiated on the basis of figures you took as right
but could actually have been inaccurate? Or written down the
wrong delivery date in your diary? If so, you need to devise
some kind of system now to make sure it can’t happen in the
future; otherwise it’s only a matter of time before you make
the same mistake. And remember, if you’ve already witnessed
your colleague getting it wrong, you’ll look even worse when
it subsequently happens to you.
Over time, you’ll find that a thorough and inquiring attitude
to other people’s mistakes, rather than a complacent, “It won’t
happen to me” approach, will more than pay off. And the
fewer mistakes you make, the more you’ll impress the boss. It’s
as simple as that.
RULE 8
WALK YOUR TALK 19
EVERY TIME SOMEONE
NEAR YOU MESSES UP,
YOU NEED TO KNOW ALL
ABOUT IT.
Enjoy What You Are Doing
RULE 9
20 THE RULES OF WORK
If you’re not enjoying yourself, what are you doing? If there is
no entertainment value in your work, then there really is no
point in doing it—you can probably get enough in unemployment benefit to survive. I think there are an awful lot of
people out there who really do enjoy working but are frightened to say so in case they get accused of being workaholics or
sad or something. 
There is no shame in saying you enjoy your work. There
seems to be some kudos in being miserable at work, in moaning about your situation. There is a sort of office pecking order
where people try to outdo each other in moaning about how
much they hate their work.
Not for you there’s not. The Rules Player enjoys work and
makes sure people know that. Once you acknowledge that
work is fun—and for you it is even more fun than for anyone
else—you will find your step lightens, your stress levels
decrease, and your whole demeanor lightens. By admitting
work is fun, you are trading in a secret bit of knowledge that
only really successful people usually have. Work is fun—
engrave it on your heart.
Having a good time at work and realizing work is good isn’t
the same thing. Work being good means you take pride in
what you do, enjoy the challenge, and look forward to each
day with optimism and enthusiasm. Having a good time at
work means not achieving much, talking a lot, winding up
colleagues, and drinking champagne all afternoon. There is a
difference, I’m sure you will agree. Having a good time at work
is a temporary thing. It lasts while the fun lasts but quickly
flags once the excitement, the elation, has worn off. 
Work being good means enjoying the negotiating, the hiring
and firing, the day-to-day challenges, the stresses and disappointments, the uncertain future, the testing of one’s mettle,
the new learning curves. A surprising number of people die
within a year of retirement—this suggests that work is more
important to our existence than we think.
If you ain’t enjoying all this and appreciating that it is enjoyable, then you are doomed to be one of the moaners, one of
life’s victims. 
RULE 9
WALK YOUR TALK 21
THERE IS NO SHAME IN
SAYING YOU ENJOY 
YOUR WORK.
Develop the Right Attitude
RULE 10
22 THE RULES OF WORK
At work a lot of people have a sort of “us and them” attitude.
They like to side with the “workers” and moan about the
“management.” You, on the other hand, will develop the right
attitude and not become one of the “us” mentality. No matter
what your position now, you are the next head of department,
an embryonic chairman of the board, a budding managing
director. You have to start to look at both sides of a situation
and identify the position of “them.” You may not voice this
and may even, in public, appear to side with your fellow
workers and colleagues. But deep down, in your heart, you
understand and side with “them.” Never forget that. Your colleagues may moan about management policy, but you will
analyze it and try to see it from their point of view. To fit in
and blend you may be tempted to adopt the camouflage of a
moaning worker—not a wise move. Nod in agreement, but
don’t moan yourself.
The right attitude is twofold:
1. You side with management and see policy decision from
their point of view.
2. You devote your attention to becoming a total and committed Rules Player—you look out for Number One
(that’s you).
The right attitude means giving it your best shot, not just
today but every day. Not just when it’s easy but when it’s awful
as well. 
The right attitude means going that extra mile, giving it that
extra effort even when you’re tired and pissed off and ready to
quit. Others can quit, but you can’t. You’re a Rules Player.
The right attitude is head up, never moaning, always positive
and upbeat, constantly looking for the advantage and the
edge.
The right attitude is developing standards—and sticking to
them. Being sure of your bottom line and knowing when to
make a stand. The right attitude is being aware that you have
enormous power and that you will exercise that power with
kindness, restraint, humanity, and consideration. You won’t
put anyone down or be ruthless or manipulative. Yes, you may
take advantage of others’ sleepiness or apathy or wrong attitude—that’s their problem. But you will take the moral high
ground and be blameless. The right attitude is being good but
quick, kind but observant, considerate but successful. 
RULE 10
WALK YOUR TALK 23
YOU WILL TAKE THE
MORAL HIGH GROUND AND
BE BLAMELESS.
Be Passionate but Don’t Kill
Yourself
RULE 11
24 THE RULES OF WORK
I hope you’re very passionate about your job. Whether your
job satisfaction comes from the people you work with, the
sense of achievement, a deep belief in what you’re doing, the
recognition you get, the money you earn, or anything else—I
hope you get enough out of the job to feel very passionate
about doing it.
But don’t fall into the trap of thinking that if you’re passionate
you have to work long hours and jump through countless
hoops to prove it. Being passionate isn’t the same thing as
staying late at the office. If you have a positive sense of belief
in your work and an enthusiasm for it, that will shine
through. Your boss will recognize it and, I trust, appreciate it,
regardless of the hours you put in.
It isn’t necessary to work yourself into the ground to be passionate about your work. In fact, it’s hard to sustain your love
of a job that is slowly draining all your energy. It’s what you
achieve that counts, not how long it takes you to achieve it.
You might argue that if you’re really passionate you should be
able to achieve the same as other people in a fraction of the
time. OK, that may not mean you can go home by mid-afternoon, but it does mean that your passion will keep your
output high even if you knock off at 5:30 like everyone else.
Being passionate about your work, which is generally regarded
as being a Good Thing, is about caring whether you do a good
job. It’s not about how you work; it’s about how you feel. So
not only do you not have to work long hours to prove your
passion, but it wouldn’t prove it anyway because it’s quite possible to work 16 hours a day and still not care about what you
do. It would be a pretty miserable life, granted, but I’ve known
people do it.
So cultivate a positive enthusiasm about your work. If you
don’t feel passionate about it, look for a new way to view it
that makes you care, or work out what would generate that
kind of passion in you, and then create it in your work. Now,
I’m not saying it’s easy. For some people it’s a lifelong search.
But I’ll promise you one thing—if you’re not even looking,
you’ll never find it.
RULE 11
WALK YOUR TALK 25
IT’S NOT ABOUT HOW 
YOU WORK; IT’S ABOUT
HOW YOU FEEL.
Manage Your Energy
RULE 12
26 THE RULES OF WORK
Have you heard of time management? Of course you have.
Everyone has. I hope you’re good at it and doing everything
you can to improve. There’s always room to manage our time
better, and the more effectively you work, the more you will
achieve and the more time you’ll have left over for yourself as
well.
What gets less well promoted is the need to manage your
energy. I don’t know why this is, since your energy is one of
your most essential resources and it doesn’t look after itself.
You need to bring plenty of energy to what you do at work,
and it’s your job to make sure that energy is there when it’s
needed.
In part this means looking after your physical energy. Make
sure you stay fit and healthy, and don’t wear yourself out when
you have work the next day. Just as we make the kids go to
bed on time when it’s school tomorrow, so you should make
sure you don’t stay up late, overeat, get drunk, wear yourself
out, skip breakfast, or otherwise reduce your potential at
work.
And don’t forget your mental energy. What time of day do you
work best? On a full stomach or just a comfortable one with
no hunger pains? What environment makes you most effective
at work—quiet, busy, pressured, noisy, companionable? We’re
all different, and you may not have total control over your
working day, but you can make sure those tasks that need concentration get allocated to times when you’re best able to
concentrate and so on.
And there’s emotional energy too. If things are going badly in
your home life, you need to find ways to bolster your emotional mood before you get to work in the morning so your
job isn’t affected (there’s more on this in Rule 14: Keep Your
Home Life at Home). If you’re under emotional pressure at
work, again, you’ll need to come up with constructive ways to
keep your energy levels up—go for a run at lunchtime, tackle
the person who’s bugging you, talk to your boss about your
worries.
Finally, your spiritual side needs room to stretch to feel energized. For some people this can happen outside work, while
others need to be doing a job that gives them a strong sense of
moral worth. Only you know where you stand on this, but
make sure that your job isn’t cramping your spiritual energy,
or in the end both you and the job will suffer.
RULE 12
WALK YOUR TALK 27
IT’S YOUR JOB TO MAKE
SURE THAT ENERGY IS
THERE WHEN IT’S NEEDED.
Never Let Anyone Know How
Hard You Work
RULE 13
28 THE RULES OF WORK
Look at someone like Richard Branson. He’s always seen as
playing, flying balloons, living on a converted barge, flying to
the States. You never see him sitting at a desk, answering
phones, doing paperwork. But at some time during his working day that is exactly what he must do. We just don’t get to
see it. Thus we think of him as the business playboy, the
happy-go-lucky entrepreneur, the devilish entertainer. It’s a
neat image and one that he seems very happy to go along
with—and why not?
This is the sort of image the intrepid Rules Player wants to
cultivate—suave, easy, relaxed, languid, in control, and very
chilled. You never run, never panic, never even seem to hurry.
Yes, you may stay up until the early hours of every morning,
but you will never admit this. Yes, you may work through
your vacations, weekends, and days off, but you will never let
on, never moan about how hard you work or the hours you
put in. To the outside observer you are coasting, taking it easy,
taking it all in your stride.
Obviously, to be able to do this you have to be very good at
your job. If you ain’t, then you’re going to fail trying this Rule
out for size. So, what do you do if you aren’t very good at your
job? Burn that midnight oil again getting good. Learn, study,
gain experience and knowledge, read, ask questions, revise,
sweat, and cram until you do know that job inside and out. Do
this first, and then you can wonder about looking cool and
very relaxed.
There are a few Rules within this Rule:
• Never ask for an extension of a deadline.
• Never ask for help: never admit that you are out of your
depth—you can ask for guidance, advice, information, an
opinion, but never help.
• Never moan or complain about how much work you have
to do.
• Learn to be assertive so you don’t get overloaded—this is
not about letting others know how hard you do work, but
you don’t have to overdo it and overwork.
• Never be seen breaking into a sweat.
• Always look for ways to ease your workload—unnoticed
of course—and ways to speed things up.
RULE 13
WALK YOUR TALK 29
TO BE ABLE TO DO THIS
YOU HAVE TO BE VERY
GOOD AT YOUR JOB.
Keep Your Home Life at Home
RULE 14
30 THE RULES OF WORK
When you go to work, you’re supposed to be focused on
work. To get on with your job. If you spend your time focused
on what goes on at home, people will assume you’re not really
committed to your job. And they’ll probably be right, if the
truth be told.
Think of the people you’ve worked with in the past—or
indeed now—who spent their time chatting about their families, relating details of their social life, complaining about their
mother, fantasizing about their vacations, discussing their
latest shopping trip, whining about health care, and telling
you about their plans for Christmas. How many of them
would you describe as passionate and committed to their
work? Probably none of them.
You don’t have to keep your personal life so private that your
colleagues don’t even know that you have kids, that your
mother is in the hospital, or that you enjoy fishing. But you do
have to keep your personal life well in the background and
concentrate on your job during working hours. That will
ensure that you do the best job you can in the quickest time
and the most effective way. That will ensure that your boss,
and your boss’s boss, see you as a focused and enthusiastic
worker. And that will ensure that you enjoy the job more and
find it more satisfying—no one can enjoy themselves fully
when their mind is elsewhere.
Your colleagues don’t need to know about your personal problems. Sure, you need to have an outlet and good friends to talk
to, but not during working hours. If you have good friends
among your coworkers, have a drink after work to discuss
your problems.
Listen, everyone has an ailing parent, a child who’s going
through a tricky patch at school, an irritating neighbor, a
mortgage they can barely afford, or a sister-in-law from hell
coming to stay for the weekend. They don’t need to hear about
your problems. Sorry, but that’s the way it is. I’m not unsympathetic, but this isn’t the time or the place for it.
Of course, I realize that there are occasionally major problems
that will have some impact on your work. One of those very
rare and exceptional events like a divorce or a bereavement. In
these cases, of course, you won’t be able to hide it at work,
and you should let your boss know why you’re not quite so on
the ball for a few days or weeks. But if you’re doing your best,
and you have a reputation for being work-focused and keeping your personal life out of the job, the people around you
will be so much more understanding and sympathetic when
you really need them to be.
RULE 14
WALK YOUR TALK 31
NO ONE CAN ENJOY
THEMSELVES FULLY WHEN
THEIR MIND IS
ELSEWHERE.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART II
KNOW THAT
YOU’RE BEING
JUDGED AT 
ALL TIMES
This page intentionally left blank 
Everything about us speaks volumes to others. The way we
dress, the car we drive, where we go on vacation, how we talk
and walk, what we eat at lunchtime—everything about us is
subject to the judgment of others. 
The following Rules are about making sure that the judgment
is positive and enhances your career. If you’ve never thought
about it before, these Rules will help you recognize the signals
you give off and how to improve them so others take notice.
You can’t stop people from making judgments—but you can
change those judgments and consciously affect them. These
Rules are about being stylish, confident, smart, well groomed,
and very smooth.
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 35
RULE 15
36 THE RULES OF WORK
Remember the poem? “If you can keep your head, etc.”—well,
how do you let them know you are keeping your head?
Easy—smile. Smile no matter what. Smile when you greet
your colleagues in the morning. Smile when you shake hands.
Smile when it’s getting tough. Smile when it’s hell. Smile no
matter what. 
And what sort of smile? Friendly, genuine—make sure it
extends to your eyes—sincere, frank, honest, open, happy.
And the easiest way to make your smile all these things is to
believe them all. This can’t be an act or it’ll be spotted immediately. It has to be genuine to appear genuine. You have to feel
happy. You have to be enjoying this or your smile will look
insincere and false. And if you’re not enjoying this, then stop
pretending with a fake smile and get the hell out.
We’ll assume your smile is real and that it comes from genuine
happiness and friendliness. Now it is legit to improve on your
smile, to rehearse it, to make it better. But it has to be there in
the first place. We’ll assume it is.
Look in the mirror and smile. Chances are it will look all
wrong. Of course it will. You can only see yourself front on.
And photos don’t work either, they’re in 2D and there is a lot
missing when you look at them. You need to see your smile
from all angles, in 3D, and there is only one way to see this
and that is on film—video or whatever.
If you feel embarrassed getting a partner or friend to video you
so you can improve your smile, then you’ll have to set it up
yourself. Please don’t make the mistake I once made. I was a
Cultivate a Smile
finance manager and was asked to cover for one of our supermarket managers for an afternoon. The store was empty, and I
spent a most enjoyable afternoon practicing my walk, my
smile, my general appearance on the CCTV system in the
store. I would go back to the office and watch the results as I
changed a slight part of whatever bit I was unhappy with. It
was great fun. A few weeks later I was invited to watch a special show for all the staff. Yes, I had forgotten to wipe the tape
and the shop manager—bless him—had found it and had
been putting on shows for all the general staff. I was forced to
sit through the whole thing while my coworkers commented
on it and pointed out where I was going wrong. Very droll,
very funny.
So to improve your smile, make sure you aren’t doing a lopsided grin, that your teeth can be seen but not too much, that
you look happy and honest. Keep practicing until you get it
right.
IT HAS TO BE GENUINE TO
APPEAR GENUINE.
RULE 15
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 37
No Limp Fish—Develop the
Perfect Handshake
RULE 16
38 THE RULES OF WORK
We shake hands often and usually quite unconsciously. How
many times do you have to shake hands during a normal business week? And how much thought do you give to it? There
are so many signals given during that brief handshake though,
that you really ought to make it supremely confident, utterly
secure, and convincingly reassuring. When someone shakes
hands with you, he should be left with the impression of
strength, confidence, power, and of someone totally in control
of himself—that’s you, of course. If you are in any doubt about
the “rightness” of your handshake, get a friend to tell you.
How do you make it better? Make it firm. You can always use
the other hand to reassuringly grip both your hand and that of
your boss/colleague/client. But don’t overdo it and leave this
person with crushed fingers. 
You can always adapt your handshake to make it more individual, more memorable. My grandfather had a wonderful
handshake. He just used his first two fingers (the fore and
index) and his thumb and gripped very firmly. You felt as if
you were shaking hands with royalty.
Handshakes are very formal, old-fashioned things. Forget
about the high fives, the Masonic twitches, or anything
gangsta-style. Stick to the old-fashioned sort of shake and you
will be remembered as someone confident and authoritative.
Good shakers are the ones who proffer their hand first as well
as shaking well. They exude confidence by announcing their
name and offering their hand at the same time thus showing
keenness, friendliness, a relaxed and confident approach, and
a general air of assertiveness. They also look you in the eyes
and say your name back to you. We like hearing our own
name, and it’s an aide memoire.
When you do announce your name, the word that goes first is
“Hello.” That’s it. You might like to be modern and friendly
and say “Hi”—that’s up to you. But the good Rules Player says
“Hello.” And follows that with her name. And your name is
also formal and old fashioned. It is never “Hi, I’m Dave, from
Marketing.” The effect is pleasant enough and certainly
friendly, but you will have impressed no one, gained no benefit or advantage, and brought yourself down to just about the
level of the most junior person there. Much better to say,
“Hello, I’m David Simpson, Marketing Manager.” This immediately separates you from the herd and makes you more
senior to anyone else there. Follow this up with a firm, confident handshake, and you will have them eating out of your
hand.
RULE 16
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 39
FORGET ABOUT THE HIGH
FIVES, THE MASONIC
TWITCHES, OR ANYTHING
GANGSTA-STYLE.
Exude Confidence and Energy
RULE 17
40 THE RULES OF WORK
I once had to give a talk to a large group of businesswomen
about stress management. As I walked to the front to start my
talk, I noticed that there was no lectern for notes (not that I
had any anyway), nowhere to stand. There was a desk with a
chair behind it. If I sat there I would have been lost to view to
anyone who wasn’t in the front row, and it would have seemed
very stilted and formal. I could have stood there with my arms
behind my back looking like Prince Charles talking to the
palace staff. I could have stood there with my hands by my
side or clasped in front of my groin like an embarrassed
schoolboy. But I was about to talk about stress—and its management. I needed to look relaxed, calm—as if I was practicing
what I was preaching, walking my talk.
I solved my dilemma by sitting on the edge of the desk. I
could swing my legs, lean back, lean forward, almost lie down
if I wanted. I met someone several years later who had been
there and she said that she couldn’t remember a thing I’d said
but had been impressed by how relaxed I’d seemed—and how
when I’d finished talking I sprang up and went off for photos
with the local journalist. I don’t remember that bit, but she
said I seemed confident, relaxed, but also energetic.
That’s what we’re aiming for. When you walk through the
office first thing in the morning, there should be a spring to
your step. Let the others crawl in looking hung over or freshly
risen from bed or exhausted from long hours commuting. You
will arrive fresh and energetic, ready for the day’s work, which
is easy to deal with, a mere nothing. Walk quickly rather than
slowly—quick means keen, means energy, means awake and
lively and ready for the challenges the day will throw your
way.
Not too quick though, or you’ll seem to be in a rush. You need
to be smoothly in control—not hurried, not sluggardly, not
cowed or beaten. You need to be seen as bright and fresh and
alive and enthusiastic. 
RULE 17
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 41
WHEN YOU WALK THROUGH
THE OFFICE FIRST THING
IN THE MORNING, THERE
SHOULD BE A SPRING TO
YOUR STEP.
Develop a Style That Gets You
Noticed
RULE 18
42 THE RULES OF WORK
The word is “style.” That means tasteful, formal, civilized,
sophisticated, elegant, cultured, refined, and discerning. You
are going to develop a style that gets you noticed in all these
things. Dying your hair red and only ever wearing Goodwill
clothes may indeed be a style and one that does get you
noticed, but it’s not for the Rules Player. Think Cary Grant
rather than Boy George. Think Lauren Bacall rather than
Madonna. All have style, all attracted attention. But trust me,
Cary or Lauren is what you want. Classic, timeless, quality.
You have various options if you want to adopt a style:
• Choose one thing and get known for it—always wear black,
or double breasted, or Armani, or have a classy handbag/
briefcase collection. Develop a trademark dress style—and
stick to it.
• Only ever buy the very best you can afford.
• Never wear anything tight—loose clothes talk of quality and
elegance, tight clothes of poverty and cheapness.
• Less is more—cut down on jewelry and buy/wear only the
very best, the finest. If it’s not expensive, then don’t wear it.
You’ll find that if you only limit yourself to very expensive
items, it helps you eliminate anything that might be considered dubious or of questionable taste—spending a lot
makes you much more discriminating.
• If you wear make-up, then stick to what suits you, what
makes you look good. Don’t change your makeup with the
seasons or with what’s in vogue—be known for your look,
be instantly recognizable, be stylish.
Always dress up rather than down—formal is best, informal is
worst.
Make sure all accessories follow the same Rules as your dress
sense—stylish, expensive, loose, recognizable, tasteful. There’s
not a lot of point in looking good and then dragging round a
battered old briefcase that’s seen better days—not unless, of
course, that’s your trademark, in which case make sure the
briefcase is very old and very battered and very expensive.
RULE 18
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 43
THINK CARY GRANT
RATHER THAN 
BOY GEORGE. 
THINK LAUREN BACALL
RATHER THAN MADONNA.
Pay Attention to Personal
Grooming
RULE 19
44 THE RULES OF WORK
Each and every morning you need to check that your personal
grooming is in tip-top condition. Details really matter. You let
one thing go and it will be noticed—and it could be the one
thing that makes the vital difference between a promotion and
a rejection. Make each day as conscientious as an interview
day. Before you leave for work check:
• Shoes shined and in good repair.
• Clothes pressed, clean, new, in good condition—no buttons off, no rips, tears, or splits.
• You are freshly showered, deodorant in place.
• Hair clean every day—and well cut and styled on a regular and consistent basis.
• Men shaved—if you have to have facial hair, check for
straggly hairs, insects, fluff, or mold.
• Women made up—this can be as simple as you want, but
it must be good, consistent, and perfect.
• Teeth clean and in good repair, breath fresh, tongue clean
(no yellow fur).
• Nails clean and freshly manicured.
• Hands clean and no ingrained grime from working on old
cars or DIY or gardening—wear thin surgical gloves for
all those dirty jobs.
• If you smoke/drink a lot of coffee, make sure your teeth
(or hands for smokers) aren’t stained, and use
mints/chewing gum to avoid dog breath.
• Nose (and ear) hair tidied up/removed.
• If you wear glasses, make sure they suit you, are renewed
on a yearly basis so that you can see, are a perfect fit, and
are in good condition—no cracked lenses or tape repairs.
You don’t have to become vain or to keep checking yourself in
the mirror. Once you have got it right, relax and enjoy it. I
worked with a woman who would go and clean her teeth after
every coffee or sticky bun. Nothing wrong with that except it
drew attention to herself and her colleagues thought her
strange and obsessive. Her fault was not in cleaning her teeth
so often but in making such a song and dance out of it. A little
discretion would have been much better.
RULE 19
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 45
MAKE EACH DAY AS
CONSCIENTIOUS AS AN
INTERVIEW DAY.
Be Attractive
RULE 20
46 THE RULES OF WORK
There is no doubt about it, and statistics back it up: handsome
people get on better than those less fortunate in this regard.
Handsome people have to work less hard to get ahead. But
what makes someone attractive, handsome? If you look at
someone you consider attractive, you will be hard pressed to
see what it is they’ve got that makes them so good looking.
Attractiveness, if we ignore the obvious physical impairments
such as buck teeth or a warty nose—all of which can be corrected—is very hard to define. Take any Hollywood stars, such
as Liza Minelli, Woody Allen, Julia Roberts, and Sean Penn,
who aren’t classically good looking, and we can see that they
have charisma, charm, magnetism, a larger-than-life attitude.
They come right out at you. They have life, presence, drama,
power, and personality.
You too must have these things. They are easier to acquire
than looks anyway. Being attractive comes from within. Know
that you’re being judged at all times. If you dress well, pay attention to your grooming, cultivate that smile, look good and
cool at all times, and come across as friendly, warm, articulate,
and caring, you will also come across as attractive and good
looking. Looks are all in the smile and the eyes. Smiles that
light up a room are magnetic and powerful. Eyes that twinkle
and are full of life are enough to make us think the whole face
is good looking.
Attractiveness is also about posture and position. If you slump
you give off an aura of gloom and depression. This is unattractive and not good looking. 
Your walk should be erect, proud, assured. So should your
handshake. Everything about you should be up and open,
happy and confident. This is attractive. Your grooming should
be faultless, your dress sense superb, your style quirky but
suave, your whole demeanor splendid and outstanding. This is
attractive.
You do not
• Slouch
• Slump
• Look scruffy
You do
• Get anything fixed that can be fixed that would be considered unattractive—warts, bad breath, bad teeth, poor
eyesight. (Stop squinting for God’s sake and get some
proper glasses!)
RULE 20
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 47
LOOKS ARE ALL IN THE
SMILE AND THE EYES.
Be Cool
RULE 21
48 THE RULES OF WORK
At work you should retain your cool at all times and, no
matter what, never ever lose your dignity. If there’s an office
costume party, you can laugh and joke with everyone else, but
let them do the dressing up. You remain apart from all that
office nonsense. Will this get you a reputation as standoffish?
Arrogant? Self-important? Not if you’re a Rules Player, because
you’ll know the Rules to make sure people admire, like, and
respect you, without the need to dress up as Elvis or a fairy or
whatever the theme is this year. Stay cool at all times. Give
generously, support the cause, but leave the red noses for
others to wear—at least when you’re at work. Remain civilized
and sophisticated at all times. 
Let’s face it, you are there to do a job. That’s what they pay you
for. You ain’t there to make a fool of yourself. Just so long as
you do that job—and do it well—the way you do it is up to
you. You can choose to get involved in the social side of the
office, or you can remain one step removed. This makes you
one step away from your colleagues and thus one step nearer
to being their manager.
None of this means you can’t have a laugh and joke with your
coworkers; just don’t get so friendly or personal that it would
become impossible to promote you above them. If you are
going to be their boss soon, then it pays to keep a little bit of
distance. And you do this by being cool.
If you don’t know what cool is, try typing cool into your word
processor and then, using the Thesaurus option, look for
antonyms. You get: warm, excited, unfashionable. For warm,
think sweaty hands—uncool. For excited, think small boy on
Christmas Day—cute but uncool. For unfashionable think
chunky cardigans—warm and uncool.
So we want to be
• Not warm—think not sweaty.
• Not excited—think not panicked.
• Not unfashionable—this isn’t the same as fashionable but
rather a timeless stylishness, which is, of course, completely different.
Cool operators are relaxed and in control. In a crisis they don’t
rush about screaming, but rather implement safety procedures
and calmly and smoothly handle the situation. They are cool.
They keep their heads and their composure. And invariably
these are the people who others will turn to in a difficult situation. You don’t want someone who panics; you want someone
cool, calm, and collected. 
RULE 21
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 49
REMAIN CIVILIZED 
AND SOPHISTICATED 
AT ALL TIMES.
Speak Well
RULE 22
50 THE RULES OF WORK
So what does speaking well mean? Am I suggesting you walk
around with a snooty voice and say “hice” instead of “house”
and “creche” instead of “crash”? Of course not. You can keep
your regional accent; that’s not the problem. Look at why we
speak—it is to communicate, to convey information—rather
than how we speak. Speaking well means getting information
across clearly and effectively. It doesn’t matter how you speak,
but it does matter that you speak clearly. And speaking clearly
means just that—clearly. The things you must avoid are
• Mumbling—For obvious reasons, people can’t hear or
understand you.
• Speaking too softly or quietly—Again, people can’t hear
you.
• Using jargon—It’s unintelligible to others outside your
department or field of expertise.
• Any sort of speaking that identifies you with a particular
group or social class—i.e. youth (trying to use the latest
trendy slang or catchphrase), or politically extreme (radical anything, politically correct gone mad, ecologist,
vegetarian, or environmentally obsessive), or too obviously belonging to any class system (too poor, too rich,
too regional).
• Speaking badly—using “less” when you really mean
“fewer”—that sort of thing. If you don’t know the difference, get a grammar book and learn it by heart. Don’t use
verbal mannerisms such as “you know” or “like.” Always
finish your sentences.
There are four key words to remember to get you speaking
well:
• Bright
• Clear
• Pleasant
• Simple
That’s all you need to know. If you use these four, you won’t
go wrong, and people will remember what you say and be
impressed by your clear, bright speaking voice. Speaking well
makes an impact. If you slouch in and mumble your name,
people will assume you are underconfident, ill at ease, and
barely human—and thus quickly forget you. If you walk in
confidently, say your name clearly and with confidence,
people will assume you know where you are going, who you
are, and what you want—and thus remember you. Speak
simply—say directly what it is you want to say and nothing
more.
RULE 22
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 51
SPEAKING WELL MEANS
GETTING INFORMATION
ACROSS CLEARLY AND
EFFECTIVELY.
Write Well
RULE 23
52 THE RULES OF WORK
We write for two purposes. We write for others to read, and
we write for ourselves to read. How you write for yourself is
immaterial. You can scribble illegible shorthand or write like a
five-year-old. It doesn’t matter, just so long as no one else sees
it. But how you write for others to read is of utmost and crucial importance. You will be judged on:
• What you write
• How your writing looks
Ah, but you say you don’t write anything; you type everything.
Fine. So what typeface do you choose, and why? What point
size, and why? And you must have to sign documents—that’s
writing. Your signature is as open to judgment as anything
else. I was once told that my signature was that of a very
wealthy person. Good, although completely wrong, but it did
indicate that I was getting close to the image I wanted to portray. A final point on this: always make your signature
big—big signature, big person.
If you use handwriting a lot, then it needs to be
• Legible—It must be able to be read by everyone—or there
simply is no point doing it and it is discourteous not to
make the effort.
• Neat—No crossings out, all lines equal, that sort of thing.
• Stylish—A bit of a flourish here and there.
• Mature—Rounded letters and joined up.
• Consistent—The writing at the bottom of the page should
look like the writing at the top of the page.
Watch your margins and the slope of your writing. You may
not know it but margins—or signatures or any form of writing—that slope down towards the right of the page indicate a
depressed person. Optimists slant upwards.
Make sure your spelling is correct and your grammar adequate—if not, study on it.
If you type a lot, use Times New Roman or Arial, 12 point,
and only use italics or bold or underlining sparingly. Never
mix typefaces—it betrays you as an unstable, immature personality, apparently—or point size. And you just thought it
looked fun.
RULE 23
KNOW THAT YOU’RE BEING JUDGED AT ALL TIMES 53
HOW YOU WRITE FOR
OTHERS TO READ IS OF
UTMOST AND CRUCIAL
IMPORTANCE.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART III
HAVE 
A PLAN
This page intentionally left blank 
Do you know where you’re going? If you don’t, then the probability is that you’ll end up going nowhere. Smart followers of
The Rules know exactly where they’re going. They have a plan.
They have plotted the path to where they want to be—in six
months, in a year, in five years. They’ve planned their game
and know how to play. And so will you. Rules Players remain
flexible and convert their plan according to circumstances—
they’re not rigid thinkers but smart and very fluid.
HAVE A PLAN 57
RULE 24
58 THE RULES OF WORK
So what’s your game plan for your life? Don’t know? Haven’t
ever thought about it? Most people don’t. And that’s why they
fail. If you don’t have a plan, it is terribly easy not to stick to it
and end up where the current takes you—a bit of flotsam
adrift on the eddies of life. Very sad. The Rules Player has a
plan—long term and short term.
Long-term plans can be very simple—qualify, move up, reach
the top, retire, die. Or they can be sensible and useful. If you
intend to have a career, it makes sense to study the game plan
of your chosen industry. Obviously, you will have to build in a
certain contingency for the unexpected and the “out-of-yourcontrol,” but the shrewd Rules Player will have already
amended their long-term game plan well in advance having
seen the indicators and read the signs. I spoke to someone
recently who said, “Who would have predicted downsizing
then?” The answer is anyone with the brains to have seen
which way their business sector was going.
So, study your chosen industry and see the progression steps
needed to make it to the position you want to occupy. Work
out what you need to make those steps. Work out how many
steps it takes—usually no more than about four—junior,
middle, senior, executive. (If you think otherwise, don’t write
in.)
Work out what you want from each step—gaining experience,
handling responsibility, learning new skills, acquiring people
management understanding, that sort of thing. You will notice
that “increasing my earnings” just isn’t an option here—that is
a foregone conclusion if you are a Rules Player anyway.
Know What You Want Long Term
Work out how each step is made. This might be a transfer to
another department, relocation to another branch, being
offered a partnership, being invited to join the board, moving
to another company, that sort of thing. Once you know how
each step is made, it doesn’t take much to work out what you
need to acquire that how.
You have to have an end game—the final goal. This can be as
high or as extreme as you like—emperor of the world, prime
minister, CEO, wealthiest person in the world, whatever. It is
a dream and thus has no limits. If you set limits on your imagination, then you will have to settle for less than the best, less
than perfect, less than you deserve. Ah, but you say we have to
be realistic. Fine. Do that—be realistic. But Rules Players head
for the very utmost of their dreams, and nothing less than the
top is good enough.
RULE 24
HAVE A PLAN 59
IF YOU DON’T HAVE A
PLAN, IT IS TERRIBLY EASY
NOT TO STICK TO IT AND
END UP WHERE THE
CURRENT TAKES YOU.
Know What You Want Short Term
RULE 25
60 THE RULES OF WORK
How short is short term? That’s entirely up to you. I have
three short-term plans on the go—this month, this year, five
years. This seems to provide me with sufficient information to
plan my workload. It also allows me to work in, in the short
term, plans that affect my family. I can allow for vacations,
changes of school, garden/house projects and birthdays,
Christmas, that sort of thing.
Your one-month short-term plan should obviously list current
work projects—deadlines, prioritized tasks, basic routines.
This is for work actually being carried out.
Your one-year plan should have projects that are being formulated, planned, presented, whatever. This is for work being
planned rather than executed.
Your five-year plan should be for ideas, dreams, goals, wishes,
wants; it is for work you intend executing one day.
Your long-term plan will have a career path built into it. Your
five-year plan will take into it any steps you need to carry out
that long-term plan.
I tend to keep three separate records for these three short-term
plans. My one-month plan is kept on a clipboard on the desk.
It contains a single sheet that lists boxes for deadlines, return
phone calls, things to do. I suppose it’s a bit like a calendar but
without daily entries.
My one-year plan lives on the wall. It isn’t a wall chart or year
planner but, again, a single sheet with 12 boxes. In each box is
a month with the relevant info of what I want to do during
that time. It is what I want to do rather than what I have to do.
It is a short-term plan, not a to-do list or a calendar or a work
schedule. As I am freelance, I have to generate work. This
work—being done during my one-month plan or being generated during my one-year plan—is my bread and butter. It is
made up of projects I want to do and projects I have to do.
The ones I have to do are the bread and the ones I want to do
are the butter—such as this book, which has been a delight to
plan and write. My five-year plan is for my general direction—
what sort of work do I want to be doing over the next five
years? Your short-term plan will include work you have to do,
but it will be mainly for work you want to do. The shorter the
term, the more likely it is to read like your work schedule and
less like a wish list.
All plans should include practical steps to put into action and
make them happen. Otherwise they aren’t “plans” but vague
ideas.
Within any of these plans, you have to build a contingency.
Someone phones you with a project; you can’t turn it down on
the basis that it isn’t in your plan. You have to be flexible.
RULE 25
HAVE A PLAN 61
ALL PLANS SHOULD
INCLUDE PRACTICAL
STEPS TO PUT INTO
ACTION AND MAKE 
THEM HAPPEN.
Study the Promotion System
RULE 26
62 THE RULES OF WORK
When you start your career, it is at the lowest level, and you
gaze upward at the boss, the manager, the managing director,
with reverence and awe. One day, inevitably, you will age, gain
experience, and ascend to greater heights yourself. Either that
or maybe start up on your own. And for most people that’s
about it. Career-wise they meander vaguely upward, often getting sidetracked and stopping at a level where they seem
comfortable, coasting, happy. And that’s it. Career over. Game
over. Very sad. Unless that’s really what you want. And if
you’re a committed Rules Player, I doubt it.
The Rules Player never meanders or arrives anywhere vaguely.
You plan. You know the system and use it. You understand the
steps to be taken to get you from A to B and onward and
upward all the way to Z.
You have to study the promotion system if you are to enter it
and profit from it. It is simply no use waiting for something to
turn up, or for fate to take a hand and propel you upward by
luck or chance. You have to seize the day and make your own
luck. You have to know exactly how to avoid all clichés and
elevate yourself within the system. 
So, what is the promotion system within your industry? Do
you know it? Have you studied it? Study the background of
others who have been there before you. If not, chances are you
are relying on luck to get you somewhere. This may be fine,
and it may get you where you want to be, but it is unreliable—
bit like playing the lottery in the hope it’ll make you rich and
you can retire. It might happen, but it’s not likely.
Making a promotion chart:
• Within your industry look upward to the most senior
position that can be held (or the highest you could possibly expect yourself to aim for—they should really be the
same thing—mark this).
• Now look at the lowest—mark this.
• Now plot all the steps in-between.
• Now mark your own place.
• Now list the steps needed to get there.
You now have your own promotion chart and can cross off
each step as you make it.
(The same principle of steps also works if you decide that
rather than ascend where you are, you’d like to go up on your
own and be entrepreneurial rather than corporate.)
While you are doing this, you can also list all the skills/experience, etc. that you would need for each step to be made
successfully. Next to this, you can add what you have to do to
acquire these—where you must go, what you have to learn,
what you need to study. You can add these back into your
long-term plan and your five-year plan.
RULE 26
HAVE A PLAN 63
YOU HAVE TO SEIZE THE
DAY AND MAKE YOUR OWN
LUCK.
Develop a Game Plan
RULE 27
64 THE RULES OF WORK
Developing a game plan is a bit like an actor choosing a part
and learning their script. Your game plan has to be who you
are going to be. Not many people choose consciously to be a
loser, but that’s where they end up. Don’t let it happen to you.
And it doesn’t happen, once you seize the initiative and
develop a game plan.
Your game plan is a sort of personal mission statement. It is
different from setting objectives, which is how to be the
person your game plan decides you are.
So who are you going to be? Successful? A failure? Someone
who gives up? Someone who picks themselves up, dusts themselves off, and starts all over again? A brilliant career
strategist? A loser? None of these?
Obviously, you could decide to be ruthless, unpleasant, cruel,
vindictive, but we assume you won’t—a Rules Player is never
any of these. Your game plan should include your qualities as
well as what sort of game you want to plan—“I will be successful and still be a thoroughly nice person.”
Not many people sit down and consciously carry out this
exercise. It may seem simple, but it is an essential tool to get
you to where you want to be. If more people did this, they
wouldn’t end up as idiots, or the office bore, or a gossip, or
frighteningly callous in their dealings with their colleagues. If
we all had to sit down and write our game plan—and then live
by it—we might all end up as nicer people. There is no bad
karma in trying your hardest to be pleasant, cooperative, helpful, friendly, kind, and honest in your dealings with others
around you. Who would sit down and write, “I am going to be
a complete and utter bastard and harm as many people as I
can, be disliked by everyone, and generally make myself as
unpopular as possible”? Yes, no one would write it, but I’ve
worked with quite a few who live by it as a game plan. Yes,
they may be successful, but how do they sleep at night? How
do they live with themselves? 
I once worked with a fairly senior manager whose technique
was to arrive, walk through the department, bawl out as many
people as he could, go to his office, put his feet up with a
coffee for half an hour and then walk back again being as nice
as pie to everyone. When I questioned him about this, he said,
“It keeps them on their toes. They never know where they are
with me.” He was genuinely disliked by everyone, feared by
most, and commanded zero respect from his peers. Good
game plan. Not.
RULE 27
HAVE A PLAN 65
NOT MANY PEOPLE
CHOOSE CONSCIOUSLY TO
BE A LOSER, BUT THAT’S
WHERE THEY END UP.
Set Objectives
RULE 28
66 THE RULES OF WORK
An objective is a simple one-sentence mission statement that
you can use to get you through your day. It is almost impossible to be successful or to get promoted if you don’t set
objectives.
An objective outlines the key important ingredients in your
work recipe. Suppose you have a meeting to go to. Now we all
hate meetings—they are interminable, boring, unproductive,
counter-productive—and an endless source of irritation and
argument. You know that Stephen from accounts is going to
be there and will endeavor—usually successfully—to wind
you up. You know you’ll get sidetracked and end up discussing the relocation to Swindon when it doesn’t even affect
your department. You know you’ll end up discussing budgets
for the exhibition stand when that’s six months away and it
hasn’t even been decided that you’re going to take a stand at
the NEC this year. So, set an objective:
“I will speak only on matters I know about and understand and are relevant to me at this meeting, and no
matter what Stephen does, I shall not rise to the bait.”
Good. Now stick to it.
Suppose you have to present a report to the Finance
Committee about the new costs of the wildflower meadow to
go in front of head office’s new buildings. You know the
Finance Committee can waffle on for hours about irrelevant
topics such as whether it is better to have oxeye daises or
marsh buttercups, and all you need to do is present them with
the cost of seeds, mowing equipment, and haymaking provisions without getting caught up in the minutiae of which
flower is most attractive in spring. So, set an objective:
“I will present my report and, once comments have been
made, will make my excuses and leave. If the committee
insist on discussing matters that are irrelevant to my being
there I shall assertively point this out and leave.”
Good. Now stick to it.
Use an objective for every area of your working life. Objectives
take but seconds, but they do help highlight
• What is wrong
• Solutions to what is wrong
• Action to be taken to correct what is wrong
• Ways to prevent the problem recurring
RULE 28
HAVE A PLAN 67
IT IS ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE
TO BE SUCCESSFUL OR TO
GET PROMOTED IF YOU
DON’T SET OBJECTIVES.
Know Your Role
RULE 29
68 THE RULES OF WORK
What is your role? I know you are there to do a job, carry out
a function, perform certain tasks, follow set procedures, and
all that. But what is your role? This is a bit like setting a game
plan. A game plan outlines what sort of working person you
are going to be. A role is what sort of facilitator you will be.
Will you be an ideas person? A moderator? A communicator?
A diplomat? A task master? A motivator? Basically, your role is
how you fit into the team—and yes, we are all team players;
we have to be in this day and age.
Dr. Meredith Belbin has spent over 20 years researching the
nature of team work to improve people’s strengths. He has
identified nine distinct team roles:
• Plant—They are original thinkers; they generate new
ideas; they offer solutions to problems; they think in radically different ways, laterally, imaginatively.
• Resource Investigator—They are creative; they like to
take ideas and run with them; they are extroverted and
popular.
• Coordinator—They are highly disciplined and controlled;
they can focus on objectives; they unify a team.
• Shaper—They are very achievement orientated; they like
to be challenged and to get results.
• Monitor Evaluator—They analyze and balance and weigh;
they are calm and detached; they are objective thinkers.
• Team Worker—They are supportive and cooperative; they
make good diplomats as they only want what is best for
the team.
• Implementer—They have good organizational skills; they
display common sense; they like to get the job done.
• Completer—They check details; they tidy up after them;
they are painstakingly conscientious.
• Specialist—They are dedicated to acquiring a specialized
skill; they are extremely professional; they have drive and
dedication.
So which are you? What role do you play in the team? Are you
happy with your role? Can you change it?
RULE 29
HAVE A PLAN 69
BASICALLY, YOUR ROLE IS
HOW YOU FIT INTO THE
TEAM—AND YES, WE ARE
ALL TEAM PLAYERS; WE
HAVE TO BE IN THIS DAY
AND AGE
Know Yourself—Strengths and
Weaknesses
RULE 30
70 THE RULES OF WORK
If you are going to be a Rules Player, you have to be incredibly
objective about yourself. A lot of people can’t do this; they
can’t turn the spotlight on themselves objectively enough or
brightly enough to see themselves as others see them. And it’s
not just how others see us; it’s also how we see ourselves. We
all carry a mental image of ourselves—what we look like and
sound like, what makes us tick; how we work—but how realistic is this image? I think I work creatively and eccentrically;
others think I am messy and unorganized. Which is true?
Which is the reality?
To know your strengths and weaknesses, you first have to
understand your role—the way you work. I might see being
creative as a strength—lots of lovely ideas, no attention to
detail, generating new projects rather than seeing them
through or actually working on them—surely all these are
strengths? Not if I am a Completer or Implementer they’re
not; then they are weaknesses. Instead, my strengths would be
perseverance, diligence, stickability, predictability, conformity,
steadfastness, orderliness—yuk, surely these are weaknesses?
You have to know your role before you can make subjective
judgments about strengths and weaknesses.
If in doubt, make lists; that’s what I always say. Write down
what you think are your strengths and weaknesses. Show this
list to a close friend who you do not work with. Ask for their
objective evaluation. Now show it to someone you can trust
who you do work with. Is there a difference in their evaluation
of how close to the truth you are? Bet there is quite a 
difference. This is because the special skills you bring to
friendships are quite different from the ones you bring to a
work relationship.
This rule is about knowing your strengths and weaknesses; it
isn’t necessarily about improving them, eliminating them,
working on them, changing them in any way. What we are is
what we are, and it is what we have to work with. You may
well be disorganized, erratic, unpredictable—is this good or
bad? It all depends on your role. You may need to change your
role to suit your strengths and weaknesses better.
A lot of people think that identifying their strengths and
weaknesses means they get to lose the bad stuff and only work
with the good stuff. Not true. This isn’t therapy. This is the
real world. We all have weaknesses. The secret trick is learning to work with them rather than trying to be perfect, which
is unrealistic and unproductive.
You might be able to find better uses for your weaknesses—
but then they would become strengths, wouldn’t they? Think
about it.
RULE 30
HAVE A PLAN 71
YOU HAVE TO KNOW YOUR
ROLE BEFORE YOU CAN
MAKE SUBJECTIVE
JUDGMENTS ABOUT
STRENGTHS AND
WEAKNESSES.
Identify Key Times and Events
RULE 31
72 THE RULES OF WORK
A cobra has a lot of power, a lot of venom, a lot of energy. But
how often do you see one strike? Rarely. Cobras only use all
that power and energy when it is
• Appropriate
• Meaningful
• Advantageous
• Beneficial
• Necessary
• Important
They strike when in danger or when they need to feed. The
rest of the time you wouldn’t know they were there. The rest
of the time they don’t even look like cobras. They don’t display
their hood except when they have to. You will become a cobra.
There is no point using all your energy and power when it
ain’t necessary. What you have to do is identify the key times
and events—then you strike.
A cobra’s key times and events are fairly simple to identify—
threat and hunger. But what are yours? Much more difficult.
There’s not a lot of point burning all that midnight oil to produce a report that only a couple of your colleagues get to see
and is then forgotten. Wait until it’s the big report that’s going
straight to the desk of the president—that’s the one that needs
the cobra’s striking force.
Of course, a lot of people wait for the key time—the office
party, the key exhibition—and then they completely and
utterly screw it up. They get drunk or fluff their lines, they are
late or sick, or they appear with their flies undone or their
skirts tucked into the back of their underwear.
And key events? The presentation is a good one. Get it right
and it’s remembered. Get it wrong and it’s you that is forgotten.
You don’t get it wrong. Identify these times and events and
shine at them. Be a cobra and strike when it is appropriate.
RULE 31
HAVE A PLAN 73
THERE IS NO POINT USING
ALL YOUR ENERGY AND
POWER WHEN IT AIN’T
NECESSARY.
Anticipate Threats
RULE 32
74 THE RULES OF WORK
Threats come at us from every quarter, every day—redundancy, downsizing, takeovers, vindictive colleagues, irascible
bosses, new technology, new systems, new procedures. In fact,
entire books are devoted to threats—mostly from change—
such as Who Moved My Cheese? and How to Handle Tough
Situations at Work. If we can think on our feet, stay out of
ruts, be flexible and move fast, roll with the punches, and go
the distance, we will not only survive change but we shall also
be contortionists and athletes of the highest order. Of course,
we can’t do all that. There will be times when the threat will
overtake us and we get squashed. It happens to us all. There is
no getting away from the fact that life gets fired at us at point
blank range, and we rarely if ever get time to duck.
But a threat is always that. Once it becomes a reality, we can
deal with it. While it is still a threat, it induces fear but can do
no harm. Spotting which threat will turn into a reality is the
skill. The talent. There are many threats, and we can’t react to
all of them. There are fewer realities, and we have to react to
them.
It helps if we don’t see threats as threats, but instead as opportunities. Each threat that becomes a reality is an opportunity
to grow and change, adapt and rework our methods and style
of management. If our attitude is positive, we tend to see
threats less as a negative thing and more as a positive thing—
they bring us the chance to prove ourselves. If we never get
challenged, we will never improve.
I was once employed as a manager by a company that was
taken over. The new bosses brought in their own managers,
and three of us were “downgraded”—demoted in other words.
We had no choice—apart from walking out, of course. I was,
by this time, a committed Rules Player, so I saw it as an opportunity to prove to the new bosses that I was good enough to
be one of their managers and, three months later, I was back
up there. 
Of the other two, one eventually walked and one stayed
“downgraded.” They both bitched and moaned and felt the
move was derogatory and demeaning and an insult. It probably was, but I didn’t need to feel depressed about it. I needed
to get back up there—upward and onward.
RULE 32
HAVE A PLAN 75
EACH THREAT THAT
BECOMES A REALITY IS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO GROW
AND CHANGE.
Look for Opportunities
RULE 33
76 THE RULES OF WORK
I know I’ve said have a plan—both long term and short
term—but there do come times when plans have to be thrown
out of the window. These are the opportunities. I had a friend
who wasn’t getting on particularly fast in his promotion plan.
One day he found himself sharing a compartment on the train
with his chairman. This was his opportunity. He could have
fluffed his lines, made a jackass of himself, or been too embarrassed or nervous to take the advantage. But he didn’t do any
of these things. He made his pitch perfectly. All he did was to
chat informally but with the respect his chairman warranted;
show a keen grasp of the company’s history, mission statement, and general aims; be presentable, smart, and well
spoken; express himself clearly and articulately; and, most
importantly, didn’t noticeably press his advantage—he knew
when to shut up and back off. It certainly worked. His department head was told by the chairman that she had a “Smart
young man there—bring him on a bit, will you?” What choice
did she have but to promote him?
That’s seizing an opportunity. You can’t write that into your
plan, and these moments will come along. When they do you
must
• Recognize them
• Play them well
• Be cool and suave
What you mustn’t do is
• Fail to recognize the moment for what it is—a fleeting
opportunity
• Panic
• Over play your hand
• Get so excited you make a idiot of yourself
Learn to see opportunities as balls—if they get thrown your
way, you have but a split second to catch them. There is no
time for asking questions, looking over your shoulder, weighing the pros and cons, or dancing the foxtrot. You either catch
the ball or you don’t.
Spend a little time looking back at what opportunities you
have missed—and what you would do if you had the same
chance a second time. Would you react differently now? What
did you do wrong? 
RULE 33
HAVE A PLAN 77
LEARN TO SEE
OPPORTUNITIES AS
BALLS—IF THEY GET
THROWN YOUR WAY, 
YOU HAVE BUT A SPLIT
SECOND TO 
CATCH THEM.
Make Learning a Lifelong Mission
RULE 34
78 THE RULES OF WORK
I met a guy once who came from a very poor background and
was unable to take his education as far as he’d have liked. He
left school at 14 and ended up working all his life as a customs
officer, working his way up to a middle management role.
When he retired at 65, he decided that at last he could afford
to get the education he’d always wanted. So he got a law
degree, did his training, and qualified as a barrister at the age
of about 70. How many of us would have the attitude to learning you need to do that? (Never mind the energy!)
When you watch kids learn, you can see how much they enjoy
it. Not when it’s boring rote learning with tedious teachers, of
course, but when they’re inspired and motivated they couldn’t
be happier. Well, you and I still have the same brain we had
when we were kids. OK, we may have lost a few little grey
cells, but we can still enjoy learning. And if we don’t keep
learning, we stagnate and become boring old stick-in-themuds. If you don’t learn, you can’t change, and if you aren’t
changing, what’s the point of being here?
So, make it your express purpose to keep learning. I know a
teacher in Scotland who dreamed as a child of becoming a
spaceman—like most of his school friends no doubt. However,
he did something about it and, instead of allowing everyday
life to get in the way of his aim, he lifted his head and made a
point of learning and developing. 
As a result, he won a scholarship to the U.S. Space and Rocket
Center in Alabama for a week’s intensive space training, complete with zero-gravity exercises and simulated shuttle
take-offs. How cool is that? After that he could pursue his
dream of taking this knowledge and passing it onto the pupils
he now teaches. All because he approached life as an ongoing
lesson.
We can all learn* from people like him. Remember what it was
that inspired you as a child? Or consider the new things that
have grabbed your interest since. Learning new skills for work
is valuable, from another language to new computer software.
But any learning keeps your mind open and free and exercised,
which will benefit your work and your employer. So, whatever
it is that excites you, go on—make it your aim to learn more
about it.
RULE 34
HAVE A PLAN 79
IF YOU DON’T LEARN, YOU
CAN’T CHANGE, AND IF
YOU AREN’T CHANGING,
WHAT’S THE POINT OF
BEING HERE?
* And if we do, we’ll be following this Rule already
This page intentionally left blank 
PART IV
IF YOU 
CAN’T SAY 
ANYTHING
NICE—
SHUT UP
This page intentionally left blank 
These are really easy Rules to understand but tough to follow.
We all like to gossip, to bitch, to talk about our boss behind
her back. The Rule, however, is—don’t do it. Learn to say only
positive things, nice things, complimentary things. People
judge you by what you say as much as how you say it, so be
known as someone who is always pleasant and upbeat.
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 83
RULE 35
84 THE RULES OF WORK
“Did you know that at the last company conference Steve,
from accounts, was seen coming out of Debbie’s, from marketing, bedroom in the early hours of Sunday morning?
And that twice since they have been seen in Luigi’s at
lunchtime, and Kathy swears she’s seen them holding hands
in the lift. Steve’s married, you know, and I thought Debbie
was engaged. What do you think? Should they be carrying
on like this?”
Answer: “What’s this got to do with me?”
Good, it has nothing to do with you, unless Steve happens to
be your boss and his work is being affected, or you happen to
be Debbie’s fiancé. This Rule says that you don’t gossip. It
doesn’t say you don’t listen. You may find it interesting, and
knowing what’s going on comes in useful sometimes. But there
is one part of this Rule that is really, really simple—don’t pass
anything on. That’s it. Gossip stops with you. If you listen but
don’t pass it along or offer an opinion, you’ll be seen as “one of
us” rather than a party pooper. You don’t have to be seen 
disapproving—merely don’t pass anything along.
Gossiping is the occupation of idle minds—those who haven’t
got enough work to do. It is also the domain of workers who
have mindless jobs to do—jobs they can do without thinking
and thus have to occupy themselves with inane chatter,
rumors, lies, and malicious stories. Trouble is that if you don’t
join in, you can be seen as severe or stuck-up. You have to
look as if you gossip without ever doing it. Don’t go getting all
self-righteous and telling everyone how silly they are doing it. 
Don’t Gossip
With most things, discretion is the key word. Don’t be seen
disapproving—just don’t do it, and keep that to yourself.
THERE IS ONE PART OF
THIS RULE THAT IS
REALLY, REALLY SIMPLE—
DON’T PASS ANYTHING ON.
RULE 35
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 85
Don’t Bitch
RULE 36
86 THE RULES OF WORK
Yep, life ain’t fair. Sometimes colleagues shirk and you end up
with extra work; bosses can be ill prepared for their jobs and
as such are incompetent and often inconsistent; idiots get promoted all around you; there’s too much work to do; there are
too many stupid systems in place; idiots thwart you at every
turn. It’s true—life’s a bitch.
Now tell me how moaning helps in any one of these scenarios.
Tell me how moaning will change one single thing. It won’t. It
doesn’t. Moaning is a time-wasting device invented by sad
people who haven’t enough work to do. And they’re usually
the ones standing next to the ones gossiping. They may even
be the same ones—chances are they are. And when they’ve
finished having a good moan, they’ll have a good gossip.
Moaning is pointless. It is unproductive and achieves nothing.
All it does is
• Identifies you as idle, petty, trivial
• Encourages you to turn the corners of your mouth
down—not attractive
• Wastes time
• Makes you a magnet for other moaners
• Gets you a reputation as someone who doesn’t offer anything productive or helpful
• Demotivates you and sets up a vicious circle
So, what are you going to do if you are a habitual moaner?
Easy, make sure that whenever you do moan you make yourself offer a solution to whatever it is you are moaning about. If
you can’t see a solution, you aren’t allowed to moan. Try that
for a few weeks, and you’ll stop moaning quite naturally.
Bitching about others invariably takes place behind their
backs. Next time you feel the need for a good bitch about
someone, make yourself go and do it to their face. If they
aren’t present in the room, don’t do it. Simple Rule, but it
works. Once they are there, you’ll stop bitching; it’s too hard
to keep doing it when you’ve upset everyone in the office. If
you’ve got something to say, say it to their face (but do see the
introduction to this Rule first—If you can’t say anything nice—
shut up).
RULE 36
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 87
MOANING IS POINTLESS. 
IT IS UNPRODUCTIVE AND
ACHIEVES NOTHING.
Compliment People Sincerely
RULE 37
88 THE RULES OF WORK
The key to this Rule is “sincerely.” You mustn’t use compliments glibly, falsely, shallowly, dishonestly, or disingenuously.
Compliments must be real, honest, open, guileless and meaningful.
Being the sort of person who gives compliments is quite tricky.
You don’t want to be seen as a slimeball or spooky—and
people who do give compliments can often end up seen like
this—but you do want to come across as genuinely warm and
friendly.
So how to do this? And why? Well, if you do it affably, it
makes people think incredibly well about you—it is good
office karma. The best way to do it is by being unsophisticated
about it. All you have to do is say, “I really like the way you’ve
had your hair cut,” and then ask a question about whatever it
is you are complimenting her on, and make it about how it
was done. “So who did your hair?”
“I do like the way you handled that customer; how did you
feel saying that?”
“I must say I liked your report; how is it going down with
the board?”
Try to avoid using over-the-top expressions. You don’t love
their new coat—you merely “like” it. Remember, if you “love”
it, you’ll want to marry it and have its babies. Not true of a
coat, or a report, or a hair style, or the way someone handles a
customer.
If you “like” something, feel free to say so. You can emphasize
how much you like something by
• “I really like …”
• “I do like …”
• “Can I tell you how much I liked …?”
• And it doesn’t just have to be “liked,” although it is a very
good one to start with
• “I was impressed by …”
• “I thought you did really well …”
• “The way you did … was very good indeed”
• “I did enjoy your presentation. It was really rather 
exceptional.”
When giving compliments, make sure you can’t be accused of
flirting or coming on to someone—keep it professional and/or
work related. I’m sure you don’t need telling this.
RULE 37
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 89
BEING THE SORT OF
PERSON WHO GIVES
COMPLIMENTS IS QUITE
TRICKY.
Stand Up for Others
RULE 38
90 THE RULES OF WORK
So, you’re all sitting round having coffee when the subject of
young Adam comes up. Now we all know that Adam is a pain
in the backside. He doesn’t pull his weight, goofs off, steals the
pens and paperclips, is rude to the security staff, always offloads as much work onto others as possible, blames others for
his mistakes, and is generally obnoxious. So you all have a
moan about him behind his back, and get a lot of your anger
about his behaviour off your chest. But you don’t. Oh, the
others might but you won’t, not from now on. You are now a
Rules Player, and you stand up for others.
No matter how obnoxious young Adam is, you will always
find something nice—and genuine—to say about him. That is
your objective—find something nice to say no matter what.
At first this may be quite hard, but if you persevere it becomes
increasingly easy—it’s all a question of habit and mental outlook. If we are used to bitching and moaning, then that’s what
we do. But if we change our approach, we can be more positive—though it does take a bit of effort initially to make this
change.
Standing up for others, no matter what, gets you a reputation
as someone who can always find something nice to say about
everybody. Thus, those who you would have moaned about
know that you, of all the work force, will always be fighting
their corner for them. It gets you unwritten loyalty and a sort
of guardian angel relationship with the more unpopular members of the team.
This is a strange relationship to have, but it works wonders—
these are the people who will back you in an emergency. They
will let you know if someone is trying to mess you up. They
will pull out all the stops for you because they know you care.
If you need a favor, they will be the ones to call on.
It’s amazing how quickly the word will spread that you are a
thoroughly nice person—you don’t bitch, you don’t moan, you
stand up for the underdog, you are supportive, and you can
always see at least one good point in a thoroughly bad apple.
Obviously, you will have to do this in an honest and sincere
fashion—it’s no good lying or making it up. If you, at first,
simply can’t find anything positive to say, then shut up. But
there is always something nice to say—nobody is completely
evil or wicked or nasty.
So, back to young Adam. What are you going to say? Well, for
a start you could point out that he makes good coffee. Or that
he is always on time. Or he is very good at handling irate customers. Or he has a brilliant sense of humor. Or he always
knows the football scores. Just keep saying “But he’s good
because he …”
RULE 38
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 91
IT GETS YOU UNWRITTEN
LOYALTY AND A SORT OF
GUARDIAN ANGEL
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE
MORE UNPOPULAR
MEMBERS OF THE TEAM.
Be Cheerful and Positive
RULE 39
92 THE RULES OF WORK
If you go into work each morning with a positive vibe, it sets
you up as the sort of person to whom stress and troubles and
problems are but as water off a duck’s back. You thus get a reputation as being someone who is in control, smooth, relaxed,
confident, and very mature. And all for the sake of a few bars
of “Moon River,” whistled as you make your way to your desk.
Be cheerful at all times. So it’s raining out there and it’s a dark
and depressing winter’s afternoon. Business is slack, interest
rates have just gone up again and the boss is in a foul mood,
and everyone’s keeping their heads down. It’s still no reason to
lose your smile. So it’s a bad day; this too will pass, and the
sun will come back. Whatever your situation, things will
always get better.
Maintaining a cheerful and positive outlook is a trick. At first
you don’t have to believe it—just do it. Act it. Pretend. But do
it. After a little while you’ll find it isn’t an act, you’re not pretending, you genuinely do feel cheerful. It’s a trick. You are
tricking yourself, no one else. Putting on a smile triggers hormones. These hormones will make you feel better. Once you
feel better, you will smile more and thus produce more hormones. All it takes is the first few days smiling when you don’t
feel like it, and you will start a cycle going that will make you
feel better all the time.
Once you are seen as someone cheerful and positive, people
will want to hang out with you more—there is nothing so
attractive as a cheerful person.
Bring some flowers into work and brighten up your desk.
Whistle. Smile. Laugh. Never reveal that you feel like the pits
inside. It’s all too easy when someone says, “How are you?” to
reply “Oh, OK, I guess, can’t complain, mustn’t grumble, you
know, struggling on.” It’s a cliché. It’s a habit. Try instead,
“Fine, really good actually, doing OK.” There’s a trick for you.
So someone brings you more work that you simply have to
do—it’s unavoidable and part of your remit, and just when
you thought you could see a little light at the end of the
tunnel. Easy to say, “Oh no, not more bloody work. Can’t
everybody see how busy I am? This really is too much.” If it’s
unavoidable and moaning isn’t going to change a thing, then
maybe saying, “Fine, just dump it there; I’ll get on with it in a
moment. Thanks.” Why berate the messenger? I’m sure he
didn’t personally generate all this extra work just to piss you
off. So it’s a drag having extra work to do. So what? So be
cheerful and get on with it. Every second spent moaning and
bitching is a second taken off your life. Every second spent
being cheerful and positive is a second added on. Take your
choice.
RULE 39
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 93
SO IT’S A BAD DAY; 
THIS TOO WILL PASS, AND
THE SUN WILL COME BACK.
Ask Questions
RULE 40
94 THE RULES OF WORK
The object of the exercise is to become:
• Popular
• Promotable
• Successful
• Thoroughly nice
• Efficient
One of the easiest ways to do this is to learn and practice the
habit of asking questions. What sort of questions? Well, that
depends, obviously on the situation. For instance, in Rule 38:
Compliment people sincerely, we used a couple of examples
where the follow-up question is useful—“I really liked your
presentation. I thought you were incredibly calm. How do you
avoid shaking?” Or—“I like your new method of handling
invoices. What gave you the idea?”
Asking questions shows that you have paid attention, care, are
interested, are thoughtful, are considerate and intelligent and
creative. Stupid people don’t ask questions. Bored people don’t
ask questions. Lazy people don’t ask questions. Any questions?
Belligerent people tend to make statements—“I don’t like that
idea; it’s unworkable.” Rules Players ask questions; they might
mean the same thing, but they handle it differently—“I think I
need more information about this idea. How do you see it
working? Will dispatch be able to handle the increase in
orders? Can we provide enough extra staff to cover? Maybe we
all need to go away and think about this one. What does
everyone else think?” You haven’t said the idea stinks, but they
know you think that but they also think you’re a thoroughly
nice person—you haven’t shot them down in flames in front
of their colleagues, but you have given them enough rope to
hang themselves if they want to. And you’ve given them a way
out if they choose to take it—go away and think about it a bit
more means let’s not hear about this again, but it’s a terribly
diplomatic way of saying so.
Asking questions is a very nice thing to do in a general way. It
shows you are interested in your colleagues. But do make the
questions genuine and sincere, worthwhile and kind.
There’s very little point in asking, “Where on earth did you get
that coat? You can’t think it suits you, surely?” Much better
not to dwell on the coat if it really is horrid. Ask instead about
the work: “How come you can always do this invoicing so
quickly? Do you have some secret the rest of us don’t have?”
As in the case of standing up for someone—even if they are
loathsome, there will always be some good point about a
person; no one is totally wicked—so too with questions. There
will always be some aspect of someone’s work that you could
ask about or their hobbies or social life or family. Even if it’s a
simple “How are the kids?”, it cuts the ice and makes you
nice. It opens up dialogue, generates pleasantness, and creates
warmth among people who have to work together every day.
RULE 40
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 95
IT SHOWS YOU ARE
INTERESTED IN YOUR
COLLEAGUES.
Use “Please” and “Thank You” 
RULE 41
96 THE RULES OF WORK
You would have thought this one so obvious, so basic, and so
fundamental that surely it can’t be part of the Rules. Sorry, but
we all need reminding that saying “please” and “thank you” is
terribly important. It just doesn’t happen enough. People say
that they are too busy or too forgetful, or that it should be
taken as read that they have said them and they don’t need to
each and every time. Rubbish. The only reason please and
thank you get forgotten is plain old bad manners. If we start
ignoring even the basic levels of human decency and politeness, then there really is no point to any of us being here. If
we aren’t civil and civilized enough to thank someone, or to be
bothered enough to say “please,” then it really is time to pack
it in.
It doesn’t matter how many times a day someone passes you a
piece of paper—it is “thank you” every single time without fail
or exception. It doesn’t matter how many times you have to
ask for the same thing—you always say “please.” If someone
does anything for you, no matter how mundane, trivial, repetitive, boring, effortless, you will always say thank you. 
You forget one time, and you will be labeled as rude, boorish,
and unpleasant. Make someone’s day and don’t forget, please.
Thank you. I once worked with a manager who could get staff
to work the graveyard shift, come in on their holidays, work
overtime, work their days off, take work home with them,
work on weekends, and work harder than any other manager
could. We all watched him, trying to work out what it was he
was doing that we weren’t. He was getting loyalty from his
team that we weren’t. I know you are ahead of me at this stage
and have got your hand up with the answer. He said “please”
and “thank you.”
Yes. Happy now? He did indeed. And that simple bit of politeness went a long way. I don’t think his staff consciously knew
he did it. We certainly couldn’t spot it for a long time. Most of
us reckoned we also said “please” and “thank you.” But he
said it without fail every single time. And when you say it,
mean it. A sincere and warm thank you goes a long way. It is
also a very good way to respond to compliments and praise
yourself. If someone says you have done something well, don’t
blush and stammer, “It was nothing really.” That subtracts
from their compliment. Better instead just to say, “Thank
you.” Never use the word “please” to wheedle or cajole. It is
“Could you work through this lunchtime, please, as we need
extra cover on the phones? I’ll make sure you get the time
back a bit later this afternoon.” It is not, “Pleeeeease can you
work, pretty pleeeease.”
RULE 41
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 97
A SINCERE AND WARM
THANK YOU GOES A 
LONG WAY.
Don’t Swear
RULE 42
98 THE RULES OF WORK
I know we all do it. I know you think it’s cool. I know we have
to be modern and move with the times. But I’m sorry, swearing
isn’t allowed. You can say what you want when you get home,
or in the car on your own. But at work you don’t swear. It’s a
simple Rule, but it works because it is a default setting—you
don’t swear. Now what decisions and choices do you have to
make about that? Answer: None. None whatsoever. It is your
bottom line. You don’t swear, so all the tricky stuff has been
taken away from you. 
But if swearing is your default setting, you have so many decisions and choices to make, I’m surprised you get any work
done at all. For instance do you:
• Swear every time something goes wrong
• Swear over the phone
• Swear in front of the boss
• Swear in front of customers
• Swear at customers
• Limit yourself to certain swear words and not use others
• Use religious blasphemy as swear words
• Limit yourself to mild swearing or go for the really 
offensive
It’s a mine field. It’s a nightmare. It really is so much easier to
just not bother. This isn’t a puritan dictate. It is an efficiency
dictate. It saves time and effort and having to think about it if
you simply don’t do it. Now go away.
RULE 42
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 99
YOU CAN SAY WHAT YOU
WANT WHEN YOU GET
HOME, OR IN THE CAR 
ON YOUR OWN. 
BUT AT WORK 
YOU DON’T SWEAR.
Be a Good Listener
RULE 43
100 THE RULES OF WORK
I don’t mean you should provide a nice padded shoulder for
all and sundry to come and cry on. In fact, that probably isn’t
good listening but therapy. A good listener is someone who
makes the speaker know that they are listening. You do this by:
• Making encouraging noises—“Hmmm, go on, yes, I’m 
listening.”
• Displaying appropriate body language—Head tilted to
one side, eyes open, and looking at the person speaking,
not yawning or fiddling with your watch.
• Repeating back some bits to make sure they know you’ve
taken them in— “On Friday at 3, yes, I’ve got that.”
• Getting them to repeat things you haven’t heard or understood—“Can you repeat that bit about Peterborough? I’m
not sure I was taking that in.”
• Asking questions—“So the move to Gloucester will not
happen now?”
• Taking notes—Write stuff down as they speak.
Now why would you want to be a good listener? I said, now
why would you want to be a good listener? Easy. You get
• More facts
• A better understanding of what you are supposed to be
doing
• A better grasp of what is going on around you
• Seen as sympathetic and considerate
• Seen as intelligent and alert
• Seen as someone on top of their job
If you don’t listen, you don’t know. If you are going to listen,
make sure they know you are. Easy.
Good listening is a skill, a special talent, that you will have to
practice and learn. It doesn’t happen overnight, and it isn’t
automatic. You have to think about it and catch yourself when
you aren’t listening and turn it on then.
RULE 43
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 101
GOOD LISTENING IS A
SKILL, A SPECIAL TALENT,
THAT YOU WILL HAVE TO
PRACTICE AND LEARN.
Only Speak Sense
RULE 44
102 THE RULES OF WORK
To become successful and get promoted, you have to project
the right image—the wise, mature, reliable, cool, sophisticated, trustworthy, experienced business person—and there
are times when all the hard work can be devastated, destroyed,
by a careless word or unguarded moment. Recently, a shadow
government front-bench minister was sacked because she told
a “racist” joke at a rugby club dinner. Her career was brought
down by an unguarded moment of not “speaking sense.”
You have to guard your tongue against:
• Un-PC comments
• Offensive jokes or remarks that alienate any section of the
community
• Sexism in any form
• Patronizing people
• Arrogance
• Loss of temper
• Offensive swearing—see Rule 42
• Bitching, moaning, gossiping—see Rules 35, 36, and 37
• Revealing what you really think of people
It might be wise to learn to speak only occasionally, rather
than chattering on. If you let your tongue run away with itself,
it is so much more likely that you’ll say the wrong thing. If
you think carefully before you speak, pause, and have a
chance to bite your tongue, then the chances are that your
delivery will be accurate, your speech edited carefully, and you
will only speak sense. You thus get a reputation for being wise
and mature. People will come to you for advice and guidance
because they know you think about what you are going to say
and don’t just chatter on. They will trust you. Once trusted,
you are a natural candidate for promotion and success.
Make sure that what you have to say has an impact and isn’t
lost in the general hubbub of office clamor. Don’t chat about
what you watched on TV last night—to be honest no one is
really interested—instead be silent until you have something
of import to offer.
RULE 44
IF YOU CAN’ T SAY ANYTHING NICE—SHUT UP 103
THERE ARE TIMES WHEN
ALL THE HARD WORK 
CAN BE DEVASTATED,
DESTROYED, BY A
CARELESS WORD OR
UNGUARDED MOMENT.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART V
LOOK AFTER
YOURSELF
This page intentionally left blank 
Most people you deal with are probably decent and good to be
around. However, there are always a few who aren’t. You can’t
avoid them—the bastards, the jealous colleagues, the ones
who will take any opportunity to stab you in the back or do
you harm. They’ll shoot you down in flames at any chance
they get. Make sure that your new image doesn’t make you a
target. These Rules are about minimizing enemies and staying
one jump ahead. As you get more successful, it is often a sort
of organic process that you attract jealousy and envy. By practicing these Rules, you will avoid this and look after
yourself—especially your back.
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 107
RULE 45
108 THE RULES OF WORK
So, what do you do for a living? I don’t mean the actual job. I
mean what contribution do you make to society? Is your contribution positive, beneficial, healthy? Or is it detrimental,
negative, damaging? What does your industry do? How much
a part of that industry are you? Have you considered the ethics
of your industry?
What do we mean by ethics? Ethics are the morals of your
industry—the rights and wrongs, the good and bad. Is your
industry a good thing or a bad thing? Does it hurt or heal? Is
it putting something positive into society or merely taking
something out?
No, you don’t have to walk out if you have just suddenly
decided that your own particular industry stinks. What you
can do is work from the inside to change things. I don’t think
we’re talking environmental issues here, although I am aware
that they may be of concern to a lot of us. Instead, I want you
to concentrate on what your industry does morally.
Obviously, if you do decide that your industry is unjustified in
its approach—and this happened to me and I walked—and
you simply cannot live with it, then you have to get out. This
is good karma, and you gain benefit even if you do lose out
financially.
Within your industry there will be good bits and bad bits.
Occasionally, you will be asked to cross the line and do bad
things. Obviously, you will have read Rule 47: Set Personal
Standards but this is about helping set standards for your
industry rather than personal ones. You have to point out that
morally, ethically, what you are being asked to do is bad for the
Know the Ethics of Your Industry
company. Constantly say, “What would the press do if they got
hold of this?” and offer them a suitable headline: “Scrooge Ltd
replaces sacked workers with Asian sweatshop labor.”
Yes, you can be as assertive as you like and refuse, but you
might just get labelled then as a wimp who is frightened to get
his hands dirty—no guts, that sort of thing. No, you have to
point out the ramifications for the company. You have to
implant the idea of the whistle blower—“Hey, what would
they do with this?” This way you will be one of the company
people while still playing the ethics card. You will be one of us
and one of them all at the same time.
To do all this, you have to know the ethics of your industry
and know what its contribution is. Do your research now.
RULE 45
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 109
IS YOUR INDUSTRY A GOOD
THING OR A BAD THING?
DOES IT HURT OR HEAL?
Know the Legalities of Your
Industry
RULE 46
110 THE RULES OF WORK
Is your company breaking any laws? Are you breaking any
laws? Do you know the legalities of your industry?
I once worked for an organization that was, initially, remarkably above board. It prided itself on being a standard setter, a
new thing in the industry. After a few years, it suddenly
changed direction and lost the Jekyll to gain the Hyde. It was
quite bizarre, and I couldn’t see why it happened. Senior board
members hadn’t changed that much, and circumstances didn’t
seem to demand it—we weren’t fighting for our lives here. But
suddenly laws were being broken—and I do mean laws.
Suddenly I found myself working for a crooked and corrupt
company. What to do? I turned a blind eye for a while, but
eventually I too was asked to participate in the law breaking. It
was at that point I left. I kept my honor and reputation and
went to work for the opposition, its rival. Once there, I was
asked about my old company and what it got up to, but I
wouldn’t give any information that would allow my new
bosses to gain benefit over my old company. I don’t know why,
but it seemed honorable to sit on what I knew. I was happy to
talk about the way they did business, just so long as it didn’t
spill over into this area of legalities.
A few years later I found myself working for a company that
was taken over by my old corrupt bunch. By now the company had been caught, punished, and cleaned up its act. Did I
want to work for the company again? Not particularly. But I
did have an interview with a senior director who said he was
happy to have me on board—“At least you know how to keep
your mouth shut,” he said. The leopard still seemed a bit
spotty to me and I walked.
So, how clean is your industry? Your company? You have to
know what you might be asked to do and what is legal and
what isn’t. Some industries have incredibly minute and trivial
laws that you can run foul of almost without realizing it. But
realize it you must. To be a Rules Player you have to be
cleaner than clean, above suspicion, and never allow yourself
to be scapegoated into anything. If your company is looking
for a sucker, make sure it ain’t you. Make sure you stay clearly
this side of the line, and don’t stray over it accidentally.
If you choose to break the law, that’s one thing, but how awful
it would be if you ended up in prison because you didn’t
know. Better to be an intelligent convict than a stupid one—
“But I didn’t know” has never been an effective defense.
RULE 46
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 111
TO BE A RULES PLAYER
YOU HAVE TO BE CLEANER
THAN CLEAN.
Set Personal Standards
RULE 47
112 THE RULES OF WORK
Do you sleep nights? I know I do, but then I set personal standards that I simply won’t break.
• I will not knowingly hurt or hinder another human being
in the pursuit of my career.
• I will not knowingly break any laws in the furtherance of
my career.
• I will have a moral code that I will follow no matter what.
• I will endeavor to provide a positive contribution to society by what I do for a living.
• I will not do anything that I would be ashamed to talk to
my children about.
• I will put my family first at all times.
• I will not work evenings or weekends unless it is an emergency and I have discussed it with my partner.
• I will not unfairly harm anyone in my pursuit of new
work.
• I will always endeavor to put something back.
• I will pass on freely and openly any skills, knowledge, or
experience to anyone who could use them to benefit
themselves within the same industry—I won’t hog information for the sake of it.
• I will not be jealous of anyone else’s success in the same
industry.
• I will question the long-term ramifications of what I do
constantly.
• I will play by the Rules at all times.
This code of conduct is my own personal set of standards. It
might not suit you. You may need or have a better set. I do
hope you don’t opt for a worse one. We must endeavor to be
the very, very best we can at all times.
RULE 47
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 113
WE MUST ENDEAVOR TO 
BE THE VERY, VERY BEST
WE CAN AT ALL TIMES.
Never Lie 
RULE 48
114 THE RULES OF WORK
This Rule, as in the case of Rule 42: Don’t Swear, is very easy. It
sets a limit that you don’t have to think about. Never lie means
exactly that—never lie. Under no circumstances do you lie.
Once you have got a reputation as someone who never lies,
you won’t ever be asked to cover up, or cover for anyone else.
If you do decide to lie for a living, you have too many choices
and decisions. Where do you draw the line? Do you only tell
little lies? Great big ones? Do you lie to save yourself? Others?
Do you lie for the company? For your boss? For colleagues?
How developed will your lies be? Will you add lie to lie when
the first lie looks like it’s about to be detected? Where will you
stop this process? Will you involve other people in your lies?
Or will you be a lone liar?
Can you see the problems? If you have a simple Rule—never
lie—you have a default setting that requires no thought, 
no choices, no decisions, no alternatives, no picking, no 
preferences. 
Not ever lying also saves you from guilt, fear, recrimination,
having to remember the lies, the risk of being punished or
sacked or embarrassed, ostracizing your colleagues, putting
your family in jeopardy, running the risk of a criminal prosecution, and not sleeping nights.
Never lie is really the simplest, cleanest, most honest approach
to your working life and career.
It is, of course, OK to embellish and hype up your resume or
experience or enthusiasm, but please don’t actually lie. You
will be found out—I guarantee it.
If I’m offering a book to a publisher and they ask me what it is
like, I don’t say, “It’s alright, I suppose.” No, instead I say, “It’s
brilliant, simply brilliant. It will sell extremely well and might
well be the best seller we’re looking for.” Is any of this a lie?
Not really. I wouldn’t be writing it if I didn’t think it was brilliant. Will it sell that well? It might. Who am I to know for
certain? It’s a changeable market. Is it a lie to say it will? No. 
You are allowed to talk up your qualities or skills or expertise—just don’t actually tell a lie. And a lie is anything that can
be proved definitely to be wrong. To say you are qualified as a
software programmer when you aren’t is a lie. To say you are a
wizard at software programming isn’t because it is a matter of
opinion rather than fact. But if in doubt—never lie or embellish if you can’t think fast on your feet.
RULE 48
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 115
YOU ARE ALLOWED TO
TALK UP YOUR QUALITIES
OR SKILLS OR EXPERTISE—
JUST DON’T ACTUALLY
TELL A LIE.
Never Cover up for Anyone Else
RULE 49
116 THE RULES OF WORK
Being a Rules Player means you are aiming for perfection, that
you are setting extremely high standards for yourself. Others
will not have these standards—obviously, they won’t be as successful as you because of this—but they may well try to either
get you to lower yours or to involve you in their shenanigans.
What do you do? Again, be happy with a simple default setting—you don’t cover up for anyone, ever, under any
circumstances. 
This way it is simple. You don’t have to think about this. You
have no choices or decisions to make. You know exactly where
you stand. You have let your colleagues know exactly where
they stand. You have let your boss know that you won’t cover
for anyone; therefore you are above suspicion, trustworthy,
reliable, beyond reproach. 
If you do decide to cover for others, it complicates your life so
much that it can’t really be worth it. For instance, do you only
cover for close colleagues or anyone who asks? Do you only
cover for small incidents or the big ones? What about covering for fraud? Criminal negligence? What do you say and do
when you get found out? How do you explain it to your family
when you get sacked?
How do you handle it when asked to cover up for a close colleague who might well be a friend as well? You can be fairly
assertive and just say “No”—you don’t have to explain. Or you
can soften the blow by saying: “Please don’t ask me, I would
have to say no if you do,” to give them a get-out clause and
save their face.
Once you have done this, it gets easier—you’ve established a
reputation for not covering up. The hardest bit is ignoring the
emotional blackmail that often accompanies a request to cover
up for someone. But in reality that is quite easy to ignore in
the sense that if people think so little of you to use this technique, then why the hell shouldn’t you turn them down? They
have already cooked their goose by using such an approach on
you.
If they put pressure on you, adopt the stuck record technique
and just keep saying: “No, I can’t, please don’t ask. No, I can’t,
please don’t ask ….” They’ll crack before you. Always remember that real friends will never ask you to cover up for them.
RULE 49
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 117
IF YOU DO DECIDE TO
COVER FOR OTHERS, 
IT COMPLICATES YOUR
LIFE SO MUCH THAT 
IT CAN’T REALLY 
BE WORTH IT.
Keep Records
RULE 50
118 THE RULES OF WORK
When a publisher and I agree to do a book together, we draw
up a contract. This specifies all those things that could get forgotten along the way. That way, when I deliver the manuscript
and the publisher says, “But this is only 100 pages and I
thought we had agreed on 200,” I can produce the contract
and find the clause where it clearly states 100 pages, or so
many words, or whatever.
If your boss asks you to do something and you make a note of
it—in front of him—he will have a very hard job arguing later
that you’ve done it wrong or late. 
If you have to submit a report, then drop your boss a quick
memo or note outlining the salient facts, very briefly, so there
will be no confusion later. Keep a copy. Make sure your boss
knows you have kept a copy.
This technique isn’t to cover your back because you are up to
no good. Instead it clarifies all issues. If it’s in writing, it makes
your job so much simpler, so much easier. Who can argue
with a written memo? In fact, such things could be forged,
written afterwards, changed, amended, and/or rewritten, but
we all assume they aren’t, that they are tamper proof.
It is amazing how often the tiniest detail will cause a major
upset—unless you got it in writing in the first place. Keeping
records isn’t an anal thing to do, but a sensible precaution.
None of us has perfect memory. We all forget things—dates,
times, details. Once we have made a note of whatever it is, we
can refer to it later. And often surprise ourselves with how
badly we have remembered something.
You will often read in management books the advice to throw
away all memo or emails or faxes over a certain age—if you
haven’t looked at it in six months then you don’t need it.
Rubbish. You hang on to everything. Make more filing space
rather than throw anything away, unless and until you are 100
percent certain it is not needed. I once had a major quarrel
with a publisher (not this one, of course) relating to a book I
had written for them five years previously. It was a dispute
that wasn’t covered by anything in the contract. But I had kept
my original notes and could produce them—a bit like having
to show your work during math at school—and could show
that what they had published had been exactly what they had
asked for. I was off the hook. You won’t get me throwing anything away. No way.
RULE 50
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 119
IF IT’S IN WRITING, 
IT MAKES YOUR JOB SO
MUCH SIMPLER, 
SO MUCH EASIER.
Know the Difference Between
the Truth and the Whole Truth
RULE 51
120 THE RULES OF WORK
While we have ascertained that you ain’t never ever gonna lie
and you don’t cover up for colleagues no matter what, you
don’t have to be a goody goody and tell tales. You don’t need
to volunteer information unless it directly helps you to do so.
Knowing that a colleague has screwed up doesn’t mean you
have to run to the boss and rat on him. Instead, it might be
beneficial sometimes to stand back and watch how things
develop. If your colleague knows you know and you ain’t
saying anything, there might be a favor being born there that
could be recalled later.
And, of course, if you do get asked, you don’t lie. But, again,
know the difference between the truth and the whole truth.
Not lying is one thing, but throwing up and regurgitating
everything you do know is something else. Sometimes it pays
to be a little editorial with what truth you are giving out. The
beauty of being a Rules Player is that you move up and are
successful and you are still able to live with yourself—to be a
thoroughly nice person. This means you don’t lie and don’t
cover up, but it also means you don’t spy on your colleagues,
rat on them, betray them, or harm them.
Look, it’s a real world out there, and it can be dog eat dog. Be
careful—there are some pretty unsavory characters. There may
be ruthlessness going on around you, but you don’t have to
participate. You don’t have to be a teacher’s pet, either. Keep
your wits about you at all times, and know when to spill the
beans and when to shut the duck up.
I guess you have to be a diplomat—knowing what to say 
and when to say it; martial arts expert—thinking on your feet;
therapist—letting others bring their problems to you, but
keeping yours to yourself; and Zen master—all seeing, all
knowing, saying little.
So when people ask for your opinion, you have to weigh up
what it is they are really asking. Do they really want the truth?
Their report sucks. Or a limited version of the truth? Your
report is fine, it’ll just about do the job. A highlighted truth?
Your report is good but you have missed out quite a lot. A
reassurance truth? Your report is really good and I liked it, and
I like you because your report is so good. Or the real truth? I
haven’t had time to read it yet because I don’t like you and
think it’ll be a pretty boring report—bit like you really.
RULE 51
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 121
THERE MAY BE
RUTHLESSNESS GOING ON
AROUND YOU, BUT YOU
DON’T HAVE TO
PARTICIPATE.
Cultivate Your Support/
Contacts/Friends
RULE 52
122 THE RULES OF WORK
If you don’t cover up for people, what use are you to them? As
I have said, it’s a real world out there, and people expect a lot
of you. They want you to be in their debt. They want you to
carry the can, cover up for them, do their dirty work for them
and watch their back—and all at the same time. But you are a
Rules Player now, and that takes you outside the spheres of
petty office gang warfare. You are now a stand-alone item. You
don’t feed with the sharks, and yet you avoid being their food.
What are you, and what are you for?
You are a pool of calm, the eye of the storm. You are the reliable strength of the team, unshakeable and unshaken. You are
the default setting, the honesty factor, the standard by which
all other colleagues judge themselves. If you think it’s a no-go 
area then they will know it is. If you turn your back on a
tricky situation, they too will know it’s not to be touched. If
you say it’s fine, then they know it’s a good thing.
You are the standard bearer, the criterion by which all else is
judged. Don’t believe me? Try it; it works.
And because you are so reliable, honest, trustworthy, other
colleagues will quickly come to rely on you for advice and
guidance. You, however, give nothing away for free. Every pat
on the back, every prod in the right direction, every session of
useful hints and tips, every point of guidance comes with a
price—loyalty. You may not hunt with the pack, but by golly
the pack had better know who really is pack leader. Yep, you.
How to achieve this? By kindness, by consideration, by playing it straight. Never let them down. Never rat on them. Never
drop them in it. Always be cheerful, supportive, loyal—don’t
lie or cover up, but do close ranks if you can—protective,
cooperative, caring, and genuinely interested in them as
human beings. You’ll have ’em eating out of your hand. Why?
Because this is a rare game to play. Playing it straight is such
an unusual thing that they will have no defense against it, no
protection. There are few management training books or
courses that teach you to be nice, be straight, be honest. The
unspoken wisdom is generally be ruthless, take advantage,
dog eat dog. The consequence of this is everyone thinks like a
dog and not like a real person. You come along and show
them how it really should be and they will follow you anywhere, you old dog you. 
RULE 52
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 123
PLAYING IT STRAIGHT IS
SUCH AN UNUSUAL THING
THAT THEY WILL HAVE NO
DEFENSE AGAINST IT, 
NO PROTECTION.
Date with Caution
RULE 53
124 THE RULES OF WORK
There are those who say that you should never date anyone you
work with, on the grounds that it can cause resentment, stress,
jealousy, distraction, frustration, and generally damage your
work and your reputation. If not when things are going well,
then certainly when the relationship is in trouble or finishes.
To some extent I agree with this, and certainly there’s no
excuse for falling into the bad behavior trap at the office party.
If you can’t resist getting it together with that tasty colleague
from accounts while photocopying your bottoms, best skip the
party. At least if you ever want to be taken seriously as a Rules
Player.
The trouble is, a simple Rule that says “never date a colleague”
would be flawed. If I’d followed that advice, my three oldest
children would never have been born, and I’m not advocating
anything with that result. You see, many people meet their
future partners through work, and you can’t ignore that 
possibility.
So what’s the Rules Player to do? Well there is an answer, and
it’s this. Only allow yourself to get involved in serious relationships at work. Of course, you can’t be sure the relationship
will last forever, but if it doesn’t have a chance, steer clear.
Here’s a good question to ask yourself—is this person more
important to you than the job? If you had to give one of them
up, which would it be? If you’d sooner give up the job than
the relationship, then go ahead.* Of course, with luck you
won’t have to give up either.
* With the date I mean; no need to hand your notice in before you ask your
coworker out.
If you get involved with a colleague, of course you have to be
grown up and responsible about it. Set ground Rules for the
pair of you to follow so that not only does the relationship not
interfere with work, but also your maturity and good sense
will be respected by your colleagues and managers. Here are
some basic principles to get you started:
• No public displays of affection.
• No huddling together sharing whispered conversations
and in-jokes.
• Let your immediate colleagues and managers know; otherwise they’ll work out something’s going on and won’t
know what. Then behave as if you weren’t going out
together.
• Ask for certain tasks to be reallocated if there’s a conflict
of interest. (This is one reason why your boss needs to
know.) For example, you can’t sensibly appraise, discipline, or interview each other.
RULE 53
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 125
OF COURSE, YOU CAN’T BE
SURE THE RELATIONSHIP
WILL LAST FOREVER, BUT
IF IT DOESN’T HAVE A
CHANCE, STEER CLEAR.
Understand Others’ Motives
RULE 54
126 THE RULES OF WORK
So what motivates you? We know that you are a Rules
Player—honest, diligent, hard working, keen, successful, and
self-motivated. You get off on doing a job fabulously well,
impressing your bosses, earning the respect of your colleagues
and the admiration, and loyalty of your juniors. You go home
at night knowing you’ve done a good day’s work and that
you’ve been pleasant to everyone and are a thoroughly nice
person. You sleep nights because you haven’t harmed anyone
or broken any laws or behaved badly in any way. You earn lots,
but that isn’t your driving force—yours is the need to be the
very best, the finest that there is. But what motivates everyone
else? Ah, to really get on you will need to understand the
motives of others. 
Understanding their motives means you have to enter the dark
and nebulous world of psychology. What gets others off can be
very diverse:
• Power
• Money
• Prestige
• Revenge
• A need to hurt
• A need to be loved
Whatever their motives, I can bet they aren’t Rules Players—
you lot stand out a mile—aloof, calm, in control, dignified,
and sophisticated. Anybody whose motives are need and fear
and greed should be treated carefully. You will have to make
sure you stay on the right side of them without fawning, that
you outmaneuvre them without sinking to their level and
without being paranoid. Look around your office now and
identify what makes each of your colleagues tick, and do the
same for your boss and their boss. Learn to identify their
motives, and you will be able to handle them easily.
Knowledge is power.
RULE 54
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 127
ANYBODY WHOSE MOTIVES
ARE NEED AND FEAR AND
GREED SHOULD BE
TREATED CAREFULLY.
Assume Everyone Else is Playing
by Different Rules
RULE 55
128 THE RULES OF WORK
So we know what Rules you are following, but what about
other people? What are their standards? What Rule book are
they following, what drumbeat do they march to? Chances are
they are making it up as they go along. This makes them
unpredictable and erratic. 
Not everybody will have your high standards of honesty and
morality. Obviously, some people are kind and dignified—just
like you—and are still able to climb the corporate ladder. But
there are equally lots out there whose Rules are suspect. 
The Rule book you now have must remain a secret. If you
reveal your Rules, you have broken the Rules. If you assume
that everyone else is playing by different Rules, you won’t go
far wrong. You don’t have to assume that their Rules are better
or worse than yours, merely different. If you assume that their
Rules are the same as yours or better, you will be constantly
let down, disappointed, disillusioned, saddened, and upset.
If you assume their Rules are worse than yours, you will grow
mistrustful, apprehensive, paranoid, suspicious, and sceptical.
Assuming that their Rules are different without assuming what
those Rules are keeps you open and receptive, cautious but
expectant, approachable but not overly trustful, responsive
but not gullible. 
It’s a bit like being a martial arts exponent:
• You are alert and prepared, but not muscle bound or
aggressive
• You remain flexible and fluid and can move like a cat and
dodge whatever is thrown your way without ever adopting a belligerent stance
• You are ready for anything by being grounded and 
centred.
RULE 55
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 129
THE RULE BOOK YOU 
NOW HAVE MUST REMAIN 
A SECRET. 
IF YOU REVEAL YOUR
RULES, YOU HAVE 
BROKEN THE RULES.
Keep the Faith
RULE 56
130 THE RULES OF WORK
There are times when you find yourself in a job where the
people around you just aren’t Rules Players in any sense. They
may be corrupt or dishonest, resistant to change, or obstructive in the way they deal with you. What can you do?
Listen, I know this can be tough, but if you drop your standards, you’ll make things worse and not better. You don’t have
to stay in the job, of course, but I appreciate that sometimes
leaving a job isn’t that easy, and you may feel you have to stick
it out. So, keep the moral high ground and hold firm to what
you believe in: decency, integrity, honesty, fair dealing,
chivalry, progress. If you don’t behave decently, why should
anyone else? It may be a slim hope for improvement, but it’s
all you’ve got.
I once heard from a reader who was stuck in just such a situation. He was clearly a consummate Rules Player and had
steadfastly refused to compromise his standards. He’d worked
hard to create cooperative teams and driven through changes
that were unwelcome but long overdue. Some of his coworkers were so threatened by this that they accused him of all
kinds of corruption and bad behavior to get him sacked. And
do you know what? His bosses dismissed these allegations
outright. You see, being a Rules Player had paid off, and
despite all his problems at work, his managers weren’t stupid
and recognized a dedicated and loyal worker when they saw
one.
So, if you’re in a similar situation, you have my sympathy. All I
can say is, stick in there. If you let them get to you, or worse
still corrupt you into their way of doing things, you won’t be
able to survive and sleep nights. If no one is flying the flag for
decency, that’s the last chance gone. Actually though, most
people would rather be friendly and decent and honorable and
cooperative. They just don’t want to be the first to stick their
necks out and do it. In a corrupt environment, it’s easier to be
corrupt. But if you show the courage that others lack, many of
them will follow you. Not all of them, of course, but just a few
allies will make you feel a whole lot happier and will vindicate
your determination to do what’s right and play by the Rules no
matter what.
RULE 56
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 131
IF NO ONE IS FLYING THE
FLAG FOR DECENCY,
THAT’S THE 
LAST CHANCE GONE.
Put Things in Perspective
RULE 57
132 THE RULES OF WORK
When all is said and done, it is only a job. It ain’t your health,
your love life, your family, your children, your life, or your
soul. If, by the way, it is any of these things, then you really
have gone badly wrong along the way.
Your job is just a job. Yes, I know you need the money etc.,
etc. But it is just a job and there are others.
Having a bad day at work shouldn’t cause you to
• Lose sleep
• Go hungry
• Lose your sex drive
• Smoke more
• Drink more
• Take drugs
• Be more irritable
• Get depressed
• Get stressed
But you’d be surprised how often these things are done by
people because they have had a bad day. Yes, they may have
had a whole series of bad days. But taken one by one, it is just
a bad day. You have to learn to switch off, relax, not take it so
seriously, enjoy it more, put things into perspective.
Get a hobby, get a life. You must work to live, not live to work.
Don’t take stuff home with you—learn to be assertive and say
no. Put your family first. Spend time with your children—they
will grow up so fast you will miss their precious childhood if
you work your way through it—believe me, I have seen my
children grow up, and it is so swift it is terrifying. It may seem
slow and stressful at the time, but it zips past and then is
irrecoverably gone—and you missed it because you were
doing paperwork one evening or attending another boring
conference over the weekend.
It is just a job.
RULE 57
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF 133
YOU HAVE TO LEARN TO
SWITCH OFF, RELAX, NOT
TAKE IT SO SERIOUSLY,
ENJOY IT MORE,
PUT THINGS INTO
PERSPECTIVE.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART VI
BLEND
IN
This page intentionally left blank 
No one likes a black sheep or a white crow or a fish that
swims in a different direction from the rest of the shoal. These
Rules teach you how to blend in, become “one of them” so
you don’t stand out as an outsider. You might stand out as
being the leader of the pack—better, more efficient—but you’ll
still be “one of us” because you know how to play the “blending in” game.
BLEND IN 137
* By the way, it was Derek Jarman, of course.
RULE 58
138 THE RULES OF WORK
Every corporation, company, industry, or even small office has
a culture. Knowing what that culture is gives you the edge, the
key to success. Knowledge is power.
The culture is how their people do things. This culture is
sometimes company led, but mostly people generated—it
grows organically and without plan or strategy. If you don’t
know this culture—or fail to make use of it—you can end up
looking foolish and are then easy to take advantage of, or be
belittled.
Bear in mind that around 70 percent of all dismissals are not
because someone couldn’t do their job properly, but because
they didn’t know the corporate culture—they didn’t fit in.
Consider this advert for a pretty big prestigious design
studio—the BMD. When Bruce Mau, the owner of this company, wanted to recruit new staff, he put out a quiz with some
40 questions, including, “Who made a film consisting of nothing but the color blue?”*
Bruce headed the advert, “Avoid fields. Jump fences.” As a
result of this, he lured some of the best, most talented top
designers to come and work for him—or with him, as he
describes his working relationship with his staff.
Now what sort of corporate culture do you think Bruce
expects, wants, gets? How would you fit in? What do you
think Bruce would expect of you?
Know the Corporate Culture
You don’t have to buy into the corporate culture—you don’t
have to believe in it—all you have to do is fit in. If they all
play golf, then you play golf. I know you hate golf, but you
will play golf—if that’s what it takes to fit in. Now you may, of
course, question whether you want to fit in. You may question
whether playing golf is where you want to be. But if you are a
Rules Player and you want to move up and be successful and
you also want to be part of a particular company where playing golf is the corporate culture—then play it you must.
RULE 58
BLEND IN 139
YOU DON’T HAVE TO BUY
INTO THE CORPORATE
CULTURE—YOU DON’T
HAVE TO BELIEVE IN IT—
ALL YOU HAVE TO DO 
IS FIT IN.
Speak the Language
RULE 59
140 THE RULES OF WORK
Fitting in means being able to follow the corporate culture,
and speaking the language is a big part of this. You can give
the game away by not using the right jargon or using computer-speak at the wrong time. If they all use geeky language,
then you too must use it. No, this isn’t the time or place to discuss whether you want to belong to a geeky company—that’s
for you to do alone in the soul-searching time of the early
hours when you can’t sleep.
If the boss talks in terms of SPRs for staff product ratios, then
you too must talk of SPRs. It isn’t your job to educate them,
re-educate them, edify them, inform them, teach them, give
them a bit of class, drag them up, stop the dumbing-down
process, or instruct them. Their corporate language is what
you must speak. I know there will be times when it will make
you want to scream—but speak it you must. 
I once worked for an Italian boss who, because of his inadequate grasp of English, had taken to talking of “clienters,”
which was his sort of mix of clients and customers. Because he
was the boss, this ridiculous term had entered the public
domain, and every member of staff from the general manager
down talked about the clienters. I could have stood there and
screamed, “No, no, no, this is wrong, stop it at once.” Fat lot
of good it would have done me. It was clienters the whole
time I was there, and I hated it every time I heard it. But I
knew the Rules and also called them clienters.
Spend a little time listening to how your office uses language.
We’re not talking accents here, but the sort of individual clienters that every office somehow manages to pick up. I also
worked with a guy who talked of people working as hard as
Mexicans. This was his way of being, what he thought, politically correct. It was, of course, just as bad, just as wrong, just
as offensive. However, he was the owner of the company, so
the term “Mexicans” had stuck and, again, it was wrong and
horrible, but it was in current usage.
The only time this Rule should be broken is where it applies
to swearing. The Rules say no swearing, but if the corporate
culture is that everyone swears, what are you to do? Answer:
not swear. Rule 42 over-rules Rule 59 in this case—you’ve been
trumped.
RULE 59
BLEND IN 141
IF THEY ALL USE GEEKY
LANGUAGE, THEN YOU 
TOO MUST USE IT.
Dress Up or Down Accordingly
RULE 60
142 THE RULES OF WORK
You will always dress elegantly, stylishly, smartly. But what if
you work for a design company where they all wear jeans and
a T-shirt? In that case, you will wear jeans too. Just make sure
your jeans are the smartest, the most stylish, the most fashionable, the most modern—no, no, you do not iron them! No
creases, for God’s sake!
Watch what the others do. If, at a meeting, it is jackets off and
sleeves rolled up, then that’s what you do. If it is very formal
and jackets stay on, then yours stays on as well. I know this
may sound obvious, but you would be surprised how often
you look around a meeting and you can see the one person
marching to a different drumbeat—and that’s the one who will
be ostracized by the others. 
To a greater or lesser extent, we all need to belong to the herd,
to fit in, to blend in, to camouflage ourselves so we don’t draw
unnecessary attention to ourselves. Obviously, if it is the boss
who takes their jacket off, then you too do so. Don’t become a
clone though and mindlessly follow what everyone else is
doing. We are talking here of dressing up or down on a general basis, not each and every minute.
I’ve always found it better to sit back for a moment or two to
see what others do rather than to be the first to follow the
head lemming. Stand back for a moment, it might be a cliff
and not a promotion opportunity; or a springboard with no
water below.
I’ve always found it useful to have a role model to check with
to see if they would have done a certain thing or worn a certain style of dress. For a lot of my business life I’ve used Cary
Grant. Easy then to ask, “Would Cary have worn this?” If the
answer is yes, then go right ahead. If the answer is no, then
don’t. See how easy this is? Try Humphrey Bogart, but in
Casablanca rather than The African Queen.
Even if the corporate culture is to dress casual, you can still
make an effort.
RULE 60
BLEND IN 143
TO A GREATER OR LESSER
EXTENT, WE ALL NEED TO
BELONG TO THE HERD.
Be Adaptable in Your Dealings
with Different People
RULE 61
144 THE RULES OF WORK
Being a chameleon is a good thing just so long as you can
carry it off. People are all different, and if you try to treat them
all the same you run the risk of offending them all or at least
failing to satisfy any of them.
It is a lot easier to understand this Rule if you are a parent. If
you have more than one child, you will know how essential it
is not to treat them the same. Each child needs different motivating forces. For some it is enough to be mildly disappointed.
For others you have to be a real ogre just to get them to get
dressed in the morning.
I have five sons and a daughter, and I have to treat each one
differently. Sometimes I forget and treat them all the same, and
they are quite surprised and quite hurt. Each needs me to be
something different, something unique for them, something
special. As a manager, you are a sort of parent to your people
and must treat them as individuals.
I once staged a completely fake loss of temper to get my own
way over a fairly trivial matter. The person for whose benefit
the tantrum was put on was so shocked that I was given into
immediately. Now there are quite a few bosses around for
whom such behavior would have been intolerable, and I
would have been shown the door straightaway.
When I was a general manager I always felt I could get the
best out of my workforce by being fairly pleasant and quite
kind. But there were the odd few who didn’t respond to this
type of behavior. They were so entrenched in their old-fashioned
approach to work that they expected a boss to be a complete
bastard and to shout at them and tell them what to do. And
here I was asking them how they were and what they thought
of it all. They couldn’t cope, and I had to be unpleasant to
them to get them to respond—different strokes for different
folks.
You have to be adaptable, ready to change quickly depending
on what is required of you. The perfect manager is the one
with the ability to spin on a dime. Study how you are with
people. Are you always the same, no matter who they are or
what is going on? Do you adapt and change readily and easily?
Identify who around you is successful, and watch what they
do with people.
RULE 61
BLEND IN 145
THE PERFECT MANAGER 
IS THE ONE WITH THE
ABILITY TO SPIN ON 
A DIME.
Make Your Boss Look Good
RULE 62
146 THE RULES OF WORK
If your boss looks good, your department looks good. And
that reflects well on you. So this one should be obvious. But
I’m amazed at how many people criticize the boss behind her
back, or are always ready to pass the buck on to her.
I realize that your boss may be a fool, have no business
acumen, be difficult and demanding, have abysmal people
skills, no idea how to manage a department, and lack all
integrity, talent, and diplomacy. If all that is true, her image
certainly needs all the help you can give it.
OK, few bosses are that bad. But few are faultless either, and
that’s not the point. It’s just common sense. You benefit all
round from making your boss look good, and it’s only a matter
of time before your boss starts to notice.
Of course, this makes sense when your boss is present, but if
you stick up for her, give her credit and draw attention to her
strengths even when she’s not there, it will do you even more
good. Other senior managers will be impressed, and word will
get back to the boss about how you told everyone it was your
boss’s thoroughness that kept the exhibition stand on budget,
or she who negotiated that great deal, or her encouragement
that gave the team the confidence to give such a good 
presentation.
This is the kind of loyalty that other managers will admire and
will help consolidate the rest of your department into a strong
team—which will also be noticed and will rub off on everyone, yourself included. I’m not suggesting here that you lie
about the boss if she in fact makes a complete mess of things.
I’m suggesting that you keep quiet on the subject if she really
screwed up, and make a noise about the stuff she gets right.
Of course, there will be times when you and your colleagues
need to discuss the boss honestly to work as a team, but make
sure you make only those negative points that are strictly necessary, and be fair and impersonal about them. It’s probably
wise to acknowledge that your boss is likely to give you the
information you need at the last possible minute, but you can
still voice it in a matter-of-fact practical way rather than a
bitchy, critical way.
RULE 62
BLEND IN 147
THIS IS THE KIND OF
LOYALTY THAT OTHER
MANAGERS WILL ADMIRE.
Know Where to Hang Out, 
and When
RULE 63
148 THE RULES OF WORK
There are always key places where the high and mighty gather
at formal and informal times. You need to check these places
out and use them, as important places to garner information,
make contacts, be seen, and make an impact. Outside work
there will be a watering hole used by senior bosses. It might be
the golf club 19th hole, the local bar, a certain restaurant, a
club. Whatever, wherever. It is your duty to know where this
is. Now don’t go rushing in there and make a complete idiot of
yourself. You have to spy out the land, learn the territory so as
to be informed of everything you need to know before going
in. Does the restaurant have a dress code or style you should
know about? Is there a waiting list for membership of the golf
club? Is the bar the sort of place you’d go alone, or should you
go with your partner? Is the club easy to join? Can you just
hang out with the bosses without looking out of place? Are
these places the sort you could just happen to be there,—“I
was just passing”—or will it be obvious that you are hanging
around waiting to make a move?
You have to be careful with this one, but you should know
where they meet and the accessibility of such places. Chances
are you might choose never to go there. That’s fine. But if it
crops up in conversation, you will have an edge just knowing
where they go—knowledge is power.
At work there may be a corridor where they hang out next to
the coffee machine or photocopier. You can always make sure
you happen to be passing. Get your face known; get your
name known.
At formal occasions perhaps the bosses all go out for a smoke.
Even if you don’t indulge, you can still pop out and be part of
that smoking gang. Or maybe they all like to visit the bar
before going into the conference or whatever. Make sure 
you are there first so you don’t have to have an excuse for
dropping in.
RULE 63
BLEND IN 149
GET YOUR FACE KNOWN;
GET YOUR NAME KNOWN.
Understand the Social Protocols
RULE 64
150 THE RULES OF WORK
Within every company and place of work there will be social
protocols. Know them and use them. They might be quite
simple:
• You never take partners to the staff dinner.
• You always turn up for the staff meetings on your days
off.
• You never park in a certain couple of spaces even though
they aren’t marked because they are unofficially reserved
for the CEO’s partner and kids.
• You always give a $5 to the leaving envelopes that go
round but only a couple of dollars for the birthdays.
• You never take the jelly doughnut with the coffee because
that’s Sylvia’s—always has been, always will be.
• You always refer to the CEO as Charles to his face but as
Charlie to the rest of the staff.
• It is OK to order wine with lunch, but beer really is
frowned on.
You may never know where some of these unwritten Rules
come from—Charles once got hit by a beer drinking
employee, hence no beer at lunch; Charles was once embarrassed by the wife of a junior manager who made a not
completely unsuccessful pass at him at a staff dinner, hence no
partners.
Of course, these social protocols may be obvious—Sylvia likes
the jelly doughnuts and she has the clout to get her own
way—the important thing is to identify them, file them away if
you like, but by golly you’d better know them if you don’t
want to make any terrible social gaffes.
I once worked for a company where it was considered taboo to
drink during a working day in any way. You couldn’t even
have a beer at lunch. Alcohol was a big no-no and I couldn’t
find out why. I was happy to go along with this, as I am not a
drinker, but it puzzled me. I eventually found out that the
company had had a finance manager who had spent every
afternoon having 40 winks in his office—sleeping it off. In
fact, he wasn’t. He did drink a lot every lunchtime, but the
afternoons were spent carefully siphoning off funds to his own
accounts. He was eventually caught and dismissed, but after
that no drinking was the Rule—and no closed office doors.
RULE 64
BLEND IN 151
OF COURSE, THESE 
SOCIAL PROTOCOLS MAY
BE OBVIOUS—THE
IMPORTANT THING IS 
TO IDENTIFY THEM, 
FILE THEM AWAY.
Know the Rules About Authority
RULE 65
152 THE RULES OF WORK
Who runs your office? I bet it ain’t the boss. Bosses tend to
closet themselves away in their ivory office, leaving the real
job of running the business to someone else. Your job is to
identify this person and stay on the right side of them.
I have worked for companies where the real power resided in
the hands of a PR consultant, a legal secretary, an auditor, a
customer, and a junior manager. In each and every case, the
reason why they were really in charge was that they
• Had the ear of the boss
• Were trusted by the boss
• Carried out a subtle whispering campaign rather than
saying anything outright or up front
• Had been there quite some time
• Were motivated entirely by power and control
• Were invariably unpleasant enough to use various tactics
to get their own way—no matter what
• Were extremely clever, but lacking the experience, qualifications, or skill to actually do the job properly
In each case, once I had made a friend of these people I got on
better. To begin with, I didn’t spot them immediately. This
always caused me problems. I would go to the boss and only
later be made to realize I had committed a gaffe by doing so—
“Oh everything goes through Sarah first,” “I’ll just run it by
Janine first to see if she thinks it a good idea,” “Do you want
to check this out with Trevor and come back to me?”
I soon learned to go to the person who had the ear of the boss
first. Play the game with this person, and don’t make an
enemy of her. She is the real authority, and you should pay her
homage. I know it ain’t fair and you hate it, but until a better
system comes along, we have to work with what we’ve got.
RULE 65
BLEND IN 153
WHO RUNS YOUR OFFICE? 
I BET IT AIN’T THE BOSS.
Know the Rules About the Office
Hierarchy
RULE 66
154 THE RULES OF WORK
This Rule goes hand in hand with the previous one. You have
to know who has the boss’s ear, and you have to know who
runs the office. You might be quite senior, but you won’t get
the key to the stationery cupboard no matter what, not unless
you speak nicely to Mark first. And your morning coffee is
going to be delivered cold if you upset the catering staff at all
by wandering up to the break room and ordering your coffee
without going through the office manager first.
Office protocols and hierarchies are old fashioned, petty, small
minded, outdated, and yet still very much with us. It wasn’t
that long ago that I worked in an office where you had to take
your typing to an office manager who then handed it to a
typist and it was returned to you later, all done. 
Trouble was that if you upset the office manager—and you
could do this by smoking near her, talking about the boss in a
derogatory way, swearing, coming to work causally dressed—
you got your work given to the worst typist and it came back
late, full of mistakes, coffee cup stained, misspelled, no copies,
you name it. 
Once you got on the right side of the office manager, it all
changed and your typist presented you with exemplary work,
on time and immaculate.
Now, you might say that this was the way it was and I couldn’t
really complain. Yes, but the office manager wasn’t my office
manager. I only used the typing facility occasionally and I was
senior. I still had to go through this hierarchy, which involved
me in having to seek the patronage of someone junior to get a
fairly mundane and routine job done. It sure made me mad,
and I had to spend quite a lot of time wooing the office manager just to get a letter done. It was time consuming,
unproductive, and petty. But you’re right—we have to work
with what we’ve got.
So what do we do? We play the game. We have no choice but
to smile and woo them.
RULE 66
BLEND IN 155
OFFICE PROTOCOLS AND
HIERARCHIES ARE OLD
FASHIONED, PETTY, 
SMALL MINDED,
OUTDATED, AND YET STILL
VERY MUCH WITH US.
Never Disapprove of Others
RULE 67
156 THE RULES OF WORK
So, they’re all going to the wine bar again this lunchtime. You
hate that. You hate the noise, the smell, the inane chatter
about last night’s TV programs. 
But do you tell them this? No, you do not. You need to be one
of the crowd—blend in. You need them to think you’re there,
in spirit if not in body, without actually being there. Easy. You
get out of it by saying you have to do some shopping, visit a
friend, go to the gym.
Don’t disapprove of the way they spend their lunch break—
this will make them think of you as an outsider. Nor do you
tell them you’re staying in the office to catch up on some
work—they will think you a creep. But it is fine to say you are
going to do some shopping and then find somewhere nice to
park in your car with a soft drink and a decent sandwich—and
your laptop. You can get all that extra work done, but you
don’t have to let them know.
Don’t tell them that you think drinking at lunchtime is
unhealthy and unproductive—tell them you’ll be along in a bit
and to carry on without you—“get one in for me.” This way
the lunchtime crowd will accept you as “one of them” without
your ever having to be one. You will be accepted if you don’t 
disapprove.
Or perhaps they all go bowling together on a Tuesday evening.
No, you don’t say “but bowling is for geeks, isn’t it?” Instead
you can say, “Ah, Tuesday evenings? That’s my night for taking
my mother to the cinema, I’m afraid.” Or how about you swallow your pride, your standards, and your disapproval—and
actually go. Who knows, maybe you’ll have fun. But you will
blend in and you won’t show that you disapprove of your colleagues. Smart move.
How others spend their leisure time, their money, or their
lives is no concern of yours. Smart movers concentrate on
their own path and ignore the route others choose to take.
Keep focused on where you are going, and ignore anything
others are up to. By ignoring, it is easier to stop making judgments. If you make judgments, you categorize yourself and
thus make it much more difficult to be flexible and to move
easily from situation to situation. By judging others you, in
turn, get pigeon-holed yourself—not a good place to be.
RULE 67
BLEND IN 157
SMART MOVERS
CONCENTRATE ON THEIR
OWN PATH AND IGNORE
THE ROUTE OTHERS
CHOOSE TO TAKE.
Understand the Herd Mentality
RULE 68
158 THE RULES OF WORK
People like to form nice safe little groups—family, friends,
work colleagues, town, country, nation, regiment—and will
fight quite fiercely to protect these groups. If you threaten
them—or, and this is important, are thought to threaten
them—they won’t like it. So don’t. Understand that this herd
mentality is important and that to blend in is important.
Suppose your herd is a pride of lions. Yes, you can roll in the
dust, roar, eat zebras, and be very fierce and you will blend
in—you will be a lion. This doesn’t mean you have to capitulate though or be weak. In every pride there is a top dog—a
senior lion. You can blend in but still stand out by being in
charge, being a pack leader, being the head honcho.
Blending in is about being a chameleon, not a wimp. Just
because I say you ought to blend in doesn’t mean you have to
give up your identity or become a clone or lose all sense of
your individuality. All you have to do is know and understand
herd mentality—and then use it to your own advantage. I once
saw an employee reduced to tears because he didn’t know the
system and the herd—his fellow workers—turned on him. He
was “different,” and they smelled his fear and went for him. 
What you are going to be is the proverbial wolf in sheep’s
clothing. If the sheep accept you, then you can do pretty much
what you want with them. If they detect any whiff of wolfishness, they start to get very unsettled.
Study any group of people and you will see conformity. They
all like to be sheep; it makes them feel
• Secure
• Comfortable
• Safe
• Protected.
All their thinking has been done for them and they can just
eat grass cozy and safe in the knowledge that they will be
taken care of. You don’t need these things; they’re for the
sheep. You are the wolf. Think independent, wolfish thoughts.
RULE 68
BLEND IN 159
THINK INDEPENDENT,
WOLFISH THOUGHTS.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART VII
ACT
ONE STEP
AHEAD
This page intentionally left blank 
If you are going to move on up, you had better start practicing
now. These Rules teach you how to adopt the mannerisms,
attitudes, and managerial traits of the position above the one
you currently hold. If you already look as if you’ve been promoted, chances are you will be.
HAVE A PLAN 163
RULE 69
164 THE RULES OF WORK
When I was an assistant manager, I dressed like one. When I
wanted to be a manager, I studied what managers wore—and
general managers. I opted to dress like a general manager and
was duly promoted, thus missing out on the manager’s position in between assistant and general. There is a style for every
job. You may choose the job you want. Now you can choose to
dress like that job. Then you will get that job. It is that simple.
Just so long as when you get that job you can do that job—
don’t fly until you can crawl.
I have held many interviews in my time for many different
positions to be filled. I have never ceased to be amazed at how
people dress for interviews. It’s almost as if they don’t want the
job. I’ve seen interviewees for senior management positions
turn up in a crumpled suit, an unironed shirt or blouse,
unpolished shoes, and uncombed hair. I wouldn’t employ
them as—here I have to be careful as I don’t want to insult any
group of workers—ferret catchers. 
I’ve seen interviews, again for senior management posts,
where they turned up late, in the wrong place, on the wrong
day, with the wrong information, and obviously for the wrong
job.
I’ve held interviews for trainees where they turned up in
tennis shoes—not quite what I had in mind.
Whatever job you are doing, you must have your eye on the
next position up. Haven’t you? If you have your eye on that
job, you must know who has that job now. Study that person.
What does he wear? How does he dress? What style, level of
smartness? Is there anything you could learn from the way
Dress One Step Ahead
this person dresses? Can you start copying it now? And when
I say copying it, I do mean learning to dress like that for real.
If it means wearing a smart business suit, then get used to it. 
There’s nothing worse than starting a new job and starting to
wear a new style at the same time. It will be noticed that the
collar doesn’t fit or the shoes seem too tight or strange, and
that the level of smartness is all wrong for you—you’re always
pulling the hem of your skirt down or straightening that tie
that feels so strange to you.
YOU MAY CHOOSE THE JOB
YOU WANT. NOW YOU CAN
CHOOSE TO DRESS LIKE
THAT JOB. THEN YOU WILL
GET THAT JOB.
RULE 69
HAVE A PLAN 165
Talk One Step Ahead
RULE 70
166 THE RULES OF WORK
How does your boss talk? I assume it is her job you want. If it
ain’t, whose job is it? Or have I been wasting my time here?
Come on, whose job do you want? Let’s start with the boss.
How does your boss talk?
What do I mean—how does your boss talk? I’ll explain. It isn’t
her accent or pronunciation—how she sounds—but the content, what she says. I bet you talk in terms of “I,” whereas
your boss will probably use “we” much more. You might speak
from a worker’s point of view, whereas your boss will speak on
behalf of the company.
The more senior you go, the less likely you are to
• Chatter inanely
• Gossip
• Swear
• Talk about last night’s TV programs or any other issues
that have no relevance to the work being done—bosses
tend to be much more focused and less inclined to waste
time
• Prattle on—bosses tend to be more thoughtful and pause
before speaking (or at least the good ones do)
So, if you are going to talk one step up, you need to be more
thoughtful, talk about issues that are relevant, talk in terms of
“we” rather than “I,” be focused and dynamic, and keep personal details to yourself—bosses don’t chatter or gossip about
their social lives.
I guess what you have to do is be the grown-up and speak 
to the other workers as children. You become aloof and
slightly withdrawn, mature and responsible, dependable and
conscientious.
When I say aloof I do not mean arrogant. I’m sure you have
encountered lots of managers who make this simple mistake.
Arrogance has no place at work. Arrogance is conceit and fake
importance. Aloofness is being slightly withdrawn, being
detached, being superior by nature of experience, skill, and
natural ability.
RULE 70
HAVE A PLAN 167
BE FOCUSED AND
DYNAMIC, AND KEEP
PERSONAL DETAILS TO
YOURSELF—BOSSES 
DON’T CHATTER OR 
GOSSIP ABOUT THEIR
SOCIAL LIVES.
Act One Step Ahead
RULE 71
168 THE RULES OF WORK
So, we’ve got you dressing one step up and talking one step
up; now you have to act one step up. I know, I know, it’s all
too much, too hard, too difficult. Who said this was going to
be easy? Not me, pal. I told you right from the word go that
this was going to be hard—harder in fact than just doing the
job like normal people. Being a Rules Player takes more effort,
requires more attention to detail, and is generally more like
hard work than hard work. But the results are fantastic. In
fact, being a Rules Player automatically qualifies you for promotion—if you can be a Rules Player you deserve to be
promoted. It’s a sort of self-fulfilling prophecy. Carrying out
the Rules requires strength of character, will power, determination, honesty, courage, experience, great talent, dedication,
drive, nerve, and charisma—if you’ve got all these, you’ll be
promoted anyway.
So, act one step up. Look at the way your boss enters the
office. Notice anything? Watch the way he answers the phone,
talks to staff, entertains customers, holds his pen, hangs up his
coat, opens his office door, sits down, stands up—anything he
does. I bet you’ll notice that he moves differently from, say, the
office manager or the maintenance team or the sales force or
the marketing folk or the PR people.
Acting one step up requires you to
• Be more certain of yourself
• Be more mature
• Be more confident
You have to be languid and suave and sophisticated—no, no,
not swaggering or aggressive. A simple exercise—do you have
your own office? Do people knock on your door? What do
you say? A mild “Come in, please”? or a one-step-up “Come.”
The higher you go, the less time you have to waste. You get
slicker and quicker, sleeker and fitter. You don’t have time to
waffle or use long expressions—a simple “Come” is more
expedient. You too have to be expedient. That’s the secret.
Next.
RULE 71
HAVE A PLAN 169
CARRYING OUT THE RULES
REQUIRES STRENGTH OF
CHARACTER, WILL POWER,
DETERMINATION,
HONESTY, COURAGE,
EXPERIENCE, GREAT
TALENT, DEDICATION,
DRIVE, NERVE, AND
CHARISMA
Think One Step Ahead
RULE 72
170 THE RULES OF WORK
We talked about being expedient. Thinking one step up is
about thinking expediently. You don’t have time to waste
thinking
• How will this affect my coffee breaks?
• Will this mean I can still have my vacations?
• Will I have to work harder? Longer?
• Will I score any kudos from this?
• No, instead you will think
• Is this better for the department?
• Will the company do well from this?
• Can we bosses sell this to the workforce?
• Are our customers going to be happy with this?
Get the message? See the point? You will start to think like a
boss and less like a worker. You will see things from the company’s point of view and not how it affects your own personal
petty little desk footprint:
• See the big picture
• See the entire picture
• Picture the picture
• Direct the picture
• Produce the picture
• Stop being an extra
I guess these Rules teach you how to be an individual, how to
think for yourself, how to stand on your own two feet. But if
you could do all that you wouldn’t need these Rules. And if
you can’t, can these Rules teach you? Yes, of course they can. 
Read on.
RULE 72
HAVE A PLAN 171
YOU WILL START TO THINK
LIKE A BOSS AND LESS
LIKE A WORKER.
Address Corporate Issues and
Problems
RULE 73
172 THE RULES OF WORK
We talked about looking at things from the company’s point of
view and not from your own. You have to take this further and
talk only about corporate issues and problems even when you
are talking to yourself or close colleagues. You have to convince them you are already a boss—see Rule 78.
I remember doing my first book and naturally being terribly
concerned with the look of it—did the cover look right, feel
right, smell right? The marketing manager, obviously getting
fed up with the interminable dreary phone calls from me to
check up on every little detail, finally said, “Tins of beans,
dear boy, tins of beans.” I didn’t know what he meant, and he
had to explain it all in words of one syllable. Each book is a
product—a tin of beans—it sits on a shelf and gets bought or
not bought depending on factors over which I, the mere little
writer, have no control—such as the position of the book on
the shelves, the competition stationed nearby, the weather, any
discounts the bookstore happens to be offering, and on and on
and on. All of these things, including fascinating things, such
as the color of the cover, can affect sales. It was my job to
supply the text and then to start thinking about the corporate
issues, such as how many tins of beans get sold in any
accounting period, what my percentage share of any tin of
beans is, what the next tin of beans will be, and can we sell
them spaghetti next time?
When problems crop up, it is easy to see things from your
own point of view—how it directly affects you. Once you
make the leap to corporate speak, it gets easier to stop doing
this and to start seeing problems from the company’s point of
view. This doesn’t mean you have to become a company
person hook, line and sinker. In fact, you are allowed to be
honest and express your opinion. If it stinks it stinks—and
you should say so. But say so from the company’s point of
view and not your own.
If the company suggests a new procedure, immediately think
how it affects your customers and not you.
RULE 73
HAVE A PLAN 173
IF THE COMPANY
SUGGESTS A NEW
PROCEDURE, IMMEDIATELY
THINK HOW IT AFFECTS
YOUR CUSTOMERS AND
NOT YOU.
Make Your Company Better for
Having You There
RULE 74
174 THE RULES OF WORK
One of the most satisfying ways to make your name in an
organization is to propose a change that will benefit everyone,
not just your own job or even your department.
I’ll give you an example. I worked in a company that had one
of those suggestion boxes that most people thought was a bit
of a pointless exercise, and we didn’t believe anyone would
take any notice of the suggestions anyway. Until this woman
we hardly knew made a blindingly simple suggestion via the
box. She recommended that all letters should be sent by
second class post as standard, unless there was a good reason
to upgrade it to first class. Up until then all post had gone first
class.
This was exactly the sort of thing I’m talking about, for several
reasons:
• It was incredibly straightforward and required no complex explanations.
• It could be put into practice by everyone in the organization at no cost.
• It was easy to implement.
• It saved the company a lot of money.
That’s what you’re looking for, ideally. Simple, universal, and of
clear and immediate benefit. You can imagine how envious the
rest of us were when this previously insignificant employee 
was the focus of managerial praise and recognition. And
deservedly so.
So take a good look at your own job, and see if you can find
anything that will benefit everyone—maybe you can see a way
to do something cheaper, quicker, or better. Or perhaps you
have (or can cultivate) a resource that everyone can use. This
is an extension of Rule 4 actually, but this time you’re finding
something that benefits your colleagues too. Such as collecting
lots of disparate information into one place so people can
access it more easily. Or writing up a proper user manual for
the phone system that every department can use to train new
staff.
I’m sure you’re getting the message: that if you look for ways
to create assets for everyone to share, the credit will rub off on
you every time they’re used. And that’s what it’s all about.
Genuinely helping everyone, and yourself most of all.
RULE 74
HAVE A PLAN 175
CAN YOU SEE A WAY TO DO
SOMETHING CHEAPER,
QUICKER, OR BETTER?
Talk of “We” Rather Than “I”
RULE 75
176 THE RULES OF WORK
I once worked for a boss who asked who we worked for. We
said:
• Ourselves
• Our families
• Our bank managers
• Our self-esteem
• Our boss
• The management
• The company board of directors
• The customers
• The inland revenue
• The government
He said a polite “No” to all of these. He explained we worked
for the shareholders. That’s it. That’s who you work for. Now
go and buy some of your company’s shares. Now you work for
yourself. Now you can start to say “we” and “us” instead of
“me” and “I” and that sort of thing.
You are now a shareholder, so when you have to talk about
company procedure, you can think how it will affect us, the
shareholders—and not them, the staff (of whom you used to
be one, not so very long ago).
If you go to meetings it is so much more grown up (and cool)
to talk of “we” instead of “I.”
“If we are going to implement this new procedure, we need 
to appraise the junior staff’s reaction first,” instead of “I think 
this sucks.”
“We ought to prioritize some time for talking about the exhibition”—instead of “I’m panicking, this exhibition is only two
weeks away and I’ve done nothing.”
RULE 75
HAVE A PLAN 177
IF YOU GO TO MEETINGS IT
IS SO MUCH MORE GROWN
UP (AND COOL) TO TALK OF
“WE” INSTEAD OF “I.”
Walk the Walk
RULE 76
178 THE RULES OF WORK
Now you’ve got to put the whole package together—you’ve
got to walk the walk. You’ve got to become whoever and whatever it is you aspire to be. This isn’t mimicry but training. If
you can’t walk the walk, you can’t do the job. 
Remember though what we said right from the outset—you
have to be able to come up with the goods, you must be able
to do the job, and do it well. That is the bottom line. If you
can’t do the job, leave the stage. 
These Rules are not for the bullshitters or the posers. They are
for the really industrious, the talented, the hard working, the
naturally gifted, those who are prepared to put in some effort
and burn some oil.
Study the job that you aspire to. Who is doing it now? Learn
to think of her as the person who is doing your job. How is
she handling it? Learn to appraise those who are senior to you
in the way that they appraise you. Don’t moan or whine about
how your boss does the job—observe instead her mistakes and
learn and profit from them. Watch where she goes wrong and
swear never to make the same mistakes. Watch what she does
superbly well and start practicing her smart moves now.
If you are going to walk your walk, you have to have the right
mannerisms, the right dress code, the right way of speaking,
the right way of acting, the right responses, and the right attitude. You only get these if you are prepared to put in some
time carrying out a four-point plan:
• Watching
• Learning
• Practicing
• Incorporating
If you are prepared to do these four things, you will fly. Of
course, you also have to do these without anyone knowing
what you are doing—as well as doing your normal everyday
job. Tough order? Of course. Who said it was going to be
easy?
RULE 76
HAVE A PLAN 179
YOU’VE GOT TO BECOME
WHOEVER AND WHATEVER
IT IS YOU ASPIRE TO BE.
Spend More Time with 
Senior Staff
RULE 77
180 THE RULES OF WORK
No matter what level you are in the company, you can spend
time with senior members of staff and they won’t even realize
it if you handle it right. Draw attention to yourself, and you
will be spotted as an interloper, a spy, an intruder, a gatecrasher. Remember as a small child you could attend
grown-up parties if you stayed quiet. They forgot you were
there. Once spotted, you got carried off to bed—where you
belonged. It’s the same as a junior. You can hang around and
learn, but don’t blow it or you’ll be sent back to bed metaphorically.
When I was an office junior I noticed that senior members of
staff tended to hang back after meetings sort of chewing the
fat among themselves. The juniors scuttled off leaving these
bigwigs to chat. I found that if I hung around also, sort of tidying up the table, emptying ashtrays (those were the days) and
keeping quiet, then I got to overhear a lot and was even consulted on the odd occasion—“Ah, Richard, you’re part of the
new invoicing procedures, what do you think of them?” This
was my chance to shine. I blew it, of course, and stammered
and blushed and was tongue tied and useless. Next time I got
it better and eventually got it right.
There came a time when I was asked something and I was
coherent, confident and mature. Strange that I was also
whisked up the promotion ladder quite rapidly very soon
after. This was when I was working for a very old-fashioned
British company and their promotion route was very fixed;
you had to follow a very set procedure. I was allowed to
bypass this system, and I put it all down to hanging around
the top guns.
Sometimes you will notice a boss sitting on his own at a lunch
or social occasion. Most “workers” are too nervous to go up to
bosses and chat or so entrenched in their social class thing
that they can’t talk to them. Forget that. Go up and make
small talk. You’ll be amazed how often bosses are grateful for a
“worker” talking to them because they too are human and feel
isolated, lonely, ignored, forgotten. They are glad for a chat,
just so long as you don’t take advantage and ask about a pay
rise or time off or your vacation. But it is OK to ask about
their experiences—“So how did you get into marketing, Ms.
Johnson?”
You may well find you pick up useful hints and tips as well as
getting ready for the next Rule—getting people to assume you
have already made the step.
RULE 77
HAVE A PLAN 181
YOU’LL BE AMAZED 
HOW OFTEN BOSSES 
ARE GRATEFUL FOR 
A “WORKER” TALKING 
TO THEM.
Get People to Assume You Have
Already Made the Step
RULE 78
182 THE RULES OF WORK
Act like a general manager, and people will accept you as one.
Act like an office junior, and that’s what people will think you
are. So how are we going to get people to make this assumption?
• Be confident and assertive and sound mature: “Yes, we
can do that—I’ll make sure we get on to that immediately.”
• Dress the part. If you come to work wearing tennis shoes
and sweats, you won’t command the same respect as you
would if you wore a smart business suit and looked the
part.
• Speak of “we.” Don’t talk of “I” and refer every problem
back to how it affects you—“I can’t work through my
lunch break, I’m entitled to my hour off”—instead of
“We” and seeing things from the company’s point of view,
what’s best for the whole organization—“We need to pull
together here. I’m happy to work through the lunch break
to help us get this problem solved.”
• Talk about the business. If you talk about what you
watched on TV last night and where you are going on
vacation and what you are going to do over the weekend,
you come across as more lightweight—and thus junior—
than if you talk about company issues, what your
department’s plans are for the future, how the rise in
interest rates is going to affect business over the next few
months, and what you are going to do about exchange
rates and the euro.
Basically, what you have to do is get people to recognize you
as a heavyweight and not a lightweight. Be serious, mature,
grown-up, and adult. This doesn’t mean you have to be a geek,
a nerd, a goody-goody, or a bore. You can still take a joke,
enjoy a laugh, smile, be lighthearted and jovial, be fun and full
of beans. You need to project a mature but fun image. You
need to make people aware that you
• Know the job
• Are experienced
• Are serious
• Are reliable and responsible
• Are trustworthy
• Are the job you want to be
So, take to sauntering around the place looking suave and cool
and being very stylish and grown-up, make the appropriate
noises and make sure that when you get offered the job you
are after, you can already do it.
RULE 78
HAVE A PLAN 183
BE SERIOUS, MATURE,
GROWN-UP, AND ADULT.
Prepare for the Step After Next
RULE 79
184 THE RULES OF WORK
Sorry, but you can’t coast. You are a Rules Player now, and you
must stick with it—no days off, no rests, no breaks, no putting
your feet up drinking coffee and staring into space. Back to
the grindstone. So, you’ve got your eye on the next step, the
next job. Fine, good. But what about after that? What’s your
next step? What’s your next target? 
Even before you’ve got your next promotion, you should
already be practicing for the next step. Because if you aren’t
getting ready now, when will you be? There is always an
opportunity to miss a step out, to skip over a promotion if you
play this game well. I’m not suggesting this should always be
your aim, but be prepared just in case it happens.
Of course, you have your long- and short-term plans—so you
will have plotted your career path and know the steps you
have to take on your great journey. Even now you will be getting people to assume you have already made the next step,
acting the part of the next step, walking your walk, and talking as if you were already the boss, but it doesn’t hurt to start
practicing for the step after that. 
Letting people see that you are officer material is no bad thing.
Once people get in the habit of assuming you are a high flier,
you become one. If you dress down, talk trivia, don’t pull your
weight, and act like you are a drudge or a drone, you will get
accepted as that—and stay right where you are. 
Look around the office. Can you spot the drudges and the
drones? The worker ants? The plodders and the sloggers? 
Now look again and spot the high fliers, the heavyweights, the
go-getters, the live wires. Can you see the difference? Can you
see what you have to do? Can you see how acting the part
makes you that part? Can you? Can you?
Whatever step you are preparing for, make sure that everything you do is genuine, real, and worthwhile. I once worked
with a young man who was a high flier. He was preparing for
his next step. He took to coming to work carrying a briefcase
when none of his colleagues did—none of us needed one.
Trouble is Ray’s briefcase fell open one day and revealed to the
entire world that all it contained was his sandwiches, a newspaper and a set of keys. It was humiliating for him,
embarrassing for us, and sad for everyone. Make sure your
briefcase is full of real stuff just in case this—or anything like
it—happens to you.
RULE 79
HAVE A PLAN 185
ONCE PEOPLE GET IN 
THE HABIT OF ASSUMING
YOU ARE A HIGH FLIER, 
YOU BECOME ONE.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART VIII
CULTIVATE
DIPLOMACY
This page intentionally left blank 
Smooth Rules Players move rapidly up the corporate ladder
because they are diplomats. They don’t start fights; they stop
them. They don’t sit on fences; they mend them. They spread
calm around them, and others turn to them for advice and
inspiration. You too will be a diplomat. You will be known for
your objective appraisal of any situation, your impartial attitude, and your even-handed dealings.
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 189
RULE 80
190 THE RULES OF WORK
So you are at a meeting and things are getting hot under the
collar. The chairman isn’t handling things particularly well,
and Steve and Rachael are going for each other’s throats yet
again. What are you going to do? Ask questions. It is easy to
diffuse dangerous situations by getting the protagonists to
look at some detail. You don’t have to break up the fight—
that’s not your job. But you can be the diplomat; this gets you
noticed and earns respect from your colleagues.
Turn to Steve and ask him, “Steve, why are you so convinced
that your department is going to find these new invoices
unworkable?” If Rachael carries on the fight, just say to her,
“Hang on Rach, I really want to hear what Steve has to say.”
You’ve made it clear that you aren’t taking sides but you are
diffusing the situation. Hear Steve out and then turn to
Rachael. “You are convinced that Steve is wrong. Tell me
why?”
What you have effectively done is taken over the chair’s role,
become the head honcho, assumed control. This is both diplomatic and clever.
Asking questions invariably takes the heat out of potentially
explosive situations. You turn to one of the combatants and
ask them a simple question. Don’t get bogged down in psychobabble of the “Why do you feel like that?” “Can you share
your anger with us?” sort. Instead, ask them to focus on 
an aspect that needs explaining. They will have to break eye
contact with their opponent to think about answering you.
Thus, the heat dissipates, and you have proved yourself as a
diplomat.
Ask Questions in Times 
of Conflict
Avoid doing this if either protagonist looks like the blood has
drained from his face—white face means they will hit someone, red face merely blowing hot and hard.
Avoid doing this if the chairman is handling the situation
effectively—obviously, he isn’t if the fight has started, but he
may be making an effort and will resent your intrusion.
Avoid doing this if you are involved in the argument in any
way personally.
Asking questions usually gets people to switch their attention
from the main argument to a detail. They have to be pretty 
angry not to be polite enough to at least attempt to answer
your question.
ASKING QUESTIONS
USUALLY GETS PEOPLE TO
SWITCH THEIR ATTENTION
FROM THE MAIN
ARGUMENT TO A DETAIL.
RULE 80
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 191
Don’t Take Sides
RULE 81
192 THE RULES OF WORK
If you take sides, then you are part of the argument, the fight,
the dispute, the disagreement. You have to remain totally
objective and firmly in the middle. Stay on the fence whatever
you do, because if you don’t, then one side will blame you as
well as the person she was arguing with originally. Whatever
the case up for discussion you need to
• Take a long-term view
• See it from the company’s point of view
• Remain impartial
• Remain calm
• Be the diplomat
• Not take sides
• Stay independent
The more detached you appear to be, the more senior you will
come across. If you jump in with your boots on and take sides,
you run the risk of making an enemy as well as being seen as
hot headed.
The difficulty is when a friend is embroiled in a fight with
another less close colleague. Your friend will invariably turn to
you and try to drag you in, “Oh, for God’s sake, tell her I’m
right will you Rich?” 
You can’t afford to be dragged in. You will have to hold your
hands up defensively and say, “Don’t involve me. If you two
can’t sort this out sensibly and without arguing, I will send
you both to your room.” Here you have
• Made a joke of it, thus lessening the tension
• Indicated that you are senior to both of them
• Remained uninvolved
• Not taken sides
RULE 81
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 193
STAY ON THE FENCE
WHATEVER YOU DO,
BECAUSE IF YOU DON’T,
THEN ONE SIDE WILL
BLAME YOU AS WELL AS
THE PERSON SHE WAS
ARGUING WITH
ORIGINALLY.
Know When to Keep Your
Opinions to Yourself
RULE 82
194 THE RULES OF WORK
It’s very easy to have opinions. We all have them. Trouble is
knowing when to keep them to yourself and when to express
them. The reason most people don’t know when to shut up is
that they think their opinion
• Counts for something
• Has an audience
• Is important
• Will make a difference
• Will make them seem clever/intelligent/effective
• Will win them approval/love/attention
All of these, of course, are the wrong reasons for expressing an
opinion. The real reason for expressing an opinion is because
you have been asked to. If you are asked, then say what you
think. If you ain’t been asked, then shut up.
Your opinion should almost have to be dragged from you.
What you have to say is important, and you don’t squander
your opinions willy-nilly. You don’t run off at the mouth. You
don’t sit there spouting opinions. You do
• Have an opinion ready for when you are asked
• Learn to express that opinion clearly and precisely and
accurately
• Always make it sound as if your opinion isn’t just an
opinion but the actual solution that will be implemented
The way to make your opinion seem less like an opinion and
more like an accepted fact is to express it as a fact. Don’t say, “I
think we should,” instead say, “We should.” Don’t say, “In my
opinion the ZX300 is a good machine.” Instead say, “The
ZX300 is a good machine.”
So avoid:
• “I think”
• “I feel”
• “In my opinion”
RULE 82
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 195
THE REAL REASON FOR
EXPRESSING AN OPINION
IS BECAUSE YOU HAVE
BEEN ASKED TO.
Be Conciliatory
RULE 83
196 THE RULES OF WORK
Feathers have been ruffled. You weren’t involved. It was nothing to do with you. Doesn’t matter. Make sure it is you who
soothes those feathers. 
• Make everyone a cup of coffee.
• Stroke a few egos.
• Clear the air.
• Open a window.
• Get them to shake hands (or kiss and make up).
If feathers have been ruffled by a boss telling off a junior,
make sure it is the junior you comfort, cheer up, brighten up,
perk up, whatever. The boss should be handled differently.
The best way is the silent but disapproving action of conciliation—make him a cup of coffee but say nothing. You are
indicating that you disapprove—and thus are really senior to
them because you wouldn’t make such a mistake—that you
aren’t scared of him or his anger or whatever. But maintain the
silence.
If you do this well, the boss will be obliged to ask you what
you thought of the way he blew up or shouted or disciplined
someone. Just say, “It isn’t really for me to say, is it?”
Invariably, he will say, “I would value your opinion,” or “No,
I’d like to know,” or “It’s OK; say what you think.” It doesn’t
matter what the boss says; you’ve got him.
Now you can be conciliatory, now you can be the diplomat,
now you have turned the tables. Just say, “You handled it fine.
Trish was out of order, and she needed telling.” Don’t, whatever you do, actually criticize the way the boss handled things.
Let him know you disapprove, but never, ever admit that in
real life.
Always remember that your job isn’t to make waves but to ride
them. Surf your way to the top by being conciliatory. By doing
this you will win friends, bring together opposing sides, and
gain respect. 
Being conciliatory is a bit like breaking up fights between
kids. You don’t want to know who started it—no, you really
don’t—or what it is about. You don’t want the details of who
pinched who or who bit who. All you want is peace restored
and for them to shake hands and start over again being
friends. That, at work, is all you want too. Use the same techniques you would use on small children.
RULE 83
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 197
DON’T, WHATEVER YOU DO,
ACTUALLY CRITICIZE 
THE WAY THE BOSS 
HANDLED THINGS.
Never Lose Your Temper
RULE 84
198 THE RULES OF WORK
I don’t care how annoying Pete in marketing can be or how
riled you get when Sandra from R & D ridicules or how high
your blood pressure rises when accounts mess it up yet
again—you will not ever, under any circumstances, lose your
temper. That’s it. There are no exceptions. No small breaches.
No thin end of any wedges. You will not lose your temper.
Not unless, of course, it is entirely staged, for effect. Then you
are allowed to do it. But you have to be very careful that you
have chosen the right moment, the right occasion and the
right person for an audience.
But if it ain’t staged then don’t do it. I don’t care how angry
someone makes you or how annoying she can be or how justified you think you are. Loss of temper means loss of control.
And the one thing a Rules Player has is control.
So how do you sit on your hands? How do you learn how to
be calm and well behaved? Easy. Raise your eyes to the heavens. No, seriously. You only lose your temper if you are
involved, if you care, if you are part of the problem. If you
shift your focus to higher issues—the old good of the company again—it becomes easier to see whatever it is that is
annoying you in a new light.
Another method is to simply leave the office or meeting or
whatever. Just say, “I find this situation intolerable.” And then
leave. It creates quite a shock and usually does the trick.
Or try counting to 10 while you sit on your hands.
Not losing your temper doesn’t mean not expressing emotion.
You are entitled to say, “I find it extremely annoying when you
eat all the chocolate donuts/lose the invoices/upset another
major customer/park in the CEO’s parking space/steal the
petty cash”—whatever it is that drives you nuts.
It is OK to refuse to give in to emotional blackmail or bullying
or over-assertive behavior or whining. It is not OK to bottle up
stuff. Say when you feel aggrieved, immediately, so that you
diffuse the situation at once. Don’t let things build up a head
of steam, or you may well blow. Let it out bit by bit, and it
shouldn’t ever come to a head.
RULE 84
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 199
SAY WHEN YOU FEEL
AGGRIEVED, IMMEDIATELY,
SO THAT YOU DIFFUSE THE
SITUATION AT ONCE.
Never Get Personal
RULE 85
200 THE RULES OF WORK
It is their behavior that is wrong or annoying or detrimental to
the department. It is never them. And it is never annoying to
you, only to the good of the department. The key way to
remember this is a dreadful new age thing that crept in from
parenting stuff. Parents often say, “She isn’t a naughty girl;
she’s a good girl who has done a naughty thing.” Yuk. Or how
about, “He is a good boy who has done a bad thing”?
This sets the scene though. It isn’t the person, it is their behavior. You never ever get personal. 
You can criticize
• The way they do their job
• Their time keeping, their attitude
• Their motivation
• Their communication skills
• Their long-term goals
• Their focus
• Their knowledge of office procedures 
• Their appreciation of company policy
• Their inter-personal skills 
• Their productivity output
But you can’t ever say they are a lazy, ignorant, good for nothing, lying, thieving, bitching bastard. Oh no. Not ever. They
may need retraining, relocating, reeducating, redirecting,
remotivating, but never being told exactly what you really,
really think of them. Getting personal will get you sacked at
worst and lose you respect and friends at best.
The same goes for your boss. You may know she is useless,
incompetent, corrupt, and stupid. But can you say so? No. Not
even to colleagues. Remember what we said about sticking up
for junior members of staff or the underdog or anyone that
everyone else is having a go at? Well, your boss is the same.
You always stick up for her—no matter what. You do not get
personal about her, with her, or around her.
RULE 85
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 201
GETTING PERSONAL WILL
GET YOU SACKED AT
WORST AND LOSE YOU
RESPECT AND FRIENDS 
AT BEST.
Know How to Handle Other
People’s Anger
RULE 86
202 THE RULES OF WORK
There will be times when you really annoy other people. In
fact, being a Rules Player may get right up their noses even if
they haven’t a clue what it is you are doing. No one likes a
smart ass and you might be seen as one if you cut loose from
the herd and start looking good and looking cool. They may
have a go. They may like to have a pop at you. How do you
diffuse their anger?
First you have to understand that there are two types of anger:
• Justified anger 
• Tactical anger.
Justified anger is exactly that—justified. You just ran over a
guy’s foot in your car because you weren’t looking. He is quite
justifiably pissed off. What do you do? You get out of the car
and apologize. Say, and mean, that you are sorry. Don’t deny it
was your fault. Don’t tell him it is nothing and he is making a
bit of a fuss and you once had your entire leg ripped off and
never even noticed. Don’t try and explain why you weren’t
looking where you were going. Don’t try to brush off the
whole thing—“I’d have thought you’d have been pleased to
have had your foot run over by a top of the range Aston
Martin.” And for God’s sake don’t laugh. 
Justifiable anger needs a result. If you have done something
wrong, listen to the guy—he is angry. You have made him so.
Listen to what you have done wrong. And then apologize and
find some way to put things right. Show the person that you 
sympathize—you may not be able to give him what he wants
but you can still let him know that you appreciate his feelings.
Don’t brush his feelings aside—they are justified.
Tactical anger is, however, another thing entirely. Tactical
anger is used to make you do things you don’t want to. People
lose their temper to intimidate you. The worst thing you can
do is let them get away with it. If you do, they’ll keep doing it,
to you and to others. You must stop them at once. The way to
do this is simply to say, “I don’t like being shouted at/threatened/intimidated/bullied/whatever, and I shall leave if you
don’t stop/calm down/put your fists down/let go of my throat,”
whatever.
If they continue, then just leave. That’s it. Say nothing; just
walk out of the room. Do this often enough and they will get
the message.
RULE 86
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 203
FOR GOD’S SAKE DON’T
LAUGH.
Stand Your Ground
RULE 87
204 THE RULES OF WORK
No one is allowed to bully you, threaten you, shout at you, hit
you, intimidate you, frighten you, tease you, victimize you, or
torment you in any way. You are an employee. If you aren’t
doing your job properly, you should be taken to one side and
have your mistakes pointed out calmly and rationally.
Anything else is abuse. 
You are allowed to refuse abuse. You are allowed, calmly and
rationally, to tell someone to stop at once or you are entitled to
use the full weight of the law to get someone to stop. You have
to know when to stand your ground.
Obviously, if someone is mildly teasing—the same as everyone
else gets—then you can’t walk out and claim unfair dismissal.
If your boss snaps at you occasionally—the same as they do to
all employees—you can’t demand the Court of Human Rights
has them strung up, even if they are out of order. If a colleague
says she’ll give you a slap if you take her hole puncher again,
you can’t really expect the Supreme Court to take up your
case. We are talking real abuse here, not the sort of rough and
tumble you’d expect in the tumult of a busy working life.
Standing your ground is about having standards, drawing a
line in the sand, and saying, “I will put up with this, but not
this,” or “I will allow them to do this to me, but not this.”
One approach is to ask the person open questions. This avoids
trying to be underhand and playing the same game she is, and
if you do it in front of other people, it can put the person on
the spot and make her feel very uncomfortable and she’ll learn
to think twice about putting you in that situation again. So, at
a meeting you can ask politely, “Why did you not tell me
about this at last week’s meeting? It would clearly have been
useful information for me to have.” Then keep quiet so the
onus is on her to justify herself. Or say, “I feel put down when
you make rude remarks. Why do you do it?” That should put
a stop to their nasty ways.
Standing your ground is about having standards, drawing a
line in the sand, and saying, “I will put up with this, but not
this.”
Standing your ground is about being assertive. Being assertive
is about stating your bottom line: “I don’t appreciate being
locked in dark cupboards and I shall have to report this incident to my union representative/boss/the police/the health and
safety committee/my mother.”
If bullied, stick to the stuck record—“I don’t appreciate being
treated like this. I don’t appreciate being treated like this. I
don’t appreciate being treated like this.” Don’t lose your
temper, or the bully may feel they have “won.” Walk away.
RULE 87
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 205
STANDING YOUR GROUND
IS ABOUT BEING
ASSERTIVE.
Be Objective About the Situation
RULE 88
206 THE RULES OF WORK
If you are feeling abused and tormented at work, you have
various choices:
• Walk
• Report it
• Flair up and be angry
• Say nothing 
• Handle it assertively
How you choose to handle difficult situations is entirely up to
you. However, before you react, think of the long-term plan.
How will a claim for unfair dismissal or constructive dismissal
look on your resume over a career history? I’m not saying 
you should put up with abuse of any sort just to get on. No, 
I am not saying that at all. I am saying be objective about the
situation.
I was once ridiculed by a particular boss—and badly ridiculed.
This man had got it into his head that I was his pet football to
be kicked around as and when he felt like it—and that was,
curiously, often after boozy lunches. I was quite junior and
had few choices—walk away from the job or go over his head
and report him. But his boss was also his best friend. If I
reported him, I would have been out on my ear pretty quick. I
needed the job and didn’t want to walk away. I had to be quite
devious, but I basically got him to treat me badly—ridiculing,
abusive language, that sort of thing—when one of our major
customers was listening. 
My boss didn’t know this, and the customer was furious. He
sorted my boss out in no uncertain terms. Said he ought to be
ashamed of himself treating a junior like that. Tore him off a
good strip indeed and then told me to tell him if this ever happened again—and that if it did he would take his business
elsewhere. His business was about 70 percent of our entire
turnover. 
My boss had to apologize to me in front of the customer. And
I wasn’t treated badly again. I felt I was objective. I then
waited, and sure enough he acted up again with someone else
and was eventually sacked. I waved him goodbye with a
cheery grin and a wink.
RULE 88
CULTIVATE DIPLOMACY 207
BEFORE YOU REACT, 
THINK OF THE 
LONG-TERM PLAN.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART IX
KNOW THE
SYSTEM—AND
MILK IT
This page intentionally left blank 
If you are going to move on up, you had better know the
ropes. These Rules teach you how to understand the system—
and how to milk it for all you’re worth. They will have you
out-managing the management because you’ll know the
system better than they do.
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 211
RULE 89
212 THE RULES OF WORK
There are a whole heap of unwritten Rules in any workplace.
These might be as simple as who is “allowed” to use which 
elevator/break room/restroom/corridor/outside smoking area,
or as complex as who holds the keys to the petty cash/photocopier/ stationery cupboard/vacation schedule. I have often
known the strangest people doing duties that no one has ever
given them. I once worked in an office where a Swiss translator was in charge of the vacation schedule. Why, for heaven’s
sake?
You had to get your vacation approved by her, logged by her,
and permitted by her. But why her? Whenever I asked, I was
told it was historical that the translators did the vacations. It
was bizarre, stupid, really off the wall. My supervisor should
have done them, but I guess he was quite pleased that the
translators had taken this “burden” off his shoulders. Weird.
If you have been in your job for a while, you should have
learned all these rules by now. If new, then these things are
waiting to be found out. OK, so you know these rules; what
use are they to you? Easy. It’s a bit like the unions used to be—
working to an obscure rule book that the management never
really understood or knew. You will be able to outmaneuvre
anyone by knowing these unwritten Rules.
I went to work in an office where the most junior had to take
the most senior boss his coffee in the mornings and the
unwritten rule was that this junior would wait while he drank
the coffee. The junior didn’t “have” to, it was just expected of
him. I was that junior. For about five minutes every day I had
the ultimate boss’s undivided attention. I had the ear of the
Know All the Unspoken Rules 
of Office Life
highest. I had access to God. I milked it, as you might have
guessed.
I got my department head moved to another department. He
was unpopular and I merely mentioned to the big boss that
the department head had certain skills that he hadn’t revealed,
but that would come in very useful in the new department. He 
was moved.
YOU WILL BE ABLE TO
OUTMANEUVRE ANYONE BY
KNOWING THESE
UNWRITTEN RULES.
RULE 89
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 213
Know What to Call Everyone
RULE 90
214 THE RULES OF WORK
Yes, you should know what to call everyone, but that doesn’t
mean you are going to call them that. I dare say Mr. Cutler has
long since forgotten me. I was his assistant many years ago.
When he changed companies he phoned me and asked me to
join the new firm with him—more money, etc.—so I said yes. 
On my first day working with him at the new company, he
said to me, “Call me Mr. Cutler.” No way, Peter. I had called
him Peter at the old place and was going to carry on calling
him that. But not quite yet. There were several assistants, and
they needed to get to know this new boss, this Mr. Cutler.
That’s what they called him, because that’s what he wanted. I
waited until the moment was right and we were all gathered
together. Then I addressed him as Peter. 
He couldn’t pull me up short in front of my peers and they
thought, quite rightly, that I had secret access to him that they
didn’t. For me the Mr. Cutler nonsense was never mentioned
again and I was the “senior” assistant because I called him
Peter. What’s in a name? A whole lot.
You need to know that Mrs. Robertson in accounts is always
addressed as Mrs. Robertson and never as Mary, although you
know that is her name and you are senior to her. Why not call
her Mary? Because she doesn’t like it and she handles the paychecks. They have been known to go astray, be very late, be
made out for much less than the anticipated amount—and all
to people who inadvertently called her Mary.
In one job, I worked with an administrative manager who was
known, for curious reasons, as Buckethead. It’s a long story,
and you really don’t want to know. (No, believe me, you really
don’t.) He was addressed to his face as Buckethead by all the
senior staff—including me as finance manager. He was
Buckethead to the board. He was Buckethead to most of the
secretarial staff. But anyone else and he was Mr. Taylor, never
Buckethead. I have seen him savage a young junior who made
the mistake and called him Buckethead. Now why this strange
division between who could and who could not call him that
name? I have no idea but I did have a very strange relationship
with him. Technically, he was my senior, albeit if only slightly.
But I was power hungry in those days, and I wanted to control
everything. I never ever called him Buckethead. I didn’t like
him. To me he was always Mr. Taylor. Why? Because it separated us and made me different from the other senior
managers. I stood alone and Buckethead could never get close
to me, never be a “friend.” I played the aloof game and was
eventually offered the general managership of the company,
which would have made him my junior. Success? Yes, but it
felt a hollow victory—I wasn’t playing the Rules as effectively
then as now—and I left for new challenges, new horizons.
RULE 90
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 215
“CALL ME MR. CUTLER.”
NO WAY, PETER.
Know When to Stay Late and
When to Go Early
RULE 91
216 THE RULES OF WORK
There is an unwritten rule that if you want to move up you
have to stay late because everyone else stays late. Clones stay
late. Drones stay late. Worker ants stay late. Rules Players go
home when they want to—and that is invariably earlier than
anyone else.
It’s the same with arriving in the office in the morning. Who
says you have to arrive early? No one. It is one of those
unwritten rules we need to know, so we can adapt it to our
own ends.
The object of the exercise is to be thought to be working as
hard as everyone else. The game is to get away with being
thought of as a conformist, a drone, when in fact you don’t
have to because you are so much better than that. You get your
work done in record time so you don’t have to stay late.
If you ever watch motivational speakers, they always put their
hand up when they ask you—and the rest of the audience—a
question. This sets the lead, and you automatically put your
hand up because there is already one hand up in the room.
Silly, isn’t it? But it only takes one of you to leave at a reasonable time for everyone else to follow suit. Staying because you
think everyone else is staying is called “presenteeism” and is a
curse of modern office life. We all think that everyone else is
watching us, as we are watching them, to see who will be the
first to break, to leave, to incur the boss’s wrath.
It is, however, a myth. The first to leave isn’t going to be missing anything. That person will be liberating the rest of us.
Leave now and set us free, please.
The fear of missing something is very real. But if we are leading exciting and interesting lives, we know that we are the
center of the universe and that the others who stay behind are
the ones who are in reality missing out, missing something,
missing in action.
People think that leaving early—or at the right time actually,
the time we are contracted to leave—will draw undue attention to us, make us seem to be shirkers. But if we leave
confidently and honestly, this doesn’t happen. We only get
viewed badly for leaving before others if we slink out, leave by
the back door, creep away into the night with our tail between
our legs. So wave boldly and tell them, “Last one to leave
turns out the lights.” Whether it is fair to point out that if they
were any good at their jobs they too, like you, would have finished their work on time is debatable. You are allowed to
think it though.
RULE 91
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 217
THE FEAR OF MISSING
SOMETHING IS VERY REAL.
Know the Theft or Perks Rule
RULE 92
218 THE RULES OF WORK
So what can you take home? Pens? Paperclips? Staplers?
When is it a perk and when is it theft? You should know this,
as it can come in useful if you want to have a hold over someone—the someone who thinks nothing of taking home
everything that ain’t actually screwed down. Watch what they
take, and make a mental note of it. This might come in useful.
You, of course, will take nothing. 
I have known an entire department cleared out because a new
manager suddenly got it into his head that they were all committing grand larceny because they took home copies of all the
software used by the computers. At home they all had the
latest Windows, Word, and Outlook Express but a lot of good
it did them when they had to sign on.
Was it theft? It doesn’t matter. It got them the sack. If one of
them had been known not to do this, they would have survived. If one of them had known the new manager’s views on
perks, they might have survived.
Before you start filling your pockets, make sure it is worth it.
Are those pens really that attractive? Will you be able to sell
enough cheap pens to feed your family for however long it
takes you to find a new job?
We’ve looked at the unwritten rules of office life. One of these
might be that you do take home perks. And if you choose not
to, make sure you don’t get labeled as a teacher’s pet or goodygoody or anything else that could get you ostracised. Be part
of the herd even if you steal nothing. Let your boss know you
don’t, but make the staff think you are the same as they are.
And watch out for the free phone calls and the Internet connection. These might not qualify as take home perks, but it is
still theft to make free phone calls when you aren’t allowed to.
There is a good chance they get monitored, so don’t do it.
Fiddling expenses can be part of the office culture. If you don’t
do it, it can blow the whistle on the others who do. So what
do you do? You have to be honest and above board, but you
can’t rat on your colleagues. Ask the audience? Phone a
friend? Doing it might seem the lesser of two evils, but you are
a Rules Player now and can’t condone such activity. Better to
say in advance to your colleagues that they can do what they
like or want, but you won’t be a party to such irregularities.
Warn them beforehand, and then if they still insist on doing it,
you haven’t dropped them in it.
RULE 92
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 219
BEFORE YOU START
FILLING YOUR POCKETS,
MAKE SURE IT IS 
WORTH IT.
Identify the People Who Count
RULE 93
220 THE RULES OF WORK
I once made a bad mistake—well, I’ve probably made lots, but
this one is relevant and sticks in my mind. I worked for a
company and we had a maintenance man. At the end of each
day, we wrote in the maintenance book anything that needed
doing, such as changing light bulbs, and plunging toilets, and
Harry would do it. Mending broken chairs, that sort of thing.
We had two offices, and I used to get quite cross that Harry
seemed to spend more time down at the other branch than at
our place. Harry was never anywhere to be found.
My notes in the maintenance book grew terse and sharper, but
it didn’t seem to do any good. I would have rollicked Harry in
person if ever I’d have been able to find him. He came in after
we had gone home and did the maintenance work in the
evenings. The other office was getting all their repairs done,
and we were getting nothing done. It was intolerable, and I
resolved one evening to wait for Harry.
Harry didn’t show, so I went over to the other office. There
was Harry having coffee with the big boss, my regional director. I steamed in—“What the devil do you think you’re doing?
I need you over at the other place doing maintenance, not sitting here drinking coffee!” Bad mistake. Several bad mistakes:
• You don’t bawl someone out for drinking coffee when
they were on an official “ coffee-break.”
• You don’t bawl someone out for drinking coffee when
they have been invited to do so by the regional director.
• You don’t bawl someone out in front of your regional
director without first checking all the salient facts with
him.
• You do things properly—go through the appropriate 
channels and don’t hide in wait for an errant worker.
• You always identify the people who count—in this case,
Harry.
Why did Harry count? Because he was my regional director’s
father-in-law. He had juice and power and influence that I
could only dream of. He was working at the other office
because he had been told to by his son-in-law. As I said, bad
mistake.
I’ve worked for companies where it was the cashier, the CEO’s
driver, the accountant, and the lunch room chef who had the
juice. Invariably, it took some time to identify these people.
They all held some trump card that gave them access to a
senior boss, or had some hold over them such as being a relative. Find them, know them.
RULE 93
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 221
WHY DID HARRY COUNT?
BECAUSE HE WAS MY
REGIONAL DIRECTOR’S
FATHER-IN-LAW.
Be on the Right Side of the
People Who Count
RULE 94
222 THE RULES OF WORK
So how do you think I got along with Harry after my outburst? Our relationship was bad beforehand. Now it positively
stank. Do you think I could get a light bulb changed? No way,
not now, not ever. Identifying the people who count and being
on the right side of them go hand in hand, obviously.
I once worked with an auditor who was a complete you-knowwhat. Everything had to be done by the book. Every i dotted
and t crossed. This man would have made Attila the Hun look
like a charity worker. But this was a man who counted. Not
only was he the auditor, he seemed to have juice far beyond
his role as an accountant. This was a man the senior management bowed to, listened to, sought advice from, dared not
cross, and were in fear of, and they generally treated him like
royalty. 
I never quite got to the bottom of why he wielded so much
influence, but I had to work with it. And once I had identified
him I had to get on the right side of him. I hadn’t been up to
then. As finance manager, my department came under his
scrutiny constantly and closely.
I had upset Harry at every step along the way. We didn’t 
see eye to eye. He was an accountant and I was a finance 
manager—there is quite a difference. My brief was to install
security systems, improve cash flow, cut costs, and tighten all
fiscal procedures. His was to audit every penny.
I took my kids to a garage sale one Saturday morning. It was
autumn and I felt cold, so I bought a college scarf at the sale.
You know the sort, stripy, dark, traditional. On Monday I wore
it into work. I bumped into the auditor in the corridor. “Ah,”
he said “I didn’t know you went to Manchester University.
Well done.” And he walked off. 
I hadn’t a clue what he was talking about until it dawned on
me that the scarf was a Manchester University scarf. This was
the university the auditor had gone to (no, I hadn’t gone there,
or to any university) and from then on he accepted me as one
of his own, a chum, an old college pal. I could do no wrong.
This was an accident. Since then I have engineered such incidents to get on the right side of the people who count, the
ones who have influence who shouldn’t. These are the ones
who have juice incommensurate with their position or job.
There is a group of people you should watch out for—they
often have unaccountable juice—which includes drivers, auditors, PR people, human resource people, assistants, people
who have been with the company for a very long time, outside
consultants, free agents, cashiers, ex-employees, and of
course, maintenance people!
RULE 94
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 223
THESE ARE THE ONES 
WHO HAVE JUICE
INCOMMENSURATE WITH
THEIR POSITION OR JOB.
Be Well Up on New
Management Techniques
RULE 95
224 THE RULES OF WORK
You cannot afford ever to stand still, to rest on your laurels, to
sit back and take it easy. All the time you are doing any of
these things, there will be someone stealing up on you. 
You have to move with the times, and that means keeping up
with the latest management techniques, the newest buzzwords, whatever is executive flavor of the month. To stay top
of the tree, you have to know what jargon is being talked. It’s
no good referring to it as personnel when everyone else is
talking about human resources. You’ll look a chump if you are
still stuck in logistics when the board are now concentrating
on client-focused core business or whatever.
I’m not suggesting you have to use these new techniques, but
you had better know them to stay ahead of the pack—you
may be asked. You can always have fun playing buzzword
bingo at meetings—award yourself a point for every new
ridiculous buzzword you hear and when you have 10 points
leap to your feet and shout, “Bingo!” It keeps you awake.
And you’ll certainly hear a lot of wonderfully useless expressions—for instance, what exactly does Blue Sky mean? As in,
“We shall have to Blue Sky this product.” It might mean, 
“Anything goes, be creative, and set no boundaries.” It might
also mean, “We’re a bunch of jargonists who want to sound
cool and with it but who actually sound rather silly.”
If you use buzzwords, try not to sound silly. You should, of
course, know what they all mean.
You should also know what all the latest management disciplines are and how they might affect you. Try not to sound
out of date when you talk of management techniques. For
instance, it was called logistics in my day, but now it is supply
chain management—and by the time you are reading this it
will be something else, I expect.
You should know what the advantages and disadvantages of
any of these buzzwords are just in case they crop up and you
want to look good. There ought to be a sort of bluffer’s guide
to management speak, but I don’t think there is. You will have
to incorporate it into your game plan and see the big picture
because at the end of the day there will be a new ball park,
and the best practice of your core business will be a sort of
knock-on effect that will play you out of the loop if you don’t
take your knowledge off-line and start thinking outside the
box. That kind of thinking might just get you in with the
movers and shakers without having to move your goal posts
or go the extra mile while playing hardball and being a show
stopper. So push the envelope, and the bottom line is total
quality.
RULE 95
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 225
TRY NOT TO SOUND OUT 
OF DATE WHEN YOU 
TALK OF MANAGEMENT
TECHNIQUES.
Know the Undercurrents and
Hidden Agendas
RULE 96
226 THE RULES OF WORK
When your boss says he wants to improve customer relations
and you should all go on a course to learn how to smile, don’t
be fooled. It’s nothing to do with smiling at customers. Your
boss is coming up for appraisal time and needs to look good,
needs to appear as if there is some drive, initiative, and motivation.
So you’ll all troop off and do the course and try to take it all in
and practice your smile. What for? Your boss couldn’t give two
monkeys whether you smile at the customers or not. All he
wants is to shine at his appraisal.
This sort of thing goes on a lot more at work than most people
like to think. Once, I volunteered to attend college every
Monday to do a course in payroll and double entry bookkeeping. My boss thought I was keen, self-motivated, and very
enthusiastic. Nonsense. I wanted to get out of the office every
Monday because that was the day we had to do all the filing
and I hated it. Going to college seemed a good cop-out.
Question the motives of everyone and everything. This doesn’t
mean you have to become paranoid. No one is out to get you.
All you need to do is watch out for the hidden agenda. It
might not affect you in any way, but it will be fun to spot what
is really going on.
I once worked for a boss who always liked to be the last to
leave. I thought him conscientious and industrious. It was
only when he had been arrested for fraud that I realized that
staying after everyone else had gone was his opportunity to
fiddle the books. And there was little old me admiring his
keen spirit.
Always ask:
• Why is this happening?
• Is there anything I am missing?
• Who benefits from this?
• How are they benefiting?
• What else could be going on?
• Can I benefit from this?
• How?
As I said, don’t get paranoid; get the facts.
RULE 96
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 227
YOUR BOSS IS COMING UP
FOR APPRAISAL TIME AND
NEEDS TO LOOK GOOD.
Know the Favorites and
Cultivate Them
RULE 97
228 THE RULES OF WORK
Every boss has a favorite. I know they/we shouldn’t, but it is
human nature. It goes on because we/they are all human, 
and even parents have favorites although they would never
admit it.
There are two parts to this rule:
• If favoritism is going on—and it will be—make sure you
are your boss’s favorite
• Make sure you know all the favorites in other 
departments.
If you have got a boss who is going to have favorites, you can
buck the system or try being the favorite. If you do become a
favorite, don’t for heaven’s sake flaunt it among your colleagues. Be self-effacing and deny it, be humble and don’t
acknowledge it, be modest and pretend it ain’t going on.
To get to be a favorite has to depend on skill, presence,
charisma, talent, expertise, experience, likeability, charm, personal affability. It must never depend on brownnosing,
fawning, obsequiousness, or flattery. You have to earn being a
favorite, not worm your way in. If you do, you will be hated
by your colleagues. If you genuinely deserve it because you are
dependable or reliable or efficient or honest, then your 
colleagues will just about put up with it.
Spotting the favorites in other departments should be fairly
easy. They will be treated pretty much as you are. They will
• Get the first pick on the vacation schedule
• Be trusted, a confidante
• Be invited to meetings
• Get the prestigious jobs and the perks
• Be chatted to by the boss rather than being barked at
Once spotted, make a friend of them. This way you will know
what is going on, be in with the in-crowd, have the ear of the
boss of other departments, and have joined an elite. If, on the
other hand, you really disapprove of favoritism, do none of
this.
RULE 97
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 229
YOU HAVE TO EARN BEING
A FAVORITE, NOT WORM
YOUR WAY IN.
Know the Mission Statement—
and Understand It
RULE 98
230 THE RULES OF WORK
In the good old days, a company’s mission statement was
probably: “Make as much money as possible and keep the
shareholders off our back.” Not any more it ain’t. A mission
statement is now much more complex. If you want to make a
success of your employment, you have to know and understand the mission statement—and then milk it for all you are
worth. Quoting the mission statement earns you brownie
points if you make sure it looks as if you are really on the side
of the company. If your boss doesn’t support the mission statement or considers such things as rubbish and not worth
bothering with, then keep quiet about mission statements.
To understand the mission statement is usually quite easy—
Walt Disney’s “To make people happy,” Wal-Mart’s “To give
ordinary folk the chance to buy the same thing as rich
people”—but to really understand it, you have to read all the
small print. For instance, Disney’s is quite simple but there is a
whole lot more because they also have a “value statement”
that covers:
• No cynicism
• Creativity, dreams and imagination
• Nurturing and promulgation of “wholesome American
values”
• Fanatical attention to consistency and detail
• Preservation and control of the Disney “magic”
If you can’t find something here—assuming you work for
Disney—to milk, you aren’t worthy of calling yourself a Rules
Player. Imagine what fun you could have with some of these.
Imagine what power you would wield at meetings just quoting
some of this. Someone suggests an idea you don’t like, you
could just say it isn’t wholesomely American. Brilliant. It’s like
being part of the Spanish Inquisition—our chief weapons are
… Among our many weapons are such diverse …
Some historical mission statements were very grand and could
have safely been milked for all they were worth:
• Ford (early 1900s)—Ford will democratize the 
automobile.
• Sony (early 1950s)—To become the company most
known for changing the worldwide poor-quality image of
Japanese products.
• Boeing (1950)—To become the dominant player in commercial aircraft and bring the world into the jet age.
• Wal-Mart (1990)—To become a $125 billion company by
the year 2000.
RULE 98
KNOW THE SYSTEM—AND MILK IT 231
QUOTING THE MISSION
STATEMENT EARNS YOU
BROWNIE POINTS IF YOU
MAKE SURE IT LOOKS AS IF
YOU ARE REALLY ON THE
SIDE OF THE COMPANY.
This page intentionally left blank 
PART X
HANDLE
THE
OPPOSITION
This page intentionally left blank 
If there’s a promotion going and five possible candidates, how
do you identify them? And then how do you make yourself
the obvious choice? Here’s how you identify the competition—your competition. And then make yourself the favorite
without being ruthless or underhand. In fact, if you practice
these Rules really well, you will get them to recommend you,
and want you to be promoted ahead of them.
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 235
RULE 99
236 THE RULES OF WORK
So, there is a chance for promotion. You want it. You want that
next step up. This promotion fits in with your long-term plan.
This is the ideal time and opportunity for you to make that
step. Trouble is you aren’t alone in the running. There are
other people to take into account—and eliminate, of course.
Obviously, for any appointment there are two categories of
candidates:
• The internal candidate
• The external candidate
The internal ones are your immediate colleagues, staff from
other departments, staff from other branches, staff from other
disciplines. If it’s your immediate colleagues, chances are you
know full well who is interested and who isn’t. Staff from
other departments should be identified by checking your
sources—you should have the ear of every favorite in every
department (see Rule 97). Staff from other branches present a
bit of a challenge, but you should use your contacts for such
information (Rule 52). Candidates from other disciplines
within the same organization are the real test. Often you won’t
know about them until they suddenly appear at the interview
stage. When I worked for American Express way back in the
early 1970s, I was in line for a promotion to department
supervisor. I had eliminated all the potential competition from
among my own colleagues, checked out the opposition from
other departments and branches—there wasn’t any—and felt
secure and relaxed when, hey presto, a new candidate
appeared from a completely separate but parallel discipline. I
was accounts and this person was from security. Security, I ask
Identify the Opposition
you; what did this person know about accounts supervision?
The senior management obviously thought he knew a great
deal because he got the job. I hadn’t had the chance to disable
him. I was taken unawares. Never again.
Candidates from outside the company are very tricky. You
have no idea who will apply. But you can
• See the advert before it goes to press and have a pretty
good idea of what is being asked for
• Use contacts to find out who is on the shortlist from outside
• Again use contacts to find out who is being called for
interview and what sort of competition you are up against
Remember that knowledge is power. You may not like what
you find out, but at least you will know.
RULE 99
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 237
USE CONTACTS TO FIND
OUT WHO IS BEING 
CALLED FOR INTERVIEW
AND WHAT SORT OF
COMPETITION YOU ARE UP
AGAINST.
Study Them Closely
RULE 100
238 THE RULES OF WORK
If you are going for a promotion and there is competition, you
need to read, understand, and completely grasp what is being
asked for. You need to tailor your resume, application document, and interview technique so that you fully fit the picture
of the ideal candidate. And you have to study what the competition is doing. Suppose the job is for a supervisory
departmental head of the computer sales division. You know
that you have
• Experience of sales
• Experience of computers
• But little experience of supervising other staff
Now check out the opposition. Suppose there are two other 
candidates:
• Tony has a good working knowledge of the products and
good supervisory experience but knows nothing about
sales.
• Sandra is good on the sales side and has excellent supervisory experience but doesn’t understand the product at
all.
Who is the ideal candidate? It depends entirely on what the
management is looking for—or what they think they are looking for. The job obviously needs three parts—sales, product
knowledge and supervisory duties. You have two out of
three—as do the other two candidates. But which one is the
most important to the management? You need to check this
out carefully:
• Read the job description
• Liaise with whoever is doing the job now
• Research what the management is thinking
If the focus is on one of the two areas you are strong in, then
you have already eliminated one of the candidates. Now it’s a
two-horse race. If, however, the third option is the focus—
supervision—the one area you are weak in, then you will have
to swing the focus more toward your own skills and experience. At interview you will have to find good reasons why
your lack of experience doesn’t discount you—talk up the
product and how essential it is to have a good knowledge of it
and its potential, talk up the importance of sales and how the
department lives or dies by its sales record.
Obviously, this is just an example; the real world is much
more complicated.
RULE 100
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 239
WHO IS THE 
IDEAL CANDIDATE? 
IT DEPENDS ENTIRELY ON
WHAT THE MANAGEMENT
IS LOOKING FOR.
Don’t Back-Stab
RULE 101
240 THE RULES OF WORK
The one thing you won’t do in your race to the top is backstab. You will not take out the opposition by unlawful means.
It is OK to talk up your own talents and skills and to cleverly
influence what management is looking for by highlighting
your own expertise and the implied failings of your competition. You can imply, suggest, and insinuate. What you cannot
do is state openly and honestly why you think they are useless. You make out that they are not up to the promotion by
getting the management to focus on how good you are, not by
pointing out how bad they are.
The things you do not do are
• Bad-mouth the opposition
• Back-stab the competition
• Speak ill of anyone
• Tell lies about the other contestants (see Rule 48)
• Reveal secret information about the competition that you
have found out that could affect their chances
• Steal information
• Peek, pry, or spy
These are what you must not do. But what can you do then?
Well, you can
• Use any contacts you have to find out the calibre of the
competition
• Enhance your own attributes creatively based on what the
management is looking for
• Talk up your own good points, highlighting special skills
and expertise you have that they are lacking—you don’t
say they haven’t got what it takes; you make sure the
management knows that you do
• Sell management something they may not have even
known they wanted, which the opposition hasn’t got
RULE 101
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 241
THE ONE THING YOU
WON’T DO IN YOUR RACE
TO THE TOP IS BACK-STAB.
Know the Psychology of
Promotion
RULE 102
242 THE RULES OF WORK
Suppose a vacancy has arisen internally. You quite fancy the
job, it fits in with your game plan, and you could do with the
extra money. You have the expertise, the experience, and the
qualifications. You think you will apply for the post. All well
and good. But what is being decided here? And what are the
criteria being used?
You think job X is vacant; therefore, person Y will fill the post
just so long as she has the right attributes. But what are the
right attributes? Oh, I know you’ll say
• Experience
• Qualifications 
• Expertise
Just like you’ve got, and that’s why you are a perfect candidate.
Not quite true, I’m afraid. There is usually a whole lot more
going on than you know. For instance, the post may be being
advertised because
• Head office says it has to be but your management has no
intention of filling it.
• Your manager has already unofficially filled it—it’s been
offered to someone already in secret.
• The job is being downsized; it will go to someone who
will be made redundant in six months’ time,
• The whole exercise is a waste of time. The person already
doing the job has resigned but he is going to withdraw
that at the last minute—he’s just holding out for more
money at the moment.
• It’s an exercise in getting rid of someone; they’ll offer it to
someone completely unsuitable so they have grounds to
sack the person, which they can’t do in their current 
position
• The job is being created so the manager can give it to
their favorite/lover/friend/relative/blackmailer.
I don’t want to make you paranoid, but there are a million and
one reasons why you may not get the job despite being, on
paper, the best person for it. There may also be a million reasons why you shouldn’t apply. You have to know all this.
Study the psychology of whatever is being offered. It may not
be quite what it seems.
RULE 102
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 243
STUDY THE PSYCHOLOGY
OF WHATEVER IS BEING
OFFERED. IT MAY NOT BE
QUITE WHAT IT SEEMS.
Don’t Give Too Much Away
RULE 103
244 THE RULES OF WORK
It is probably advisable not to tell anyone that you
• Intend on applying for a new position within the company
• Intend on applying for a new job outside of the company
• Are thinking of leaving anyway
• Are thinking of asking for a pay rise
• Are thinking of changing your working schedules
• Are a Rules Player
Don’t blab to anyone of anything you are doing. It might be
seen as bragging—a Rules Player never brags about anything,
we are quiet humility itself—or it might give rise to gossip,
and we know the Rule about that, don’t we? And the truth is
that even if you only tell one person things leak out. She tells
her closest friend and he tells his. And so on it goes until you
are being hauled before the boss and interrogated as to why
you are leaving next Monday when all you had done was say
you were thinking about it to Susan in the break room. If you
do reveal stuff about yourself, you are open to
• Rumor, gossip, and an opportunity for others to possibly
use it against you
• Giving the opposition an unfair advantage
• Giving the management information they shouldn’t be
privy to at this stage
Don’t even allow yourself the privilege of thinking out loud.
Keep your own counsel, and you won’t go far wrong. What
you intend doing is entirely up to you. If you need information and anyone asks you why you need it, invent something
entirely bogus. No, this is not lying; it is throwing someone off
the scent. Don’t lie, but you can be circumspect, devious,
inventive, creative, eccentric, and you are allowed to set up a
decoy.
If someone asks you directly if you are thinking about applying for a particular position, you can always brush it off, “Oh,
always thinking about applying.” Does this mean yes or no?
Remember: don’t lie and say, “No,” when it is plainly untrue
and will be seen to be such when you do apply. 
RULE 103
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 245
KEEP YOUR OWN COUNSEL,
AND YOU WON’T GO 
FAR WRONG.
Keep Your Ear to the Ground
RULE 104
246 THE RULES OF WORK
If you don’t know what is going on, how can you make
informed decisions or coordinate your career plan? It might be
as simple as someone applying for a position you had in mind.
If that person is more experienced, better qualified, and has
more expertise and skill in that area, then you might be sensible holding back. If you don’t you will probably fail—and a
Rules Player is always successful.
Now you don’t want gossip; you want hard facts. You want to
know what is going on without having to listen to gossip and
idle chit-chat. Therefore, it makes sense to
• Use your contacts for information from other 
departments
• Pay attention at meetings—it is often surprising how
much information you can pick up by reading between
the lines
• Watch and listen for the “hidden agendas”—what people
are saying might mask what is really going on
• Cultivate the office favorite/s and you’ll find that they
invariably know stuff mere mortals aren’t privy to—you’ll
just have to get them to spill the beans
• Keep abreast of things like the trade press as you may
pick up bits of information that have been “leaked” to the
press before the rank and file have been told—that new
merger, the takeover, the acquisition of a rival company,
all these can be useful snippets of information that can
put you one step ahead of colleagues and competitors
A lot of people don’t get anywhere with their job because they
spend far too much time doing their job. You need to get your
head up from time to time and look around you. You might
find the herd has moved on while you were busy feeding and
now you are alone and forgotten. 
RULE 104
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 247
YOU NEED TO GET YOUR
HEAD UP FROM TIME TO
TIME AND LOOK 
AROUND YOU.
Make the Opposition Seem
Irreplaceable
RULE 105
248 THE RULES OF WORK
We have looked at why you can’t indulge in any backstabbing—Rule 101: Don’t Back-Stab—and you know you can’t
say anything bad about anyone, but all the same, one of the
competition is getting in a bit too close with the boss and it
looks like that promotion might just go their way. What do
you do? You make them seem irreplaceable, of course. But you
do it by pointing out all the important but mundane jobs they
do. You point out their strengths to your boss in the boring,
humdrum areas. “God, I don’t know what we’d do without
Rachael to do the filing. She must be a Virgo—she’s so good at
that sort of stuff.” But you are only going to point out things
that your rival is genuinely good at. We are not going to lie—
Rule 48: Never Lie—but merely praise the competition for a
particular skill. And a skill that they can best exercise right
where they are.
Your boss is your customer—you sell your services to them.
Your colleagues are the competition. If you were selling cars
and someone asked if the next garage sold better cars, what
would you say? You wouldn’t say, “Yes, they sell much better
cars than us—and cheaper; in fact you ought to go straight
there and buy one of theirs right now.” But you also wouldn’t
say anything bad—“Their cars are all stolen”—though you
might well say, “Their cars are fine but they appeal to a different customer; they sell more family saloons than we do.” You
haven’t lied. You have indirectly flattered your customer—the
implication being, “You obviously need a much more upmarket executive car than those shoddy little boxes they sell
next door”—but you haven’t said anything bad. 
You can also get your rival colleague to ask questions of themselves about the new position: “If you did get Richard’s job,
how do you think you’d cope with all those meetings? I
remember your telling me you hated meetings.” Hopefully
she’ll think about all those dreary interminable, intimidating
meetings and may well back off. You, on the other hand, find
them stimulating, exciting, and very productive—and you
haven’t said anything bad, merely asked a simple question.
You’ll get them to want to stay right where they are—they’ll
make themselves irreplaceable.
RULE 105
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 249
YOUR BOSS IS YOUR
CUSTOMER. YOUR
COLLEAGUES ARE THE
COMPETITION.
Don’t Damn the Opposition with
Faint Praise
RULE 106
250 THE RULES OF WORK
The last Rule may have seemed as if we were approaching
something underhand or devious or ruthless. It isn’t.
Everything has to be meant, genuine, and honest. Don’t praise
them. Not unless you really mean it. It is so easy to undermine
someone by using praise when you are actually being rather
horrid and stitching them up. You may think this a clever
approach. It isn’t. You will be seen through immediately and
come across as shallow, vindictive, and really rather ruthless.
Remember: If you can’t say anything nice—shut up? Well, you
may think that you can get away with saying nasty things, disguised as nice things, but you can’t. This is the sort of thing
that is forbidden:
• “Oh, I know Bill is brilliantly wacky. He is such an independent thinker. He really does operate outside of the
box; he’s so original and off the wall.” 
What you’re really saying: he’s a lone wolf who is slightly mad
and shouldn’t be trusted supervising a chimps’ coffe break let
alone an entire department:
• “Bill is such a determined worker. He doesn’t care how
much it costs; he goes for the last detail of a job. Superb
resolution. He likes to see things through to the very end,
no matter what. I admire his ability to just see not just the
dollar signs on a project but the application.” 
What you’re really saying: he should never be trusted with his
own money, let alone someone else’s:
• “Bill really is one of the guys. He really knows how to let
his hair down and have fun. I admire his ability to hold
his liquor. If there’s a wacky stunt going on, Bill is always
in the thick of it; he is such a free spirit and so youth orientated.”
What you’re really saying: he’s a drunk, a bit wild, not to be
trusted looking after staff,s and he has the mental age of a
teenager:
• “We can’t keep Bill in the office. He’s such a live wire. I
don’t think our little cage is big enough for someone with
that much energy. I envy him. I sit here doing the paperwork while he’s off, out there talking to customers and
liaising and being brilliant at sales.” 
What you’re really saying: Bill is crap at paperwork. Don’t get
into this trap. Your seniors will see through it, and if they are
decent people they aren’t going to like it.
RULE 106
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 251
WELL, YOU MAY THINK
THAT YOU CAN GET AWAY
WITH SAYING NASTY
THINGS, DISGUISED 
AS NICE THINGS, BUT 
YOU CAN’T.
Capitalize on the 
Career-Enhancing Moments
RULE 107
252 THE RULES OF WORK
Every now and then there is a break from the routine, the
humdrum, the everyday. These moments of intense activity or
public limelight are your moments to enhance your career.
They can be
• The initial selection interview
• Your first day
• Running a presentation
• Running an exhibition
• Chairing an important meeting
• Being put in charge of staff training
• Handling a crisis
• Negotiating with the unions
• Attending a health and safety committee meeting
• Being a first aider
• Organizing the staff function
• Being responsible for the visit of a dignitary, celebrity, or
royalty
• Editing the newsletter
• Dealing with the media
• Supervising the office relocation
A lot of people, when first presented with such an option, will
be filled with dismay and horror. “Oh, no,” they cry, “Not running the exhibition stand at the NEC this year. Why me? Oh
Lord, why me?”
You, on the other hand, know this rule—this is a careerenhancing moment and you had better take the opportunity to
shine. There are no bad jobs, only bad attitudes to jobs.
Always look for ways of making such jobs better, more interesting, slicker, and quicker, and realize that they are providing
you with the means to shine.
RULE 107
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 253
THERE ARE NO BAD JOBS,
ONLY BAD ATTITUDES 
TO JOBS.
Cultivate the Friendship and
Approval of Your Colleagues
RULE 108
254 THE RULES OF WORK
If you follow all the rules outlined in this book, you will be a
thoroughly nice person, likeable, confident, agreeable, and
assured. You will be grown up but still a lot of fun to be
around. You need the support of your fellow coworkers to
move up, and you need their friendship and approval. If you
don’t have these things, you open yourself up to the possibility
of being set up, pulled down, dumped upon, or seen off. But
how do you cultivate their friendship and approval when you
are doing everything to get promoted above them, to be their
boss?
What you have to do is be one of the girls/guys while retaining
a modicum of detachment. You have to run with the sheep
and hunt with the wolves. You have to be “one of them” and
one of the bosses.
You’ll need to socialize with the staff without losing control,
getting drunk, sleeping with any of them, or getting involved.
Laugh at their jokes, but don’t go on vacation with them.
Listen to their troubles, but don’t tell them they are trivial or
inconsequential. Support them and nurture them when they
are under pressure, but remain calm at all times yourself. You
have to become their mother hen at the same time as their
friend and fellow conspirator. You have to listen to their complaints and moans about management and the boss without
revealing who you really are—their eventual new boss.
You have to help them with their work so they get to rely on
you. You have to be the diplomat, the conciliator, the referee,
the pal, and the priest. You have to get them to love you
because you are so nice, so friendly yourself. 
You have to be their tower of strength and their prop and their
chum. You have to make them feel special, feel that without
you their lives are gray and dull and boring. You have to be
the life and soul of the party and the party organizer and the
one who clears up afterward.
All this is possible—not easy but possible. If you get on the
right side of your colleagues to such an extent, it will be they
who push you forward, they whot want you to be their boss,
demand of you that you lead. You will be the Rules Player par
excellence.
RULE 108
HANDLE THE OPPOSITION 255
LAUGH AT THEIR JOKES,
BUT DON’T GO ON
VACATION WITH THEM.
256 THE RULES OF WORK
Know When to Break the Rules
POSTSCRIPT
Many excellent and committed Rules Players I meet start out
following every Rule. When you’re first setting out, this is a
sensible approach. After all, the alternative is complacency
and an assurance that “I can do this stuff,” which certainly
isn’t true. None of us finds every situation effortless. It may be
clear what we should do, but that doesn’t always mean it’s
easy. And sometimes we’re not sure which way to go.
So, by all means start out taking each Rule seriously. That’s the
general idea. However, as you become more comfortable and
self-assured as a Rules Player and begin to develop sound
instincts for Rules behavior, you can begin to loosen up. Many
of the Rules will become automatic, and you’ll no longer have
to think about them. And once you reach this stage, you’ll find
that occasionally one of the Rules really isn’t quite appropriate.
It’s no good persuading yourself a Rule doesn’t fit because
you’d much rather not have to follow it. You need to be clear
and objective. But when your instincts genuninely tell you to
break a Rule, then go for it.
Personally, I find that there’s rarely a need to break a Rule. I do
break Rules occasionally. For example, a Rules Player never
deliberately belittles other people in public, but about twice in
my life I’ve encountered people who really needed to be belittled in public to stop them from doing it to others.
In the end it’s about gut feeling. Follow the Rules until they’re
so ingrained they become instinct, and then trust your
instincts. If you refer back to the Rules from time to time, and
you work on the ones you find tricky, you can be confident
that in time your instincts will serve you better than any book