Author Preface
You Are Perishable—Eat Accordingly
When my oldest child, Max, was six years old he was misdiagnosed with scarlet fever
and almost lost his life. By day three of the prescribed antibiotics his lungs were filled
with fluid, he couldn’t lift his body off the bathroom floor, and his fingers and toes were
turning blue. I called 911 and the local fire department arrived moments later to pump
his body with epinephrine and rush him to the closest emergency room. He spent the
rest of the week at the hospital where he received more antibiotics, but a diagnosis was
never reached. He was tested for various possible irritants and allergies but the doctors
couldn’t find a cause.
Over the next several years Max had a series of infections, more antibiotics, and in
2005 he was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease. He was cared for by well-respected
doctors in our community, and we were told there wasn’t a cure or reliable treatment for
Crohn’s. We would have to experiment to see which pharmaceutical options best
controlled the symptoms and go from there. Around this time someone told me that the
Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) might help my son with his Crohn’s disease, yet not
a single doctor mentioned a diet. In fact there was no mention of diet in the medical
literature I received, and I couldn’t find one on the official Crohn’s and IBD
(inflammatory bowel disease) websites.
Fast-forward six years. A lot has changed since I first heard about SCD. Our society is
now closely scrutinizing where our food comes from and what’s in it. There is a
proliferation of diets that exclude processed foods, grains, dairy, and sugar, or variations
on this theme. We are taking matters into our own hands: growing food ourselves,
buying only from trusted sources, and finding joy in cooking at home. We also know
that no single lifestyle, diet, or food pyramid fits all people. No two people are
genetically the same, so it makes perfect sense that each person should eat food that
works well for his or her body.
As my family began to change the way we ate, my son’s health—and my family’s
health—improved. At the suggestion of a coworker I started a website, comfybelly.com,
to track and share my recipes. My hope was that others would enjoy them and find out
about SCD, and that I would learn in the process. I got all that and more. I’m so grateful
that I found SCD and discovered so many other food blogs and books on SCD. But
most of all, I’m grateful for Elaine Gottschall’s landmark book Breaking the Vicious
Cycle, as well as her efforts to research and publish her findings, and to reach out to so
many.
The following pages are filled with new delicious recipes that work well for SCD, and
I’ve also included some of the much-loved recipes from the Comfy Belly website. I
hope that you can find pleasure in eating and change your life for the better, just as I
and so many others have. Let food be thy medicine, or at least help the cause.
Eat well, be well,
Erica
About the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet
This cookbook is filled with recipes that are grain-free, sugar-free, and gluten-free;
many are dairy-free or can be made as such. The reason will be clear once you
read about SCD.
A Quick History of the Specific Carbohydrate Diet
(SCD)
There are so many ways to eat, ideas about eating, and reasons why people choose
certain foods. The Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) came from the need to heal
patients who had digestive disorders and to improve digestive health.
SCD originated from a diet specifically developed by a New York physician, Dr. Sidney
Haas, for his patients suffering from celiac disease. Celiac disease is an immune
response to foods that contain gluten, found in many grains including wheat, barley, and
rye. The disease has been documented as far back as the second century (by a Greek
physician named Aretaeus of Cappadocia). Since that time, doctors have made strides to
identify it and prescribe relief.
In 1955, the young daughter of Elaine Gottschall was suffering from ulcerative colitis.
Elaine took a leap of faith and followed Dr. Haas’s prescribed diet for her daughter. The
diet healed her. Elaine went back to school to earn a master’s degree in nutritional
biochemistry and then shared what she’d learned in a book titled Food and the Gut
Reaction—now known as Breaking the Vicious Cycle: Intestinal Health Through Diet.
Elaine’s book explains the science behind SCD, so I recommend reading it to gain a full
understanding of how and why this diet can work. Since the book was originally
published, SCD has been used to help adults and children who have Crohn’s disease,
ulcerative colitis, celiac disease, cystic fibrosis, diverticulitis, IBS (irritable bowel
syndrome), gluten and other food intolerances, and a myriad of other health issues.
Elaine passed away in September 2005, but SCD continues to be used successfully, and
her book has sold millions of copies.
A Bit of SCD Science
SCD guides you to eat certain kinds of carbohydrates and other foods that aid digestion
and healing. The goal is to repair the injured intestinal lining, achieve a healthy balance
of intestinal bacteria, improve absorption of nutrients from food, and quiet the immune
system’s infammatory response that occurs with many digestive issues and diseases.
You’ll notice the word “specific” in the name Specific Carbohydrate Diet. This is
because you don’t eliminate all carbohydrates, just the ones that are complex and
difficult to digest. Simple carbohydrates, or monosaccharides, are the most basic form
of a sugar and don’t require digestive splitting (enzymatic digestion) in order to be
absorbed into the bloodstream through the intestinal lining. Examples of foods that have
monosaccharides are honey, fruit juice, and certain vegetables.
More complex carbohydrates—disaccharides and polysaccharides—require splitting in
order to be absorbed. Disaccharides include lactose (found in cheese and milk),
processed sugar (such as cane sugar), and corn syrup. Examples of foods that contain
polysaccharides include rice, sweet potatoes, grains, and some vegetables.
Fiber is another beneficial component of many foods. Fiber, along with adequate
amounts of water, allows food to move quickly and easily through your digestive
system, sweeping and cleaning up as it goes. Fiber from fruits, nuts, and certain
vegetables can be eaten when following SCD, but not the fiber from grains.
Keeping a Comfy Belly
In general, raw vegetables and fruits are tough on a damaged gut. If you have
diarrhea, avoid an abundance of honey, almond flour, raw fruits and vegetables,
orange juice, and other acidic foods. Along with broths, steamed veggies, scrambled
eggs, and other nourishing cooked foods, these things can help sooth an aching
belly:
drinking mint tea
massaging your belly and intestinal area
taking a warm shower or bath
What Can I Eat?
While many diets prepare you for restrictions, SCD is nutritionally rich, delicious, and
balanced, so you will likely feel grateful rather than deprived. It just takes some
commitment and patience. You may feel some of the effects of this dietary change
instantly, while others may be felt over a period of time, sometimes years. It’s possible
that SCD may not work for you and you’ll need to consider that as well. Or you may
need to customize SCD for your body. An elimination diet can help isolate foods that
are working or not.
It’s important to adhere to SCD guidelines for an extended period of time (two or more
years), or indefinitely, depending on how you’re doing and feeling. You’ll also want to
figure out which foods you don’t like or can’t tolerate, despite their being acceptable for
SCD. Get to know your own body and what foods work for you, regardless of what
SCD allows you to eat. For example, some people might find they do better when not
eating nightshades, such as eggplant and tomatoes, while for others it will be dairybased food.
Also consider the top eight allergens: milk, eggs, tree nuts, peanuts, fish, shellfish, soy,
and wheat. You’ll know right away if you are allergic to a food, because you’ll have an
immediate reaction, such as a rash or hives, trouble breathing, swelling, or other
extreme symptoms that may even threaten your life. If you don’t have an allergy to a
food, you may have an intolerance, which means that over time your body shows signs
such as reduced energy, reduced breathing capacity, nutritional issues, and unexplained
aches and pains. It’s important to identify which foods aren’t working for you. The
easiest way to figure this out on your own is to eliminate a suspect food for a few weeks
and see if you feel better.
Yogurt and Probiotics
Probiotics are a type of good bacteria that aid in digestion and help maintain a healthy
digestive tract. By eating foods that contain probiotics and taking formulated probiotics,
you can “rebalance” out a build-up of bad bacteria that cause health problems. And it’s
a good idea to have probiotics whenever you’re on prescription antibiotics, to
counteract the loss of good bacteria along with the bad.
Yogurt and fermented foods will give you a good dose of probiotics, and you can get a
wider variety of bacteria by supplementing your diet with a probiotic containing more
strains of gut-enhancing bacteria. (see Product Sources, page 161) to find out where you
can purchase SCD-compatible probiotics.
Eating Lactose-Free
Lactose is the sugar found in dairy products such as milk, cheese, and yogurt. Because
lactose is a complex sugar, it’s more difficult than simple sugars to digest when you
have an injured digestive system.
In general when following SCD, you can eat cheeses that have low amounts of lactose,
such as Parmesan, Cheddar, and Brie. I’ve found that it’s a good idea to remove cheese
and other dairy products from your diet when you’re not feeling well, or at least remove
any cheese that doesn’t work well for you. For dairy-free milk and cream substitutions,
see Basic Recipes (page 17).
Travel and Restaurant Tips
It can be challenging to find food that you can trust when you’re out and about, whether
it’s in your own neighborhood or another country. I research restaurants and markets
before I arrive in another location. Make a list of places, have back-ups, and print out
maps, phone numbers, and hours of operation, and try to have a kitchen where you’re
staying.
When traveling by car for long distances, I find it helpful to carry a cooler for
preserving food. Dried foods are also handy to have around. I’m also big on lists—lists
of what you need to pack, food, and supplemental stuff you need to bring.
For air travel, don’t rely on airplane food. Bring your own snacks and a bottle to fill
with water. For food you’ll eat over the course of a day, slip a portable dry ice pack into
a soft cooler. You can also freeze some food and slip that into your goodie bag to let it
defrost over travel time.
Carry water, or a water bottle that you can fill up (see Product Sources, page 161).
When going to a restaurant, order or bring these foods:
Foods that don’t have additives (ask the waiter or manager to check on ingredients)
Your own dressings (or request salt, butter, or oil to add your own seasonings)
Steamed food without sauces, or food prepared with nothing other than salt, butter,
or oil
Simple roasted or grilled foods with only salt, butter, or oil added
School and College Tips
It was our first doctor who tipped us off to putting a plan in place at school to protect
my son in case of severe illness and to ensure that he had daily support. The doctor
wrote a letter explaining my son’s condition and requirements and the challenges he
might face.
In middle and high school, my son had a plan the school signed off on, called a 504,
that allowed him access to a bathroom, food, and water at any time. The plan also made
it clear that he might miss blocks of school due to illness beyond his control, and that he
was to receive extended time to complete assignments when he was ill. We were lucky
that the staff and teachers were accommodating, but it was good to have this plan in
place just in case.
As of this writing, my son is in college, and he works through the disability office to
arrange accommodations. While there’s much less hand-holding at the college level,
there are still plans in place to protect him in case of possible breaks in attendance.
The food part of living is a bit more challenging for students following SCD or any
other restrictive diet. Here are some things to explore to keep your food supply up while
you’re away at school.
You can use a rice steamer for a variety of purposes, including steaming meat,
vegetables, fruit, reheating, and defrosting food.
Rent or buy your own refrigerator, microwave, blender, and any other cooking
appliances allowed in your dorm room, apartment, or house.
Get to know the folks who work in your local dining halls, restaurants, and food
service areas, and ask about SCD-safe foods. See if you can preorder foods in your
name.
Find places to buy SCD-safe food and stores that carry brands you trust. Look into
ordering food online to be delivered to your dorm room, apartment, or house.
Tips for Athletes
Athletes sometimes work themselves quite hard and try to avoid missing a workout or
competition because of injury or illness. If you’ve watched a professional sporting
event, I’m sure you’ve noticed an athlete getting patched up in order to get back into the
game.
Sometimes, though, you just have to let it go. Slow down or take a break for a few days
to give your body time to recover. If you’re experiencing any discomfort or are in any
way feeling less than 100 percent, any kind of athletic activity will have a greater
impact on your health because your body is spending a large amount of energy just
managing inflammation.
When you’re working hard and have symptoms, you may be weaker, tire more easily,
and not perform as you normally would. To counteract this, it’s vitally important that
you pay extra attention to your fluid and food intake. Take extra precautions, including
drinking and eating a bit more than normal. Eating frequent, small meals (at least five a
day) will help keep up your energy and stamina as well as ease the digestion process.
That said, exercise is still quite important for keeping you as healthy as possible. When
you’re experiencing any symptoms, moderation is the key. A brisk walk may be all
you’re up for, and that’s okay. The goal is to get your body moving, even if it’s just for a
short time.
If you’re a competitive athlete, you may want to have a physical to determine if you
have any vitamin or mineral deficiencies. Common deficiencies associated with
digestive diseases include vitamins B6 and B12, vitamin D, and magnesium. Depending
on your health care provider and the urgency of your deficiency, oral supplements or IV
fluid therapy may be suggested in addition to adjusting your diet. Keep in mind that if
you’re on anti-inflammatory or other drug therapy, some drugs can deplete your body of
vitamins and nutrients, so find out what supplements you may need to counteract this.
The dosage will probably depend on your weight and the therapy, so check with your
health care provider to confirm what supplements are necessary or will complement
your therapy and nutrition.
Carbohydrate Intake
Whether you’re a recreational or professional athlete, you probably know the
importance of fluid and food intake in preparing for any athletic endeavor. Before,
during, and after any high-exertion activity, you’ll want to consume adequate fluids and
follow a balanced diet. For competitive athletes, a high-performance diet will consist of
mostly carbohydrates, a moderate amount of protein, and a smaller amount of fat.
You may be somewhat concerned about how SCD fits in with your athletic life,
especially if your source of energy before changing your diet was complex
carbohydrates such as potatoes and pasta. You’ll just be changing your sources of
carbohydrates, not reducing your intake of carbohydrates. When following SCD, the
carbohydrates are mostly simple sugars such as those in fruits, vegetables, nuts, honey,
yogurt, and cheese.
It’s important to eat foods in combination to keep your body from absorbing
carbohydrates too quickly. Adding protein and a small amount of fat to a meal prevents
the carbohydrates from being absorbed too fast. You want to prevent that feeling of high
and low sugar levels in your bloodstream. You’ll experience steady energy levels during
times of exertion from a balance of carbohydrates, protein, and fat. You may find that
your body uses the foods you eat more efficiently, since they stay around longer—
especially proteins and fats.
A steady stream of carbohydrates, plus protein, is essential to maintaining healthy blood
glucose levels. Eat before, during, and after any exercise that lasts more than an hour in
order to maintain your energy level. It’s also important to replenish your body with
carbohydrates and fluids within an hour of heavy exertion so that your body can begin
replenishing electrolytes and glucose, repair tissues, and rebalance fluids.
Workout Food List
The following foods will help you get enough carbohydrates, protein, fat, and fluids to
perform your best. It’s easiest to eat in small spurts so as not to overwhelm your
digestive system. Small bites throughout the day work well. And don’t forget water
(filtered is best).
Pickles and pickled salads—excellent sources of electrolytes
Fresh fruits such as bananas, apples, berries, oranges, pears
Applesauce, pear sauce, cheese sticks, crackers (page 51), granola (page 138), and
even ketchup (page 71) to give you quick energy for recovery
Breakfast Cookies (page 148), quick breads, and fruit and nut bars
Steamed vegetables in Classic Marinara Sauce (page 72) or salad dressing, veggiebased soups, and salted broth
Frittatas, egg scrambles with veggies, pesto, or fruit (apple-egg scrambles are my
favorite)
Sports drinks (page 41) with small amounts of salt plus fruit or honey, or both
Lightly salted vegetable juices, gazpacho (page 60), or smoothies with a bit of salt
added
Fruit in yogurt (page 28) or fruit and cheese sandwiches, such as Apple Cheddar
Panini (page 82); cheese; and pickles
High-Performance Tips
I’ve been an athlete all my life, and while I don’t have autoimmune or digestive issues,
just a quick walk with the dog helps me feel better and recover faster when I’ve been
sick. Walking gets your entire body working, including your digestive system.
If you’re an athlete on a special diet such as SCD, here are some things to keep in mind.
This list is good for all athletes, but I have a special affinity for athletes persevering in
the face of challenging conditions. I’ve helped my son keep playing sports in some of
the most challenging conditions, and as a result he has learned how to care for himself,
both physically and mentally.
Always get enough rest, and sleep on a regular schedule.
Moderate how much exercise you do on a daily basis according to your health at
the moment.
Eat enough carbohydrates, protein, and fat in combination to avoid low blood
glucose.
Drink, drink, drink—electrolytes, juice, water, soups, broths.
Try to eat small meals or snacks every couple of hours or so.
Carry extra snacks to eat before, during, and after any athletic endeavor.
Eat within 60 minutes of any high-exertion activity.
Have fun, and don’t be too hard on yourself! You’re working extra hard to stay
healthy, and that’s no small feat.
Kitchen and Pantry
Here’s a snapshot of kitchen tools and food I keep on hand. Some are essential and
others are just nice to have. If you haven’t invested in many kitchen tools yet, it’s okay
to start slow and figure out what you really need and go from there. The same goes for
spices, herbs, and fresh and dry food staples. As you adjust to this eating style you’ll be
able to better determine what’s essential to have in your kitchen and pantry.
Kitchen Tools
Building an inventory of essential kitchen tools takes time, and you can improvise using
just a few simple kitchen tools and utensils. But I have to admit that since I purchased a
food processor and high-speed blender, my cooking and eating choices have expanded
exponentially.
Baking has been a lifelong passion for me, and for years I used an inexpensive hand
mixer. Then one day my husband came home with a shiny red KitchenAid stand mixer
left by a client. He had no idea what it was used for, but several folks at work were
eagerly willing to take it off his hands, so he figured it must be good. Since then, I can
honestly say my life has changed. If you enjoy baking and do it often, put a stand mixer
on your wish list.
My favorite kitchen tools and baking supplies include:
Food processor
High-speed blender
Stand mixer
Slow cooker
Saucepans
Skillet
Baking/cookie sheets
Baking pans
Paring knife, carving knife
Vegetable peeler
Cutting board
Tongs
Whisk
Spatula
Wooden stirring spoons
Glass storage containers/Mason jars
Parchment paper, nonstick silicone baking mats, muffin liners (see Product
Sources, page 161)
Nut milk bag (see Product Sources, page 161)
Dehydrator (dries food in a range of temperature settings)
Colander and fine-mesh strainer
Measuring cups and spoons
Snapshot of My Pantry
It came to the point that I needed two refrigerators for my family of four (and a dog that
eats some bones and turkey necks), but your needs may vary. If it’s just you and maybe
another person, a single refrigerator is probably enough, with possibly a backup freezer
so you can benefit from buying flours and other staples in bulk.
I shop a few times a week because I prefer fresh ingredients. If you don’t get a thrill out
of shopping or don’t have the time, there are many fresh food delivery options online.
Fresh ingredients are always going to contain more nutrients than those that have been
refrigerated or frozen a while, especially vegetables and fruits. Purchasing organically
and locally grown food in season is another way to optimize the nutrients you’re getting
from your food. That said, frozen foods retain more nutrients than canned, so I’m also a
big fan of freezing foods for later use.
Here’s a snapshot of my pantry at any given day:
Room temperature/kitchen counter:
Ghee
Olive oil
Tomatoes
Bananas
Oranges, apples, pears
Squash (acorn, spaghetti, butternut)
Almond flour, coconut flour (when being used frequently; sealed)
Ginger
Garlic (in an airy closed container)
Iodized sea salt, course sea salt
Honey
Breads, muffins that will be eaten soon
Room temperature/pantry, cabinets (cool, dark places):
Red and yellow onions
Dried herbs and spices
Red and green lentils
Cans of crushed tomatoes, tomato paste
Unopened canned chutneys, jams, syrups, sauces
Dried fruit
Vanilla beans, seeds, nuts (or sealed in the refrigerator if not being used frequently)
Olive oil, avocado oil, toasted sesame oil
Coconut oil
High-heat oils, including coconut oil, ghee, high-heat sunflower oil
Vinegars
Refrigerator:
Eggs
Butter
Cheese
Yogurt
Nut milk
Juice
Dates
Berries (seasonal)
Bell peppers, cucumbers, zucchini, kale, chard, fresh herbs, lettuce, carrots, green
onions
Opened jams, sauces, dips, pesto
Breads, muffins
Almond flour, coconut flour, and other flours that I won’t go through quickly;
sealed
Nuts and seeds that I’m not using frequently
Freezer:
Juices
Jams
Broth
Tomato sauce
Frozen herbs and pesto
Vegetables and fruits (cut/trimmed and sealed but not washed before freezing, or
rinsed but completely dry)
Meat, poultry, fish
Basic Recipes
Here is a collection of basic recipes and techniques that can be used on their own
or as part of other recipes, including many in this book. I use some of these recipes
on a weekly basis. You’ll find both dairy-based and dairy-free recipes, as well as
both vegetarian and meat-based recipes.
Soaked Nuts, Seeds, and Beans
Soaking nuts, seeds, and beans (legumes) is a great idea, and just requires a bit of
planning—mostly in the way of soaking time. Most seeds, nuts, and beans (and grains,
by the way) are coated with enzyme inhibitors to prevent them from sprouting (growing)
prematurely. Soaking initiates enzyme activity, making these foods easier to digest and
their nutrients more available and easily absorbable. Many nuts also taste better after
they’ve been soaked, especially walnuts and almonds. This is because any tannins, dust,
and residue from the skins is released into the soaking water, leaving the soaked nut
with a smoother, buttery flavor.
Quick Tips
You can store soaked (and drained) nuts and seeds in the refrigerator for a day or so
if you’re not quite ready to use them.
Make sure you’re soaking the raw, unsalted, and unprocessed form of seed, nut, or
bean.
Some legumes, such as red lentils, don’t need soaking.
In general, you want to soak the nut, seed, or bean until it’s softened. The chart on page
19 will help guide you—in general, the denser the nut, seed, or bean, the longer the
soaking time. Here’s how to proceed:
1 Remove nuts or seeds from their shells, if they have them.
2 Fill a container with about double the amount of water as nuts, seeds, or beans to be
soaked. If you are soaking 2 cups of almonds, for example, soak them in 4 cups of
water. Many nuts, seeds, and beans will expand while soaking.
3 Soak for anywhere from 15 minutes to overnight. The goal is to soak until the nuts,
seeds, or beans start to soften. The necessary soaking time varies—check the chart on
page 19 for estimated soaking time for some types.
4 Rinse and drain the nuts, seeds, or beans until the water is clear. Let them drain fully
and then they’re ready to use in a recipe. You can also dry them in a dehydrator if you
want them completely dry.
Nut/Seed/Bean (raw) Soak Time
Almonds 8 to 12 hours
Black beans 4 hours
Brazil nuts Don’t soak
Cashews 4 to 8 hours
Hazelnuts Don’t soak
Lentils Depends on the type; follow the directions that come with the lentils
Macadamias Don’t soak
Dried peas Most need 12 hours; follow the directions that come with the peas
Peanuts 8 hours
Pecans 8 hours
Pepitas (pumpkin seeds) 8 hours
Pine nuts Don’t soak
Pistachios Don’t soak
Sesame seeds 8 hours
Sunflower seeds 2 hours
Walnuts 4 hours
Almond Milk (and Other Nut Milks)
Almond milk is my favorite dairy-free milk. It can be used in soups, baking, tea,
smoothies, or just to drink on its own. I make my own almond milk because it’s difficult
to find almond milk that works for SCD due to the additives in most brands. To change
it up, this recipe also works with other nuts, such as macadamias, Brazil nuts, and
hazelnuts. Or try a mixture of nuts, or use seeds, if you prefer.
As almond milk sits in the refrigerator, it will separate. Just whisk or shake it up again
before drinking or using it in a recipe. Besides the water and nuts, you’ll also want a
nut milk bag (see Product Sources, page 161), or use several layers of cheesecloth.
Leggings and tights work, too! The almond pulp that remains can be used to make
crackers (see Parmesan Crackers, page 49, and Almond Saltine Crackers, page 51).
1 cup raw almonds
2 cups water
1 Place the almonds in a bowl and cover them with water to soak overnight.
2 Drain and rinse the almonds and place them in a high-speed blender. Add 2 cups of
water to the almonds and blend until completely ground up; I blend mine for about 1
minute.
3 Drain the almond milk through a nut milk bag (or several layers of cheesecloth) into a
pitcher or bowl.
4 Store in the refrigerator for up to several days.
Makes about 2 cups
Sweet Almond Milk
The only difference between this and the straight-up almond milk above is that you
add 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract and 2 dates to give it a subtle sweetness. Or you
could just stir in 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract and 2 teaspoons honey. This milk is
good by itself at any time of day, and in smoothies and tea—as well as for cookie
dunking.
Almond SCD Yogurt
Homemade yogurt tastes nothing like the store-bought versions I’ve had. Even if you
don’t eat dairy-free, this is a really nice, mellow yogurt with a subtly sweet flavor. While
this recipe is a bit more detailed than making regular yogurt, it’s totally worth it for the
taste, in my humble opinion.
You can make this using any nut milk, including hazelnut and cashew milk—see my
recipes for nut milks in this chapter. Since almond milk doesn’t contain lactose, you’ll
need to add some honey so the starter bacteria have something to munch on (culture).
Or you can use a sweet milk as the base. I don’t culture this yogurt as long as for dairybased yogurts; you can culture it for more than 4 hours, but there’s no pressing need to
do so, since it contains no lactose.
You’ll notice that I add gelatin to thicken the yogurt. If you don’t add the gelatin, the
yogurt will have more of a thick liquid consistency. That works well if you’re using it to
make a probiotic drink or a milkshake. Otherwise I suggest including the gelatin for a
thicker, yogurt-like texture. You may have to experiment a bit to obtain the thickness you
like, and it will also depend somewhat on the gelatin brand. In general, I add less
gelatin than most manufacturers call for, because I don’t want the yogurt to completely
gel. If your almond yogurt is too thick, you can blend in more almond milk, fruit juice,
or cooked fruit.
You can easily double or triple this recipe.
2 cups almond milk
1 tablespoon honey
1/2 teaspoon unsweetened powdered gelatin (see Product Sources, page 161)
yogurt starter (see Product Sources, page 161, for dairy-free starters; I use about
⅛ teaspoon dairy-free starter, but check the manufacturer’s directions for the
suggested amount)
1 Place the almond milk and honey in a saucepan over low to medium heat. Heat for
about 5 minutes, or until the honey is dissolved and the liquid is steaming and has
begun to bubble. Stir occasionally to prevent separation. You want the temperature of
the milk to be around 180°F/80°C. The milk may thicken a bit.
2 Remove from the heat off and let the milk cool to room temperature.
3 Whisk the gelatin into the cooled milk until blended. Add the yogurt starter and blend
until dissolved and evenly distributed.
4 Place the milk in a yogurt maker, or set in a warm environment, such as a dehydrator,
that stays between 100°F/38°C and 110°F/43°C. Culture for at least 4 hours (or follow
the yogurt starter directions).
5 Cover and refrigerate for at least 1 hour. You can store the yogurt in the refrigerator
for up to a week.
Makes about 2 cups
Modify SCD for Your Body
If you need to be dairy-free, find dairy-free substitutes. Find the foods that work best
for your body and fit into the list of SCD-compatible foods. You may think that
doesn’t leave you much to eat, instead you may just need to take some time to learn
about flavors and how various foods complement each other.
Coconut Milk
My favorite thing about this recipe is that I can have dairy-free coconut milk in just a
few minutes. While you can soak the shredded coconut for 2 hours, I usually just soak it
in hot water for a few minutes and move on to the next step. It’s up to you. Soaking
longer gets you a slightly thicker, more flavorful cup of milk, but the shortcut is nothing
to sneeze at, especially if you have a really good high-speed blender.
Coconut milk can be used in soups and smoothies and for baking. I prefer to make it
from shredded coconut, because it’s easy and the coconut is additive free. I sometimes
wonder what’s in a can of coconut milk and how long it’s been sitting on the shelf. In a
pinch, though, I’ll use a can that doesn’t have any additives (see Product Sources, page
161), but read the label carefully—most canned coconut milk has one or more additives.
As coconut milk sits in the refrigerator, it will separate. Just whisk or shake it up again
before drinking it or using it in a recipe.
1 cup unsweetened shredded coconut (see Product Sources, page 161)
2 cups water
1 Combine the shredded coconut and water in a blender container and let soak for about
2 hours. Or, if you’re short on time, soak the coconut in hot water (about the
temperature of hot tap water) for a few minutes and move on to the next step.
2 Blend the coconut and water in a high-speed blender on the highest speed.
3 Strain the coconut milk through a nut milk bag or several layers of cheesecloth into a
pitcher or bowl. Store in the refrigerator for up to several days.
Makes about 2 cups
Sweet Coconut Milk
This sweetened version of the basic recipe above is equally delicious on its own or in
smoothies or other recipes. When you blend the soaked coconut, simply add 2 pitted
Medjool dates or about 2 tablespoons honey, and 1 teaspoon vanilla extract. Then
strain the milk through a nut milk bag or a few layers of cheesecloth set on top of a
fine-mesh strainer.
Cashew Milk
Cashew milk is dairy-free milk that can be used for baking or cooking, or you can drink
it on its own, hot or cold. Sweetening it up a bit adds to the goodness. While you don’t
have to soak the cashews (see page 18 for directions) before making the milk, it does
tend to come out a bit creamier when you do. You’ll need a high-speed blender to get
the milk as creamy as possible. As cashew milk sits in the refrigerator, it will separate—
just whisk it again before serving it or using it in a recipe.
1 cup raw cashews
4 cups water
1 Place the cashews and water in a high-speed blender and blend until the nuts are
completely ground up.
2 The milk will separate after several hours and can then be blended again or mixed by
hand.
3 Cover and store in the refrigerator. It will last for several days in the refrigerator.
Makes about 4 cups
Sweet Cashew Milk
Sweetening up basic cashew milk just adds to its goodness. Whirl the cashews in a
high-speed blender along with 2 pitted Medjool dates or about 2 tablespoons honey,
1 teaspoon vanilla, and 4 cups water, until the cashews are completely ground up.
The milk will settle after several hours and the milk can be blended again or mixed
by hand. Store covered in the refrigerator for a few days, or freeze for later use.
Sweet Cashew Cream
This dairy-free whipped cream can be flavored to suit your taste or the recipe you’re
adding it to. For example, add a little lemon or orange juice for a tangy version to use
with lemon-flavored baked goods. Or add cinnamon, nutmeg, or other spices. You can
store the soaked and drained cashews in the refrigerator for a day or two until you’re
ready to use them.
1 cup raw cashews
3 cups water, for soaking
1/4 cup fruit juice or coconut water, or more as needed
2 Medjool dates, pitted (or substitute 2 tablespoons of honey)
1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract
pinch of salt (or to taste)
1 Soak the cashews in about 3 cups of water for at least 4 hours, or overnight.
2 Drain the cashews and then rinse them with water and drain again.
3 Combine all the ingredients in a high-speed blender and process for about 1 minute,
or until creamy. Add more juice or coconut water if the mixture seems too thick or isn’t
blending well. (You can use a food processor or a regular blender, but it will take
longer.)
4 Cover and store in the refrigerator for up to a few weeks.
Makes about 2 cups
Sour Cashew Cream
Here’s a dairy-free version of sour cream that can be used in many recipes and as a
topping for soups, nachos, and other savory dishes. It helps to have a high-speed
blender or food processor when whipping it up, but you can also use a regular blender
—just keep it running for a while to make sure the nut pieces are all ground up. You can
use sour cashew cream in most recipes that call for yogurt, such as many of the dips
and sauces in this book. Use your imagination to add flavors that will enhance a dish—
lime and chili powder, for example. For a dairy-based, lactose-free sour cream, see the
recipe for crème fraîche, page 32.
1 cup raw cashews
3 cups water, for soaking
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
salt, to taste
3 tablespoons water, or more as needed
1 Soak the cashews in about 3 cups of water for at least 4 hours, or overnight. Drain,
rinse with water, and drain again.
2 Place the cashews, lemon juice, and salt in a high-speed blender; add 3 tablespoons of
water. Blend until the mixture until is creamy and smooth, about 1 minute; add more
water if needed. (If you’re using a regular blender or food processor, it will take longer.)
3 Store in the refrigerator, sealed airtight, for up to about a week.
Makes about 1 cup
Buy in Bulk and Freeze
Buy more than you need and freeze the rest. When they’re in season, I buy loads of
strawberries, blueberries, and other fruits or vegetables that can easily be frozen for
later. You can buy flour in bulk and freeze or refrigerate it for later, too. Nuts and nut
oils tend to spoil quickly, so I store those in the refrigerator if I know I won’t be
plowing through them right away.
SCD Yogurt
Homemade yogurt is easy to make and so economical. It’s also a good thing for
intestinal healing because it contains good bacteria for your digestive system. If you
can’t have dairy or simply don’t like yogurt, I suggest finding a probiotic as a source of
good bacteria (see Product Sources, page 161).
There are just two requirements for SCD Yogurt: it must be cultured for 24 hours (to
ensure that the lactose is removed), and it must contain beneficial bacteria that will
help the gut heal. The bacteria come from the starter you add to the milk—either yogurt
or a yogurt starter. In either case, the recommended cultures are lactobacillus
bulgaricus, L. acidophilus, and S. thermophilus. In Elaine Gottschall’s book, Breaking
the Vicious Cycle, she recommends that you avoid bifidus because it has been known to
cause digestive issues.
While you can use yogurt from previous batches as a starter, I prefer not to; it never
turns out quite as well, in my experience. But it works in a pinch. For more on yogurt
starter, see Product Sources, page 161.
4 cups milk (cow’s, goat’s, or sheep’s milk)
about 1 tablespoon yogurt starter
1 Pour the milk into a saucepan, place it on low to medium heat and bring the milk to a
steady simmer. When the milk reaches about 180°F/90°C, remove it from the heat and
let cool to room temperature.
2 Pour about 1/4 cup of the cooled milk into a sterile container that has a cover. Add the
yogurt starter and stir to blend well. Pour in the rest of the milk and blend well.
3 Place in a yogurt maker or other warm environment, between 100°F/38°C and
110°F/43°C, for 24 hours.
4 After 24 hours, refrigerate the yogurt until you’re ready to use it. It will keep for a few
weeks in the refrigerator.
Makes about 4 cups
Dripped SCD Yogurt
Dripped yogurt—also called strained or Greek yogurt—is thick yogurt that’s had a
lot of its moisture dripped out of it. I use dripped yogurt whenever a recipe calls for
Greek yogurt, or when I want to reduce the amount of moisture added to a recipe. It
also makes an excellent substitute for cream cheese or farmer’s cheese (pot cheese).
Set a mesh strainer or colander over a bowl to catch the dripping liquid from the
yogurt (whey). Line the strainer with cheesecloth, a coffee filter, or a few sheets of
paper towels. Place the yogurt in the lined strainer. You don’t need to refrigerate the
dripping yogurt, but I tend to do so in case I don’t use it right away. Let it drip for at
least 30 minutes, or up to at least 6 hours for cream cheese consistency. Once you
have cream cheese, you can add salt and herbs to create a tasty dip or a spread for
sandwiches.
Herbed Cream Cheese
This recipe uses the Dripped SCD Yogurt recipe on page 29. The longer you drip the
yogurt, the firmer your cream cheese will be. I try to let it go for at least a day to get
really thick cream cheese. In the end, you have a creamy, lactose-free cheese spread
that can be flavored to your liking.
You don’t need to heavily season this cheese to enjoy it; I just think the seasoning adds a
lot of dimension to the rich creaminess of the cheese. If you use goat’s-milk yogurt, your
cream cheese will become a creamy herbed goat cheese.
Quick Tip
You can play around with the seasonings, using either fresh or dried herbs. If
you’re using dried herbs, you’ll need less than for fresh herbs. If you’d normally
use 1 tablespoon fresh thyme, for example, then you’ll only need 1 teaspoon dried
thyme.
2 cups SCD Yogurt (page 28)
1 tablespoon minced fresh parsley
1/2 teaspoon dried dill weed
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon garlic powder
1/4 teaspoon onion powder
1 Drip the yogurt for 24 hours, following the directions for Dripped SCD Yogurt on
page 29.
2 Blend the resulting cream cheese in a bowl with all the remaining ingredients, using a
whisk or fork, until the mixture is well blended and creamy.
3 Cover and store in the refrigerator for up to a few weeks.
Makes about 1 cup
Clarified Butter and Ghee
Clarified butter is butter from which the water and milk solids have been removed. This
is done both for flavor and to raise the butter’s smoking point so that it can be used at
high temperatures, such as when sautéing, roasting, or grilling. It has the added side
benefit of removing milk solids, which may be difficult for some to digest or tolerate.
Ghee is just like clarified butter, except that the milk solids are browned before being
removed. The result is that ghee has a slightly stronger, nuttier flavor than clarified
butter. To make ghee, follow the directions for clarified butter and keep heating it until
the milk solids turn brown.
Clarified butter and ghee will stay fresh for at least a month at room temperature, or at
least four months in the refrigerator. I use clarified butter for frying and sautéing. I
make big batches and leave a jar out at room temperature for cooking, while the rest is
stored in the refrigerator. When I’m getting low, I just pull out a new jar and bring it to
room temperature before I use it.
unsalted butter
1 Melt the butter in a saucepan over medium heat until it begins to simmer. (This is the
water escaping.)
2 Simmer slowly until the milk solids have separated to the bottom, some foam sits on
top, and the clear yellow clarified butter sits in the middle. This takes about 10 minutes.
If you’re making ghee, continue heating until the milk solids on the bottom of the
saucepan have turned brown (to about 250°F/120°C)—but don’t let them burn. Don’t
stir the butter.
3 Use a fine-mesh strainer lined with cheesecloth to strain the butter (or ghee) into a jar
or other container. The milk solids and excess foam will separate out and the clarified
butter will drip into the jar.
4 Store at room temperature for up to about a month, or keep in the refrigerator for a
few months.
Crème Fraîche (Sour Cream)
I used to buy cultured sour cream for soups, dressings, and dips. Now I much prefer this
creamy cultured crème fraîche. Traditional crème fraîche is made with buttermilk, but
this version is made with the same yogurt starter you use to make SCD-style lactosefree yogurt. Use it in recipes that call for sour cream, crème fraîche, or extra-creamy
yogurt. It’s also great as a tangy substitute for whipped cream.
Try flavoring this with lemon, herbs, and spices to create creamy dips and dressings.
My favorite variation has a pinch of salt, some minced green herbs, crushed fresh
garlic, lemon juice, and a drizzle of olive oil.
2 cups heavy cream
yogurt starter (see Product Sources, page 161)
1 Pour the cream into a saucepan, place on a low to medium heat, bring it to a simmer,
and then remove from the heat and let cool to room temperature.
2 Pour some of the cooled cream into a sterile container that has a lid. Add the yogurt
starter according to the manufacturer’s instructions and stir to blend well. Add the rest
of the cream and blend well.
3 Place the container in yogurt maker, or other warm environment, between 100°F/38°C
and 110°F/43°C, for 24 hours.
4 After 24 hours, place the cream in the refrigerator until you’re ready to use it.
Makes 2 cups
In the Beginning
Start with broths and steamed veggies, and go easy on fruit and dairy. Raw foods are
challenging to digest, so steer clear of salads for a while. And when you have a
setback, return to the basics that make you feel good.
Whipped Cream
You can whip yogurt cream the same way you’d whip heavy cream—it just has a tangier
taste. It’s like having whipped yogurt. You can add flavor with vanilla extract, honey, or
cinnamon, or just use it on its own. Yogurt cream goes great with granola, strawberries,
and other fruit; on top of muffins; and as a filling for crêpes.
2 cups crème fraîche (page 32)
1 tablespoon honey, or to taste
1/4 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 Place all the ingredients in a bowl and whip for several minutes, or until the mixture
becomes lighter and forms soft peaks. I use my stand mixer with the whip attachment,
but you can use a hand or standing mixer, or a whisk.
2 Cover and store in the refrigerator for up to a few days.
Makes about 2 cups
Nut Butter
Nut butters such as almond and cashew are easy to make—and most of the time the
homemade version will cost you less than a jar of the premade version.
To make nut butter, you just process the nuts in a high-speed blender or food processor
until they go from nuts to flour to butter. It can take a few minutes, depending on the
nuts and whether you’ve soaked them.
You can make butter from cashews, hazelnuts, sunflower seeds, or other nuts and seeds
—and peanuts, of course (a legume). If you like your nut butter salted, just add a bit of
sea salt, or you can add honey, cinnamon, or vanilla. You get the idea. Yes. It’s that
simple.
2 cups raw or roasted nuts (if you’re using raw nuts, soaking is optional; see page
18)
1 Place the nuts in the container of a food processor or high-speed blender.
2 Blend for about 5 to 10 minutes, depending on the nut and whether it has been
soaked.
3 Store nut butter in a sealed container for about a month, or in the refrigerator for
several months.
Nut Flour
Many of the baked goodies in this book are made with blanched almond flour, but you
can try other nut flours, such as walnut and cashew. In case you’re wondering what
types of nut flour are out there, here’s a quick primer.
The nuts can be raw or roasted. Each will yield a different flavor. Almond meal is
ground-up raw almonds with their skins on. Blanched almond flour is a ground-up raw
almonds that have had the skins removed. Unless otherwise noted, recipes in this book
use finely ground blanched almond flour. This is the nut flour I bake with the most,
because it produces a texture that I like. That being said, many of my bread and muffin
recipes will also work with almond meal as well as other nut flours, though they’ll taste
a bit different than if made with blanched almond flour.
Some nut flours (such as cashew) are easy to make, while others require a bit more
preparation if you don’t want the nut skins in the flour. Almonds are the prime example.
For blanched almond flour, you can buy almonds with the skins off (blanched), use
diced or sliced almonds, or purchase blanched almond flour (see Product Sources, page
161). Some recipes work well without blanching, but if you want to emulate baked
goodies made with all-purpose flour, you’ll want the skins off.
Quick Tips
Not all ground-nut flours have the same fineness in grind. If you’d like your flour
to be finer than it is, place it in a food processor and grind it to a finer texture.
If you’re using almonds, remove the skins to produce blanched almond flour.
If you’re soaking the nuts, dry them completely before grinding them.
2 cups raw or roasted nuts or seeds
1 Place the nuts in the container of a high-speed blender or food processor and pulse
until you have fine grains of flour. Be careful not to pulse the flour too much or you’ll
end up with nut or seed butter. Another option is to use a coffee grinder to grind the
nuts, grinding small batches at a time.
Makes about 2 cups
Chicken Broth
Chicken broth is so soothing to the body and soul. Serve it as a soup broth on its own,
or use it to build nutritious soups, stews, puréed vegetables, and other recipes that call
for savory liquids. And bone broth is an excellent way to replenish your body with fluids
and nutrients.
I freeze chicken broth in 2-cup portions because this size is easy to add to recipes or
make a big bowl of soup. You may want to freeze smaller amounts in an ice cube tray
for adding a bit of flavor to a marinade or to a soup or sauce. Label your containers
and keep them in the freezer for up to a few months. When freezing the broth in a jar or
other container, leave some space at the top to allow for expansion as the liquid freezes.
Quick Tips
Add about 1 tablespoon vinegar when cooking the broth to release more calcium
from the bones, soften them, and produce a better soup gel.
If you’re using a roasted chicken from the store (usually rotisserie style, ready to
eat) and it has extra seasonings, remove the skin to avoid over-seasoning the stock.
I suggest purchasing the most natural version of the store-bought roast chicken that
you can, to avoid additives and unwanted seasonings.
1 chicken carcass, whole chicken pieces, 1 whole chicken, or chicken bones
8 cups water (or enough to cover most of the chicken)
4 cups (approximately) of diced vegetables or vegetable scraps (such as carrots,
celery, leeks, and onions; avoid cabbage, which tends to make the broth bitter)
chopped herbs, herb scraps, or other seasonings (such as thyme, parsley, garlic,
chives, green onions, kosher or sea salt, pepper; optional)
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar (optional)
1 Add the chicken carcass or pieces to a stockpot filled with about 8 cups of water.
2 Add diced vegetables and any seasonings you’re using. You can add cut carrots
(which make the broth sweet), leeks, celery, onions, herbs, and salt and pepper to taste
(if you want it pre-seasoned). Add the vinegar, if using.
3 Let simmer for at least 3 hours on a low heat, covered.
4 Remove from the heat, let cool, and strain the liquid through a fine-mesh strainer.
5 Discard everything but the broth. Cover and store the broth in the refrigerator for up
to about a week, or keep in the freezer for several months.
Makes about 8 cups
Chicken Broth in a Hurry
This is a quick way to recover the pan drippings from roasted chicken for use as
chicken broth. It comes in handy when you need some chicken broth in a hurry to
make gravy and puréed vegetables.
Add the pan drippings from a roasted chicken or chicken pieces to a pot with about 3
cups water (about 1 cup for each tablespoon of drippings). Place the pot over
medium heat and bring to a steady simmer, and continue for 10 minutes. Turn off the
heat, let cool for a bit, and train the liquid through a mesh strainer. Cover and store
in the refrigerator for about a week or in the freezer for a few months. Makes about 4
cups.
Beef Broth
Bone broths are great for warming your body and boosting your immune system and
overall health. They’re rich in minerals such as calcium and phosphorus, soaked from
the bone and marrow. In addition, the joint tissues contain collagen and other
supplemental compounds that are good for bone and tissue health.
For this recipe, the beef bones are roasted before the long simmer to preserve and bring
out their best flavor. While you might be tempted to skip this step, take the extra time to
roast the bones and the veggies in order to produce an exceptionally flavored broth.
2 pounds meaty beef bones (from grass-fed cows, if possible)
2 large carrots, cut into a few large chunks
1 large onion, cut into a few large chunks
about 8 cups water
sweet vegetable scraps: celery, carrot, leek, onion, garlic
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar (or other vinegar or lemon juice)
salt and pepper
1 Preheat your oven to 400°F/200°C.
2 Place the beef bones, carrots, and onions on a rimmed baking sheet and roast for 30
minutes.
3 Let the roasted bones and veggies cool for a bit and then place them in a large
stockpot or slow cooker with about 8 cups of water and the vegetable scraps, vinegar,
and salt and pepper to taste.
4 Cover and simmer on a low heat for about 5 hours.
5 Let cool and then strain the beef broth to remove all veggies, bones, meat, and
residual scraps, using a fine-mesh strainer.
6 Cover and refrigerate for a few hours or overnight and then skim the fat off the top of
the beef broth. Store in the refrigerator for several days, or freeze for later use.
Makes about 8 cups
Vegetable Broth
Vegetable broth is a great way to capture the minerals and vitamins in a variety of
vegetables, as well as enhance the flavor of another recipe. It also can serve as the
basis for just about any soup.
The classic recipe for vegetable broth is to simmer sweet vegetables such as carrots,
onions, leeks, and garlic for a few hours. Vegetables you don’t want to use in a broth
include beets, broccoli, kale, lettuce, and squash. Most of these don’t add flavor to the
broth, and vegetables that are part of the brassica family (such as cabbages,
cauliflower, and broccoli) will add a bitter taste. You can make frozen vegetable
bouillon by whirling raw vegetables in a food processor until they’re the consistency of
pesto, then freezing in small containers, bags, or ice cube trays.
1 tablespoon ghee (page 31) or butter
1 leek, cut into thin rings
1 carrot, peeled and coarsely chopped
1 celery stalk, chopped
1 medium garlic clove
1 small bunch parsley, chopped
salt and pepper, to taste
water to cover the veggies (at least 6 cups)
1 Place all the ingredients in a large saucepan over a medium heat and bring to a boil.
2 Reduce the heat to low and simmer for an hour or so, until all the vegetables are
tender.
3 Strain the liquid through a fine-mesh strainer, discarding the vegetable pieces. Cover
and store in the refrigerator for a few days, or freeze for up to several months.
Makes about 6 cups
Filtered Water
I like drinking water that has been filtered using a carbon filter. There are several ways
to do this, but no matter which method you choose, I think you’ll notice that the flavor
is improved. What you won’t notice are the residual chemicals that have been removed.
This depends on your water source, but most tap water contains chorine and fluoride
along with small amounts of other chemicals that you don’t want to ingest on a regular
basis.
Here are some ways to filter your water:
Charcoal-filtered water bottle (see Product Sources, page 161)
Refrigerator water dispenser with water filter insert
Filtered water bottle stored in your refrigerator
Filter attachment on your water faucet
Filter attachment at your home’s main water source
Hydrate
Having enough water in your body at all times is essential to your health. Water
carries nutrients throughout the body, eliminates waste, lubricates joints, and
cushions organs. Drink lots of water, broth, and electrolytes to keep everything
moving, replenish water lost due to diarrhea, flush out toxins, and make it easier to
digest your food. While you don’t want to drink too much water, finding a happy
balance is important. I prefer filtered water because it removes excess residue found
in tap water, including chorine, pesticides, and prescription drug residue
increasingly found in water sources. One of my favorite portable sources of filtered
water is a charcoal-filtered water bottle (see Product Sources, page 161).
Sports Drinks (Electrolytes)
Just about any fruit drink or smoothie can be turned into an electrolyte with the
addition of a natural source of salt. Two ingredients to add to an electrolyte are a
simple carbohydrate, such as citrus fruit or fruit juice, and a source of sodium and
possibly potassium, as from iodized sea salt.
Here are two basic electrolytes, one using fruit juice and the other using both dairy-free
milk and coconut water. The fruit juice drink might be acidic, depending on the juice
you use; that might cause irritation for some, in which case you can choose a less
acidic juice, such as apple or grape juice.
Coconut water is a natural electrolyte and sweetener that contributes essential
minerals, including potassium, calcium, and magnesium. If you don’t have coconut
water, you can substitute water and 2 tablespoons honey.
Fruit Juice Electrolyte
3 cups water
1 cup fresh orange juice (or other juice, such as apple, grape, or a combination of
lemon and a sweet juice)
1/2 teaspoon iodized salt
In a container that has a cap or cover, mix all the ingredients together until the salt is
dissolved. Cover and store in the refrigerator for up to a few weeks.
Makes 4 cups
Dairy-Free Milk Electrolyte
2 cups dairy-free milk (almond, coconut, or other)
2 cups coconut water (or 2 cups water with 2 tablespoons honey)
1/2 teaspoon iodized salt
Mix all the ingredients together in a bottle or other container until the salt is dissolved.
Cover and store in the refrigerator for up to about a week. Shake as needed to blend
again.
Makes 4 cups
Small Bites and Snacks
The flavor-packed recipes on the following pages can be shared as appetizers or
packed as snacks. Snacking is always fun, and you’ll find a variety of snacks here
to satisfy you when you’re craving some quick and easy bites.
Cherry Pecan Bars
Here’s a date-nut-fruit bar that’s great to have around for quick energy and nutrition
after a run or bike ride, or just as a midday snack. You’ll need a food processor or highspeed blender to whip up these bars, but that’s all you’ll need besides the nutritious
ingredients. You can substitute other dried fruits or nuts for what’s listed, which will
change the taste a bit depending on the ingredients.
Be sure to use dried fruit and nuts that have no added sugar, honey, oil, or other
additives. Dried cranberries, for example, tend to have oil and apple juice added to
make them tastier; I love that for some recipes, but the added oil makes these bars
greasy.
1/2 cup dried tart cherries
1/2 cup whole pitted Medjool or other dates
1 cup raw or roasted pecans (I use raw, but both work)
⅛ teaspoon salt, or to taste
1 Place all the ingredients in the bowl of a food processor or high-speed blender. Pulse
until the mixture is ground well and can be pressed into bars (usually a minute or so).
2 Press the ground mixture into a square (about 9 × 9-inch) or rectangular pan or baking
dish, flattening it to cut into bars.
3 Store covered at room temperature for about a week, or in the refrigerator for a few
weeks. I individually wrap my bars in waxed paper so they’re easy to grab for on-the-go
snacking.
Makes about 8 bars
Limit Almond Flour
While almonds are a rich source of minerals, healthy fat, fiber, and protein, don’t try
to fill up on treats made from almond flour. And also try other nut flours and coconut
flour when you’re baking. But focusing on vegetables, fish, poultry, and a small
amount of fruit will be healthier and easier on your body.
Zucchini Sticks
I love the taste of almond flour, cheese, and egg coating on fish, chicken, and veggies
such as these zucchini sticks. They’re terrific with many kinds of dips and dressings,
including Caramelized Onion Dip (page 77) and Ranch Dressing (page 74). For more
ideas, see Sauces, Jams, and Dips chapter (page 68). Zucchini tend to contain a lot of
moisture that gets released when they’re cooked. To reduce the water content before
using them in a recipe, you can let them sweat out some of the moisture in a colander
for 15 minutes or more (as instructed below). This recipe also works well without the
almond flour; replace flour with the equivalent amount of Parmesan cheese, grated or
shredded.
4 medium zucchini, peeled and cut into 3-inch sticks
1-1/4 teaspoons salt, divided
1/4 cup blanched almond flour
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1 teaspoon dried basil
1/2 cup grated Parmesan cheese
1/2 cup shredded Parmesan cheese
2 eggs, lightly beaten
dip, for serving
1 Place the zucchini sticks in a colander (or on a paper towel) and sprinkle with 1
teaspoon salt. Toss to coat well with the salt. Let sit for at least 15 minutes.
2 Preheat your oven to 425°F/220°C. Line a baking sheet(s) with parchment paper or
other nonstick material.
3 In a bowl, blend together the almond flour, remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt, oregano,
basil, and grated and shredded Parmesan. Whisk the eggs in a separate bowl.
4 Dry the zucchini sticks using a paper towel or cloth. Coat each stick with egg, dredge
in the cheese-flour mixture, and place on the prepared baking sheet.
5 Bake for about 10 minutes, or until browned. Let cool for a few minutes and then
serve with a dip.
6 Store leftovers in a closed container in the refrigerator for several days, or freeze for
up to a month or so. Reheat the frozen zucchini sticks at 325°F/175°C for 6 to 8
minutes.
Makes 4 servings
Tomato Bruschetta
You can make this bruschetta mixture any time of the year, but it’s especially tasty
during the summer months when you have a good batch of sweet tomatoes. Cherry
tomatoes, when in season, are especially good in this recipe.
As far as bread, use any recipe you prefer. I love toasting up several slices of garlic
toast and then topping them with this. It also goes well alongside grilled fish, chicken,
and vegetables, or as a topping for a pizza or flatbread (see Pizza Crust, page 96).
4 large plum tomatoes (about 1-1/2 pounds), diced into large pieces
1/4 cup diced onion (optional)
2 medium garlic cloves
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil (or fresh oregano or parsley)
1 teaspoon red wine vinegar
2 tablespoons olive oil 1/2 teaspoon salt
Garlic Toasts (page 97), to serve (optional)
1 Place the tomatoes, onion (if using), and garlic in a food processor and gently pulse
until the pieces are finely chopped. Alternatively, you can chop these ingredients by
hand.
2 Transfer the tomato mixture to a bowl and blend in the remaining ingredients.
3 Let sit for an hour or so if time permits. Serve with Garlic Toasts or with a meal.
Makes about 2 cups
Grilled Cheese Croutons
Grilled cheese is the ultimate comfort food for many. Once you’ve made the grilled
cheese sandwich, you can decide to stop there, but cutting these into croutons gives you
a wonderful topping for soup, stew, or chili. See the Breads, Biscuits, and Crêpes
chapter (page 79) for some excellent bread options.
1/2 tablespoon butter, ghee (page 31), or cooking oil
your favorite cheese, shredded or sliced (Cheddar, Havarti, and Swiss cheese are
good options)
2 slices of bread from this book, or other SCD bread
1 Warm a skillet over medium heat. Melt the butter or ghee or heat the oil in the skillet.
2 Create a cheese sandwich by placing the cheese between the bread slices. Set the
sandwich in the heated skillet and grill on each side for about 5 minutes, or until the
cheese begins to melt and the bread is toasted.
3 Let cool for a moment, slice into croutons and serve.
Makes about 12 croutons
Balancing Your Diet
Try not to get caught up in balancing your diet based on standard food pyramids—
they don’t apply here. Balanced nutrition does matter, though. You may be forgoing
some things by not having grains or cereals, so you’ll need to balance that out
another way, which I find is essential for healing and general mental health. Seek out
a health professional to find out what vitamins and minerals you may need boosted a
bit. Vitamin D, B12, and folic acid tend to be low in folks who have digestive issues.
Parmesan Crisps
This quick and simple snack contains just a single ingredient—Parmesan cheese. Or
two ingredients, if you want to sprinkle some dried oregano or basil on top of each
cracker. If you don’t have Parmesan cheese, another aged hard cheese will also work.
4 ounces Parmesan cheese, shredded
dried oregano or basil (optional)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Line two baking sheets with parchment paper or
nonstick silicone mats.
2 Drop about 1 tablespoon shredded Parmesan cheese at a time onto the lined cookie
sheet. If you want the crisps to be thick in the center, pile the cheese in a mound and it
will spread as it bakes. If you want them to be crunchy and lacy, spread the cheese out
evenly. Sprinkle with dried oregano or basil, if you wish.
3 Bake for 6 minutes, or until the tops are starting to brown.
4 Let cool for a few minutes and then crunch away. Store at room temperature in a
sealed container for a few days, or in the refrigerator for a few weeks.
Makes about 28 crisps
Parmesan Crackers
Use these as either croutons or crackers, or crumble crackers to use as a crunchy
topping for other dishes. I like to keep it simple, seasoning-wise, but this recipe could
stand up to many seasoning modifications and additions. My favorite is just garlic
powder and salt, and maybe some dried thyme or oregano. You can substitute almond
pulp for the almond flour (see Almond Milk, page 20), in which case you won’t need the
cold water to hold the dough together; the moisture in the pulp will probably be
enough.
1-1/2 cups grated Parmesan cheese (about 6.5 ounces)
1-1/2 cups blanched almond flour
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon garlic powder
1/2 teaspoon dried thyme or oregano (optional)
2 to 3 tablespoons cold water
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Using a food processor or blender, pulse together all the ingredients except for the
water.
3 Add the cold water, a bit at a time, until the mixture is holding together well enough
to work into a ball.
4 Separate into 2 balls of dough and place each on a nonstick silicone mat, parchment
paper, or other nonstick surface that can be transferred to a baking sheet. Roll each ball
into a sheet of dough about 1/8 inch thick, taking time to roll it evenly into a rectangular
shape (since the outer edges will tend to bake faster).
5 Using a pizza cutter or soft-edged knife if you are using silicone mats, gently score
the dough into squares for crackers or croutons. Lift the mats or parchment paper onto
two baking sheets.
6 Bake for 25 minutes, or until the crackers or croutons are browned—the darker they
are, the crunchier they’ll be. If the crackers in the center of the baking sheets aren’t
fully crunchy, turn off the oven, remove the outer crackers to cooling racks, and leave
the soft crackers in the oven for another 5 minutes.
7 Let cool, break the sheets into crackers, and store in a sealed container for several
weeks.
Makes about 30 crackers
Almond Saltine Crackers
This recipe can be the basis for more elaborate crackers you may be craving, but if
what you want is a simple, slightly salty cracker, then just stay with the basics. You can
dip these crackers in a variety of things—soups, cheese spreads, creamy dips, and
preserves. Or make Herbed Cream Cheese (page 30) and Cured Salmon (page 133),
and have a little party.
If you feel like dressing up these crackers before they go in the oven, stir some seeds or
seasoning into the dough or sprinkle some on top before you slide it into the oven. Give
a gentle press to make things stick, or lightly brush the top with an egg white wash
before you do the sprinkling.
2 cups blanched almond flour
1/2 teaspoon salt, plus more for sprinkling
1 large egg
1 tablespoon olive oil or unsalted softened or melted butter
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Combine the almond flour and 1/2 teaspoon salt in a bowl and blend well. Blend in
the egg and oil or butter. Shape the mixture into 2 balls.
3 Place each dough ball on a nonstick silicone baking mat. Place a piece of parchment
paper (or another mat) over the ball and roll the dough into a thin layer, about 1/8 inch
thick, taking care to roll it evenly into a rectangular shape (since the outer edges tend to
bake faster).
4 Score into cracker shapes using a pizza cutter or soft knife if you’re using a silicone
mat. Sprinkle salt lightly across the cracker sheet.
5 Bake for about 15 minutes, or until the crackers start to brown lightly. If the crackers
in the center aren’t yet fully crunchy, remove the outer crackers to a cooling rack, turn
off the oven, and leave the soft crackers in for another 5 minutes.
6 Let cool for about 15 minutes and then break apart into crackers. Store the crackers in
a sealed container at room temperature for several weeks.
Makes about 30 crackers
Cauliflower Popcorn
This is a light treat, sort of like popcorn in intent and flavor, with the texture on the
crisped edges of the cauliflower bits. This isn’t going to fill a big bowl like its namesake,
but it’s divine in its own way. Feel free to play around with toppings, such as cumin,
chili powder, flavored salts, or turmeric to give the “popcorn” a deep yellow coloring.
I try not to use too much oil, so that the cauliflower crisps without burning too much. If
you don’t like the cauliflower bits this dry, add a bit more oil or ghee. Or top the
popcorn with melted butter once it’s out of the oven.
2 large cauliflower heads
1 tablespoon high-heat oil or melted ghee (page 31), or as desired
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
1 Preheat your oven to 425°F/220°C. Line two rimmed baking sheets with parchment
paper or nonstick silicone mats.
2 Using a knife, dice the cauliflower heads into pieces about the size of popped popcorn
kernels, all about the same size so they’ll roast fairly evenly.
3 Mix the cauliflower, oil, and salt in a bowl until the pieces are well-coated.
4 Spread them out on the prepared baking sheets.
5 Bake for 15 minutes, or until all the cauliflower is crisped around the edges. Let cool
for a moment before removing from the baking sheets and serve immediately.
Makes about 3 cups
Beet Chips
These chips have a slightly sweet flavor and a nice, light crunch. A mandolin works
well for slicing the beets evenly and thinly, but it isn’t absolutely necessary. If you have
a slicing attachment for your food processor, that also works well. I use a paring knife,
and that does the job pretty well, but it takes a while.
If the chips become soft, just place them in the oven for 5 minutes or so at 350°F/175°C
to crisp them again.
4 large beets—red, gold, striped (chiogga), or any combination
1 to 2 teaspoons olive oil (or other cooking oil)
sea salt, to taste
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Line two baking sheets with parchment paper or
nonstick silicone mats.
2 Peel the beets and slice them very thin—about 1/16-inch thickness.
3 Combine the beet slices and olive oil in a bowl and toss well to coat evenly.
4 Place the beet slices on the prepared baking sheets and sprinkle lightly with salt. Bake
for about 30 minutes or until the beets are curling around the edges.
5 Let cool for a few minutes so the beet chips become crunchy, and then serve. Store in
a sealed container for a few days.
Makes 4 servings
Salads and Soups
Soups are classic comfort food, and they’re easy to digest. Besides the recipes in
this chapter, you can make soups from the chicken, beef, and vegetable broths in
the Basic Recipes chapter (page 17).
When it comes to salads, if you’re not able to eat raw veggies and fruits, you can
get creative by cooking your salads or letting them marinate in a dressing for a day
to soften them up.
Cherry Chicken Salad
This creamy chopped salad is on the sweet side, and meant to be served cold, but it can
be a bit less sweet if you choose a tart apple and tart cherries. If you’re not eating raw
fruits and veggies, steam the apples and celery for 5 minutes or so, or until tender. Then
add them to the rest of the ingredients. You can soak the pecans as well, if you wish (see
page 18).
1 cup dried or pitted fresh cherries, finely chopped
2 cups chopped roasted chicken (or other cooked chicken)
1/2 cup finely chopped apples (peel or no peel, your choice)
1/2 cup finely chopped celery
1/4 cup chopped raw or roasted pecans
2 tablespoons mayonnaise (page 69)
salt and pepper, to taste
1 If you’re using dried cherries, soak them in a bowl of hot water (about the
temperature of hot tap water) for about 10 minutes. Drain.
2 Combine all the ingredients in a bowl and stir to blend well.
3 Serve, or cover and store in the refrigerator for up to a few days.
Makes 2 servings
Tabbouleh
This classic Middle Eastern dish uses roasted cauliflower to bring rich flavor and
texture similar to that of traditional tabbouleh made with bulgur or couscous. It’s meant
to be a parsley salad, but I tend to add more of all the other good stuff. If you want a
more authentic salad, add another cup or so of fresh chopped parsley. If you’re not
eating raw veggies, you can give the veggies and herbs a quick stir-fry to soften them up
before adding them to this salad.
1 large cauliflower head (or 2 small heads), diced into small chunks
1 tablespoon ghee (page 31), high-heat oil, or coconut oil
1/4 teaspoon sea salt, plus more as needed
2 cups finely chopped fresh parsley
1 cup finely chopped fresh mint
2 cups diced tomatoes (small pieces)
3 green onions, bottoms removed, thinly diced
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice, plus more as needed
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 Preheat your oven to 400°F/200°C.
2 In a bowl, blend the cauliflower, ghee or oil, and salt together until the cauliflower is
well coated.
3 Spread the cauliflower onto the baking sheet and roast for 20 minutes.
4 Let cool for a few minutes, then place in the bowl of a food processor and process
into “grain-size pieces.”
5 Transfer the cauliflower to a bowl and add the parsley, mint, tomatoes, green onions,
1 tablespoon lemon juice, and the olive oil. Blend well, adjusting the seasoning with
more salt and/or lemon juice, as desired.
6 Serve either chilled or at room temperature.
Makes 4 servings
Creamy Coleslaw
While I know that cabbage can be a bit hard on the digestive system, when you let
coleslaw marinate for a few hours, or overnight, it loses that problematic crunch and
firmness. This coleslaw works well as a side dish, as a topping for Fish Tacos (page
136) or grilled food, or on sandwiches. And even if you’re feeling fine and are symptom
free, letting the cabbage marinate in the dressing for a few hours makes it just that
much better.
1/2 medium green cabbage
1/2 medium red cabbage
1/2 cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons vinegar (apple cider or white wine vinegar is good)
2 tablespoons Dijon mustard (or other mustard)
2 tablespoons honey
1 Using a food processor, thinly slice, dice, or shred the cabbage. Transfer the cut-up
cabbage to a large mixing bowl.
2 Add all the remaining ingredients to the bowl and mix until well blended, adjusting
the flavors to your liking. Cover and refrigerate the coleslaw for up to a week.
Makes 4 servings
Scrambled Egg Salad
If you’re craving egg salad but don’t have time to hard-boil the eggs, try this quick and
easy scrambled version.
4 eggs, scrambled and chopped
2 tablespoons mayonnaise (page 69), crème fraîche (page 32), or SCD Yogurt (page
28), plus more if needed
1 teaspoon honey (optional)
1/2 celery stalk, diced into small pieces
a few dill or other pickle slices, diced
salt and pepper, to taste
Place all the ingredients in a bowl and blend thoroughly. Add more mayonnaise as
needed.
Makes 2 servings
Supplements
Here are supplements my son uses on a pretty regular basis, especially in the winter
when sunlight (a major source of vitamin D) in my part of the world is at a
minimum:
Vitamin D (usually with added magnesium)
Folic acid (to counteract medication)
Fish oil (for additional vitamin D and healthy fats, and to soothe the digestive
system)
Keep in mind that by following SCD, you’re also not eating processed cereals or
other foods often fortified with vitamins. Most minerals and vitamins work in
conjunction with other minerals and vitamins, many of which come from the food you
eat and drink. For example, vitamin D and calcium are best absorbed in combination
with magnesium. Your doctor or other health care provider can help you determine
which vitamins and minerals you may need and the best way to find a healthy
balance.
Curried Egg Salad
This egg salad is a meal in itself, depending on what you add to the medley. Spread it
on an Almond Saltine Cracker (page 51) or it on to some Simple Sandwich Bread (page
80). The dressing can be used with other salads, too. I like to add it to chopped-up
leftover chicken and then blend in leftover fruits and vegetables. You can change this as
you wish, so I’ve just listed a few suggestions. If you’re still having symptoms, you’ll
want to add cooked rather than raw fruits and vegetables.
This dressing used is a very quick one that I make when I don’t have mayonnaise on
hand, but you could swap in mayonnaise if you don’t have yogurt, or try the Curry
Dressing on page 75 for a full-on version of my favorite dressing for this salad.
SALAD
5 eggs
1 cup diced grapes (raisins or currants work, too; soak them in hot tap water for a
few minutes to soften them), diced
1/4 cup finely diced green onions or chives
1/2 cup finely chopped apples (peeled or not, your choice)
1/4 cup soaked nuts (pistachios, pecans, almonds, or walnuts work well; see page
18 for soaking directions)
DRESSING
1/2 cup SCD Yogurt (page 28)
1 teaspoon honey
1/2 teaspoon curry powder
salt and pepper, to taste
1 Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil. Use a spoon to gently lower the eggs into
the boiling water; they should be completely covered with water. Boil for 15 minutes
and then immediately cool in ice water for 10 minutes.
2 Prepare the dressing by combining the yogurt, honey, curry powder, salt, and pepper
in a small bowl, blending well with a fork or whisk.
3 Gently crack the sides of the eggs and peel off the shells. Chop the eggs into very
small pieces.
4 In a bowl, combine the dressing with the chopped eggs and all the other ingredients,
gently stirring with a spoon. Serve, or cover and store in the refrigerator for up to about
a week.
Makes 4 servings
Gazpacho
This chilled tomato-based soup is a wonderful way to cool down during the summer.
The method I’ve given here is a classic one, but the soup can also be blended into more
of a smoothie consistency. Ideally, you’ll want to chill this soup for at least an hour
before serving, or overnight. It gets better when it marinates for a while. When you’re
ready to serve your gazpacho you can add diced avocado, diced onion, and crème
fraîche (page 32) to enhance it. It makes a fine accompaniment to grilled chicken,
shrimp, or steak.
1 large cucumber, peeled and cut into large pieces
1 large red bell pepper, cut into large pieces
4 plum tomatoes, cut into large pieces
1 medium red onion, cut into large pieces
2 garlic cloves
1 cup tomato juice (or 1/2 cup tomato purée and 1/2 cup water)
2 tablespoons red or white wine vinegar
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon sea salt
dash of red Tabasco sauce (no additives or preservatives), or pinch of cayenne
pepper (optional)
1 In a food processor, separately pulse the following into finely ground pieces:
cucumber, tomatoes, and red bell pepper. Place in a large mixing bowl.
2 Pulse the onion and garlic together into finely ground pieces and add to the tomato
mixture.
3 Stir the remaining ingredients into the tomato mixture, blending well. Cover and
refrigerate to serve chilled.
Makes 4 to 6 servings
Tomato Cheddar Basil Soup
Cheese and tomato go well together in so many recipes, the first of which that comes to
mind is pizza. But this is a close second in flavor, and you can up the ante by pairing it
with Grilled Cheese Croutons (page 47) and garnishing with fresh basil.
1 tablespoon ghee (page 31) or cooking oil
1 small yellow onion, chopped
1 garlic clove, chopped
1 (28-ounce) can tomato sauce or crushed tomatoes
1 cup vegetable broth (or water)
1 teaspoon dried oregano
about 6 fresh basil leaves, chopped (or about 1 teaspoon dried basil)
1/4 teaspoon salt, plus more as needed
1 teaspoon honey
1/2 cup SCD Yogurt (page 28), dairy-free milk, or Sour Cashew Cream (page 26)
1/2 cup grated Cheddar or other aged cheese, plus more for serving
salt and pepper, to taste
1 Warm the ghee or oil in large saucepan over medium heat. Add the onion and cook for
5 minutes. Add the chopped garlic and cook for a few more minutes.
2 Add the tomato sauce, vegetable broth, oregano, basil, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and honey to
the saucepan and stir to blend well. Bring to a boil, reduce the heat, and then simmer,
covered, for about 10 minutes.
3 Let cool for few minutes and then add the yogurt and cheese. Purée the soup using a
blender, food processor, or immersion blender. Season with salt and pepper to taste.
4 Garnish individual servings with additional shredded cheese.
5 Store in the refrigerator for up to a few days, or freeze for a month or so.
Makes 4 to 6 servings
French Onion Soup
Any recipe with caramelized onions is probably one that I’ll love, including this classic
soup. French onion soup requires you to set aside a couple of hours to make it, but I
think it’s well worth the time it takes.
I’ve simplified this recipe a bit, mostly by toasting the bread and cheese separately from
the bowl of soup. If you prefer, you can ladle soup into an oven-safe bowl, top it with
toasted bread and grated cheese, and bake it in your oven for about 10 minutes at
350°F/175°C.
3 large red or yellow onions (about 1 pound), thinly sliced
2 tablespoons olive oil, ghee (page 31), or butter (or some combination)
drizzle of honey
1/2 teaspoon salt, plus more as needed
1 garlic clove, minced
6 cups broth (beef, chicken, or vegetable)
1/4 cup dry white wine (optional)
pepper, to taste
4 slices Simple Sandwich Bread (page 80)
1/2 cup grated Gruyère or other Swiss cheese
1 Place the onions and oil, ghee, or butter in a large saucepan or Dutch oven over low
heat. Cover and cook for 15 minutes.
2 Raise the heat to medium-low, add the honey and 1/2 teaspoon salt, and stir to
dissolve. With the cover off, cook the onions for 30 to 40 minutes more, or until they
are caramelized (they’ll turn brown, gooey, and sweet). Stir occasionally.
3 Add the garlic and cook for 1 minute.
4 Add the broth and wine, if using, and stir to blend. Add salt and pepper to taste, cover,
and simmer for 30 minutes, partially covered to allow some moisture to escape.
5 Cover the bread with the grated cheese and toast in the oven on broil or a high heat
setting for about 5 minutes, or until the cheese is bubbling and turning darker and the
edges of the bread are crisp.
6 To serve, fill four bowls with the onion soup and place a piece of cheese bread on top
of each.
Makes 4 servings
Black Bean Soup
For a delicious meal, pair this soup with crème fraîche (page 32), yogurt, or Sour
Cashew Cream (page 26); diced avocado; and a wedge of lime.
3 tablespoons olive oil (or other cooking oil)
1 large yellow onion, finely chopped
3 large carrots, peeled and cut into coins
1 large celery stalk, finely chopped
1/2 teaspoon salt
4 medium garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
4 cups vegetable broth (or chicken broth or water)
1 tablespoon honey
1 red bell pepper, diced into small pieces
2 cups black beans, either from a can (with no additives) or dried beans that have
been rinsed and soaked in 4 quarts of water overnight, then washed and drained
a few tablespoons lime juice, to taste
sea salt, to taste
1 Place the olive oil in a large saucepan (at least 6-quart size) over medium heat.
2 Place the carrots, onion, celery, and salt in the saucepan and cook for about 5 minutes,
stirring occasionally, until the onion begins to turn translucent.
3 Add the garlic, cumin, and chili powder. Blend well and cook for a few minutes.
4 Add the broth, honey, red pepper, and beans and blend well. Bring to a boil and then
reduce the heat and simmer for about 30 minutes.
5 Ladle out about half the soup into a blender container. Purée until smooth and then
stir back into the soup in the saucepan.
6 Add lime juice and sea salt to taste and serve with your favorite toppings. The soup
can be refrigerated for a few days or frozen for use later.
Makes 6 servings
Seafood Chowder
When you’re in the mood for a simple, wholesome serving of seafood chowder, this
recipe will give you just that. Seafood chowder serves up a bowl full of easily digested
vegetables, broth, and protein for healing and fortification.
This seafood chowder can easily be made dairy-free and you can use any seafood you
have on hand in your freezer, or if you’re lucky, fresh seafood. It seems to taste best on a
blustery rainy day, with images of rough seas and storms in the background.
1 tablespoon ghee (page 31), butter, or cooking oil
1 large yellow onion, chopped (about 2 cups)
1 cup peeled and diced winter squash (such as butternut or acorn) cut into bitesize pieces
2 cups clam juice (or fish stock)
1 tablespoon fresh thyme (or 1 teaspoon dried thyme)
1 teaspoon salt, plus more as needed
about 2 pounds raw seafood (such as shrimp, clams, cod, halibut), cut into bite-size
pieces
1 cup crème fraîche (page 32), SCD Yogurt (page 28), or dairy-free milk
pepper, to taste
1 Heat the ghee, butter, or oil in a large saucepan over medium heat. Add the onion to
the saucepan and heat for about 5 minutes, or until it starts to turn translucent.
2 Add the squash, clam juice or fish stock, thyme, and 1 teaspoon salt and bring to a
low boil. Cook for about 10 minutes, or until the squash is somewhat tender.
3 Add the seafood and cook for another 5 minutes, or until all the seafood is cooked.
Remove from the heat and let cool for a few minutes.
4 Stir the crème fraîche into the chowder and blend well. Season to taste with salt and
pepper. Serve immediately, store in the refrigerator for up to several days, or freeze for
up to a few weeks.
Makes 4 servings
Italian Wedding Soup
There are many variations on this soup, but essentially they all come down to broth with
greens, veggies, and meatballs. This is a very nurturing soup that can serve as a hardy
meal on its own. The meatballs are the Fennel Pesto Meatballs (page 126) served with
tomato sauce; when I’m making those, I double the recipe and use half for this soup.
You can refrigerate or freeze half of this soup for another time.
MEATBALLS
1/2 cup grated Parmesan cheese
1/2 cup chopped fresh parsley (or other greens such as basil, kale, oregano, or
arugula)
1-1/2 teaspoons fennel seeds
1 medium garlic clove
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 pound ground meat (a mix of beef and pork works well, or turkey and chicken)
1 egg
1 to 2 tablespoons ghee (page 31) or high-heat oil
SOUP
2 tablespoons ghee (page 31) or cooking oil
1 small yellow onion, finely diced
1 medium carrot, peeled and finely chopped
1 stalk celery, finely chopped
2 medium garlic cloves, finely minced
1 cup chopped spinach, kale, or other greens (cut in bite-size pieces)
8 cups chicken or vegetable broth
1/2 teaspoon dried thyme (or 1/2 tablespoon of fresh)
1/2 teaspoon dried oregano (or 1/2 tablespoon of fresh)
1/4 teaspoon salt, plus more as needed
pepper, to taste
⅓ cup grated Parmesan cheese, for serving (optional)
Garlic Toasts (page 97) or Parmesan Crackers (page 49), for serving (optional)
1 To make the meatballs, combine the Parmesan, parsley, fennel seeds, garlic, and salt
in the bowl of a food processor and process until finely ground, like pesto. Place in a
bowl along with the ground meat and egg; use a spatula or fork to blend.
2 Heat the ghee or oil in a Dutch oven or large saucepan (one that has a cover) over
medium heat.
3 Using an ice cream scoop or spoon, shape the meat mixture into meatballs and place
in the hot pan, leaving space between them. Brown briefly on all sides, just enough that
the meatballs won’t fall apart. Transfer the meatballs to a plate and set aside. Drain the
excess fat from the pan.
4 For the soup, add the ghee or oil to the pan along with the onion, carrot, celery, and
garlic. Cook for a few minutes, stirring occasionally.
5 Stir in the broth, chopped greens, thyme, oregano, and salt, blending well. Spoon the
meatballs into the broth. Simmer for 30 minutes, or until the vegetables are tender.
Adjust the seasoning with salt and pepper to taste.
6 Place the soup in a serving bowl and top with shredded Parmesan and croutons, if you
wish, or offer the toasts. This soup can be refrigerated for a few days, covered, or kept
in the freezer for a few months.
Makes 4 to 6 servings
Sauces, Jams, and Dips
Here are some of my favorite sauces, with a range of textures and flavors to
accompany a variety of foods. You’ll want to make extra of some of these classic
sauces—such as the homemade ketchup and the marinara sauce—and freeze them
so you’ll have them on hand to use later.
Mayonnaise
This homemade mayonnaise comes in quite handy for a number of the dressings and
dips in this book. You can also use it on sandwiches and in cold, fresh salads.
1 egg
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice or white vinegar
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard (or other style of moist mustard)
drizzle of honey, or to taste
1 cup oil (avocado, almond, sunflower, macadamia, or other neutral-flavored oil),
or as needed
1 Place the egg, lemon juice, mustard, and honey in the bowl of a food processor or a
blender.
2 Turn your processor or blender on high and slowly drizzle in the oil, adding it through
the small opening at the top of most processors and blenders. If the mayonnaise isn’t
thick enough, add a bit more oil.
3 Store in the refrigerator, covered, for up to a few weeks
Makes about 1 cup
Honey Mustard Dressing and Dip
This somewhat thick dressing also makes a great dip for veggies and Chicken Tenders
(page 119). The recipe calls for mayonnaise, but you can substitute Sour Cashew Cream
(page 26) or olive oil if you wish.
I like this dressing on the sweet side, so I use close to 2 tablespoons honey. If you’re not
sure, start with 1 tablespoon, taste, and then add more if desired. This recipe can easily
be doubled.
1/4 cup mayonnaise (page 69)
2 tablespoons stoneground mustard (or other prepared mustard)
1-1/2 tablespoons honey, or to taste
Combine all the ingredients in a bowl and whisk or stir until completely blended. Store
in the refrigerator in a sealed container for a few weeks.
Makes 1/2 cup
Simple Ketchup
There are a lot of good ketchup recipes, but this one is quite simple, which is why I like
it. You can make tomato paste by simmering tomato juice for an hour or so, or until it
has the consistency of tomato paste—just keep the top off the saucepan. In a pinch you
can use tomato sauce in this recipe and let it simmer longer to condense it to the
thickness you desire.
8 ounces tomato paste (see above)
1/4 teaspoon apple cider vinegar
1 teaspoon honey (optional for a sweeter ketchup)
water, if needed
1 Place all the ingredients in a saucepan over a low to medium heat and simmer for 10
minutes or so, stirring occasionally to blend. Add a little water if the ketchup becomes
thicker than you want.
2 Let cool to room temperature, cover, and refrigerate. This ketchup will keep for about
a week or so in the refrigerator, and you can freeze some for later use.
Makes 1 cup
Avoid Additives and Processed Food
When you read the label of a packaged or canned food, if there are ingredients you
don’t recognize or you’re unsure if they’re OK to eat while following SCD, then steer
clear of these foods. Finding fresh, unpackaged, and minimally processed is your
goal. Eating seasonal and organic food is a bonus, because you’re reducing your
toxic load and getting the maximum nutrients from the food.
Classic Marinara Sauce
This vitamin-rich tomato sauce can be used for all sorts of recipes that call for tomato
sauce. I use cans of crushed tomatoes, but if Roma (plum) tomatoes are in season, find
a way to buy a few pounds and run them through a food mill, and you’ll end up with the
most fantastic marinara sauce. Roma tomatoes, in season, are among the sweetest and
most flavorful tomatoes around. Try to buy organic tomatoes or sauce, if possible; since
tomato skins are thin, it’s likely the insides will absorb any toxins or pesticides. The
grated carrots are my favorite ingredient in this recipe. They give a vitamin boost and
sweeten the sauce.
1/4 cup olive oil
1 small onion, finely diced (about 1 cup)
4 garlic cloves, minced
2 (28-ounce) cans crushed or puréed tomatoes
1/2 cup finely grated peeled carrots (about 2 small carrots)
1 teaspoon dried basil (or a few fresh leaves, chopped)
1/4 teaspoon sea salt, plus more as needed
1 teaspoon dried oregano
pinch of red pepper flakes (optional, for a little kick)
pepper, to taste
1 Place the olive oil, onion, and garlic in a large saucepan and heat over low to medium
heat. Cook until the onions begin to soften, or for about 5 minutes.
2 Add the tomatoes, carrots, basil, salt, oregano, and red pepper flakes, if using, and stir
to blend well.
3 Bring the sauce to a boil and then reduce to a steady simmer and cover the saucepan.
Simmer for at least 30 minutes, stirring occasionally. Season to taste with salt and
pepper.
4 Cover and store the sauce in the refrigerator; it will keep for about a week. You can
also freeze this sauce for up to 6 months, or can it for a year.
Makes about 4 cups
Parsley and Spinach Pesto
The real trick to making good pesto is to have a food processor. Because I like to make
pesto at a moment’s notice, I keep these basic ingredients on hand: Parmesan cheese,
fresh lemon, and olive oil. Then I take whatever greens I happen to have, and green
onions if I have them, and it all goes together in the food processor. My favorite fresh
greens for making pesto are arugula, spinach, parsley, basil, and mixed baby greens.
The parsley in the following recipe helps prevent the pesto from turning brownish green.
Keep this pesto around for a meal at any time—green eggs, green cauliflower rice, fish
or chicken marinade, or simply a spread for pizza crust or toast. If you don’t eat
Parmesan or other hard aged cheese, you can substitute pine nuts (which are actually
seeds) and salt. I use about 1/4 cup pine nuts and 1/8 teaspoon sea salt when I don’t
have Parmesan on hand.
4 ounces (or so) fresh parsley
4 ounces (or so) fresh spinach
2 green onions, cut into segments
1/4 cup olive oil (or more if needed)
2 garlic cloves
1/4 cup grated or shredded Parmesan cheese
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 Whirl the parsley and spinach in a food processor until finely chopped.
2 Add all the remaining ingredients and process until finely ground and well blended.
Store in the refrigerator, sealed, for up to a week or so, or freeze for up to a few months.
Makes about 1 cup
Ranch Dressing
Here’s a simple, creamy dressing or dip that can be used on salads, with chips and
veggie strips, and with grilled meat strips. And what I love about this dressing is that
while no buttermilk is necessary, it certainly tastes like it’s in there. To make this dairyfree, replace the mayonnaise and yogurt with Sour Cashew Cream (page 26).
1/4 cup mayonnaise
1/4 cup SCD Yogurt (page 28)
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
1/4 teaspoon garlic powder
1/4 teaspoon onion powder
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh dill, Italian parsley, or chives (optional)
pepper, to taste
Combine all the ingredients in a bowl and blend well, using a fork or whisk. Cover and
store in the refrigerator for up to a few weeks.
Makes about 1 cup
Curry Dressing
I love this dressing so much that I drink it—a bit. I sip it every now and then, and I lick
the salad bowl to get every last drop of dressing after the salad morsels have been
consumed. It seems to go with almost any fresh dish. Use it as a salad dressing, as a
veggie and fruit dip, or as a super-tasty mayonnaise. It’s especially good for chicken
and egg salads.
If you’re a bit sensitive to spicy seasonings, go a little easy on the curry powder. I tend
to use a lot here, but you can still have great flavor using a teaspoon less.
⅓ cup mayonnaise (page 69)
⅓ cup SCD Yogurt (page 28)
2 teaspoons honey
1/2 tablespoon lime juice (optional)
2 teaspoons curry powder
1/4 teaspoon ground ginger
⅛ teaspoon sea salt
Combine all the ingredients in a bowl and blend well, using a fork or a whisk. Cover
and store in the refrigerator for up to a few weeks.
Makes about 1 cup
Reduced Toxic Load
Every day you are breathing, drinking, and absorbing all kinds of chemicals. Some
are naturally occurring while others aren’t, and you probably don’t want the latter
near you or inside you. While they may be present only in small amounts, over time
these harmful chemicals can accumulate in your body and create a toxic load that
affects how you feel and live. Here are a few ways to lower your toxic load: drink
filtered water; use green cleaning products, soaps, shampoos, and other personal
care products (see ewg.org/skindeep); wear and use natural fabrics and other
products with low to no toxicity; eat organic food when possible; avoid antibiotics,
pesticides, and industrially produced food.
Caramelized Onion Dip
Caramelized anything sounds good to me, but especially caramelized onions. Use this
dip for Zucchini Sticks (page 44), cut veggies, chicken strips, and other savory treats.
It’s also tasty as a spread on sandwiches.
1 large sweet onion (about 1 pound), diced
sea salt, as needed
1 tablespoon ghee (page 31), unsalted butter, or high-heat oil
2 tablespoons apple cider vinegar
2 tablespoons honey
1 tablespoon smooth mustard (Dijon works well)
1 cup mayonnaise (page 69)
pepper, to taste
1 Place the onions, a pinch of salt, and the ghee, butter, or oil in a skillet over medium
heat. Cook for about 15 minutes, stirring occasionally, until the onions are soft,
translucent, and browned (caramelized).
2 Let cool and then combine the onions with the vinegar, honey, and mustard in a food
processor or blender. Process until mostly smooth.
3 Transfer the onion mixture to a bowl and stir in the mayonnaise to blend well. Add
salt and pepper to taste. Store sealed in the refrigerator for up to a few weeks.
Makes about 2 cups
Avocado Crema
Avocado crema isn’t just for tacos and nachos, but it does a great job of serving those
up. Try it on sandwiches, as a substitute for mayonnaise, and in dressings. This recipe
can be made lactose-free by using crème fraîche (page 32) or dairy-free by using Sour
Cashew Cream (page 26). I kept this version mellow, but to spice it up, you can add a
tablespoon of minced jalapeno (seeds removed for less kick) or a pinch of cayenne
pepper.
This recipe makes 2 cups, but in my experience there’s never enough, so I’d double this
amount for a crowd.
1-1/2 cups avocado pieces (about 2 avocados)
1/2 cup crème fraîche (page 32) or Sour Cashew Cream (page 26)
1-1/2 tablespoons fresh lime juice
⅛ teaspoon salt, or to taste
Combine all the ingredients in a food processor, or blend them by hand using a potato
smasher or fork, and process or blend until smooth. You can store the mixture in the
refrigerator, covered, for about a week.
Makes 2 cups
Always Make Extra
Leftovers are a great way to carry your meal planning over to the next day. Leftovers
from dinner can be lunch for the next day. And don’t restrict yourself to eating
certain foods only at certain times of the day. Breakfast is okay for dinner, and vice
versa.
Breads, Biscuits, and Crêpes
You’ll find a lot of meal options in this chapter, many of them made with almond
flour and/or coconut flour, or with nut butter. I prefer simple recipes, so my goal is
that you’ll find these easy to make and will stock up so that you always have
something around for a quick meal or treat.
Simple Sandwich Bread
This is probably my favorite easy-to-bake bread. It can be used for sandwiches, rolls,
and toast. It comes together easily and tastes delicious. What I also like about this
bread is its overall texture, which to me is like sandwich bread that contains gluten. It
stays together well, and it’s a bit firm on the outside and softer on the inside. This is
also a very flexible recipe, in that you can use just about any nut or seed butter. The
flavor and color may change a bit, but the overall texture stays the same. If the nut
butter is dark, like roasted almond butter, the bread will be on the darker side, while the
opposite is true for lighter butters, such as cashew. Double the recipe to make more
than one loaf at a time.
If you like French toast, create a loaf especially for French toast by adding an
additional 1/2 tablespoon honey and 1 teaspoon ground cinnamon to the batter. Slice
the bread, dip each slice in a beaten egg, and fry on both sides in a buttered frying pan.
3/4 cup smooth nut butter (I use almond or cashew)
4 eggs
1 tablespoon honey
1/4 cup finely ground nut flour (I use blanched almond or cashew flour)
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 In a bowl, use a spatula or mixer to blend together the nut butter, eggs, and honey
until creamy.
3 Add the remaining dry ingredients to the batter and blend until creamy.
4 Pour the batter into a baking pan; I use a 3-1/2 × 7-1/2-inch loaf pan, but you can use
a larger pan. Bake for 40 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted in the center of the loaf
comes out clean.
5 Let cool and slice. Seal and store at room temperature for a few days, in the
refrigerator for a few weeks, or in the freezer for a month or so.
Makes 1 loaf
Sandwich Rounds
While you can use another of the breads in this book to make sandwich rolls, this is my
favorite recipe for making flat rolls. It produces a sandwich round that tastes like a
white roll and is easy to dress up. This isn’t a high roll—it’s more of a “round”—but I
use these as rolls, and they make great panini (see Apple Cheddar Panino, page 82). To
create variety, try different toppings. My personal favorite is a pinch of sea salt, poppy
seeds, and sesame seeds. Onion and garlic bits or dried garlic powder are another
option. Sprinkle on the topping once you’ve poured the rounds onto the cookie sheets,
and then bake.
2-1/2 cups blanched almond flour
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 cup SCD Yogurt (page 28)
1/4 cup butter or ghee (page 31), melted
3 large eggs
2 tablespoons honey
toppings, such as poppy seeds, sesame seeds, and coarse salt (optional)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Line two or three (depending their size) baking
sheets with nonstick baking mats, parchment paper, or other nonstick material.
2 Place all the ingredients except your toppings in a food processor; blend until creamy.
3 Pour 2-tablespoon batter circles onto the prepared baking sheets, leaving at least 2
inches between rounds. Use the back of a spoon to spread the batter out to the size you
want, but don’t make it too thin. If you want larger buns, use 3 or 4 tablespoons and
don’t spread them, because they’ll spread sufficiently while baking.
4 Sprinkle with your chosen toppings and bake for 15 minutes, or until the rolls brown
slightly on top. If you’re making larger rolls, they’ll take a few more minutes to brown
and firm up sufficiently. Don’t be afraid to go a little brown with these—that will make
them firmer and add a tasty crunch at the edges.
5 Slide a knife or spatula under each roll and remove to a cooling rack. Let cool
completely, seal, and store in the refrigerator for a week or so, or in the freezer for a few
months.
Makes about 12 small or 6 large rounds
Apple Cheddar Panino
A panino is a pressed and toasted sandwich. Though it’s often called a panini, with an
“i” instead of an “o” at the end, that’s actually the plural form of this popular
sandwich. It’s quite portable, which is one of the reasons I like it so much—toast, cool,
and wrap, and you have a sandwich to go. The Sandwich Rounds on page 81 are
excellent for panini, or you can use another bread recipe from this book.
This is one type of panino, but the possible combinations are endless. Put your favorite
sandwich ingredients together, place the sandwich in the panini maker, and toast for a
few minutes. It’s that simple. You can make the sandwich either with a panini press, or
with two frying pans. Just warm one pan over medium heat; butter the inside of that
pan and the bottom of the second pan. Place the panino in the warm pan and press on it
with the second pan for a few minutes. Once the first side is cooked, flip the panino and
press again for a few minutes to cook the other side.
2 Sandwich Rounds (page 81)
1 tablespoon stoneground mustard
1/2 cup shredded Cheddar cheese (or a few thin slices)
1/2 apple, cored and thinly sliced (skin on or off)
2 slices prosciutto
1 Warm up your panini press.
2 Spread the mustard on the inside of each round, and then layer the cheese, apple, and
prosciutto between the 2 sandwich rounds.
3 Place the sandwich in the panini press for about 3 minutes, or until the cheese begins
to melt.
Makes 1 panino
Almond Flour Waffles
I have fond memories of meeting my grandmother on Manhattan’s Upper East Side for
the best Belgian waffles in town. The narrow, hole-in-the-wall diner had the most
enormous waffle makers I had ever seen.
The size of your waffles will depend on your waffle iron, too, and there are many to
choose from. My latest model has a nonstick surface, but if you’re not into that, there
are waffle makers that have cast-iron surfaces. While I don’t need to grease mine, I
usually give it a quick rub of butter or oil before I begin. It’s also a good idea to fully
warm up the iron to ensure that the first waffle is just as good as the next. To crisp your
cooked waffles, place them in a dehydrator or oven at 150°F/65°C for up to 30 minutes.
1 cup blanched almond flour (or other nut flour)
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon (optional)
4 eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 tablespoons honey
1 Preheat your waffle iron on a medium setting. Grease as needed, or according to the
manufacturer’s directions.
2 Place the almond flour, salt, baking soda, and cinnamon (if using) in a mixing bowl.
Blend together using a whisk.
3 Add the eggs, vanilla, and honey and whisk until well blended.
4 Pour about 1/4 cup batter into the heated waffle maker (more or less, depending on
your waffle iron) and close the lid.
5 When the waffle is ready, transfer it to a plate and add your favorite topping. Seal and
store any extra waffles in the refrigerator for a few days, or freeze them for up to a
month or so.
Makes 6 to 8 waffles, depending on your waffle maker
Almond Brioche
This moist, brioche-style bread can be baked either as a loaf or as rolls. The rolls will
bake much faster than the bread, so keep that in mind.
2-1/2 cups blanched almond f1our 1 teaspoon baking soda
1 cup SCD Yogurt (page 28)
1/4 cup butter or ghee (page 31), melted
3 large eggs
2 tablespoons honey
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Line a loaf pan with parchment paper if you’re
making bread, or insert nonstick liners in the wells of a standard-size muffin tin (or use
silicone muffin cups). For the loaf pan, you can line the bottom of the pan and grease
the sides, or insert the parchment paper to completely cover the inside.
2 Place all the ingredients in the bowl of a food processor. Blend until the mixture is
creamy.
3 Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan, or fill the muffin cups about 2/3 full.
4 Bake the bread for 50 minutes, or until a long toothpick or wooden skewer comes out
clean; the top will be brown and have a hard crust. Bake the rolls for 12 minutes, or
until they’ve browned slightly on top.
5 Let cool for a few minutes. Serve, or seal and store at room temperature for a few
days, in the refrigerator for a week or so, or in the freezer for a few months.
Makes 1 loaf or about 8 rolls
Popovers
These popovers, made with coconut flour and dairy-free milk, are delightfully light on
their own. You can add herbs and spices to give these an added flavor, and top the
popovers with grated Parmesan cheese, garlic powder, Parsley and Spinach Pesto
(page 73), or minced fresh parsley. My personal favorite, though, is eating them plain,
hot out of the oven, with a bit of butter and jam.
These are best eaten fresh from the oven, but you can store them at room temperature
for a few hours if necessary. They’ll deflate after several minutes, but they’ll still look
and taste marvelous. If you add about a tablespoon of crème fraîche (page 32) or
grated cheese to the batter, the popovers will become denser and tend to hold their
structure better after cooling. To bake these, use a muffin tin with nonstick muffin liners
(see Product Sources, page 161), silicone baking cups, or a nonstick brioche or popover
pan.
4 eggs
1/2 cup coconut milk or other non-dairy milk
1/4 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons coconut flour
1 Preheat your oven to 425°F/220°C. Prepare a muffin tin with nonstick liners or
silicone cups or grease a brioche or popover pan, as needed.
2 In a bowl, whisk together all the ingredients until fully blended and a bit bubbly.
3 Fill the muffin or popover wells about 2/3 full with batter.
4 Bake for about 20 minutes, or until the popovers are brown on top. Let cool for a
moment and then devour.
Makes 6 popovers
Crêpes
A crêpe is a very thin pancake that can be filled with just about anything sweet or
savory. This recipe is simple in nature and easy to prepare. Just whisk together the
ingredients and prepare a hot skillet.
Filling ideas for your crêpes include yogurt and fruit, Roasted Ratatouille (page 106),
jam and cheese, and ham and egg scramble.
2 eggs
2 tablespoons butter, ghee (page 31), or coconut oil, melted, plus more for the
skillet
1 teaspoon honey
⅓ cup dairy-free milk (almond or other)
2 tablespoons coconut flour
⅛ teaspoon salt
1 In a bowl, whisk together the eggs, 2 tablespoons butter, ghee, or oil, honey, and milk.
2 Add the coconut flour and salt and whisk until well blended. Let the batter sit for a
few minutes so the coconut flour can absorb the moisture.
3 Heat a skillet over medium heat and add about 1 tablespoon butter or oil.
4 Once the skillet is warm, pour in about 2 tablespoons batter to make a 4 to 5-inch
crêpe and tilt the pan to allow the batter to spread across skillet in the shape of a circle.
5 After a few minutes, when the edges and bottom are starting to brown and you can
easily slip a spatula underneath, flip the crêpe to the other side. Cook another minute or
so on the other side, or until it is slightly browned.
6 Transfer the cooked crêpe onto a plate and repeat with the rest of the batter. Place
waxed paper or paper towels between the crêpes on the plate to keep them from
sticking.
7 To serve, fold or roll the crêpes around your chosen filling. Or, cover the unfilled
crêpes and store in the refrigerator for up to a week or so.
Makes about 6 crêpes
Butter Biscuits
This is a very simple recipe that can easily be dressed up with seasonings or small
chopped additions such as bacon bits, Cheddar cheese, chives, and more. These are
good as breakfast biscuits with scrambled eggs. I also use this recipe as a crust for
Chicken Pot Pie (page 120).
2-1/2 cups blanched almond flour
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
2 eggs
1/4 cup ghee (page 31) or unsalted butter, softened
1 tablespoon honey
1 In a bowl, combine the almond flour, salt, and baking soda; blend well using a fork.
2 In a separate bowl, whisk together the eggs, ghee or butter, and honey. Add to the dry
ingredients and stir with a fork to blend thoroughly.
3 Roll the dough into a ball, wrap in waxed paper, and place in the freezer for about 10
minutes.
4 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper or a
nonstick baking mat.
5 Place the chilled dough between two pieces of parchment paper or other nonstick
material and roll to a thickness of about 1 inch. Cut out biscuits using a cookie cutter.
(Alternatively, you can roll small balls of dough in your hands, flatten them to about 1
inch thick, and shape into biscuits by hand.)
6 Place the biscuits on the prepared baking sheet and bake for about 12 minutes, or until
they’re browned on the outside and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean.
Makes about 6 biscuits
No-Corn Cornbread
Almond flour happens to make a fine base for “cornbread,” even when it doesn’t
contain a single grain of cornmeal. Coconut flour lightens the texture, reduces the
amount of nut flour needed, and adds a boost of good fiber.
This is a slightly sweet, slightly salty, slightly buttery version of cornbread—the basic
kind. It’s the softer, cakelike kind, not grainy, unless you use a grainier grind of almond
or coconut flour. Feel free to add minced jalapeno, chili powder, chives, or grated
Cheddar to make the bread savory. Or if you like it sweeter, add 1 tablespoon more
honey. Or just bake the basic cornbread, let it cool for a minute, slice it into squares,
and serve it with a hot bowl of your favorite chili or soup.
Baked in an 8 × 8-inch baking pan, this bread gets about 1 inch thick. For thicker
bread, use a smaller pan or double the recipe and use a larger pan (about 9 × 12-inch
size).
1/2 cup blanched almond flour
1/4 cup coconut flour
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
3 eggs
1/4 cup unsalted butter, melted
2 tablespoons honey
1/2 cup almond milk (or other dairy-free milk or SCD Yogurt, page 28)
1 Preheat your oven to 325°F/165°C. Line the bottom of a baking pan (8 × 8-inch size
or smaller) with parchment paper or other nonstick material, or grease well.
2 Blend the almond and coconut flours, salt, and baking soda in a bowl. (I use a stand
mixer and mixing bowl.)
3 Add the eggs, butter, honey, and almond milk. Blend well.
4 Pour the batter into the prepared pan and bake for 20 minutes, or until a toothpick
inserted in the center comes out clean.
5 Let cool briefly on a wire rack and then cut into squares. The bread can be sealed and
stored in the refrigerator for a week or so, or frozen for a few months.
Makes 9 or 12 servings
Banana Bread
This is one of those recipes that grew out of a few other recipes and became one of the
most reliable staples for my family, for friends, for my website readers—and for good
reason. It’s unbreakable, and it tastes great. This recipe is easy to multiply. I always
double it, and I triple it if I’m planning to give a loaf away.
You can use a 5 × 8-inch pan for this, but I usually use a smaller 3-1/2 × 7-1/2-inch
loaf pan for this bread. The loaf will have a flat top in the larger pan, and it will be
taller in a smaller loaf pan. If you want the loaf to lift out of the pan easily, line the
inside with parchment paper. Otherwise just oil or butter it.
3/4 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon sea salt
3/4 cup almond flour
1/4 cup coconut flour
2 tablespoons olive oil (or other cooking oil)
3 eggs
2 very ripe bananas, mashed (about 1 cup)
1/4 cup honey
1/2 cup chopped walnuts (optional)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Oil or butter a 5 × 8-inch or smaller loaf pan, or
cover the bottom of sides of the pan with parchment paper if you want to be able to lift
the loaf out of the pan.
2 Using a whisk or fork, blend the baking soda, salt, and flours in a bowl.
3 In a separate bowl, mix together the oil, eggs, mashed bananas, and honey. Combine
the blended wet ingredients with the dry ingredients. I use an electric mixer to ensure
that the batter is well blended.
4 Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake for 40 minutes, or until the sides and top
are browned and a toothpick inserted in the middle comes out clean.
5 Let cool in the pan or on a cooling rack, and slice. To store, cover and refrigerate for
up to a few weeks, or freeze for a month or so.
Makes 1 loaf
Pumpkin Bread
After many requests, I staring experimenting with pumpkin bread recipes. As a result,
there are at least three baked pumpkin goodies on my website. But this one remains one
of my favorites because of its flavor and moistness. It’s almost a cake.
I usually use homemade squash purée in this recipe, but you can used canned as well.
To make your own roasted pumpkin or squash purée, see page 105.
3/4 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon ground cloves
1/2 teaspoon ground ginger
2 cups blanched almond flour
1 cup squash or pumpkin purée (homemade or canned)
1 cup honey
2 eggs
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Grease a loaf pan, about 8 × 5 inches.
2 In a bowl, combine all the dry ingredients in the order listed (baking soda through
almond flour); blend well.
3 In a separate bowl, combine the squash purée, honey, and eggs, blending thoroughly.
4 Combine the wet and dry ingredients and blend well.
5 Scoop the batter into the prepared pan and bake for 60 minutes, or until the outside is
brown and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. The darker you go, the
better it tastes, in my opinion. It might take more or less time, depending on how moist
your purée is.
6 Cover and store at room temperature for a few days, in the refrigerator for a few
weeks, or in the freezer for a few months.
Makes 1 loaf
Cinnamon Raisin Bread
This bread recipe uses both almond butter and almond flour. The creamy butter makes it
soft, and honey makes it slightly sweet. You can use either raw or roasted almond butter
with this recipe.
I use a good amount of raisins because I love them, but you could easily reduce the
amount to 1/2 cup if you prefer just a few raisins in each slice. The raisins tend to be a
bit heavier than the batter and will gravitate toward the bottom of the bread. To
counteract this, I add half the raisins to the batter, then sprinkle the rest over the batter
once it’s poured into the baking pan.
3/4 cup smooth almond butter
4 eggs
2 tablespoons honey
1/4 cup blanched almond flour
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1 cup raisins
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Line a loaf pan with parchment paper. I either line
the entire pan, or at least the bottom and then grease the sides. I use a smaller pan, about
4 × 7 inches, but any pan around this size will work, since the loaf does rise.
2 Using either a spatula or mixer, blend the almond butter, eggs, and honey in a large
bowl until creamy.
3 In a separate bowl, blend the almond flour, salt, baking soda, and cinnamon together.
Add the dry mix to the almond butter batter and blend well.
4 Stir half of the raisins into the batter, blending well.
5 Pour the batter into the prepared baking pan and then sprinkle the rest of the raisins
over the top. Use a spoon or spatula to press them into the batter.
6 Bake for 45 minutes, or until a long toothpick or wooden skewer inserted all the way
into the center comes out clean. Make sure the very bottom of the loaf is baked.
7 Let cool and slice. Seal and store in the refrigerator for a week or so, or freeze for up
to a few months.
Makes 1 loaf
Cinnamon Bun Muffins
This is a well-loved recipe from my website, and I actually have two versions: this one
using coconut flour and another using almond flour. Both are good, but the coconut
flour recipe seems to be just a bit more popular. I couldn’t imagine not including it in
this book.
MUFFINS
1/2 cup coconut flour
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
4 eggs
⅓ cup SCD Yogurt (page 28) or dairy-free milk
1/2 cup honey
CINNAMON TOPPING
2 tablespoons ground cinnamon
1/4 cup honey
2 tablespoons unsalted butter, ghee (page 31), or coconut oil, melted
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Insert nonstick muffin liners into the wells of a
muffin tin.
2 For the muffins, combine the coconut flour, baking soda, and salt in a bowl and blend
well.
3 Add the eggs, yogurt, and honey, using an electric mixer or blending well with a
whisk. Make sure no clumps of flour remain.
4 Fill the muffin liners about 3/4 full with batter.
5 In a small bowl, blend the topping ingredients together. Drip topping over each
muffin. Some will sink into the batter, and you can use a toothpick to poke topping into
the batter to spread it around.
6 Bake for about 20 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted in the center of a muffin
comes out clean. Serve warm; or let cool, cover, and store for a few days at room
temperature or for a week or so in the refrigerator.
Makes 8 muffins
Tortillas
These easy-to-make tortillas can be pulled out of the refrigerator at a moment’s notice
for a quick meal or snack. Make sure to place wax or parchment paper between the
tortillas to make them easy to separate.
You can top these with just about anything, including marinated grilled veggies, fish,
and chicken. You can also use them to make baked enchiladas and burritos. One of my
favorite ways to use them is to create Fish Tacos (page 136). These modest-sized tacos
are easier to fold (less fragile) than larger ones.
Quick Tips
If you don’t have enough egg whites, you can substitute 2 whole eggs for the
whites.
⅔ cup egg whites (about 4 large egg whites)
2 tablespoons butter, ghee (page 31), or coconut oil, melted, plus more for the
skillet
1/4 cup dairy-free milk (almond or coconut works well)
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
2 tablespoons coconut flour
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 In a bowl, whisk together the egg whites, 2 tablespoons butter (or ghee or oil), milk,
and lime juice.
2 2. Add the coconut flour, cumin, and salt; whisk until well blended. Let the batter sit
for a few minutes so the coconut flour can absorb the moisture.
3 Heat a skillet over medium heat and add about 1 tablespoon butter or oil.
4 Once the skillet is warm, pour in about 2 tablespoons batter to make a 4 to 5-inch
tortilla.
5 After a few minutes, when the edges and bottom are starting to brown and you can
easily slip a spatula underneath, flip the tortilla to the other side.
6 Transfer the tortilla to a plate and repeat with the rest of the batter. Place waxed paper
or parchment paper between the tortillas. Serve, or cover and store in the refrigerator for
up to a week or so.
Makes about 6 tortillas
Pizza Crust (Focaccia)
This recipe for a thick pizza crust has been on my website for quite a while and remains
popular. It can be used with toppings or on its own as focaccia. You can easily
substitute different types of nut flour and cheese.
The bottom of this cheesy crust gets nice and crunchy. You can serve this as either pizza
or bread, with toppings or with flavored olive oils, and you can wrap it up and save it in
the fridge or freezer, making it convenient for quick meals and snacks.
2 cups blanched almond flour
1/4 teaspoon each dried basil, dried oregano, and garlic powder (one or more are
optional)
⅛ teaspoon sea salt
2 eggs
1 cup shredded cheese (Cheddar, Parmesan, or a mix of soft and hard cheeses)
1 tablespoon olive oil
toppings, if desired
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Blend the dry ingredients in a mixing bowl using a spatula or a mixer.
3 Add the eggs, cheese, and olive oil and blend well. Form into 2 or 4 dough balls,
depending on how big you want your pizza pies.
4 On a nonstick baking mat or parchment paper, use your hands or a spatula to flatten 1
dough ball into a circular crust about 1/4 inch thick, or thinner if you wish. I make
individual pies, but a single big pie will work just as well. Lift the crusts and parchment
paper or mat onto baking sheets.
5 Bake the crusts for about 15 minutes, or until they’re as dark and firm as you want.
The longer they stay in the oven, the crunchier the outer crust will be, top and bottom.
6 Add any toppings you like and bake for another 5 to 10 minutes, or remove from the
oven and serve as flatbread slices or focaccia. To store, seal and refrigerate for a week
or so, or freeze for about a month.
Makes 2 to 4 pizzas
Garlic Toasts
For this recipe, pick your favorite bread and combine it with your favorite olive oil,
some garlic powder, and a dash of salt. For our family, this is a bit of heaven. Top these
toasts with Tomato Bruschetta (page 46), or combine with a warm bowl of soup or
Classic Marinara Sauce (page 72).
6 slices bread
2 tablespoons garlic powder
1/2 teaspoon salt
2 to 3 tablespoons olive oil
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Place the bread slices on a baking sheet and sprinkle each slice with garlic powder
and salt. Drizzle on some olive oil.
3 Toast the bread until it is brown around the edges.
4 Let cool and slice into triangles or rectangles. Store covered in the refrigerator for a
week, or freeze for a few months.
Makes 6 servings
Prescription Drugs
It’s okay to follow SCD while taking prescription drugs. Some people start out on
drugs and then follow SCD to slowly reduce their drug dependency, with the goal of
transitioning to controlling their symptoms with just SCD. While you’re probably
hoping to avoid taking prescribed drugs, sometimes it may be necessary. Try not to
feel defeated, but instead focus on eating well and learning to cook and prepare food
that you like and need, and the rest will follow. It may be difficult to tell what’s
working and what’s not, but you can figure that out as you go along, and as your
body heals.
Vegetables and Mock Starches
I’m a veggie lover, and I always have been. As a kid I loved all the green stuff—
spinach, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, salads. I munched on whole sweet bell peppers
as if I were grabbing an apple. I hope you’ll find some green love, too, and
incorporate vegetables into your daily meal planning. Some of the best sources of
nutrients are green and bright-colored veggies, and the Roasted Ratatouille on
page 106 fits that requirement easily. I keep a huge supply of it in my refrigerator
so that I always have the makings of a quick bruschetta or sandwich.
Simple Quiche
Here’s a very easy recipe for a quiche that can be made with or without a crust. In fact,
I kind of like it without a crust, because that frees me up to have just one step in the
process. If you prefer a crust, use the Almond Tart Crust on page 100.
Feel free to adjust the ingredients—just keep the general ratio the same. It’s really hard
to mess this one up, so use whatever you have on hand. This is also convenient to have
for ongoing leftovers as a snack, lunch, or breakfast. Reheat at 375°F/190°C for 5
minutes or so.
8 eggs, lightly beaten
1 cup (about 4 ounces) shredded cheese (Cheddar or other aged cheese)
1 cup SCD Yogurt (page 28) or a soft cheese
1 cup chopped veggies or cured meat (greens, bell peppers, ham, raw bacon)
2 green onions, chopped
⅛ teaspoon salt
1/4 cup chopped jalapeno chiles (optional; if you like heat, don’t remove the seeds)
1 prepared Almond Tart Crust (page 100; optional)
1 Preheat your oven to 375°F/190°C.
2 Mix all the filling ingredients together in a big bowl.
3 Pour the mixture into an 8-inch baking pan or a prepared tart crust, if you’re using
one. Bake for about 25 minutes, or until the top begins to brown and the center is firm.
4 Cool for a few minutes and then serve warm, or store in the refrigerator, covered, for
up to a week.
Makes 8 servings
Almond Tart Crust
This tart crust can be used for quiches and savory tarts, and the seasonings can be
changed to suit your own preferences or what you have on hand. I sometimes add fresh
chopped thyme or rosemary to the mix, or some dill and oregano when I’m including
feta cheese in my tart filling.
Quick Tip
This crust fills an 8-inch round tart pan or pie dish, or a 7 × 11-inch rectangular tart
pan.
2 cups blanched almond flour or almond meal
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/4 cup ghee (page 31), unsalted butter, or coconut oil, softened
1 tablespoon water
1 tablespoon chopped fresh herbs or 1 teaspoon dried herbs (optional)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Blend the almond flour or meal with the salt in a bowl.
3 Add the ghee, butter, or oil and the water, plus any herbs you’re using. Blend until the
dough is crumbly but sticks together when you press it with your fingers.
4 Press the dough into a tart pan or pie dish.
5 Bake for 10 minutes, or until the crust begins to brown slightly. Let cool for at least
10 minutes and then fill.
Makes 1 tart crust or shell
Fresh Air and Exercise
Get outside every day for fresh air and sunlight. One hour of exposure to sunlight
each day is the best source of vitamin D. Open up the windows in your house, and
bring herbs and plants inside to freshen the air. Clean out air filters in furnaces and
vacuum cleaners. Even in the winter, I keep a few windows cracked for fresh airflow.
Find a happy balance with exercise that keeps you in shape without depleting the
energy reserves you need for healing. Walking, running, sweating, stretching, and
replenishing with water help your body detoxify and improve your muscle and bone
strength.
Kale Onion Tart
Caramelized onions lend wonderful flavor to any savory recipe, including vegetable
tarts. You can take the time to fully caramelize the onions, or cut it short and only cook
them for about 15 minutes. If you don’t have kale, you can substitute other greens you
may have on hand, such as spinach or chard. If you want more of a quiche from this
recipe, just add a bit more salt and 2 more eggs. And if you want to leave out the
cheese, you can substitute SCD Yogurt (page 28) or crème fraîche (page 32).
2 tablespoons unsalted ghee (page 31) or other cooking oil (or a mix of both)
1 large onion (white or yellow), about 1-1/2 cups finely diced
1/4 teaspoon salt, divided
drizzle of honey (optional)
2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced
4 eggs, lightly beaten
3 cups kale pieces (from about 6 large leaves)*
1 cup shredded Gruyère or other Swiss cheese (about 4 ounces)
1 prepared Almond Tart Crust (page 100), in a tart or pie pan
* Tear the kale leaves from the stems and cut into bite-size pieces. Discard the
stems, or save them for vegetable stock or juicing.
1 In a large skillet, heat the ghee or oil over medium heat.
2 Add the diced onions, sprinkle on 1/8 teaspoon salt, and cook for about 15 minutes,
stirring occasionally, until the onions are translucent and beginning to brown. If you
wish to fully caramelize the onions, cover the pan for the first 15 minutes, then uncover
it, add a drizzle of honey, and cook for another 15 minutes, or until browned.
3 Add the garlic to the onion mixture and cook for a few more minutes.
4 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
5 Let the onion mixture cool in the skillet for a few minutes, then gently stir in the eggs,
kale, shredded cheese, and 1/8 teaspoon salt.
6 Pour the filling into the prepared tart crust and bake for 20 minutes. Cool for a few
minutes and then serve warm or store in the refrigerator, covered, for up to a week.
Makes 8 servings
Squash Ribbon Noodles
These squash ribbons are a veggie replacement for regular noodles—not quite the same
texture, but they go well with the right toppings. You can peel the squash into any width
you prefer, but wide noodles are especially nice with heavier toppings such as tomato
sauces, and in cheese-topped casseroles.
You’ll want a vegetable peeler and skewers to create the squash ribbons. You can eat
them raw or dry them out a bit as instructed below, using a dehydrator or your oven,
and add a topping.
4 medium zucchini or yellow squash (about 3 pounds)
about 1/2 tablespoon of olive oil, butter, or ghee (page 31) (optional)
sea salt and pepper, to taste (optional)
1 Peel the skin off each zucchini (optional), keeping the stem top intact.
2 Place a skewer through the stem end to hold the zucchini in place while you use a
vegetable peeler to cut wide ribbons of zucchini.
3 Place the zucchini ribbons on dehydrator sheets or a baking sheet lined with a
nonstick silicone mat (optional if you want to remove moisture from the noodles).
4 If you’re using a dehydrator, set the temperature to about 120°F/50°C; dehydrate for
about 5 minutes, or until the noodles have a texture you like and some of the moisture
has been removed. If you’re using an oven, set it as low as it will go and bake for about
5 minutes.
5 Place the squash noodles in a bowl and blend with a little olive oil (or butter or ghee),
salt, and pepper to taste, if you wish. Alternatively, you might add Parsley and Spinach
Pesto (page 73), grated Parmesan cheese, or Classic Marinara Sauce (page 72).
Serves 4
Spaghetti Squash
I love the simplicity of this squash. You’re rewarded with a basic but versatile
“spaghetti” without having to do any scraping, peeling, or other slicing tricks.
Spaghetti squash does have a more neutral flavor than other squash varieties, which
makes it perfect for dressing up with sauces, grated cheeses, flavored oils, and butters.
Some of my favorite spaghetti squash toppings include meatballs and marinara sauce,
Parmesan cheese and olive oil, pesto, or a pile of ratatouille with olive oil and grated
Parmesan.
Like other winter squash, this one can be a bit challenging to cut open. If you find it
difficult, try cracking the squash by making an indentation with a knife and then
tapping the squash on a hard surface to crack it open. You may be tempted to cut your
spaghetti squash lengthwise, which is fine, but the spaghetti strings actually run around
the squash, not lengthwise. Cutting it into cross sections will give you longer spaghetti
strings.
1 spaghetti squash (about 3 pounds)
1 teaspoon ghee (page 31), coconut oil, or high-heat oil
1 Preheat your oven to 425°F/220°C.
2 Peel and cut the squash crosswise into 2 or 3 pieces. Scoop out the seeds, using a fork.
3 Lightly oil a baking sheet with the ghee or oil. Place the squash pieces, cut side down,
on the baking sheet.
4 Bake for at least 30 minutes—or up to 40 minutes, depending on the size of your
squash.
5 Let the squash cool for few minutes and then use a fork to scoop out the stringy pulp
from the squash. Serve the “spaghetti” with your topping of choice.
Makes 4 servings
Roasted Squash
Roasted squash purée is quite easy to make, though both canned and fresh work in my
recipes. My preference is to use butternut squash, but pumpkin and other squash also
work—they just aren’t as sweet as butternut squash, generally.
The only disclaimer I would add is that fresh squash purée tends to be moister than the
canned type, which can affect your recipe. (Bread made with fresh purée may be
moister and take longer to bake.) I use a spoon to remove excess water when possible.
It can be quite treacherous cutting up some pumpkins and squash. If you can’t cut
without endangering a finger or other body part, try cracking your squash open by
making a few strategic cuts around the outside and then prying it apart with your hands
—or give it a gentle bounce on a hard surface.
1 butternut squash (about 2 pounds) or other winter squash
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Grease a rimmed baking sheet or pan.
2 Wash the squash and cut it in half (either lengthwise or crosswise works). Scoop out
the seeds.
3 Place the halves cut side down on the prepared pan. Bake for 45 minutes, or until
tender when pierced with a fork.
4 Let cool for several minutes and then scoop the flesh into the bowl of a food
processor. Pulse until smooth.
5 Use a spoon to press out and remove excess water, and then your squash purée is
ready to use. Or, you can seal and freeze it for up to a year.
Makes about 2 cups
Roasted Ratatouille
This is my go-to veggie comfort dish, and I almost always have a container of it in the
refrigerator, ready at a moment’s notice. Just give me a big bowl of this ratatouille,
sprinkled generously with Parmesan cheese, and I’m a happy camper. I make a large
batch and eat it for days, adding it to quiches and eggs or spreading it on slices of toast
to make bruschetta. Ratatouille so open to change-ups, meaning you can add just about
any vegetable, make substitutions, and season to your liking. It’s kind of like regular
roasted vegetables, except that you don’t want to spread out the veggies on the baking
sheets. Instead, you want them piled a bit on top of each other so they steam together a
bit.
Traditional ratatouille includes eggplant and tomatoes, but if you are avoiding these
you can substitute mushrooms and other seasonal veggies that will roast in about 40
minutes.
2 large zucchini
1 medium eggplant, diced into bite-size pieces (optional)
4 large plum tomatoes (about 1 pound)
2 large bell peppers (red and orange are my favorites)
1 large red onion (or other type), peeled and diced
1/4 teaspoon salt, or to taste
4 garlic cloves, minced
3 tablespoons high-heat oil (or a mix of olive oil and high-heat oil)
1 Preheat your oven to 375°F/190°C. Line one or two rimmed baking sheets with
nonstick silicone mats or parchment paper.
2 Chop the zucchini, tomatoes, and peppers into bite-size pieces.
3 Toss all the ingredients together in a large bowl until the veggies are well coated with
the oil. Spread the mixture out on the prepared baking sheets, allowing the veggies to
pile onto each other a bit.
4 Bake for 40 minutes, or until the onions and tomatoes are soft. Serve either warm or
at room temperature. Store in a covered container in the refrigerator for up to about a
week.
Makes 4 servings
Sweet Fries
Here’s a sweet fry that’s full of vitamins A and C, with iron and calcium thrown in for
good measure. I might even go so far as to say these can hold a candle to almost any
fry. Well, I might be stretching it a bit here, but they are worth the effort and really tasty
with homemade Simple Ketchup (page 71).
I suggest peeling the skin off before you cut the squash, because it’s just easier. Then cut
the squash either across the center or lengthwise, scoop out the seeds, and begin slicing
for fries. Try to cut your fries all the same width and length, more or less, so they’ll
bake in about the same time.
Since the prep work takes a bit of time, you can peel and slice the squash ahead of time
and store it in the refrigerator, or even freeze it. You can also dry the slices by leaving
them out for a few hours before you plan to bake them. Frozen fries will take a bit
longer to bake.
1 butternut squash (about 3 pounds), peeled and sliced into fries (see note above)
1/2 teaspoon salt, plus more as needed
1/2 teaspoon high-heat oil (just enough to lightly coat each fry)
pepper, to taste
1 Place the cut fries in a bowl, sprinkle with the 1/2 teaspoon salt, and toss to coat.
2 Spread the fries out on a paper towel or kitchen cloth and let them sit for 30 minutes
or so to sweat out moisture.
3 Preheat your oven to 425°F/220°C. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment
paper.
4 Use a paper towel to wipe the moisture off the fries, then transfer them back to their
bowl and blend with the oil.
5 Spread the fries out on the prepared baking sheet so they’re not touching. Bake for 15
minutes on the first side, then flip them over and bake for another 7 minutes, or until
crisped on the edges. If you want them crisped a bit more, turn off the oven and leave
them in for about 5 more minutes.
6 Salt and pepper the fries to taste and serve hot. You can also reheat these for 5
minutes at 400°F/200°C.
Makes 4 servings
Garlic Mashed “Potatoes”
This is a classic recipe for mashed “potatoes”—also known as mashed roasted
cauliflower. While you can find this recipe dressed up in various ways all over the
Internet, I thought I’d also include it here, since it’s such a fine side dish.
1 large cauliflower head
1 garlic clove, minced
1/4 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons melted ghee (page 31) or other cooking oil
1 to 2 cups warm water or dairy-free milk
1 Preheat your oven to 400°F/200°C.
2 Cut the cauliflower into bite-size pieces and place them in a bowl. Add the garlic, salt,
and ghee or oil and stir to fully coat the cauliflower.
3 Place the cauliflower on a baking sheet and bake for about 20 minutes, or until the
cauliflower is browning around the edges.
4 Let the cauliflower cool for a few minutes and then transfer it to a blender or food
processor. Slowly blend in water or milk until the mashed cauliflower mixture is the
consistency you like.
Makes 4 servings
Soothing the Soul
Your mind plays an important role in your physical well-being. Here are a few ideas
for soothing your soul: listen to music, go on a walk, take a nap, do some stretching
or yoga, meditate, read a book, play a game, watch a movie, talk to a friend, laugh
as much as possible. Eliminate or reduce things that bring stress to your life. Give
yourself permission to lie low, listen to soothing music, meditate, and indulge in what
makes you feel happy.
Yellow Cauliflower Rice
There’s something about the appearance of yellow rice that almost allows me taste all
its flavors before it even reaches my mouth. It could be that yellow, buttery color that
glows, thanks to the saffron and turmeric.
Saffron lends a unique flavor to the cauliflower in this recipe—but truth be told, when I
don’t have saffron the rice still tastes quite good. If you’re not an onion fan, you can do
without, but it does add an additional flavor dimension to this tasty rice.
2 or 3 saffron threads
2 tablespoons cooking oil or ghee (page 31), divided
2 large cauliflower heads, cut into large pieces
1/4 teaspoon ground turmeric
1/4 teaspoon fine salt, plus more as needed
1 small white onion, finely diced
1/2 teaspoon fish sauce (optional; see Product Sources, page 161)
1 Preheat your oven to 400°F/200°C. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment paper
or a nonstick silicone mat.
2 Break the saffron threads into small pieces and place them in a large bowl. Add 1
tablespoon oil or ghee and set the bowl in a warm spot, such as next to a warm oven;
leave for about 10 minutes.
3 Add the cauliflower, turmeric, and 1/4 teaspoon salt to the saffron bowl and blend
well to coat the cauliflower.
4 Spread the cauliflower onto the prepared baking sheet and bake for 15 minutes, or
until the edges begin to brown and the cauliflower is tender when pierced with a fork.
5 Place the onions, fish sauce (optional), and remaining 1 tablespoon oil or ghee in a
small skillet and cook over medium heat until the onions are translucent and starting to
brown, about 8 minutes, stirring occasionally.
6 Let the cauliflower cool for a few minutes and then place it in a food processor to
process into rice-size pieces, or chop finely by hand.
7 Combine the cauliflower rice with the onions and blend well. Add salt to taste.
Makes 4 servings
Orange Cauliflower Couscous
Here’s a simple sweet “couscous” that pairs well with just about any grilled veggie or
meat. I love it with fish that’s also been flavored with citrus, such as the Citrus Tuna
Kebabs (page 132). You could spice it up a bit by adding ginger and cinnamon, but I
prefer this basic version most of the time. This dish also does well after being stored in
the refrigerator for a few days, brought to room temperature.
1/4 cup raisins or currants
1 large cauliflower head (or 2 small heads)
1 carrot, peeled
1 tablespoon melted ghee (page 31) or high-heat oil
⅜ teaspoon sea salt, divided, plus more as needed
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 tablespoon grated orange zest
4 tablespoons fresh orange juice
2 tablespoons crushed blanched almonds orange slices, for garnish
1 Preheat your oven to 400°F/200°C.
2 Soak the raisins or currants in hot water (about the temperature of hot tap water) for
about 5 minutes to soften them. Drain.
3 Chop up the cauliflower into small florets. Cut the carrot into a few long thin strips. In
a bowl, mix the cauliflower and carrots with the 1 tablespoon melted ghee or oil and 1/4
teaspoon sea salt.
4 Transfer the cauliflower and carrots to a rimmed baking sheet and roast for 15
minutes, or until they begin to brown at the edges. Let cool.
5 Separate the cooled carrots and cauliflower and place the cauliflower in the bowl of a
food processor. Process until you have fine granules the size of couscous.
6 Chop the raisins and roasted carrots into fine pieces.
7 In a bowl, combine the cauliflower, 2 tablespoons olive oil, carrots, raisins, orange
zest, orange juice, 1/8 teaspoon salt, and almonds. Add salt to taste.
8 Garnish with orange slices and serve warm or cold.
Makes 4 servings
Roasted Cauliflower Rice
This is my favorite recipe for cauliflower rice, because the roasting locks in flavor and
gives a texture that I find closest to actual rice. If you’re sensitive to digesting roasted
veggies, or to cauliflower itself, I’d recommend steaming your rice.
2 large cauliflower heads, chopped into chunks
1 tablespoon cooking oil or ghee (page 31)
1/4 teaspoon fine salt, plus more as needed
pepper, to taste
1 Preheat your oven to 400°F/200°C. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment paper
or a nonstick silicone mat.
2 Place the cauliflower, oil or ghee, and 1/4 teaspoon salt in a bowl and mix well to coat
the cauliflower.
3 Spread out the cauliflower on the prepared baking sheet and roast for 15 minutes, or
until the edges begin to brown and the cauliflower is tender when pierced with a fork.
4 Let the cauliflower cool for a few minutes and then place it in the bowl of a food
processor to process into rice-size pieces, or chop finely by hand.
Makes 4 servings
Emotional Support
Some who suffer from digestive conditions are lucky to have a support system built
into their lives to help them get through the tough times. There are many sources for
emotional support, but do seek out the help of friends, family, and others who can
lend a hand. It might be a spouse, a friend, support groups, or just the unconditional
love of a pet that helps you along. Don’t discount this important part of healing.
Fried Cauliflower Rice
If you love Asian-style dishes that rely on soy sauce, I think you’ll like this take on fried
rice. Instead of soy sauce, I use fish sauce—but don’t sweat it if you don’t have the
sauce on hand. Several years ago, a friend who was born and raised in Japan brought
me her version of fried rice, and it was delicious. I asked her what she seasoned it with
and was surprised to hear she’d used only salt and pepper. Since then, I don’t believe
you have to have soy sauce for Asian foods to taste good. You just need to be a bit
creative and take advantage of other seasonings available to you: ginger, salt, honey,
vinegar, and—in this case—fish sauce.
recipe for Roasted Cauliflower Rice (page 113)
2 tablespoons ghee (page 31) or cooking oil, divided
2 eggs, scrambled
1 cup finely diced peeled carrots (about 2 carrots)
1 cup finely diced celery
1 cup finely diced green onions
2 large garlic cloves, minced
fish sauce, to taste (see Product Sources, page 161)
salt, to taste
1 Preheat your oven to 400°F/200°C and prepare the Roasted Cauliflower Rice
according to the recipe instructions.
2 While the cauliflower is roasting, heat half of the ghee or oil in a wok or skillet over
medium heat.
3 Add the eggs to the hot pan and either scramble them or cook them as a flat omelet
and chop up at the end of cooking. Remove the eggs from the pan and set aside.
4 Add the rest of the ghee to the pan along with the carrots and celery. Cook for about 7
minutes, or until the vegetables begin to soften.
5 Add the garlic and onions to the pan and continue cooking for another 5 minutes. Add
the roasted cauliflower and stir to blend well.
6 Add fish sauce and salt to taste. Blend in the eggs and remove from the heat. Serve
immediately, or cover and store in the refrigerator for up to a few days.
Makes 4 servings
Poultry, Meat, and Seafood
Here’s a collection of recipes that are simple and flavorful versions of comfort food
for meat and seafood lovers. Roasted or slow-cooked rotisserie chickens are the
most requested birthday meals every year by my son, so you can imagine that I’ve
mastered the art of grilling, roasting, and slow-cooking chicken. The other meal
that never goes to waste is meatballs. These comfort meals will leave you with
leftovers for lunch or dinner the next day or beyond. Or you can freeze half of a
meal for a later date.
Fish are rich in healthy oils, protein, minerals, and vitamins. Unfortunately, many
types are also endangered due to overfishing and toxicity in our waterways and
oceans. An excellent way to determine if a fish is in season, local, safe, and
sustainable is to use the Monterey Bay Aquarium’s Seafood Watch website
(montereybayaquarium.org). There’s also a handy pocket guide you can carry in
your wallet, and there’s an app you can install on your phone to check while
you’re shopping.
Classic Roasted Chicken
I can think of many ways to roast a chicken, and I’ve tried lots of them, but the simplest
is often the best. This simple roasted chicken stays moist on the inside and crunchy on
the outside. Gather some herbs, salt, and a lemon, and you have the makings of the
most important component of a comforting meal. Plus, you can use the leftovers for
chicken broth (page 36) or a chicken salad, such as the Cherry Chicken Salad on page
55. And if you like eating chicken skin without herbs attached, you can move them all
inside the chicken when dressing it for the oven.
Often I’ll make a chicken on Sunday night, then add the carcass and giblets to my slow
cooker to make chicken broth for soups and other meals later in the week. When you’re
cooking for a crowd, I suggest roasting two chickens—if your oven can handle it—
rather than buying a very large one. The larger your chicken, the longer it will take to
roast and the drier the outside pieces will be. Also, with a pair of chickens you’ll have
more legs and wings to go around.
I have a roasting pan, but I dread cleaning it. So my favorite roasting setup for chicken
is a rimmed baking sheet lined with parchment paper. I have a roasting rack that fits on
the baking sheet, and then the chicken rests on the rack. The cleanup is a snap, and the
drippings are easy to scoop up off the parchment paper to use for gravy. If you’re
finding that your chicken is becoming too dry on the outside about halfway through
roasting, lower the temperature to about 325°F/165°C and roast it a bit longer than
normal.
1 roasting chicken (4 to 6 pounds; free-range if possible)
1 large lemon, sliced in half or quarters
2 large garlic cloves, sliced
2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted
1 tablespoon fresh thyme sprigs (or 1 teaspoon dried thyme)
1 tablespoon fresh or dried rosemary
1/2 teaspoon salt, divided
1 Preheat your oven to 425°F/220°C.
2 Gently pull any excess fat off the chicken. Remove any parts from inside the cavity
and then briefly rinse the chicken with water and pat dry with a paper towel. Drying off
the skin ensures that it will be crunchy at the end of roasting and that the seasonings
will stay put.
3 Set the chicken in a roasting rack. Place the lemon, garlic, and half the thyme and
rosemary inside the chicken.
4 Gently lift the skin near the neck area and evenly spread 1/4 teaspoon of salt under the
skin. Rub the melted butter all over the outside of the chicken. Sprinkle the outside with
the remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt. Place the remaining thyme and rosemary between the
legs and wings, as well as pressing some onto the body of the chicken.
5 Use string to tie the wings and legs close to the body. This is referred to as trussing a
chicken, and I don’t worry too much about the technique (although you can probably
see many videos of this on the Internet). I just wrap the string around the body until all
the parts are secure.
6 Roast the chicken for about an hour; test it by making a small cut inside a thigh to see
if the juice from the chicken is clear. If it’s still red, the chicken needs more time in the
oven. If it’s getting too dark on the outside, lightly rest some foil on top of the chicken.
Makes 4 to 6 servings
Falling-off-the-Bone Chicken
If you have a slow cooker, you’ll love this recipe. If you don’t have a slow cooker, I
highly recommend saving up for one, because you can use it to make just about any
warm meal, given enough time. To slow-cook chicken, just apply a healthy amount of
dry rub to the skin and let it cook for several hours. That’s all there is to it.
4 carrots, peeled and trimmed
1 chicken (about 4 pounds), rinsed and patted dry
dry rub (1 teaspoon each garlic powder, mustard powder, salt, and paprika)
1 lemon, cut in half
2 garlic cloves, diced
1 Place the carrots on the bottom of the slow cooker.
2 Rub the chicken skin with the dry rub. Place the lemon and garlic inside the chicken
cavity and set the chicken on top of the carrots in the cooker.
3 Cover and cook on a slow setting for 8 to 10 hours, or on a higher setting for 4 to 6
hours. The chicken is cooked when the juice coming out of slice near a leg is clear and
the leg moves easily or falls off at the joint.
4 If you want to brown the skin, heat your oven on broil (425°F/220°C), transfer the
chicken to a broiling pan or a baking sheet, and set it in the oven for about 10 minutes.
5 Let the chicken cool for a few minutes and then slice. Store leftovers in the
refrigerator, covered, for up to a few days, and consider making chicken broth out of the
remains (see page 36).
Makes 4 to 6 servings
Chicken Tenders
I’ve been making these chicken tenders for many years, but it wasn’t until we started
changing our diet that I began dredging them in almond flour. Now this is one of our
most-loved recipes. It can be turned into chicken Parmesan, made into chicken
sandwiches, chopped up and added to a salad, or just enjoyed as tenders to dip in a
favorite sauce or dressing. Simple Ketchup (page 71) and Honey Mustard Dressing
(page 70) are my family’s favorites.
I’ve always used dill with this recipe, because the recipe started out as lemon-flavored
tenders, with lemon juice dripped over them as they came out of the pan. If you don’t
have dill, you can do without it or use dried oregano, parsley, or basil instead.
2 to 3 tablespoons olive oil or other cooking oil
1 to 1-1/2 pounds chicken breast meat, sliced into pieces 1 to 2 inches long
1 egg, lightly beaten
1 tablespoon mustard (Dijon or stoneground works well)
1/4 teaspoon salt, or to taste
1/4 teaspoon dried dill weed
1 cup blanched almond flour
dip or dressing, for serving
1 Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat.
2 In a large bowl, stir together the chicken pieces, egg, and mustard until well blended.
3 In a separate bowl or on a plate, use a fork to stir together the almond flour, salt, and
dill.
4 Dredge each piece of chicken in the flour mixture to fully coat it and then transfer it
straight into the hot oil.
5 Fry the chicken pieces for 5 minutes or so on each side. Transfer to a plate and serve
along with your favorite dip or dressing.
Makes 4 servings
Chicken Pot Pie
I usually make pot pie when I have leftover roast chicken. You can use any kind of
cooked chicken, though, leftover or not. A word about the egg wash: I love to add egg
wash to crusts, when I remember to do so. If you can take the extra time, it will give the
crust a very appealing patina.
You can bake this recipe a number of ways, depending on what you have on hand and
how many will be partaking: 4 ramekins (about 6-ounce capacity); 1 (8-inch) round or
square baking dish; 2 (6-inch) square baking dishes; or some variation of these dishes.
2 cups shredded cooked chicken
2 cups chicken broth (or water)
2 large carrots, peeled and sliced into coins
2 large celery stalks, sliced
1 cup peas (fresh or frozen)
1/2 teaspoon dried thyme, or 1/2 tablespoon fresh
1/4 teaspoon sea salt, or to taste
1/4 cup almond milk or other dairy-free milk, or SCD Yogurt (page 28; optional,
for a creamy taste)
1 Butter Biscuits dough ball (page 87)
1 egg, beaten, for egg wash (optional)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Place the chicken, broth, carrots, celery, peas, thyme, salt, and milk or yogurt (if
using) in a saucepan over low to medium heat and simmer for about 15 minutes, or until
the carrots are tender.
3 Prepare the biscuit dough and chill in the freezer for 5 minutes.
4 Place the chilled dough between 2 sheets of parchment paper (or other nonstick
material) and roll large enough to cover your baking dish or dishes.
5 Pour the chicken mixture into the baking dish (or dishes) about 3/4 of the way full,
leaving chunks of meat and veggies on top for the crust to rest on (avoid resting the
crust on liquid, so it won’t get soggy).
6 Rest the biscuit topping over the chicken mixture. Lightly brush the topping with egg
wash, if you wish. Use a fork to make a few small punctures in the crust.
7 Bake for 15 minutes or so, depending on the size of your baking dish, or when the
biscuit topping is beginning to brown and the filling is lightly bubbling. Let cool briefly
and serve.
8 Refrigerate any leftovers, covered, for up to a few days. Reheat at 325°F/165°C for
about 10 minutes or so, or until the filling is lightly bubbling.
Makes 4 servings
Dirty Rice
This is one-dish meal is easy to reheat, so I usually make extra. Consider this recipe a
somewhat loose description of dirty rice, because you can substitute a number of
ingredients depending on what you have on hand or what you prefer. It also happens to
go well with a side of salsa or gazpacho.
I always use Roasted Cauliflower Rice (page 113), but you can mix and match the
protein sources as you prefer. While I happen to like chicken liver, many don’t, so I
avoid using it in large amounts. Everyone loves bacon, so I always include that. If you
don’t use bacon, you’ll want to add a bit more salt, since the bacon contributes quite a
bit of saltiness.
1/2 cup chicken livers (optional; I only use them from guaranteed healthy, freerange chickens)
1 teaspoon cooking oil (if using chicken livers)
4 slices bacon, chopped into small pieces
1/2 pound ground pork (or other ground meat)
1/2 cup finely diced onion
4 small celery stalks, finely diced
1/2 cup finely chopped green or red bell pepper
1/2 cup chicken broth (or vegetable broth, or water)
1/2 teaspoon garlic powder
1/2 teaspoon paprika
pinch of cayenne pepper (optional, for a bit of heat)
recipe for Roasted Cauliflower Rice (page 113)
sea salt and pepper, to taste
1 If you’re using the chicken livers, place them in a warmed skillet over medium heat
with 1 teaspoon cooking oil, and cook, stirring occasionally. When they are browned
and no longer red on the outside, remove them from the pan. Dice them finely, and set
aside.
2 Add the bacon pieces to the same skillet and cook over medium heat until crispy on
the edges, about 5 minutes. Leave the bacon fat in the skillet for the next step.
3 Spread the ground pork across the surface of the skillet and brown it for about 5
minutes over high heat without stirring.
4 Once the pork is browned on the bottom, break it up into small pieces and lower the
heat back to medium.
5 Add the onion, celery, and bell pepper and cook for another 5 minutes, stirring
occasionally. Cook until the onions start to become translucent.
6 Add the chicken broth, garlic powder, paprika, and cayenne pepper (if using) to the
skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the stock has boiled off.
7 Add the cauliflower rice to the skillet along with the chicken livers, if using; stir to
blend well. Add salt and pepper to taste.
8 Remove from the heat and serve warm. You can store leftovers in the refrigerator,
covered, for up to a few days.
Makes 4 servings
Ragu Bolognese (Red Meat Sauce)
This is a classic recipe for red meat sauce that I’ve simplified a bit and made dairy-free.
I tend to use ground beef and pork, but you can use sausage meat or substitute
something else. It’s delicious over Focaccia (page 96), Squash Ribbon Noodles (page
103), or on Garlic Toasts (page 97).
4 tablespoons olive oil, divided
1 pound ground pork
1 pound ground beef
1/2 cup finely diced onion
1/2 cup finely diced carrots
1/4 cup finely chopped celery
1 tablespoon fresh thyme, or 1 teaspoon dried thyme
3 medium garlic cloves, minced
2 tablespoons tomato paste
1/2 cup dry red wine
4 ounces pancetta, finely diced (ham or bacon also work)
1 (28-ounce) can crushed tomatoes
3 cups beef broth (or chicken or vegetable broth, or water)
salt and pepper, to taste
1 Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add the pork and beef,
breaking it up with a spatula. Brown for a few minutes, and then remove the browned
meat from the pan and set aside in a large saucepan you’ll use for cooking the ragu.
2 Add the onions, carrots, and celery to the skillet and cook for about 5 minutes, stirring
occasionally. Add the thyme, garlic, and tomato paste and cook for another minute or
so.
3 Pour the wine into the pan and cook for another few minutes, or until the wine is
reduced by half.
4 Pour the frying pan mixture into a large saucepan along with the meat and all the
remaining ingredients, stirring to combine well. Simmer for about 45 minutes on a low
heat lightly covered, or until the sauce is thick but easily stirred. About halfway through
cooking remove the cover and if the sauce is not thick enough, let some of the moisture
evaporate. If it is too thick, add some water and cook for a few more minutes.
5 Serve warm; or let cool, cover, and store in the refrigerator for several days or in the
freezer for a few months.
Makes about 8 cups
Fennel Pesto Meatballs
I use pesto for many kinds of recipes—it’s a terrific way to pack greens and flavor into a
dish, and it’s so easy to make. I’ve been known to eat just pesto on toast, or with
scrambled eggs. In this case, the pesto is part of the meatball recipe, and I use whatever
fresh greens I have on hand. It could be kale, parsley, basil, or arugula. It’s nice to
change it up to give the meatballs a different flavor, or depending on the ground meat
and sauce base you’re using. If you’re not eating eggs, no worries. These meatballs will
stay together without the egg.
1/2 cup grated Parmesan cheese
1/2 cup fresh parsley (or other greens, such as basil, kale, or arugula)
1/2 tablespoon fennel seeds
1 medium garlic clove
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 pound ground meat (beef and pork, or turkey and chicken)
1 egg
1 tablespoon ghee (page 31) or high-heat oil
2 cups Classic Marinara Sauce (page 72) or a trustworthy jar of sauce (see Product
Sources, page 161)
1 Combine the Parmesan, parsley, fennel seeds, garlic, and salt in the bowl of a food
processor and process until finely ground, like pesto.
2 Place the pesto, meat, and egg in a bowl and combine gently, using a spatula or fork.
3 Melt the ghee or oil over medium heat in a large Dutch oven or saucepan (one that has
a cover).
4 Using an ice cream scoop or spoon, shape the meat mixture into meatballs and place
in the hot skillet, leaving space between the meatballs.
5 Brown the meatballs briefly on all sides so that they hold together. Transfer them to a
plate and set aside. Drain the excess fat from the pan.
6 Pour the marinara sauce into the pan and return the meatballs to the pan as well.
Cover and bring the sauce to a steady simmer. Reduce the heat and simmer for 10
minutes or so and then serve; or let cool, cover, and refrigerate for a few days, or freeze
for later use.
Makes about 10 meatballs
Stuffed Bell Peppers
I have a personal affection for bell peppers, especially the red and orange versions,
which I think stems from the fact that they are the sweetest. The red pepper happens to
offer the most vitamins and nutrients, evident in its color. Pair that with a savory filling,
and you have a compact meal elegantly held together in a vitamin-rich fruit (yes, it’s
actually a fruit, because it has seeds).
8 medium red bell peppers (or yellow, orange, or green)
1 tablespoon olive oil, plus more for coating the peppers
1 small onion, diced into small pieces
1 pound ground meat (chicken, beef, or turkey)
4 cups Classic Marinara Sauce (page 72) or other tomato sauce, divided
2 tablespoons capers
1/4 cup finely chopped fresh parsley
1/2 cup grated Parmesan cheese (or other aged hard cheese)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Cut the stem tops off the peppers and take out the seeds.
3 Steam or boil the peppers in a pot of lightly salted water for about 8 minutes, or until
they are slightly soft and brighter in color. Drain and set aside.
4 Place 1 tablespoon of olive oil and the onions in a skillet over medium heat and cook
for about 5 minutes, or until they start to turn translucent.
5 Add the meat and cook for another 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Turn off the heat
and stir in 1 cup of the marinara sauce, the capers, parsley, and the cheese. Stir
occasionally, breaking up the meat with a spatula.
6 Lightly coat each pepper inside and outside with olive oil, then spoon the meat filling
into the peppers.
7 Pour 1 cup of marinara sauce into a shallow baking dish about 9 × 11 inches in size,
adding water as necessary to cover the bottom of the dish. Set the stuffed peppers in the
baking dish and bake for about 12 minutes.
8 Serve the remaining marinara sauce with the peppers.
Makes 8 servings
Braised Short Ribs and Carrots
You can make this slow-cooking meal in a slow cooker or in a Dutch oven or heavy
saucepan on your stovetop. It can keep going until you’re ready for it, and it can
tolerate other root vegetable additions (added about 1 hour before it’s done) as well as
last-minute additions such as peas and diced zucchini (added 15 minutes before it’s
done). At around 4 hours, it’s usually done, but another hour or so and the meat will fall
off the bone and melt in your mouth. The cut of meat means this does produce a lot of
fat that floats to the top, so I always skim the fat off the top after letting it cool for a bit.
1 tablespoon ghee (page 31) or cooking oil
4 pounds beef short ribs (grass-fed, if possible)
simple rub (equal amounts garlic powder, onion powder, mustard powder, and
salt)
1 cup chopped onion (about 1 small onion)
4 cloves garlic, chopped
1 cup broth (beef, chicken, or vegetable) or water
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon honey
3/4 cup (6 ounces) tomato paste
1/4 cup chopped fresh parsley
4 carrots, peeled and chopped
1 Heat the ghee or oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Coat each rib with the rub
and then lightly brown on all sides in the skillet. Set aside.
2 In a slow cooker or a Dutch oven or large saucepan, place the onion and garlic on the
bottom and then add the broth, salt, honey, and tomato paste. Stir to combine.
3 Place the ribs on top of the onion mixture and cover the slow cooker or pan.
4 Set the slow cooker to high or the stovetop burner between low and medium. Cover
and cook for 4 hours and then add the parsley and carrots to the mixture; cover again
and continue cooking.
5 After 5 to 6 hours of cooking, the meat should be falling off the bone and the carrots
should be quite tender. Turn off the slow cooker or remove the pan from the burner,
cool for a few minutes, and skim the fat off the top.
6 Serve warm; or cover and store in the refrigerator for a few days or in the freezer for
up to about a month.
Makes 4 servings
Citrus Tuna Kebabs
Seafood and citrus go especially well together, and I love the balance of sweet, salty,
and citrus in this dish. It cooks quickly, so I suggest preparing everything ahead of time
and then chilling it until you’re ready to grill and serve. Serve these kebobs with
Orange Cauliflower Couscous (page 111).
I’d estimate that I have tuna only a few times a year, and when I do, I buy only
sustainable tuna. If you don’t have access to tuna, you can substitute halibut or another
fish that cooks well in cubed cuts.
2 pounds filleted ahi tuna (troll or pole-caught is best)
1/4 cup olive oil
2 tablespoons grated fresh ginger
1 tablespoon grated orange zest
1/4 cup fresh orange juice
1/4 cup honey
1 or 2 pinches of sea salt
1 Cut the tuna into bite-size cubes.
2 Blend the tuna cubes with all the other ingredients in a glass bowl. Cover and let
marinate in the refrigerator for at least 30 minutes.
3 Thread the tuna onto skewers.
4 Preheat a grill to medium heat, and grill the tuna kebobs for about 5 minutes on each
side, for a total of 10 minutes on the grill. Watch them carefully because they tend to
cook quickly.
Makes 4 to 6 servings
Parties
Bring food that you know you can eat. There are great dishes that are party-safe, and
you may be surprised when your dish is the first to go.
Cured Salmon (Gravlax)
Gravlax is salted salmon that has been cured for a few days—not to be confused with
smoked salmon, which is drier and has a smoky flavor. While gravlax is easy to make,
you’ll need to plan ahead by at least a day. The reward will be worth the time. I prefer
my salmon a bit less salty, so I tend to hold back a bit on the salt and only cure the fish
for a day. It’s up to you, though. If the salmon tastes too salty to you after curing, you
can add some water and let it cure for a few more hours to let the water pull out the
salt. The opposite will also work—if it’s not salty enough, add salt and let it cure for a
few more hours. And if it’s not sweet enough, add honey and cure for a few more hours.
You can substitute a citrus cure for the dill, using about 1 teaspoon grated lemon or
lime zest on each side.
Try cured salmon in a crêpe (page 86) with capers and Herbed Cream Cheese (page
30), or mixed into scrambled eggs with a side of toasted Simple Sandwich Bread (page
80).
2 pounds filleted salmon
1/4 cup fresh chopped dill, divided
1/4 cup honey, divided
1/4 cup kosher sea salt (or other coarse salt)
1 Rinse the salmon and pat dry with a paper towel.
2 Place half the dill and half the honey in the bottom of a glass baking dish large
enough to hold the salmon.
3 Coat both sides of the salmon with the salt, sprinkling it evenly.
4 Lay the salmon on top of the honey and dill in the baking dish. Cover with the
remaining salt, honey, and dill.
5 Cover with plastic wrap and place a heavy plate or dish over the salmon. Refrigerate
for 24 hours to cure.
6 When the salmon is fully cured, it will be darker and firmer. Drain off the liquid and
rinse off the salt, honey, and dill; pat dry.
7 Slice thinly to serve—perhaps with Herbed Goat Cheese on toasted Simple Sandwich
Bread (page 80). Store in a sealed container in the refrigerator for up to a week or so.
Makes 4 servings
Parchment-Baked Fish
I love the simplicity and elegance of this meal. It’s like a meal packet for one, and you
can use any kind of fish, not only salmon. Just adjust the baking time according to the
thickness of the fish.
The following amounts are for a single packet per person, so you’ll want to double or
quadruple them depending on how many you’re serving. For four people, for example,
you’ll want two carrots, two zucchini, and two lemons.
This dish goes well with Roasted Cauliflower Rice (page 113).
1/2 medium zucchini, thinly diced or julienned
1/2 medium carrot, peeled and thinly diced or julienned
1 shallot or 1/2 small onion, thinly sliced
1 tablespoon unsalted butter, ghee (page 31), or olive oil
2 or 3 thin lemon slices and 1 lemon wedge
1/4 teaspoon dried dill weed or 1/2 tablespoon fresh dill (or other herb)
1 (6 to 8-ounce) salmon fillet
salt and pepper to taste
splash of dry white wine (about 1 tablespoon; optional)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Cut a piece of parchment paper about 12 × 14 inches. Arrange the zucchini, carrot,
and onion slices in the middle of the paper.
3 Place the butter, lemon slices, and dill on top of the veggies.
4 Place the salmon fillet on top of the veggies, cover with the lemon slices, and sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Optionally, pour about 1 tablespoon white wine over the fish.
5 Bring the longer sides of the parchment paper together, covering the salmon. Crimp
the edges together, forming a sealed parchment packet, and place the sealed packet on a
baking sheet.
6 Bake for 15 minutes, or until the salmon has some white on top and the veggies are
bubbling.
7 Keep the packet closed until ready to eat. Serve with a lemon wedge to squeeze over
the salmon.
Makes 1 serving
Pan-Fried White Fish (Sole Meuniere)
Here’s a dish that’s both easy and elegant. While the classic recipe calls for Dover sole,
you can use any white fish, sliced somewhat thin. As for most fish dishes, I recommend
preparing the ingredients ahead of time, since the sole cooks relatively quickly. You can
keep it warm in the oven before serving.
This pairs well with Roasted Cauliflower Rice (page 113).
1/2 cup blanched almond flour
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
6 tablespoons unsalted butter or ghee (page 31), divided
6 Dover sole fillets (3 to 4 ounces each)
1 cup finely chopped fresh Italian parsley, plus more for garnish
3 lemons, both juice and zest (about 1/2 cup juice and 1-1/2 tablespoons grated
zest)
1 lemon, sliced for garnish
1 Blend the almond flour and salt on a plate, for dredging.
2 In a wide skillet over medium heat, melt 4 tablespoons of the butter or ghee. Keep
cooking until it begins to bubble and turns slightly brown but isn’t burnt. (Ghee won’t
turn brown, because the solids have been removed.)
3 While the butter is melting, dredge the fish fillets in the almond flour.
4 Place the fillets in the pan when the butter is starting to brown. Fry for about a minute
on each side, then transfer to a warm plate or a baking dish in a warm oven.
5 Add the remaining 2 tablespoons butter or ghee to the skillet along with the 1 cup
parsley, lemon juice and zest, and any almond flour remaining after dredging. Cook for
about 1 minute.
6 Cover the fillets with the parsley-lemon sauce and serve garnished with the lemon
slices.
Makes 3 to 6 servings
Fish Tacos
This is actually a combination of recipes from this book. And while you don’t have to,
it’s nice to soak the fish in the lime juice for at least an hour before you plan to cook it.
about 1 pound white fish fillets (cod, halibut, or other)
1 lime, plus a few thinly sliced wedges
Avocado Crema (page 78)
Tortillas (page 95)
Creamy Coleslaw (page 57)
1 tablespoon unsalted butter
1/4 teaspoon salt
pico de gallo (optional)
1 Soak the fish in the juice of 1 lime.
2 Prepare the Avocado Crema, tortillas, and coleslaw.
3 Place a large skillet over medium heat. Add the butter to the skillet and heat until it
begins to turn light brown.
4 Add the fish fillets and cook for about 8 minutes, turning in between, or cook on each
side until cooked through and lightly flaking.
5 Assemble the tacos and serve with lime wedges and pico de gallo.
Makes 4 servings
Sweet Treats
I’ve been an avid baker all my life. It started with chocolate chip cookies at about
9 years of age, and I’ve been going strong since then. I hadn’t baked with almond
or coconut flour until I stumbled upon SCD, but now I love using these nutritious
and flavorful flours.
Before you dive into a recipe, here are some tips to bring you baking success:
Read the recipe at least twice (I even reread my familiar favorites every so
often).
Bring all your ingredients to room temperature, if possible. (I must admit I’m
guilty of using cold ingredients. To counteract this, I bring the batter to room
temperature before baking it.)
Prepare baking pans and baking sheets at the beginning (makes life that much
easier).
Check on your baking goodies about 10 minutes before they’re supposed to be
done. Baking times are approximate and depend on a number of factors,
including your oven, the altitude, any swapped ingredients, the pan you use,
etc.
Crunchy No-Grain Granola
Granola is easy to make, and it’s more affordable when you make it yourself. Here’s a
simple granola formula that I use, allowing me not to think too much about how much
of how many things I’m adding. I just add 6 cups of my favorite stuff, plus a bit of salt,
vanilla, and oil, and off it goes on a baking sheet to the oven.
You can also make this nut-free if you’re avoiding nuts or feel you’re eating too many
nut-based goodies—which can be a hazard with all those wonderful almond flour baked
goods. Add granola on top of yogurt or ice cream, or pour cold almond milk (or other
dairy-free milk) over a bowl of it. And it’s a highly portable protein/carbohydrate snack.
Leave the dried fruit out of the mix until the granola has finished baking. This prevents
the dried fruit from becoming dry and hard. For a less chunky, finer-textured granola,
chop up at least half of the larger nuts, such as the hazelnuts and almonds. I wrap them
in a dishtowel and gently smash them with a hammer. To make the granola less sweet,
reduce the honey to about 1/3 cup.
1 cup raw pecans
1 cup raw almonds
1 cup raw pumpkin seeds
1 cup raw walnuts
1 cup raw hazelnuts
1/4 cup raw sesame seeds
1 tablespoon coconut oil, ghee (page 31), or unsalted butter, melted
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/2 cup honey
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1/2 cup dried cherries (or raisins or dried cranberries)
1 Preheat your oven to 300°F/150°C. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment paper
or a nonstick silicone mat.
2 In a large bowl, combine all the ingredients except for the dried cherries, stirring until
the nuts and seeds are well coated.
3 Spread the mixture evenly across the prepared baking sheet. Bake for 10 minutes,
then use a spatula to shuffle the granola around so that it bakes evenly.
4 Bake for another 10 to 15 minutes, or until the granola begins to brown. The pieces
should be slightly sticky to touch but not too sticky. Remove it from the oven,
separating the pieces before they cool and clump together.
5 Let cool completely (for at least 20 minutes) and then mix in the dried fruit. Store the
granola in a sealed container at room temperature for several weeks or in the
refrigerator for a few months.
Makes 6 cups
Apricot Frozen Yogurt
This frozen treat tastes exactly like a creamy sorbet, and there’s no detectable sourness
that yogurt sometimes imparts in ice cream recipes. I think it’s the apricots dominating
the flavor and successfully blending with the simple list of ingredients.
This yogurt goes perfectly between a couple of cookies to make a frozen yogurt
sandwich—though the truth is, I eat it straight out of the container on warm summer
months. If it’s not summer, feel free to use frozen apricots, or if you don’t have apricots,
use fresh ripe peaches.
8 ripe apricots (about 10 ounces), pits removed (or use frozen apricots)
1/2 cup honey
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice
2 cups SCD Yogurt (page 28)
Blend all the ingredients together in a high-speed blender. Seal and store in the freezer
for up to several weeks.
Makes about 3 cups
Avoid Sweet Overload
It’s tempting to fill up on baked goods and honey-sweetened food, but avoid doing so.
Instead, focus on making meals and healthy small plates and snacks, not treats and
desserts. While you do need sugar, let it be a small part of a bigger meal and daily
intake.
French Vanilla Ice Cream
I love ice cream, and it’s one of the best reasons for making dairy-free milk. It’s
naturally sweet, so it doesn’t take much to sweeten it up and flavor it with honey or
dates and some vanilla. There are a couple of ways to thicken ice cream made with
dairy-free milk. I prefer using egg yolks; you can save the egg whites in the refrigerator
for at least a week to use in other recipes.
Quick Tip
If you don’t have an ice cream maker, place the ice cream in a blender container
and chill in the freezer. Every half hour or so, take out the blender and blend the
ice cream. Do this for several hours, or until it is the consistency that you want.
Freeze in a sealed container.
4 cups unsweetened almond milk
2 vanilla beans or 2 tablespoons vanilla extract
4 tablespoons honey, or to taste
6 egg yolks
1 Pour the milk into a saucepan and place over low to medium heat.
2 If you’re using vanilla beans, slice them the long way and run the edge of the knife
down the inside of the bean to scrape the seeds into the milk. If you’re using vanilla
extract, add it to the milk.
3 Stir the honey into the milk. Add the egg yolks and stir on and off to blend them with
the milk. Heat slowly until the milk has thickened a bit and a light film of custard forms
on the back of the stirring spoon.
4 Remove the mixture from the heat and let cool for at least 30 minutes at room
temperature. Then cover and place in the refrigerator for at least 1 hour to chill. The
longer the milk chills, the easier it will be to make the ice cream.
5 Pour the chilled mixture into an ice cream maker and follow the manufacturer’s
directions. (See the Quick Tip above if you don’t have an ice cream maker.)
6 Store your ice cream in a sealed container in the freezer for up to a few weeks. The
ice cream will get firmer as time goes by, so you may need to leave the container out at
room temperature for several minutes before scooping.
Makes about 1 quart
Lemon Pound Cake
This petite pound cake is a piece of cake heaven. I’ve wanted a pound cake recipe for
myself for a long time, so this was the first sweet recipe I developed for this book.
The lemon in the cake provides a subtle tangy flavor, just as you’d expect. To get a
stronger lemon flavor, you can add 1/2 teaspoon or so more lemon juice, which I
sometimes do. If you don’t have a citrus zester, you can use a cheese grater. Or use a
vegetable peeler to peel the yellow skin off the lemon in very thin strips and then chop it
as fine as possible.
1/2 cup blanched almond flour
1/4 cup coconut flour
1/2 teaspoon sea salt
4 eggs
1/4 cup unsalted butter, melted
⅓ cup honey
1/4 cup SCD Yogurt (page 28) or dairy-free milk
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
1 tablespoon fresh grated lemon zest (from 1 small lemon)
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 Preheat your oven to 325°F/165°C. Grease a loaf pan and/or line the bottom with
parchment paper to make the cake easier to remove. (I usually do both for this recipe.) I
use a 3-1/2 × 7-1/2-inch loaf pan, but a slightly larger one will work, too.
2 Blend the almond flour, coconut flour, and salt together in a bowl, either using an
electric mixer or by hand.
3 Add the eggs, melted butter, honey, yogurt, lemon juice, and zest and blend well, until
all the lumps are gone.
4 Pour the batter into the prepared pan and bake for 50 minutes, or until a toothpick
inserted in the center comes out clean.
5 Cool for 15 minutes or so and then serve. Store covered for a few days, or in the
refrigerator for a few weeks.
Makes 1 cake
Yellow Birthday Cake
Almond and coconut flours are combined in this simple layer cake to give you the best
of both worlds. A light, spongy cake that soaks up sweetness around it, it’s a nice
alternative to yellow cake made with just almond flour. This cake works well as a
celebratory cake with frosting or other toppings. I don’t make this as sweet as some
might like. If you find you want it sweeter, replace some of the almond milk with honey,
since this cake is plenty moist already.
This recipe is for a single cake layer, baked in an 8-inch round pan. To make a 2-layer
cake, double the recipe and split the batter between two 8-inch cake pans. To make
cupcakes, place nonstick muffin liners in a muffin tin and fill each liner about 2/3 full
with batter. Bake for about 10 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted in the center of the
cupcake comes out clean.
1/2 cup blanched almond flour
1/4 cup coconut flour
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
3 eggs
1/4 cup unsalted butter or ghee (page 31), melted, or cooking oil
3 tablespoons honey
1/2 cup almond milk (or other dairy-free milk)
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 Preheat your oven to 325°F/165°C. Line the bottom of an 8-inch round cake pan with
a parchment paper circle or other nonstick covering, or grease the pan well.
2 Blend the almond and coconut flours, salt, and baking soda in a mixing bowl. Add all
the remaining ingredients and blend well. I use an electric mixer for this.
3 Pour the batter into the prepared pan and bake for 20 minutes, or until a toothpick
inserted in the center of the cake comes out clean.
4 Let the cake cool on a wire rack for about 15 minutes, or an hour if you plan to frost
the cake. Gently run a knife around the outside edge of the cake to make it easy to
remove.
5 Once completely cooled, store covered at room temperature for a week or so, or store
it in the refrigerator for a few weeks.
Makes 1 cake layer or 6 cupcakes
“Oatmeal” Raisin Cookies
If you don’t have the time or patience to make these as whoopie pies, you can just make
the oatmeal raisin cookies and be quite happy. While there’s not actually any oatmeal in
this recipe, the texture will please those who love oatmeal raisin cookies. And since
these are soft and chewy, they make fine ice cream sandwiches (use the French Vanilla
Ice Cream on page 141).
Watch the baking time, since these cookies brown on the bottom first. If you want a
drier cookie, you can go a few minutes longer, but I like them moist with a bit of
chewiness.
1 cup smooth roasted almond butter
⅓ cup honey
1 egg
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1/2 cup unsweetened shredded coconut
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon salt
3/4 cup raisins
Vanilla Frosting (page 153)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper or a
nonstick silicone mat.
2 Blend all the wet ingredients together using a spatula or a mixer, until creamy.
3 Combine the dry ingredients in a separate small bowl. Add them to the almond butter
mixture and blend well.
4 Spoon about 1 tablespoon of batter per cookie onto the prepared baking sheet, spacing
the cookies about 1 inch apart. If you prefer a flatter cookie/pie, flatten the cookies a bit
with the bottom of a glass jar, spoon, or spatula.
5 Bake for 10 to 12 minutes, or until the edges are just starting to brown.
6 Transfer the cookies to a wire rack to cool. Make whoopie pies by sandwiching pairs
of cookies together with vanilla frosting filling in the middle. Store the cookies covered
at room temperature for about a week, or in the refrigerator for a few weeks.
Makes 24 cookies or 12 whoopie pies
Breakfast Cookies
I’m about to give you a good excuse to eat cookies for breakfast, or any other time of
day. Pack a cookie with enough protein and vitamins, and you have yourself a
respectable breakfast treat.
Another thing I like about these packets of nutritional power is that they can easily be
customized to your own taste. Your favorite nuts, seeds, and dried fruit will all work in
this recipe. It’s that easy. One of my readers leaves the honey out and says that these
cookies still taste great.
2-1/2 cups blanched almond flour (or almond meal or other nut flour)
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 cup unsalted butter, coconut oil, or ghee (page 31), melted
1/2 cup honey
1 egg
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
2 cups nuts, dried fruit, and/or seeds (or anything else your heart desires)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Combine the almond flour, salt, and baking soda in a bowl and blend, using a whisk
or fork.
3 Add the remaining ingredients and combine well, stirring with a fork or spoon. If the
batter is a bit too soft to handle, place it in the freezer for 5 minutes.
4 Drop tablespoons of batter onto the baking sheets, spacing them about 1 inch apart.
5 Bake for 12 to 15 minutes, or until the cookies are starting to brown around the edges.
(If you prefer your cookies slightly crunchier, turn off the oven and leave them in for
another 15 minutes or so; or place them in a dehydrator on a fairly low temperature for
about 30 minutes.)
6 Store the cookies in a sealed container at room temperature for a few days, in the
refrigerator for a few weeks, or in the freezer for a few months.
Makes about 24 cookies
Blueberry Cinnamon Coffee Cake
Okay, there’s no coffee in this recipe, but you can certainly pair it with all kinds of
beverages—and with ice cream, of course. It’s a friendly cake, meant for sharing after a
meal or maybe when relaxing on a lazy Sunday morning.
Feel free to switch berries if something else is in season. I tend to use frozen berries
when it’s not blueberry season, just because I love the way blueberries and cinnamon
work together. Don’t be put off by the long list of layers and ingredients—a lot of it is
the same kind of ingredient, and each layer comes together quite easily. If you want to
forgo a layer, I’d say that the cake will taste good even without the crumble topping,
though the crumble completes this quintessential cake.
I’ve arranged this recipe in the order of the layers that go into your baking pan. The
recipe fills an 8 × 8-inch or smaller pan. The batter may seem a bit skimpy, but it does
rise a bit, and the layers add to the cake’s height.
Quick Tip
If you really like cinnamon, you can double the recipe for the cinnamon layer. And
if you like nuts, add 1/4 cup finely chopped walnuts to the crumble layer to add a
bit of a crunch.
CAKE LAYER
1/2 cup blanched almond flour
1/4 cup coconut flour
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon
3 eggs
1/4 cup unsalted butter, melted
3 tablespoons honey
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1/2 cup almond milk (or other dairy-free milk or SCD Yogurt, page 28)
CRUMBLE LAYER
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
⅛ teaspoon baking soda
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 cup blanched almond flour (or other nut flour)
2 tablespoons honey
1 tablespoon unsalted butter, softened
1/4 cup crushed walnuts (optional)
BLUEBERRY LAYER
1 cup blueberries (fresh or frozen)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 Line the bottom of an 8-inch square (or smaller) baking pan with parchment paper.
3 For the cake layer, combine the almond flour, coconut flour, salt, baking soda, and
cinnamon in a mixing bowl; blend well.
4 Add the eggs, butter, honey, vanilla, and almond milk. Mix until well blended; I use
an electric stand mixer for this step.
5 Scoop the cake batter into the prepared pan and shuffle the pan to spread the batter
evenly.
6 In another bowl, combine all the crumble layer ingredients and blend with a fork until
crumbly. Spread evenly over the top of the cake layer.
7 Spread the blueberries across the top of the crumble layer.
8 Bake for 40 minutes, or until the top is browned and a toothpick inserted in the center
comes out clean.
9 Let cool, slice, and serve. You can store the cake at room temperature, covered, for a
few days or in the refrigerator for a few weeks.
Makes about 9 servings
Pumpkin Pie
This is a classic pumpkin pie that happens to be dairy-free. If you don’t feel like
whipping up a crust, the pumpkin filling tastes good baked on its own, without a crust—
it’s kind of like pumpkin custard.
As for the baking time, it will depend on the size of your pie pan. The custard filling will
bake faster in a large, flat tart pan than in a deep pie dish. Because my tart pan isn’t
nonstick, I line the bottom with parchment paper. You can also grease the sides a bit.
CRUST
2 cups blanched almond flour
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/4 cup coconut oil, unsalted butter, or ghee (page 31)
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 tablespoon honey
FILLING
1-3/4 cups (about 15 ounces) canned pumpkin purée or roasted squash (page 105;
butternut squash is the best)
1/4 cup dairy-free milk (coconut or almond, or substitute more squash instead)
3 eggs
1/2 cup honey (or a bit more, depending on the sweetness of the squash or
pumpkin)
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg
1/4 teaspoon each ground ginger, ground cloves, ground allspice, and ground
cardamom (optional, for a spicier pie)
1 Preheat your oven to 350°F/175°C.
2 To make the crust, place the almond flour, salt, baking soda, and cinnamon in the
bowl of a food processor and pulse briefly to blend. Add the coconut oil, vanilla, and
honey and process briefly so that you have small grains of dough that stick together
when you press them with your fingers.
3 Press the crust into a 8 or 9-inch pie pan or tart pan using your fingers. Line with
parchment paper and fill with pie weights (or dried beans), or insert a toothpick in
several places around the crust, to keep the crust from bubbling while it browns. Bake
for 5 minutes, or until the crust is slightly browned.
4 Let the crust cool for 10 minutes and then place it in the freezer for about 15 minutes.
5 Meanwhile, combine all the pie filling ingredients in a bowl, whisking to blend well.
6 Pour the filling into the chilled crust. I like to pour it right up to the edge of the crust
to keep the crust from getting too brown. You can also cover the crust edges with foil to
prevent them from browning too fast.
7 Bake for about 35 minutes if you’re using a tart pan, or until the outer edges of the
filling are firm. A deeper pie pan will take closer to 45 minutes.
8 Let cool for at least 30 minutes before slicing. Store the pie in the refrigerator,
covered, for up to a week or so.
Makes 8 servings
Vanilla Frosting
For most of my family, a celebration isn’t complete until we have a yellow cake with
frosting. But any cake you like can be a birthday cake. It could be banana bread
drizzled with white glaze and candied nuts. Or it could be a tower of your favorite
pancakes, with cream and berries between the layers and syrup drizzled over the top.
Or it might be fresh berries between cake layers, topped with whipped crème frâiche.
For a flavor twist, you can add a little cinnamon and nutmeg to this dairy-free vanilla
frosting.
If you’re craving the familiar, though, bake two layers of yellow cake (page 145), let
them cool, and make this or one of the following frostings. Be sure to wait to frost your
cake until it’s completely cool—otherwise the frosting will melt. Then spread on a thin
layer of frosting to seal the crumbs. Chill the cake for 10 minutes and then finish
frosting it.
1/2 cup Spectrum shortening (see Product Sources, page 161)
1/4 cup honey
1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract (or vanilla bean seeds)
1 tablespoon almond milk (or other dairy-free milk), or more if needed to soften
the frosting and add flavor
Using an electric mixer, blend all the ingredients together until you have the
consistency of a creamy frosting. Feel free to adjust the sweetness and the amount of
milk to get the consistency and flavor you prefer. Use this frosting at room temperature.
Makes about 1 cup
Marshmallow Meringue Frosting
This combination of egg whites and honey, with a few intricately timed steps, will yield
you a shiny, light meringue frosting. Lemon juice or vinegar helps the frosting stay
fluffy, and a little bit of vanilla adds flavor.
1/4 cup honey
2 egg whites
1/4 teaspoon fresh lemon juice or white vinegar (optional)
1/4 teaspoon vanilla extract (optional)
1 In a small saucepan over low to medium heat, bring the honey to a steady low boil.
Boil for about 5 to 10 minutes, or until the honey starts to darken. It’s ready when you
drop some in cold water and it forms a small ball.
2 Add the egg whites and lemon juice to a bowl. Whisk the egg whites in a mixer with a
whisk attachment, or by hand, until they form stiff peaks and have a glossy finish.
While you’re whipping the egg whites, slowly drizzle in the honey and the vanilla. If
you’re using a mixer, the honey may spray a bit, so try to drizzle it down the side of the
bowl, away from the whisk.
3 Use this frosting soon, as it tends to deflate a bit as it absorbs moisture from the air.
You can store it in the refrigerator for about a week, covered, and rewhip it if it begins
to separate.
Makes about 3 cups
Cream Cheese Frosting
This is a simple topping that goes great on muffins and cakes or as a tasty dip for sliced
fruit. The recipe makes enough to frost a few muffins or to use as dip. Double or triple
these amounts if you’re frosting a cake.
1/2 cup Dripped SCD Yogurt (page 29)
1/2 teaspoon honey
Combine the yogurt and honey in a bowl, blending well. Chill until ready to use.
Depending on the thickness of your yogurt, you may want to bring this frosting to room
temperature before spreading it on a cake or cupcakes.
Makes about 1/2 cup
White Glaze
1/2 cup coconut butter (see Product Sources, page 161)
1/2 tablespoon honey
1/4 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 Place the coconut butter and honey in a small, heatproof bowl.
2 Immerse the bowl halfway in another bowl or a saucepan containing hot water, or
place it in a warm oven, until the butter is soft but not fully melted.
3 Add the vanilla and stir until everything is well blended. Drizzle over your cake.
Makes about 1 cup
Measurements and Substitutions
Common Equivalents
1 gallon = 4 quarts = 8 pints = 16 cups = 128 fluid ounces = 3.8 liters
1 quart = 2 pints = 4 cups = 32 ounces = .95 liter
1 pint = 2 cups = 16 ounces = 480 ml
1 cup = 8 ounces = 240 ml
1/4 cup = 4 tablespoons = 12 teaspoons = 2 ounces = 60 ml
1 tablespoon = 3 teaspoons = 1/2 ounce = 15 ml
Temperature Conversions
Fahrenheit (°F) Celsius (°C) Gas Mark
200°F 95°C 0
225°F 110°C 1/4
250°F 120°C 1/2
275°F 135°C 1
300°F 150°C 2
325°F 165°C 3
350°F 175°C 4
375°F 190°C 5
400°F 200°C 6
425°F 220°C 7
450°F 230°C 8
475°F 245°C 9
Volume Conversions
U.S. U.S. Metric
1 tablespoon (3 teaspoons) 1/2 fluid ounce 15 ml
1/4 cup 2 fluid ounces 60 ml
1/3 cup 3 fluid ounces 90 ml
1/2 cup 4 fluid ounces 120 ml
2/3 cup 5 fluid ounces 150 ml
3/4 cup 6 fluid ounces 180 ml
1 cup 8 fluid ounces 240 ml
2 cups 16 fluid ounces 480 ml
Weight
U.S. Metric
1/2 ounce 15 grams
1 ounce 30 grams
2 ounces 60 grams
1/4 pound 115 grams
1/3 pound 150 grams
1/2 pound 225 grams
3/4 pound 350 grams
1 pound 450 grams
Ingredient Substitutions
Here are some suggested substitutions for a few commonly used ingredients.
Substituting ingredients successfully can vary from recipe to recipe—you’ll want to
take into account how swapping out one ingredient for another will affect the overall
taste and texture of a dish.
Baking Powder
Baking powder is avoided on the SCD because it contains starch or other caking
additives. It’s quite easy to substitute baking soda and another component instead:
1 teaspoon baking powder = 1/2 teaspoon baking soda + 1/2 teaspoon lemon juice
1 teaspoon baking powder = 1/2 teaspoon baking soda + 1/2 cup plain yogurt
Eggs
The egg is a tricky ingredient to swap out because it’s a flavorless binding agent. Eggs
can be replicated somewhat with the alternatives below. Keep in mind that banana has a
distinct flavor, so use it when you want that flavor. Applesauce not only acts as a
binding agent and adds sweetness, but it can also be used as a substitute for oil or butter
by adding moisture and volume. Puréed prunes (baby food), like applesauce, bind and
add sweetness.
1/4 cup mashed banana = 1 egg
1/4 cup unsweetened applesauce = 1 egg
3 tablespoons puréed prunes = 1 egg
Baking soda plus vinegar can also be used to replace eggs. Add the baking soda to the
dry ingredients in the recipe and add the vinegar to the wet ingredients, then combine
the dry and wet ingredients. A chemical reaction will release gas and lift your batter.
Place the batter in the oven as soon as you combine the dry and wet ingredients, before
the gas can escape.
1 teaspoon baking soda + 1 teaspoon apple cider vinegar = 1 egg
Yogurt, both dairy and dairy-free, binds and adds moisture.
1/4 cup of yogurt = 1 egg
Duck Eggs
For people who can better digest duck eggs than chicken eggs, you can replace duck
eggs in recipes calling for eggs.
1 duck egg = 1/2 chicken egg
Honey
Dates are an excellent sweetener alternative to honey. My favorite date is the Medjool,
but others work, too.
1/4 cup honey = 1/4 cup chopped dates
Nut Butter
While the flavor may change a bit, in general you can replace any nut butter with a seed
butter, such as sunflower seed or sesame seed butter (tahini).
nut butter = seed butter
Vanilla
Both the shells and the seeds of vanilla beans contain vanilla flavoring. To use the seeds
in place of extract, choose a soft, fresh bean (not dried out), slice it down the middle the
long way, and then use the edge of the knife to scrape out the seeds. Here’s an easy
equivalent for swapping the seeds for vanilla extract:
seeds from 1 vanilla bean = 1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Resources
Books
Bager, Jodi, and Jenny Lass. Everyday Grain-Free Gourmet. Toronto: Whitecap Books,
2008.
Gottschall, Elaine Gloria. Breaking the Vicious Cycle: Intestinal Health Through Diet.
Baltimore, ON: The Kirkton Press, 1994.
Haas, S.V., and M.P. Haas. Management of Celiac Disease. Philadelphia: J.B.
Lippincott & Co., 1951. (Previously out of print, this book has been reproduced and can
be found at managingceliac.com and also through Digestive Wellness
[digestivewellness.com], Lucy’s Kitchen Shop [lucyskitchenshop.com], and
Amazon.com.)
Metzl, Jordan D. The Athlete’s Book of Home Remedies. Emmaus, PA: Rodale Books,
2012.
Oppenheimer, Margaret A. Beat Crohn’s! Getting to Remission with Enteral Nutrition.
Long Island City, NY: Solutions, 2009.
Websites
Comfy Belly comfybelly.com
Breaking the Vicious Cycle breakingtheviciouscycle.info/home
The Gottschall Autism Center gottschallcenter.com
Pecan Bread (focus on children) pecanbread.com
SCD Bakery scdbakery.com
SCD Recipe scdrecipe.com
SCD Web Library scdiet.org
Product Sources
Product Source Contact Info
Almond flour
CB Kitchen
Honeyville
Hughson Nut
Lucy’s Kitchen Shop
Digestive Wellness
JK Gourmet
cbkitchen.com
honeyvillegrain.com
hughsonnut.com
lucyskitchenshop.com
digestivewellness.com
jkgourmet.ca
Almond meal Trader Joe’s traderjoes.com
Baking papers, plastic
If You Care
Natural Value
ifyoucare.com
naturalvalue.com
Coconut products (oil,
butter, flour, unsweetened
shredded coconut)
CB Kitchen
Tropical Traditions
Wilderness Family Naturals
Artisana
Bob’s Red Mill
Edward & Sons
Nuts.com
Digestive Wellness
Nutiva
cbkitchen.com
tropicaltraditions.com
wildernessfamilynaturals.com
artisanafoods.com
bobsredmill.com
edwardandsons.com
nuts.com
digestivewellness.com
nutiva.com
Coconut milk
Trader Joe’s
Natural Value
traderjoes.com
naturalvalue.com
Dehydrator Excalibur excaliburdehydrator.com
Dried fruit and nuts
Nuts.com
Eden Foods
nuts.com
edenfoods.com
Filtered water bottles
Eau Good Bottle
Bobble
black-blum.com
waterbobble.com
Fish sauce Red Boat redboatfishsauce.com
Gelatin
Bernard Jensen
Great Lakes
bernardjensen.com
greatlakesgelatin.com
Honey
(Locally sourced brands are best, in
general. Manuka honey comes from
New Zealand or Australia.)
Note: Children under the age of 1 year
should not eat honey.
Trader Joe’s
Bee Raw Honey
Glory Bee (Oregon-based)
traderjoes.com
beeraw.com
glorybeehoney.com
Nut milk bag The Raw Food World therawfoodworld.com
Nut and seed butters
Artisana
Sunbutter
MaraNatha
artisanafoods.com
sunbutter.com
maranathafoods.com
Probiotics
GI ProHealth
Klaire Labs
giprohealth.com
klaire.com
Tomato sauce
Muir Glen
Bionaturae
Lucini
muirglen.com
bionaturae.com
lucini.com
Vanilla, dried herbs, spices
Frontier
Simply Organic
Flavorganics
Mountain Rose Herbs
frontiercoop.com
simplyorganic.com
flavorganics.com
mountainroseherbs.com
Vegetable shortening and
high-heat oils
Eden Foods
Lucini
Napa Valley Naturals
Spectrum
edenfoods.com
beeraw.com
glorybeehoney.com
spectrumorganics.com
Yogurt Starter
GI ProHealth
Klaire Labs
giprohealth.com
klaire.com
Acknowledgments
I never dreamed I would write a cookbook, share recipes with the world, take photos of
food, or bake with ingredients such as almond and coconut flour. But here I am. And
here are some of those I’d like to thank for helping to make this book possible:
Craig, for giving me time and space to create this book.
Max and Sam, whom I’m so proud of for living life to the fullest, regardless of
obstacles.
My recipe testers, old friends and new, and a special thanks to Kim Ryder, Ruth
Moorman, Eran Caspi, Laura Shepherd, and Bonnie Eng.
Comfy Belly readers, who try my recipes and enthusiastically share how they turn
out and what changes they made. What an amazing world we live in, where people
who don’t know each other take the time to share what works for them so that
others can benefit.
Anne Depue, for having my back.
Marin McEntyre, Elizabeth Reese, Etch Haring, and Susan Lammers for your
encouragement and support.
Suzanne Paterson and Barbara Dorhofer, PCC Market folks, for answering my
many cheese and meat questions.
Helene Dujardin, for generously sharing her insight on the cookbook world.
Tucker Sweeney, for his generosity and insight.
My editor, Katherine Furman, who is a pleasure to work with.
Everyone at Ulysses for all their hard work and support in making this book
happen.
And for the unwavering love and dedication of Elaine Gottschall and all parents,
families, and friends of those whose lives have been challenged by health issues.
About the Author
Erica Kerwien is a kitchen chemist and writer. When one of her sons was diagnosed
with an autoimmune disease called Crohn’s disease, she set out to help him restore his
health in the best way possible—with food. Along the way, she discovered the Specific
Carbohydrate Diet (SCD), which changed the way her family eats and cooks. Erica
started the website Comfy Belly (comfybelly.com) to track and share her recipes, and it
has become a valuable resource for recipes that are gluten-free, sugar-free, lactose-free,
dairy-free, and grain-free.