About the Author 
Dr . Caroline J . Cederquist is one of only 850 physicians who have achieved a 
board certification in bariatric medicine . She has conducted years of clinical 
research and specializes in nutrition and metabolism . She is a nationally 
recognized and versatile media personality covering a wide spectrum of 
health-related news and topics . 
After graduating from the University Of Miami School of Medicine , 
she completed her residency and board certification in family medicine . 
In 1998 , she opened her practice , Cederquist Medical Wellness Center , in 
Naples , Florida . Based on requests from a rapidly expanding client base , in 
2005 she cofounded bistroMD , a national weight loss company that provides 
physician-designed , chef-prepared weight loss meals that are delivered to 
your home . 
Dr . Cederquist provides an opportunity for a wellness transformation 
to patients who have metabolism dysfunction . She helps patients with 
complex medical conditions related to weight and nutritional issues . She 
also identifies and treats food allergies and sensitivities , giving access to her 
patients to feel well—sometimes for the first time . Her practice strives to give 
patients the path to a vibrant , healthy lifestyle through nutrition , metabolism 
correction , weight loss , and weight management . 
Through her practice and media outreach , she aims to help men , women , 
and children through the struggles and confusion of weight management 
with the identification and treatment of metabolism dysfunction . 
Career Highlights Include : 
• Author of Helping Your Overweight Child , A Family Guide
• Contributor to national television including Dr . Phil , Ricki Lake , and 
NBC News
• Regular contributor editor for Huffington Post and è Bella Magazine
• Recognized as an expert in numerous print and e-publications , including 
the New York Times , Wall Street Journal , Time , CNN , Glamour , Shape , 
Men ’ s Health , Elle , Woman ’ s Day , Family Circle , Parenting Magazine , Men ’ s 
Fitness , and Health Magazine
viii The MD Factor Diet
• Former Trustee , American Society of Bariatric Physicians
• National Upjohn Achievement Award recipient for Outstanding
Academic and Personal Qualities in a Physician
• Keynote Speaker for national and regional wellness seminars including
Metabolic Summit
• Officer of Alpha Omega Alpha Medical Society
Dr . Cederquist is also a busy mom of four and devoted to her husband , 
Ed , fondly referred to as The Foodie and cofounder of bistroMD . The duo 
combines the science of healthy weight loss with their passion for great 
tasting , nutritious food to create a compelling difference in people ’ s lives . 
ix
Cederquist Medical Wellness Center partners with our 
patients to create a profound transformation that makes a lifelong difference 
in their health and well-being . 
We are experts in nutrition and metabolism . Firmly grounded in medical 
science , we are a refreshing opportunity for our patients who have difficulty 
obtaining an optimally functioning metabolism . We strive to continuously 
refine and explore the medical and metabolic reasons why achieving and 
maintaining a healthy weight can be so challenging for our patients who have 
achieved success and mastery in almost every other aspect of their lives . 
We stand for that all people ’ s well-being can be transformed . Many , 
while hopeful for change , come to us resigned by the difficulties and issues 
they have known . Some feel their body has changed and a new frustrating 
metabolism has taken over . Others have had issues for as long as they can 
remember and find it difficult to visualize a different future . A number of 
our patients share that they do not know and never have known what it is 
like to feel well . We acknowledge and appreciate the strength , courage , and 
integrity necessary to triumph over these health challenges . Our partnership powerfully enables our patients to let go of ineffective nutrition plans 
and patterns of behavior that no longer work within the context of a 
healthy future . 
Our excitement with our work goes beyond healthy weight management . 
With thorough investigation and analysis and the collaboration of our 
patients , our multidisciplinary team creates a carefully devised plan of action 
to alleviate or significantly improve physical symptoms that dampen vitality , 
as well as create a new future of health and well-being . 
We recruit and develop dynamic , skillful professionals who are 
committed to the lives we touch and the pursuit of excellence . 
It is our fortune to play an integral role in the successes and accomplishments that impact our patient ’ s lives . 
Our patients are able to obtain a quality of life that had been lost or was 
never known and confidently embrace a new vibrant and healthy future . 
Our Charter

xi
Acknowledgments
Putting more than twenty years of what you do day to day into a
book should be so easy and straightforward . However , it was a great 
undertaking and I am so grateful to the many people who helped put into 
words the motivating and refreshing opportunity I am privileged to provide 
for my patients on a daily basis . 
First , I must thank my husband , Ed Cederquist , for always supporting 
me in my desire to create a medical practice dedicated to nutrition and 
metabolism unlike any other in existence . This support also created 
bistroMD , the amazing home meal delivery program that allows the benefits 
of my knowledge and expertise to touch hundreds of thousands of people 
outside of my practice . I thank my four beautiful and amazing children , 
two of whom are now adults . Thank you for trying the meals created for 
our programs because we always knew a “ thumbs up ” from you signaled 
a winning recipe . Thank you for patiently sharing me with my work , 
research , and writing . I thank my parents , Cathy and Neale Szabo . You 
always supported me in everything I wanted to pursue , including my plan to 
become a physician . 
Thank you to Adriana Kinn , the brilliant nurse practitioner I have been 
blessed to work with for the past twelve years . Your attention to detail and 
greatly skilled , insightful , and motivating coaching has helped thousands 
of our patients . Thank you to the dynamic and skillful team of dietitians 
at Cederquist Medical Wellness Center—Joy Post , Nicole Hartwick , Amy 
Geant , Natasha Genevro , and others over the years . You take the nutrition 
prescription to correct metabolism dysfunction and turn it into a meal plan 
that our patients enjoy eating . Thank you for partnering with our patients 
to create a profound transformation that makes a lifelong difference in their 
health and well-being . Thank you to my administrative and support team at 
the medical center—Rebecca and Julie . Thank you for your dedication to the 
people we serve and your pursuit of excellence . Thank you as well to Donna 
Alpert , LMHC , who for the past twelve years has shared her wisdom and 
solutions with those patients who have struggled with patterns of behavior 
that no longer work in the context of a healthy future . 
xii The MD Factor Diet
With regards to the book specifically , a further great thank-you goes to 
Joy Lynn Post . You and I created the first manuscript that would eventually 
become The MD Factor Diet . Your nutritional knowledge coupled with your 
gift for making it understandable on paper is such a brilliant combination , 
and I am so thankful for all you have contributed to the educational modules 
of the medical center , as well as to this book . I expect further great things as 
you complete your doctoral degree in nutrition and add more to the field . 
Thank you , Rebecca Wells and Wesley Bloemers . Your brilliance in 
writing and marketing at such a young age is humbling . Thank you for 
championing this book project and taking it from pages of medical jargon 
and dietary data to the beautiful and user-friendly book it is today . Thank 
you , Sonja Pustay , for your contributions to the editing process . Thank you 
to my business coach Kelly Townsend for your talents in helping us create 
the charters of the Cederquist Medical Wellness Center and bistroMD and 
for coaching us to fulfill on those charters . 
Thank you to dietitian Sarah Hallenberger and to the chefs of bistroMD 
for your insights and for sharing some of the fabulous recipes of bistroMD 
with our readers . 
Thank you , Karen Moline , for your upbeat and motivational writing 
style . You made what I say come alive in the written format . Thank you to 
Mayerchak & Co . for the skillful book design and production . The artistic 
design and clean organizational style reflect how doable correcting the 
MD Factor is for people . 
Thank you to my great friend Rebecca Zung-Clough for your friendship 
and the fact that I am always empowered in your presence . 
Finally , I thank my patients and the medical community of Collier 
County . I have been so fortunate over the years to have had thousands 
of men , women , children , and their physicians entrust me and my team 
with their care and the creation of their new healthy futures . You are my 
motivation to always research more and learn more about the mysteries of 
metabolism and the healing power of clean , great-tasting , nourishing food . 
—C . J . C . 
The
MD Factor
Diet
Salmon piccata with couscous and broccoli
PART I
DISCOVER YOUR
MD FACTOR
1
CHAPTER 1
Metabolism Dysfunction : 
It ’ s Not Your Fault
2 The MD Factor Diet 
 “ Why is it so hard 
for me to lose weight ?  ” 
That ’ s the question I hear every day from patients who ’ ve come 
to my weight management medical practice . These are smart 
people who have usually been eating the same amount of food and 
who are often following strict diets . Many of them have upped their 
workouts , too , but the weight still won ’ t come off—or , worse , they 
are gaining weight for seemingly no reason at all ! They are incredibly 
frustrated because they think the only way to lose weight is to eat less 
and exercise more—which is what the media ( and sometimes their 
physicians ) tell them over and over again . 
Other patients have become resigned to being overweight , because 
losing the extra pounds has become too difficult for them .  “ I know 
what to do ,  ” they ’ ll tell me ,  “ and I ’ ve done it . But it ’ s not working .  ” Maybe 
somehow they ’ re eating more than they realize , or they ’ re getting less 
exercise than they think . Or maybe it ’ s menopause that ’ s making them fat . 
In any case , they think there ’ s nothing they can do about it . 
And some patients tell me , with a heartbreaking look in their eyes ,  “ I ’ ve 
had a weight problem all my life , and nothing will ever work for me .  ” 
After twenty years of treating patients who want to lose weight , I know 
exactly why they ’ re so frustrated and upset . They might have put on fat in 
their torso , especially their bellies . It might creep up slowly or seemingly 
appear overnight . But these weight problems aren ’ t just about overeating 
or underexercising—they ’ re about metabolic changes . 
In other words , if you ’ ve tried to lose weight and haven ’ t made any 
real progress , one thing is certain : your metabolism has changed . It ’ s like 
a switch has been flipped and your old , familiar metabolism has been 
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 3
replaced with a frustratingly difficult new one , a metabolism that likes 
storing fat . You have what I call the MD Factor . 
The MD Factor is incredibly common : 
✔ When you gain belly weight for any reason , your 
metabolism changes . 
✔ When you have hormonal changes , your metabolism changes . 
✔ As you age , your metabolism changes . 
You don ’ t have to be overweight to have the MD Factor . Even if your 
weight is perfectly normal , you can still suffer from its effects . This is 
particularly important for premenopausal women to know , as following 
the MD Factor Action Plan you ’ ll read about in this book can help 
prevent the typical fifteen-to-thirty-pound weight gain that happens 
around menopause . 
Let me tell you that your symptoms are very real . Craving sugars , 
feeling foggy , having energy dips throughout the day , and increased 
hunger are all symptoms of the MD Factor . I know how hard it is 
to lose weight if you are hungry , have intense cravings , and have no 
energy . After following the MD Factor Plan for just one week , these 
symptoms will be better . 
The MD Factor is caused by changes in how your body is able to use 
the nutrients in your food , and even though it ’ s very common , it ’ s not 
often recognized by those who have it—or by their physicians . Whatever 
your weight , when your metabolism is no longer acting the way it used to , 
you can fix it . There is a specific way your body needs to be fed to get the 
best out of your metabolism , ensuring that you are able to lose weight and 
keep it off . You ’ ll see how to do just that with the MD Factor Action Plan . 
Even if you ’ ve tried every diet out there and not lost the weight you 
wanted , the MD Factor Action Plan will work for you . You can lose 
Even if you ’ ve tried every 
diet out there and not lost 
the weight you wanted , the 
MD Factor Action Plan will 
work for you . 
4 The MD Factor Diet
weight and keep it off . That ’ s because the MD Factor Action Plan is not 
merely a diet—it ’ s a lifestyle change that works . It will empower you to 
lose weight , as well as prevent future weight gains . 
The MD Factor Action Plan gives you access to a healthy future . 
By adjusting your diet and lifestyle , you ’ ll eat better , sleep better , have 
more energy , be sharper and more focused , and lower your risk for heart 
disease , some cancers , stroke , and dementia . 
What have you got to lose ? Nothing but a lot of weight , a myriad of 
health problems , and a lot of frustration ! 
How the MD Factor Can 
Impact Your Health
I decided to become a physician because I wanted to help people live the 
healthiest lives possible . I graduated from medical school in 1991 and 
completed specialized training in family practice , learning how to care 
for people from infancy through childhood , adolescence , and adulthood , 
during pregnancy , through the years of hormone changes such as 
menopause , and through all aspects of aging . 
I realized early on that many of my patients had medical problems and 
a decreased quality of life due to problems with their weight . I decided 
I would learn everything I could about nutrition and metabolism to 
help them live healthier and more vibrant lives . I have years of clinical 
experience with thousands of patients of all ages—men , women , 
and children . I ’ ve also spent years researching why metabolism can 
become dysfunctional and why losing weight can become so difficult 
even for highly motivated people . To better help them , I created the 
comprehensive Cederquist Medical Wellness Center , where I ’ m aided by 
my expert team of dietitians , a nurse practitioner , a behavioral therapist , 
and exercise specialists . 
What have you got to lose ? 
Nothing but a lot of weight , 
a lot of health problems , 
and a lot of frustration ! 
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 5
It is incredibly gratifying to see a patient radiate joy and triumph 
after dropping several dress sizes or getting a smaller belt . It ’ s wonderful 
to see these physical signs of a metabolism that is now working again . 
But because I am a physician first , I know that while helping people look 
better is great , there is more to my mission in life . I have become an 
expert in nutrition and metabolism for another reason : correcting the 
MD Factor can have many benefits . It adds years to my patients ’ lives , 
helps their medical conditions , and reduces the medications they are 
required to take . 
Here ’ s how an uncontrolled MD Factor can negatively impact 
your health : 
✔ It increases your risk of heart disease . The MD Factor is one of 
the major reasons cholesterol levels get skewed , with too many 
triglycerides and too little “ good ” HDL cholesterol . This abnormal 
cholesterol profile , or dyslipidemia , is a major contributor to heart 
disease , which leads to heart attacks . The MD Factor also increases 
inflammation , a newly discovered risk factor for heart attacks . 
✔ It increases your risk of stroke . A stroke impedes blood flow to 
your brain . It can cause permanent brain and nerve damage , and 
even kill you . 
✔ It increases your risk of high blood pressure . This makes it more 
likely that you ’ ll develop heart disease or have a stroke later in life . 
✔ It increases your risk for type 2 diabetes . Type 2 diabetes is 
almost always caused by lifestyle , particularly by being overweight . 
Diabetes is an extremely serious illness and is a leading cause of 
blindness , kidney disease , heart disease , circulatory problems , 
and general disability . The longer you have it , the more damage it 
can do to your organs . And the disease is now reaching epidemic 
levels : as of 2011 , 27 percent of adults over sixty-five in America 
have diabetes , and 35 percent of Americans over twenty have 
I ’ ve also spent years 
researching why metabolism 
can become dysfunctional 
and why losing weight can 
become so difficult even for 
highly motivated people . 
6 The MD Factor Diet
pre-diabetes , which means they ’ ve had the MD Factor for years 
and are at grave risk for developing diabetes . And most of them 
don ’ t know they have it . 
The MD Factor also greatly increases your risk for many other 
ailments : 
✔ Cancer : breast cancer , colon cancer , endometrial cancer , 
esophagus cancer , gallbladder cancer , kidney cancer , leukemia ( in 
adults )  , liver cancer , lymphoma , pancreatic cancer , prostate cancer
✔ Dementia and other forms of mental decline
✔ Kidney disease
✔ Nerve damage
Take heart , though . You can fight and defeat the MD Factor and 
successfully reverse many of these health risks . 
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 7
Is This You ? 
You ’ ll be able to pinpoint your MD Factor symptoms in more detail once 
you take the quiz on page 9 , but see if you have any of these : 
❑ You crave sugary foods , and once you start eating them , you find it
difficult to stop . 
❑ You feel weak or light-headed after missing a meal or shortly after
having something sweet on an empty stomach .  ( For example , if you eat
a doughnut at 8 : 00 a . m .  , you ’ ll feel weak or foggy an hour later .  ) 
❑ You have afternoon energy slumps several hours after lunch . 
❑ You have a hard time sleeping soundly through the night . You tend to
wake up a few hours after falling asleep , then feel too wide awake to
be able to get back to sleep . 
❑ You have trouble focusing and maintaining attention . 
❑ You have frequent mood swings . 
❑ If you are a woman in your midforties or beyond , you may experience
hot flashes . 
❑ You feel that if you don ’ t have something to eat at the exact moment
that hunger pangs strike , you ’ ll be grumpy , edgy , light-headed , or shaky . 
❑ You want to eat pasta , rice , or other starchy carbohydrates at meals . You
crave potato chips , popcorn , sweets , cookies , candy , or crackers . 
❑ You eat cereal with milk and fruit for breakfast , yet find you are starving
by 10 : 00 a . m . —hungrier than if you skipped breakfast altogether . 
❑ Your hunger is so intense at 5 : 00 or 6 : 00 p . m . that you think ,  “ I ’ ll eat
anything that doesn ’ t eat me first !  ” 
❑ You find it extremely difficult to lose weight and very easy to gain
weight . 
8 The MD Factor Diet
The MD Factor is very frustrating—but you can defeat it . I say that 
with certainty because I ’ ve treated thousands of men , women , and 
children who ’ ve had it , and they ’ ve finally won the weight loss battle . I 
know you can do it , too . 
What I want you to do now is take the MD Factor Quiz on the next 
page . I developed it to help you see how the MD Factor affects you . Then , 
in Part II , you ’ ll discover what the MD Factor is in more depth . In Part 
III , you can move right into the MD Factor Action Plan . I ’ ll guide you 
every step of the way . Part IV will give you amazingly delicious recipes , 
and finally , the appendices have additional information to help you 
control your 
MD Factor . 
So let ’ s get to work ! 
The MD Factor Quiz
Since between 89–94 percent of the patients who come to see me for help 
with their weight have the MD Factor , I developed this quiz to help me 
pinpoint their symptoms . These patients are almost always shocked—and 
then relieved—that a very real metabolic condition has made weight loss 
so challenging for them . 
As you take the MD Factor Quiz , see if any of these symptoms 
resonate with you . The scoring will help you determine if you have the 
MD Factor . I developed this test in my medical practice and ran clinical 
studies to test it . My patients ’ scores on the quiz directly correlated to 
whether or not they had the MD Factor on blood work testing and also 
how severe their MD Factor was . Take the quiz and then check your 
score in the pages that follow . 
These patients are almost 
always shocked-and then 
relieved-that a very real 
metabolic condition has made 
weight loss so challenging for 
them . 
Chapter
1 
| Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault
9
The MD Factor Quiz : Part 1
Please circle ONLY ONE of the following answers that most closely 
describes how you feel every day . Then circle the point value for each 
answer in the table on the side of the page . Record your points for each 
question in the table on page 15 . 
1 . Describe your appetite in
the morning . 
a . I wake up hungry and need
breakfast to start my day . 
b . I ’ m not hungry at first , but in a
few hours I need to eat . 
c . I ’ m mildly hungry and feel better
if I have breakfast , but I could go
without it if needed . 
d . I have no appetite in the morning . 
It ’ s really hard for me to be able to
eat any breakfast . 
2 . How would you describe your
energy level at 3 : 00 p . m .  ? 
a . My energy is good . 
b . I ’ m a little tired , but I can shake it
off by getting up and stretching
or taking a brief walk away from
my desk . 
c . I need a pick-me-up , so I ’ ll look
for something with caffeine or a
sugary snack . 
d . I ’ m exhausted . I need a nap , and if
I can take one , I ’ ll conk right out . 
3 . What ’ s your opinion about sweets
such as cookies or starchy foods such
as breads or pasta ? 
a . I can take them or leave them . 
When I have them , fine , but I
don ’ t crave them . 
b . I have always liked sugars and
starches and still do . No meal is
complete without starches as well
as dessert . 
c . I like these foods , but I know
they ’ re a problem . Every time I
eat them , they either increase my
appetite or make me hungrier . 
d . I have uncontrollable cravings
for sugars and starches even if
I ’ ve just eaten and am not really
hungry . It ’ s almost as if it doesn ’ t
matter what the food is or how
much I like it or not—I have to
eat it . 
QUESTION 1
Answer Points
A 0
B 1
C 3
D 7
QUESTION 2
Answer Points
A 0
B 1
C 3
D 7
QUESTION 3
Answer Points
A 0
B 2
C 5
D 7
10 The MD Factor Diet
The MD Factor Quiz : Part 2
Please select the answer that best describes how you feel . If you no longer 
eat or drink the way the question references , then answer how you would 
have felt in the past when you ate or drank that way . 
4 . How do you feel after eating a 
typical high-carbohydrate breakfast 
( cereal , fruit juice , toast , waffles , 
a bagel , pancakes )  ? 
a . I feel good , have lots of energy , 
and am full . 
b . I feel full but get hungry again a 
few hours later—usually before 
my scheduled lunchtime . 
c . I feel crummy . I get tired and don ’ t 
feel satisfied , so I start looking for 
something else to eat a few hours 
later . 
d . This breakfast stimulates my 
appetite , and I ’ m ravenous within 
an hour or two . 
e . This does not apply to me as I 
never eat this type of breakfast . 
In the past when I ate this type of 
breakfast , I had some symptoms 
of increased appetite . 
f . This does not apply to me as 
I never eat this type of breakfast . I 
do not like this type of breakfast , 
but when I have eaten these foods 
in the past , I do not recall any 
symptoms of increased appetite . 
5 . How do you feel if you haven ’ t eaten 
for six or more hours ? 
a . I ’ m hungry and want to eat , but 
I can take the time to prepare a 
healthful meal if it takes less than 
thirty minutes . 
b . I ’ m very hungry and can ’ t wait 
to prepare a meal , so I ’ ll start 
snacking because I need to eat 
before my meal is ready . 
c . I feel irritable and cranky or 
headachy , and I need to get 
something fast . 
d . I feel terrible . I ’ m weak and shaky 
and almost feel like I ’ m going to 
faint . Basically , I ’ ll eat anything 
that won ’ t eat me first ! And I ’ ll eat 
it very quickly so I can make that 
awful feeling go away . 
e . This does not apply to me as I never 
go this long without eating . In the 
past , when I went this long without 
eating , I would get some of the 
symptoms listed above . 
f . This does not apply to me as I never 
go this long without eating . In the 
past , when I went this long without 
eating , I do not recall having 
symptoms of hunger , headaches , 
irritability , or feeling weak . 
QUESTION 4
Answer Points
A 0
B 2
C 7
D 7
E 7
F 0
QUESTION 5
Answer Points
A 0
B 3
C 5
D 7
E 7
F 0
Chapter
1 
| Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 11
6 . How do you feel when eating
something sweet , such as cookies , 
or something starchy , such as
potatoes or pasta ? 
a . I feel fine . I enjoy these foods and
feel satisfied with a normal-size
serving . 
b . Sometimes eating these types of
food seem to make me hungrier , 
and I want another portion . 
c . Usually when I eat these types of
food , I end up eating slightly more
than I wanted , but I don ’ t have to
finish every last chip in the bag or
the entire box of cookies . 
d . If I eat these foods , I know I won ’ t
be able to stop . They make me
feel out of control , and I ’ ll eat
the whole bag or box no matter
how big it is . Even when I ’ m
uncomfortably full , it ’ s really hard
to stop eating . 
e . This does not apply to me as I 
don ’ t eat sweet or starchy food . 
In the past when I ate these 
foods , I would have symptoms of 
increased hunger or loss of control . 
f . This does not apply to me as I
don ’ t eat sweet or starchy food . 
They don ’ t cause any symptoms
that I am aware of ; I just don ’ t like
these foods . 
7 . If you eat a meal that contains
mostly carbohydrates , such as pasta
and garlic bread , how do you feel
RIGHT afterward ? 
a . I feel full but otherwise fine . 
b . I feel a little tired shortly
after eating . 
c . I feel very physically tired . 
d . I feel like I ’ m in a mental fog—
what I would describe as a food
coma—and I want to go to sleep . 
e . This does not apply to me as
I don ’ t eat high carbohydrate
meals like this . In the past , when
I ate meals like this , I felt more
physically or mentally tired . 
f . This does not apply to me as I
don ’ t eat high carbohydrate meals
like this . When I have eaten a meal
like this in the past , it did not
cause any symptoms that I recall . I
just do not like this type of meal . 
QUESTION 6
Answer Points
A 0
B 2
C 5
D 7
E 7
F 0
QUESTION 7
Answer Points
A 0
B 2
C 5
D 7
E 7
F 0
12 The MD Factor Diet
8 . How do you feel several hours after
that same carbohydrate-rich evening
meal , adding a glass of wine to it ? 
a . I feel fine , no different from any
other meal . 
b . I feel fine and sleep well . I could
be a bit hungrier than usual in
the morning . 
c . My sleep is disturbed . I ’ ll wake up
in the middle of the night , maybe
around 2 : 00 or 3 : 00 a . m .  , and feel
wide awake . 
d . I wake up multiple times during
the night . I could be a bit hungrier
than usual in the morning . 
e . A few hours later I feel warm and
sweaty , almost like I ’ m having a
hot flash . 
f . I no longer drink alcohol , but
when I did in the past , if combined 
with a carbohydrate-rich meal , 
I recall having disturbed sleep or
hot flashes . 
g . This does not apply to me as
I do not drink alcohol or have
carbohydrate-rich meals . If I did
have alcohol in the past with a
similar meal , I do not recall any
effect on my sleep or hot flashes . 
QUESTION 8
Answer Points
A 0
B 2
C 7
D 5
E 7
F 7
G 0
Chapter
1 
| Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 13
The MD Factor Quiz : Part 3
Please circle ONLY ONE of the choices for each question . 
9 . If you ’ ve tried to lose weight 
recently , were you successful ? 
a . Yes . I was able to lose weight fairly 
easily by increasing my exercise 
and cutting back on portion size , 
sweets , and alcohol . 
b . Yes , but I can lose weight only if I 
follow a fairly rigid , structured diet 
and increase my exercise level . 
Merely cutting back on food and 
increasing exercise doesn ’ t work . 
c . Not really . I can lose very slowly if I 
never cheat on a rigid , low-calorie 
diet and add a lot more daily 
exercise to my routine . I should 
show a lot more results for my 
efforts . And as soon as I go off the 
diet , I put on a few pounds really 
quickly . 
d . No . I ’ m following such a strict 
diet that ’ s there ’ s no way I can cut 
back further , plus I ’ m exercising 
more than I ever used to , but I ’ ve 
lost almost no weight . Or , worse , I 
even gained a few pounds . 
e . This does not apply to me as I 
have not tried to lose weight 
recently . 
10 . How would you rate your current 
body weight ? 
a . Very good . I ’ m at a healthy weight . 
b . I am not necessarily overweight , 
but I have noticed more weight in 
my abdominal area , which I did 
not have before . 
c . I ’ m slightly overweight . 
d . I am pretty overweight , at least 
thirty pounds or more over where 
I should be . 
11 . How would you describe how your 
body stores fat ? 
a . My weight is normal and my body 
fat is evenly distributed . 
b . I carry any excess weight in my 
lower body , such as around my 
hips or thighs . 
c . I am carrying excess body fat and 
it seems to be evenly distributed , 
with some in my abdomen and or 
torso and some in my arms and 
lower body . 
d . My weight gain is predominantly 
in my abdomen or my torso , 
concentrated in my belly , breasts , 
or back . 
QUESTION 9
Answer Points A 0 B 5 C 7 D 7 E 0
QUESTION 10
Answer Points A 0 B 7 C 5 D 14
QUESTION 11
Answer Points A 0 B 2 C 5 D 14
14 The MD Factor Diet
12 . Please select all of the medical 
conditions that you have or have had 
in the past . 
a . High blood pressure
b . Gestational diabetes
c . Borderline diabetes or 
pre-diabetes
d . Diabetes Type II
e . Polycystic ovarian syndrome 
( PCOS ) 
f . High triglycerides
g . Low HDL or “ good ” cholesterol
h . Fatty liver
i . Metabolic Syndrome
j . none
QUESTION 12
Answer Points
A 25
B 75
C 100
D 100
E 100
F 75
G 75
H 100
I 100
J 0
QUESTION 13
Answer Points
A 0
B 2
C 5
D 7
E 14
13 . What is your age ? 
a . Under 25
b . 26 to 34 
c . 35 to 47
d . 48 to 58
e . Over 58
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 15
Part 1 points Part 2 points Part 3 points
Question 1 Question 4 Question 9
Question 2 Question 5 Question 10
Question 3 Question 6 Question 11
Question 7 Question 12
Your Total 
Score Question 8 Question 13
Part I 
Total
Part 2 
Total
Part 3 
Total
Your MD Factor Quiz Results
It ’ s time to calculate your quiz results . Once you determine your score 
and know if you have the MD Factor , I will give you the steps you need to 
take to correct your underlying metabolic issues . 
The MD Factor is caused by changes in how your body is able to 
use the nutrients in your food . Even if you have not gained a significant 
amount of weight , your metabolism may no longer be acting the way 
it used to . 
Remember , the MD Factor can occur : 
✔ When you gain belly weight for any reason , your metabolism 
changes . 
✔ When you have hormonal changes , your metabolism changes . 
✔ As you age , your metabolism changes . 
Calculate Your Quiz Score
Write in the total point value for each of your answers below . 
16 The MD Factor Diet
Your Total 
Score
What Does Your Score Mean ? 
0–19 Congratulations ! It is unlikely that you have the MD Factor . I 
recommend that you review the MD Factor Action Plan and , if you 
have not already , incorporate my recommended healthy eating 
plan into your lifestyle . 
20–37 Your quiz shows that you are borderline for the MD Factor . This 
means you are in the process of developing the MD Factor . This is 
a great opportunity to make a lasting change now for your health 
and wellness before you further develop weight or health issues 
that can accompany the MD Factor . 
38–77 Your quiz shows that you have the MD Factor . You now have an 
amazing opportunity to follow the MD Factor Action Plan , where 
you will learn the specific way to feed and retrain your body so that 
you are able to get the best out of your metabolism . 
78 + You have a very strong MD Factor . I highly recommend following 
the MD Factor Action Plan so that you can restore your metabolism 
and correct your metabolism dysfunction . 
Take the Next Steps to Create a Healthy Future
You now join the thousands who have taken the MD Factor Quiz . 
Whether you score with a low incidence of the MD Factor or have a 
strong MD Factor , you have the power to create a healthy future . I will 
provide you with the power to feed and retrain your body so that you get 
the best out of your metabolism . You ’ ll see how to do just that with the 
MD Factor Action Plan . 
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 17
Well-Being & Metabolism 
Correction Quiz 
Take this quiz to assess your current well-being and metabolism results . 
Write this number down . Then , as you begin the MD Factor Action Plan , 
go back and reference this number to track your improvement . 
How satisfied are you ? 
Answer on a scale from 1–7 , with 1 being very dissatisfied and 7 being 
very satisfied . 
A . Your weight and physical appearance 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
B . Your health 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
C . Your energy level 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
D . Your ability to focus on tasks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
E . Your sleep 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
F . Your hunger level being appropriate 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
G . Your willpower 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
As you answer on a scale from 1–7 , you will see that if you selected a 
lower number , this shows an opportunity area for you to be in better 
health . As you progress through the MD Factor Action Plan , check back 
weekly to take this quiz and track improvement in your well-being and 
metabolism . As your health improves , you will see an increase in your 
overall wellness score . 
Check back weekly to take this 
quiz and track improvement 
in your well-being and 
metabolism . 
18 The MD Factor Diet
Meet Jennifer , Steve , and Michelle
Jennifer is thirty-two , 5 ' 5 "  , and 230 pounds . 
She has the MD Factor due to her weight . 
I wasn ’ t super thin as a teenager , 
but I wasn ’ t overweight , either . I 
would say I was solid . I was on my 
high school softball team and was 
pretty active . 
When I went away to college , 
I gained the freshman fifteen—
actually , it was more like the 
freshman twenty . I was busy with 
my classes and worked part time , 
too . I know I ate too much pizza 
late at night , and I did drink 
alcohol , sometimes too much . I 
went to the gym on and off , but 
when I graduated I was thirty 
pounds overweight , at 160 . I would 
love to be back at that weight now . 
I got a job with a twenty-fiveminute commute , and it was hard 
to find the time to exercise . I also 
got into the habit of ordering in 
or going out for lunch almost 
every day . Looking back at it 
now , I realize I was not eating a 
lot of vegetables . It was more like 
burgers , sandwiches and chips , 
pizza—easy , quick food . 
I decided enough was enough 
when my weight climbed to 173 . 
I joined a support group with a 
friend from work and was able to 
lose eighteen pounds . She and I 
walked at lunchtime and brought 
our own meals to work , and I 
started cooking more . I am not 
a fast loser and after six months 
stopped losing weight . I got to 155 , 
which was not as low as I wanted , 
but it was better than where 
I ’ d been . 
I met my husband , Rob , when 
I was twenty-six , and we married 
two years later . I tried to lose some 
more before the wedding , but I 
think I was actually back to 160 . 
Rob is a big guy ; he played football 
in high school , and he loves to eat . 
I do , too , and I started to follow 
his eating habits . You do that when 
you ’ re married . 
I got pregnant pretty soon 
after our first anniversary . We 
were thrilled . I felt great during 
my pregnancy , but my doctor was 
Jennifer ’ s Story 
 “ It is so frustrating . 
I know I ’ m not perfect , but 
after a year of dieting on 
my own , I ’ ve lost only three 
pounds , and I ’ m tired and 
hungry all the time .  ”  
 “ 
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 19
concerned I was gaining too much 
weight . After I ’ d gained almost 
forty pounds , I was tested for 
gestational [ pregnancy-related ] 
diabetes . The test showed I had 
it , but luckily I didn ’ t need to 
take insulin . I had to meet with a 
dietitian , who told me to eat less 
bread and sugars and eat more 
vegetables and protein . I delivered 
my son two weeks early , which was 
probably a good thing , as he was 
already nine pounds . I weighed 215 
when I delivered him , but I have 
to admit I stopped looking at the 
scale when I passed the 200 mark . 
My son , Brandon , was a very 
colicky baby . I got very little sleep , 
especially as I had to go back 
to work after eight weeks . The 
next two years were a blur . Rob 
and I both work , but due to our 
schedules , I had to get Brandon 
fed , dressed , and off to day care 
before I got to work . I never had 
time to eat breakfast , but I grabbed 
a Diet Coke for the caffeine . I ’ m 
not hungry in the morning anyway . 
I fell into my old pattern of going 
out to lunch and getting takeout 
for meals at home , too . It was really 
hard to shop and cook when I was 
so completely exhausted . 
I lost fifteen pounds after 
Brandon ’ s birth , but I gained 
that back and then some . So last 
year , when I hit 233 , I started the 
support group online . I started 
eating some fruit or cereal in the 
morning , but that actually makes 
me hungrier . I make a turkey 
sandwich on two slices of really 
thinly sliced bread and bring 
pretzels and fruit for lunch . But I ’ m 
so hungry for dinner that it ’ s nearly 
impossible to take the time to 
make a healthful meal like grilled 
chicken and salad and vegetables . 
Some days I do it , but others I end 
up eating crackers and cheese or 
pretzels or grapes while trying to 
get dinner on . Other days I just 
give in and order Chinese food 
or pizza . 
Even though I am so tired , I 
have been forcing myself to go 
to the gym and do the treadmill , 
usually on Saturdays and one night 
during the week when Rob gets 
home earlier . 
It is so frustrating . I know 
I ’ m not perfect , but after a year 
of dieting on my own , I ’ ve lost 
only three pounds , and I ’ m tired 
and hungry all the time . Some 
days I just don ’ t even bother to 
diet because it doesn ’ t seem to 
make a difference anyway . I ’ m 
very worried because I want to 
have another child in a few years 
and I ’ m afraid I won ’ t be healthy 
enough to do so . What is wrong 
with me and my metabolism ? 
I was able to lose weight before 
by following the same plan I am 
following now , but it ’ s stopped 
working . I ’ m only thirty-two . If I 
don ’ t get a handle on this now , I ’ m 
not going to be able to keep up 
with my son as he runs around . 
Please help me .  ” 
20 The MD Factor Diet
Steve is forty-five , 5 ' 10 "  , and 220 pounds . 
He has the MD Factor due to getting older . 
It ’ s been hard for me to get my 
weight under control for the 
past few years . I was an athlete 
in high school , and I ’ ve always 
liked to exercise . I ’ d prefer to play 
basketball or softball , but that can 
be hard to coordinate with work 
and family life , so I ’ ve been going 
to the gym for the past fifteen years 
at least . I ’ d been able to eat what I 
wanted as long as I was consistent 
with doing the treadmill twice a 
week and lifting weights three days 
a week for at least an hour . On 
weekends I am busy with my kids ; 
I ’ m my seven-year-old son ’ s soccer 
coach on Saturdays . It is not a 
heavy workout , but there ’ s a lot 
of running ! 
But even though my exercise 
routine is the same and my eating 
habits haven ’ t changed , my weight 
has been creeping up over the past 
few years , especially once I turned 
forty . It was only a few pounds a 
year , but over the past four years 
it ’ s been cumulative , and now I am 
twenty-five pounds heavier than I 
was in my thirties . 
My wife makes healthy meals 
at least three times a week , like 
chicken with vegetables or pasta 
with red sauce , and I cook steak on 
the grill once a week . We try to do 
one date night a week where my 
wife and I go to a restaurant and 
get a break from the kids . Friday 
night is pizza night , and one night 
is usually leftovers . My lunches are 
pretty healthy , too . I eat lunch out , 
but usually I order a salad with 
chicken or fish or a sandwich . I do 
eat the chips or whatever comes 
with it , but again , that is nothing 
new . I ’ ve never been much of a 
breakfast eater—usually just coffee 
after the gym . 
What ’ s annoying is that in my 
thirties , if I gained a few pounds , 
I ’ d just cut down by skipping lunch 
a few days a week or eating less at 
dinner and I could easily lose three 
to five pounds in a few days . That 
doesn ’ t happen anymore . I guess 
because I ’ m older , right ? 
I ’ ve also gotten a gut like I see a 
lot of men in their forties and fifties 
have . That bothers me a lot because 
Steve ’ s Story 
 “ 
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 21
I still work out and feel I ’ m athletic . 
I had a physical when I turned 
forty-two and my doctor told me 
my cholesterol wasn ’ t great and 
my blood pressure was creeping 
up . Cholesterol medicine doesn ’ t 
work for what I have , and he told 
me to start exercising . That was 
aggravating , as I already exercise 
five days a week . So then he told 
me to cut out soda and junk food . 
I really haven ’ t had fast food since 
before I was married , and I stopped 
drinking Cokes years ago . 
I need to get this weight under 
control . My wife is worried , and 
so am I , as my father , who ’ d always 
done physical work but never any 
kind of exercise regimen , had a 
heart attack in his early fifties . He 
survived it , but it really affected 
him—he was never as active again 
and always seemed short of breath . 
He also had a big gut at the same 
age I am now , and I thought it was 
because he didn ’ t work out . I don ’ t 
want to have a heart attack . And I 
want my energy level to get back to 
what it was . I ’ m more tired than I 
used to be , and I don ’ t want to be 
the kind of dad who ’ s too pooped 
to run after his kids !  ”  
 “ I could easily lose three to five pounds in a few days . That 
doesn ’ t happen anymore . I guess because I ’ m older , right ?  ” 
22 The MD Factor Diet
Michelle is fifty-four , 5 ' 4 " tall , and weighs 145 pounds . 
She has the MD Factor because of hormonal changes . 
I know my metabolism has 
changed . Ever since I turned fortynine the weight has been piling on . 
I was 115 lbs . when I graduated from 
high school and have been 118 lbs . 
for all of my adult life until recently . 
I ’ ve never had a weight problem 
before , and now I have all this belly 
fat and cellulite . I can ’ t stand it ! 
I was really thin as a child and 
my mother was so worried about 
me that she took me to the doctor . 
He said I was fine but she should 
give me milkshakes and let me eat 
what I wanted . I was always very 
active , and I still am ; I don ’ t stop all 
day . I am a type A personality and 
always have a lot going on . I am 
on the computer and phone at 
work—I ’ m in sales and have a 
great career—but I also walk 
around my office a lot . I have to 
admit , recently I ’ ve been having 
energy slumps around 3 : 00 p . m . 
and need to grab coffee . I also 
fantasize about a quick nap but 
never take one . I never had those 
energy slumps before . 
I have always eaten whatever I 
wanted , and I never dieted . When 
I travel and meet with clients , I eat 
out a lot—the portions are too big , 
but I never finish my meal . I prefer 
healthier foods . I avoid fried foods 
except french fries , and I love 
vegetables . I am a big fan of ethnic 
foods and have been for years . I do 
like my wine , though , and I usually 
have two glasses of wine each 
night , as it helps me relax . 
I wouldn ’ t say I was a heavy 
exerciser like some of my friends 
who are runners , but I walked my 
dogs at least a mile a day when I 
was home , and I played tennis if I 
got a chance , just for fun . 
When I was forty-nine , my 
skirts and my pants seemed to be 
getting tight . It was odd , because 
nothing had changed with my diet 
and exercise . The first few times I 
noticed it , I actually thought the 
dry cleaner had shrunk some of 
my clothes ! I also realized that 
I wasn ’ t sleeping as well , either . 
Some nights I ’ d wake up at two 
Michelle ’ s Story 
 “ I really feel like my body has 
let me down . Menopause is 
awful , and the worst part is 
all the weight gain .  ”  
 “ 
Chapter 1 | Metabolism Dysfunction : It ’ s Not Your Fault 23
o ’ clock and be too alert to go 
back to sleep . Other nights I had 
some night sweats , so I saw my 
doctor , who told me I was going 
through perimenopause and that 
I could take hormones if I wanted . 
My mother had breast cancer in 
her early fifties , so I was not too 
excited about the prospect of the 
hormones . I could live with the hot 
flashes . What I can ’ t live with is the 
weight gain . 
I ’ d never dieted before , but I cut 
down on everything . I decreased 
my portions and ate less pasta , 
because my friends who are always 
dieting told me it puts weight on . I 
wasn ’ t a huge dessert eater , but I cut 
out desserts and other sweets . What 
is weird is that I noticed I had been 
craving sweets more in the past few 
years , and I don ’ t remember ever 
craving them before . 
Despite that , I gained ten 
pounds in a year . I saw my doctor 
again and told him to check my 
thyroid and anything else , but all 
my numbers were normal . He said 
that I needed to exercise more 
and eat less , which wasn ’ t helpful 
at all ! Still , I started working with 
a personal trainer . He works me 
out , hard . We lift weights and do 
cardio three times a week . I am 
so sore after the workouts . I know 
I am getting stronger and more 
toned , but I didn ’ t lose any weight , 
so I added two more days of cardio 
during the weeks I don ’ t travel . 
My appearance is very important 
for the impression I need to make 
at work . 
I can ’ t believe my weight 
hasn ’ t budged . I ’ m eating so much 
less than I ever did before and 
exercising so much more , and 
I still have not lost any weight . 
In fact , I ’ m gaining . I even cut 
down on wine and then stopped 
it altogether for two weeks , but it 
made no difference in my weight , 
so I started having wine again . 
Despite all my hard work , I ’ ve 
still gained more than twenty 
pounds in the last five years . I went 
back to my doctor and he told 
me my cholesterol was high and 
I should start medicine for it . He 
also told me my blood pressure was 
creeping up . I told him I wanted 
more tests to find out why I can ’ t 
lose weight , and he referred me to 
you . I don ’ t want to take medicine 
and I can ’ t stand this weight . I love 
clothes and have a closet full of 
expensive designer clothes I can ’ t 
wear . I used to enjoy shopping , but 
now it ’ s too depressing . I am not 
even comfortable in my underwear 
because so much of my weight is 
in my belly area . I refuse to buy 
larger sizes ! 
I could understand this weight 
gain if I was eating all day and not 
exercising , but I ’ m not . I really feel 
like my body has let me down . 
Menopause is awful , and the worst 
part is all the weight gain .  ” 
Does any of this sound familiar to you ? Read on to find out what I 
recommended to Jennifer , Steve , and Michelle . And at the end of the 
book , on pages 183–185 , you ’ ll see what happened for them once they 
started following the MD Factor Action Plan . 
PART II
UNDERSTANDING
THE MD FACTOR
Jerk pork tenderloin
25
CHAPTER 2
The MD Factor = 
Metabolism Dysfunction
I
f counting calories and sweating it out during intense workouts can ’ t 
melt those pounds anymore—if you ’ re doing everything you ’ ve been 
told to do in order to lose weight but nothing ’ s working—stop blaming 
yourself . Something isn ’ t right with how your body is functioning . 
There has to be an underlying factor making your body resist what 
should be a steady weight loss , because our bodies are not stubborn 
without a good reason ! 
The reason , of course , is the MD Factor . When you have it , your 
metabolism is out of whack . It ’ s not what it used to be because 
it ’ s dysfunctional . 
Not only that , but the MD Factor means that your metabolism 
loves to store fat and hates to let go of it . This means you can gain 
weight even when you ’ re meticulously watching what you eat . Just 
what you needed , right ? 
26 The MD Factor Diet
What Causes the MD Factor ? 
The overwhelming majority of my patients who ’ ve put up a valiant 
yet fruitless battle against the bulge have insulin resistance—what 
I ’ m calling the MD Factor . It ’ s a very common metabolic condition , 
but because it flies under the radar , it can be overlooked , even by 
medical professionals . 
The MD Factor simply means that your cells are resistant to the action 
of insulin , a hormone produced by your pancreas that regulates how 
your cells metabolize energy .  ( I ’ ll explain why the MD Factor happens 
in Chapter 3 .  ) The sensitivity of your cells to insulin is crucial for weight 
management , as insulin directs fuel to your cells so that they can have 
energy and perform all the day-to-day cellular functions to keep you 
healthy and moving . 
In your body , insulin acts like a key that unlocks the door to your 
cells—the medical term for this door is “ glucose portal ” —and allows 
glucose ( sugar ) to get inside . Your body likes to use glucose for its 
metabolic needs , because it ’ s very efficient and produces a lot of energy . 
But if you have the MD Factor , the insulin key doesn ’ t fit into the lock 
of the glucose portal anymore . The cell remains shut , even if it ’ s desperate 
for fuel . And when these cells become starved for fuel , you already 
know what happens . Your ravenously hungry cells send signals to 
your brain , telling you to do whatever you can to get sugar into your 
body—pronto ! 
To make matters worse for those with the MD Factor , there is the 
problem of what to do with all that glucose that remains outside your 
cells . Your body is pretty smart about its needs for fuel , especially because 
human beings evolved when food was not as easy as it is to obtain now . 
So your body says ,  “ Hey , I ’ m not going to waste all this perfectly good 
Do You Know 
What Fat Really Is ? 
What few dieters know is that
fat is primarily composed of
lots of glucose molecules , with
some additional biochemical
adjustments , linked together
in a nice , usable package . 
When your body does need
fuel and goes to use this
stored fat , it breaks down the
links between these glucose
molecules and delivers them
to your bloodstream . 
In other words , when your
body is burning fat , it ’ s really
burning sugar ! 
Chapter 2 | The MD Factor = Metabolism Dysfunction 27
Glucose
Insulin Receptors
Insulin
Normal Cell
Glucose
Insulin Receptors
Insulin
Insulin Resistant Cell
Glucose
Insulin Receptors
Insulin
Normal Cell
Glucose
Insulin Receptors
Insulin
Insulin Resistant Cell
What ’ s the Difference between the MD Factor and Metabolic Syndrome ? 
Thirty percent of all American adults , including 47 percent of those over the age of fifty , have such an
advanced case of MD Factor that it has a clinical name : metabolic syndrome . Having metabolic syndrome
drastically increases your likelihood of developing diabetes , heart disease , stroke , or cancer . Many of
my patients do have metabolic syndrome , but they had no idea that their metabolism was changing
so drastically . All they knew is that they kept on gaining weight , first in their bellies and then all over their
bodies , and nothing they did reversed it . Fortunately , the MD Factor Action Plan can help cure
metabolic syndrome . 
Healthy amounts of glucose inside the cell will fuel the 
cell . Also note there are normal glucose and insulin levels 
outside the cell . 
Here there is so little glucose or energy inside the cell , the 
cell is starving . Outside the cell , there are higher glucose and 
insulin levels . This extra glucose will be converted to fat . 
fuel . I might be starving tomorrow ! I ’ m going to store it , just in case . Even 
better , I ’ m not going to store it as sugar—I ’ m going to stash it away as 
plump , juicy fat .  ” 
28 The MD Factor Diet
How the MD Factor
Makes You Feel
When you have the MD Factor , your pancreas produces lots of extra 
insulin to try to get glucose into cells that are no longer as sensitive to the 
hormone as they used to be .  ( Many of my patients have insulin levels as 
much as three to ten times higher than normal .  ) Much the way a battering 
ram will eventually break down the door to the castle , producing excess 
insulin means that at least some of the glucose in your bloodstream will 
get into those starving cells . But when the glucose finally reaches its 
destination , your blood sugar will plummet . This is called low blood sugar , 
or hypoglycemia , and it can trigger a number of symptoms , including 
cravings , lack of energy , mental fogginess , shakiness , and trouble sleeping . 
Craving Sweets ? Your Cells 
Are Starving for Sugar
The most common symptom of the MD Factor is a craving for sweets or 
carbohydrates . Steve is a good example . He never ate breakfast . He ’ d have 
a large black coffee , and that kept him going all morning . By lunchtime , 
he still wasn ’ t very hungry , but he ’ d have something small , like a salad 
with some chicken . And then he ’ d be so tired he had to take a short nap 
( which wasn ’ t very refreshing )  . When he woke up , he was desperately 
craving either something soft and sweet , such as chocolate chip cookies , 
or something crunchy and salty , maybe potato chips or pretzels . He 
knew this wasn ’ t healthful , but he couldn ’ t break the cycle because he just 
couldn ’ t bear the thought of eating any breakfast . 
Chapter 2 | The MD Factor = Metabolism Dysfunction 29
Same with Jennifer .  “ I know I ’ m supposed to eat breakfast , so I force 
myself to have some whole-grain cereal or fruit and a piece of wholewheat toast , but when I do this , I ’ m so ravenously hungry by ten in the 
morning that I practically keel over . So then I gobble up the only kind of 
food available at work , usually doughnuts . I ’ ve tried this over and over , 
and it always happens . Being five times hungrier after what ’ s supposedly a 
healthful breakfast and then chowing down on doughnuts isn ’ t helping me 
lose weight !  ” 
Steve and Jennifer have a typical MD Factor pattern . When their 
cells were unable to get the glucose they needed , they responded with a 
vengeance . Mike ’ s post-lunchtime brain was screaming ,  “ Naptime now !  ” 
And when he woke up , his midafternoon brain was shrieking ,  “ Feed 
me now !  ” Jennifer ’ s insulin-driven appetite didn ’ t even carry her from 
breakfast to lunch—she just had to eat . 
Michelle was also worried .  “ I ’ ve never been a big sweets eater ,  ” she 
told me ,  “ but now I feel like I physically crave them . I want to lose weight 
and eat sensibly , but then I go out and buy a candy bar an hour after 
lunch , or turn the cupboard inside out a few hours after dinner searching 
for something sweet . I haven ’ t been doing this my whole life . This is new . 
Something has changed , and it ’ s driving me crazy !  ” 
Steve unwittingly blamed himself for his eating pattern because he had 
no idea what the MD Factor was doing to him .  “ I normally eat a healthysize portion for lunch or dinner—more than enough food—but I still want 
sweet or starchy afterward ,  ” he explained .  “ It must be all in my head , or 
because I ’ m stressed or something . I mean , I ’ m an intelligent person , and I 
know that when I ’ ve eaten seven or eight hundred calories during a meal , it 
should be enough . But I just keep going , and then I find myself eating things 
that I ’ d promised myself I wouldn ’ t eat . And then I start over the next day 
with the best intentions , only to blow it by dinner . Why do I keep eating 
sugar and junk food when my goal is to lose weight ? I know better and want 
better for myself , but obviously I can ’ t do it on my own .  ” 
30 The MD Factor Diet
Stories like these are incredibly common . Steve , Jennifer , and Michelle 
all crave the very foods they know they shouldn ’ t eat because their 
starving cells send distress signals to other cells , which in turn respond 
by producing hormones , chemical messages to their brains that compel 
them to eat the kind of starchy carbohydrates that can quickly deliver 
sugar into their bloodstreams . 
This sets up the devastating MD Factor cycle . Your cells scream 
and shout at you to eat carbs and sugars , but because you have the 
MD Factor , all that glucose still can ’ t get into your starving cells , so it 
gets stored as fat .  .  . plus , you ’ re still hungry ! So you eat more carbs and 
sugars and pack on the pounds . To make things worse , at the same time , 
your metabolic rate begins to drop because when your body doesn ’ t get 
the right amount of fuel it needs on a regular basis , it tries to conserve 
as much energy as possible . The result is that your body needs fewer 
calories , so even eating the same amount you used to eat will result in 
weight gain . 
Chapter 2 | The MD Factor = Metabolism Dysfunction 31
Low Energy Level ? 
The Cause Is Low Blood Sugar
Does this sound familiar ? Your energy level plummets several hours after 
you eat , especially in the afternoon . You can get so tired after eating that 
you absolutely need to lie down and take a nap . You might also feel weak , 
dizzy , or shaky if you ’ re late for your usual mealtime , or several hours 
after a meal that was particularly high in sugar or carbohydrates . Your 
concentration can be poor . People tend to describe this as having a “ fuzzy 
head ” or “ brain fog .  ”  
 “ I have a really big dip in energy around three in the afternoon ,  ” Jennifer 
told me .  “ I feel weak and tired and it ’ s really hard to stay focused at work . 
When this happens on weekends , I normally take a nap , but I can ’ t do 
that during the week . So I eat a little something , which helps me come out 
of it . But the snacking means that I ’ m gaining weight . I try to stop doing 
this—sometimes I ’ ll skip lunch and just drink lots of water—but when I do 
that , I ’ m like a wild woman when I get home . I ’ ll eat anything that won ’ t 
eat me first ! I ’ ll power through an entire bag of chips or a pack of crackers 
with a big hunk of cheese . I ’ ll keep eating this kind of stuff when I ’ m making 
dinner . If I ’ m cooking a nice meal and it ’ ll be ready in twenty minutes , I 
swear I can ’ t wait . Do I have diabetes or something ?  ” 
Luckily , Jennifer does not have diabetes , but her “ something ” is the 
MD Factor . Her blood sugar fluctuations are sharpening her appetite . 
And people with the MD Factor tend to eat very fast , scarfing down a 
huge amount of calories in only a few minutes . The reason they do this 
is because hypoglycemia , or low blood sugar , is a threat to the proper 
functioning of the body . 
Bear in mind , though , that this type of hypoglycemia is not the same 
as what diabetics live with . Anyone who must inject insulin needs to be 
meticulous about it , as their blood sugar levels can decline drastically 
afterward , causing them to faint , have a convulsion , or even die . This 
is truly life threatening—but it is not the type of low blood sugar the 
32 The MD Factor Diet
MD Factor causes . However , people with the MD Factor do experience 
relative drops in blood sugar , and these can make you feel awful . 
Rarely Hungry in the Morning ? 
You ’ re Producing Too Much Insulin
If you have the MD Factor , you may not be hungry when you wake 
up , and you may find it hard to eat breakfast or sometimes even lunch . 
Instead , you start getting intense hunger pangs in the middle of the 
afternoon , and when you do eat , you don ’ t seem to feel full . 
When you have the MD Factor , you ’ ll usually wake up with a higher 
than normal level of insulin circulating in your blood , trying to open up 
those locked cells . This is not normal , because usually insulin is released 
after you eat . So if you haven ’ t eaten for eight hours , you should have a 
very low level of insulin in your blood . These higher insulin levels explain 
why you aren ’ t hungry at all . 
When you have too much insulin and then eat carbohydrate-rich 
foods for breakfast , look out ! This is what happens : 
✔ Sugar gets absorbed into your bloodstream . 
✔ Your blood sugar spikes and then drops rapidly because the extra 
insulin is battering at the glucose portals of your cells , trying to get 
that sugar out of your bloodstream and into the starving cells . 
✔ Your body perceives the dropping blood sugar , so it sends distress 
signals of hunger , telling you to eat so that your blood sugar level 
will go back up . 
For example , if you have the MD Factor , when you eat an allegedly 
healthful breakfast , such as whole-grain cereal , fruit , or a bagel with a tiny 
bit of butter , all these carbs are rapidly processed since your insulin level 
is already high to begin with . The result is that your blood sugar falls just 
Chapter 2 | The MD Factor = Metabolism Dysfunction 33
as rapidly , even dipping below normal within a short span of time , so you 
get hungry again ! 
If , on the other hand , you do have normal insulin levels in the 
morning , or if you have the MD Factor and your breakfast contains less 
carbohydrate and sugar—which is what you ’ ll eat on the MD Factor
Action Plan—then this process is much more gradual and controlled . 
A normal blood sugar response after a meal should be like riding a 
bike over gently sloping hills , up and down , slowly and evenly , over the 
course of several hours . With the MD Factor , however , these drops are 
like sharp jags and spikes—and you ’ re going to fall off your bike ! 
This graph shows what happens when someone with the MD Factor
eats . GL , or glycemic load , refers to how much your blood glucose rises 
after a meal . A high-glycemic-load meal would be cereal , toast , and 
juice ( all sugar and carbohydrates )  . A low-glycemic-load 
meal would be eggs scrambled with peppers , onions , and 
Canadian bacon ( mostly protein )  . 
When blood sugar falls rapidly , the rate of the fall is 
what triggers many of the MD Factor symptoms . Look 
at the graph again , and you ’ ll see that with the highglycemic-load meal , blood sugar dips below normal about 
an hour and forty-five minutes after eating . Because your 
body doesn ’ t know why your blood sugar is falling or 
how low it will go , it panics , releasing the stress hormone 
epinephrine . This is what causes that shaky , anxious 
feeling where you just have to eat . 
These jittery symptoms won ’ t happen if you eat the 
right kind of breakfast , one that provides your body with 
the nutrition that it needs . 
0 1
Time / Hours
Blood Glucose Levels
2
High GI
Low GI
In the graph above , the amount of carbohydrate in the 
reference and test food must be the same . 
34 The MD Factor Diet
Got Brain Fog ? It ’ s the Result 
of Too Much Insulin
After having a meal that is high in carbohydrates , such as pasta with a 
side of garlic bread , you feel foggy and exhausted , right ? Or do you feel 
fuzzy , blah , spaced out , or sluggish after you eat something with a lot of 
sugar ? Do you find it hard to concentrate or be precise ? Does your mind 
wander while you get nothing accomplished at your desk ? 
This is not a normal metabolic response to a carbohydrate meal . But if 
you have the MD Factor , it is what you can expect . All that insulin has a 
direct effect on the water and electrolyte levels in your brain . Electrolytes 
such as sodium , potassium , and magnesium are in careful balance inside 
and outside all our cells . Excess insulin causes these electrolytes to enter 
the brain cells in a slightly increased amount , and then water follows 
these electrolytes in . The result is a slight swelling of your brain tissues , so 
your thinking can ’ t be as fast or crisp as it should be . A study published 
in the Journal of Holistic Medicine proved that susceptible people ( such 
as those with the MD Factor ) showed changes to their brain wave signals 
and communication after eating a high-carbohydrate meal . 
Bloated ? Another Result 
of Too Much Insulin
Many of my patients complain that their faces , arms , and legs are puffy 
and that their abdomens are bloated . This is likely related to the same 
fluid and electrolyte change that ’ s triggered by too much insulin . Sodium , 
in particular , causes puffiness and bloat , which is why your jeans can feel 
extra tight after a salty meal .  ( When that happens , drinking lots of water 
to rehydrate your tissues and flush the extra sodium out of your system is 
the best solution .  ) 
Chapter 2 | The MD Factor = Metabolism Dysfunction 35
Fortunately , when you start the MD Factor Action Plan , you should see 
a drop in water weight along with body fat the very first week . The longer you 
stay on the plan , the less likely it is that any puffiness or bloat will return . 
Trouble Sleeping ? Low Blood 
Sugar Is the Culprit
A common symptom of the MD Factor is that you sleep poorly , often 
waking in the wee hours—and feeling wide awake when that happens .  
 “ Usually I have no trouble falling asleep ,  ” Michelle said ,  “ but just a few 
hours later I wake up . Not just wake up—I ’ m wide awake , as if I ’ d already 
had seven hours of sleep when I really only had three . I ’ ll toss and turn , 
or else I ’ ll give up and get up to do some work . I feel okay then , but then 
by 5 : 00 p . m . the next day I ’ m totally wiped out . I notice this happens even 
more often if I have a few glasses of wine in the evening .  ” 
Michelle ’ s MD Factor causes her blood sugar to drop , and alcohol 
makes it worse . That ’ s because alcohol first raises your blood sugar and 
then lowers it after an insulin release . Even two glasses of wine can be 
enough to cause you to wake up from a sound sleep in the middle of the 
night . This is an important part of managing the MD Factor , so if you 
drink alcohol regularly , Chapter 9 is a must-read . 
Bottom Line
The MD Factor responds incredibly quickly to the right kind of eating 
plan , which is why Part III will help you right away . Usually it takes only 
a week or two on the Action Plan before your symptoms start to lessen 
and then disappear entirely . It ’ s a lot easier to lose weight if you aren ’ t 
constantly hungry , tired , cranky , weak , and craving sugar ! 
It ’ s a lot easier to lose weight 
if you aren ’ t constantly 
hungry , tired , cranky , weak , 
and craving sugar ! 

37
CHAPTER 3
Triggers for the MD Factor 
When you have the MD Factor , it ’ s easy to feel defeated , 
especially when you ’ re trying your hardest to lose weight and 
not seeing any results . But you are not alone . By now , it should be very 
clear just how common the MD Factor really is . 
38 The MD Factor Diet
What Triggers the MD Factor ? 
The MD Factor doesn ’ t develop overnight . There are many reasons 
for it , and your particular situation may be caused by a combination 
of the following : 
Genetic Predisposition
This is the one reason you have no control over , because genetic factors 
are inherited from your parents . To see how genetic factors affected me 
and my family members , go to Appendix D , where you can read about 
new genetic testing that can reveal more information about your personal 
predisposition to the MD Factor . 
Some people are lucky and don ’ t have genes that make it likely they ’ ll 
have the MD Factor . Chances are good , however , that you were born with 
a tendency to have cells that don ’ t respond particularly well to insulin . 
And if there ’ s a strong family history of diabetes , particularly from your 
parents , you are at high risk . In my practice , I ’ ve treated children , teens , 
and young adults who have the MD Factor thanks to their genes and 
certain lifestyle factors that cause these genes to become active . 
Your genes also regulate where your body stores fat . Take a look : 
If you are a pear shape , you tend to store your weight in your hips , 
buttocks , and thighs . If , however , you ’ re an apple shape , you ’ ll store fat in 
your abdominal area , as well as your sides and lower back . Many of my 
patients tell me that everyone in their families , even the thin ones , have a 
bit of a pooch .  “ I have the Smith family belly !  ” they say . 
Belly or Visceral Fat 
If you have a tendency to store fat in your abdominal area , when you gain 
weight your body adds significantly to the thin layer of protective and 
Apple-Shaped Pear-Shaped
Chapter 3 | Triggers for the MD Factor 39
Apple-Shaped Pear-Shaped
cushioning fat tissue that normally surrounds your vital organs , such as 
your liver . This is called visceral fat . 
Extra visceral fat hinders organs from functioning properly , especially 
your liver , which has to sift through a lot of fat tissue to do its job , which 
is ridding your body of toxins . In addition , as the MD Factor progresses , 
fat actually gets deposited inside your organs . When this happens to your 
liver , its cells now have fat stored in them ( this is called fatty liver )  . 
Visceral fat puts you at a higher risk for developing the MD Factor . 
In addition , it increases bad cholesterol while lowering good cholesterol 
levels . It also increases levels of inflammatory hormones , which are 
significant contributing factors for heart disease . 
And since men deposit fat in the abdomen whenever they gain weight , 
while women prior to menopause usually deposit extra weight in their 
hips and thighs , this explains why men often develop heart disease ten to 
twenty years before women do . After menopause , however , when women 
start depositing visceral fat in their abdomen , their rate of heart disease 
catches up to or even surpasses that of men . 
People of different ethnicities have a greater or lesser likelihood of 
developing more or less visceral fat . CAT scans used by researchers to see 
where body fat is stored show that people of East Asian or South Asian 
descent tend to have the largest amounts of visceral fat . This is one reason 
that diabetes is so prevalent in China , India , and Chinese and Indian 
communities elsewhere in the world . There has been scientific discussion 
as to whether people of Asian descent need to be considered overweight 
at a much lighter weight than Caucasians because an Asian person is 
likely to carry almost all of his or her excess weight in the dangerous 
visceral fat location . 
People of Hispanic descent and Native Americans also have higher 
levels of visceral fat and a higher risk of developing the MD Factor than 
Caucasian Americans . A study published a few years ago in the Journal 
40 The MD Factor Diet
of the American Medical Association forecast that of American girls of 
Hispanic descent born in the year 2000 , a full 50 percent will develop type 
2 diabetes , which is very alarming . And as you know , type 2 diabetes occurs 
when the MD Factor is not treated and corrected . 
Daily Stress
The daily stress of life in the twenty-first century can take a toll on your 
waistline , making you gain weight either gradually or suddenly . Perhaps 
you have a new job or a new baby , your kids are having trouble in school 
or you need to move , or your parents become ill or a beloved family 
member dies . Maybe you ’ re just too busy to find the time to exercise 
and cook healthful food the way you used to , so you have nutritional 
deficiencies . Or you might finally stop smoking . In all of these cases , the 
weight can creep up before you know it . 
Normal Aging
As we grow older , our hormones gradually decline . This is a natural , 
normal process that happens to everyone . Women lose estrogen and 
progesterone , men lose testosterone , and both lose human growth 
hormone . These declining hormonal levels also affect muscle mass . Add 
in a more sedentary lifestyle , and here comes the MD Factor . There are , 
after all , very few of us who can eat the same way at thirty as we did at 
ten , or who can eat at fifty what we ate at thirty . 
That means that as you age , your changing body needs you to change 
your eating habits , too . Normal aging , when combined with other risk 
factors , contributes substantially to the development of the MD Factor . 
Doctors have known for years that the risk of diabetes increases as people 
get older , and a specific medical study conducted more than thirty years 
ago concluded that carbohydrate intolerance develops as a part of the 
Very few of us can eat the 
same way at thirty as we 
did at ten , or can eat at fifty 
what we ate at thirty . 
Chapter 3 | Triggers for the MD Factor 41
normal aging process . But what was not clear at the time , nor to many in 
the medical community still today , is the reason the MD Factor increases 
with age . 
Many people already feel a sense of anxiety regarding the aging 
process , but to be blunt , aging in a healthy manner is far better than 
the alternative , which is an early death . If we are to avoid weight gain , 
diabetes , and other related medical problems as we age , we need to 
become more aware of the MD Factor and eat and exercise in such a way 
as to minimize its effects . 
Often experts will say things like ,  “ The only reason that people gain 
weight as they age is that they are eating more calories than they need . 
They ’ re simply not burning as many calories as they are taking in .  ” 
However , this calories-in / calories-out logic is simply not how the human 
body works . This simplistic approach to weight gain with age ignores the 
important metabolic fact that the MD Factor is a very real condition that 
plays a large role in the process . 
What researchers uncovered at least thirty years ago was that when 
people of a normal weight are compared by age , the amount of insulin 
their bodies secrete after a test meal of sugar increases with age . This 
study found that normal weight people in their sixties secreted far more 
insulin and also had higher blood sugar levels after consuming the test 
meal than did people in their thirties . 
There is also a loss of muscle mass that comes with aging . The 
conventional thought has always been that this loss of muscle contributes 
to the risk factors that produce the MD Factor . While this is true , the 
process is a whole lot more complicated . In fact , the MD Factor also 
directly causes a loss of muscle tissue . As our cells burn energy sources 
as part of the metabolic process , waste by-products called reactive oxygen 
species build up and damage the mitochondria , which are the tiny 
components of our cells that are responsible for creating energy . 
42 The MD Factor Diet
When mitochondria do not function properly , the food that we 
eat cannot be metabolized normally . Instead of being burned , fat 
accumulates in the cells and impairs the function of insulin . With this 
comes the MD Factor and a downward spiral that leads to the breakdown 
of muscle mass , as well as a decrease in the creation of new muscle . 
Unfortunately , those with the MD Factor are also destined to 
experience higher than normal blood sugar levels , which cause even 
more damage to the cells . This really is a vicious cycle that you must 
address sooner rather than later . But take heart—studies have shown 
that a person ’ s amount of body fat affects the MD Factor more than age 
does . This is extremely good news ! It means that although you can ’ t slow 
down time , you can control one of the single biggest risk factors for the 
MD Factor : what you eat and when . 
One last note about the MD Factor and aging . It is never too soon to 
start working on controlling your weight . I see plenty of people in my 
practice in their forties who have gained around fifteen pounds that they 
find very difficult to lose . The reasons they have gained the weight are 
different for each person , but the end result is the same : they are more 
likely to develop the MD Factor . Sometimes patients who ’ ve only gained 
five or ten pounds tell me that when they ’ ve discussed this with their 
friends , the reaction is often ,  “ Why do you need to see a doctor when 
you ’ ve only gained a few pounds ?  ” When that happens , I tell my patients 
that they ’ re very smart to be so proactive about their weight gain and that 
it ’ s always important for everyone to get their metabolism back on track . 
It is far easier to prevent weight gain than to lose weight . It ’ s easier to lose 
fifteen pounds than it is to lose thirty . 
We will all get older . As we get older , the effect of the MD Factor
becomes stronger . However , we all have the power to minimize that effect 
and prevent future medical problems . 
It is far easier to prevent 
weight gain than to lose weight . 
It ’ s easier to lose fifteen 
pounds than it is to lose thirty . 
Chapter 3 | Triggers for the MD Factor 43
Your Medications
Many different medications can contribute to the MD Factor . In fact , 
there are more than 480 drugs with weight gain as a known side effect . 
This can be a big problem for weight loss when you have a medical 
condition and you need to take these drugs in order to get healthy or 
stay healthy , especially when there are no safe or effective substitutions 
available for them . Sometimes there may be substitutions that might be 
just as effective , so discuss your alternatives with your doctor and follow 
the MD Factor Action Plan . 
Medications That Often Cause Weight Gain
✔ Antidepressants
✔ Antihistamines
✔ Anti-anxiety medications
✔ Anti-inflammatories ( particularly steroids ) 
✔ Anti-seizure medications
✔ Birth control pills or progesterone injections
✔ Blood pressure medications ( such as beta-blockers or diuretics ) 
✔ Insulin shots
✔ Psychotropic medications ( for bipolar disorder or schizophrenia ) 
44 The MD Factor Diet
Nutritional Deficiencies
When your body doesn ’ t get the right fuel it needs to keep it running 
smoothly , the MD Factor can appear . The most common nutritional 
deficiency has to do with how much protein you eat and when you eat it . 
Other common deficiency triggers are a lack of vitamin D , vitamin B12 , 
and magnesium . You ’ ll read much more about protein in Chapter 4 and 
supplements in Chapter 7 , and you can see what blood tests I recommend 
in Appendix B . 
Your Thyroid and Metabolism
If you have many of the symptoms in the list below , you need to have 
blood work done . Your doctor should look at your levels of T4 ( inactive 
thyroid hormone )  , T3 ( active thyroid hormone )  , and TSH ( thyroidstimulating hormone )  ; be sure to insist that your physician tests you 
Initial Symptoms of 
Hypothyroidism
✔ Constipation
✔ Forgetfulness
✔ High cholesterol
✔ Menstrual changes 
( too heavy or very light , 
too frequent or too
infrequent ) 
✔ Sensitivity to cold
✔ Unexplained weight gain
Symptoms of Advanced 
Hypothyroidism
✔ Depression and decreasing
mental stability
✔ Dry , flaky , inelastic skin
✔ Dry , sparse hair
✔ Fluid under the eyes
✔ Hoarseness
✔ Puffy face , hands , and feet
✔ Thick , brittle nails
✔ Upper eyelid droop
Chapter 3 | Triggers for the MD Factor 45
for T3 , which is often not ordered . Often women , especially after 
menopause , have a hard time converting T4 into T3 and may show 
lower T3 levels even with an otherwise normal thyroid blood test profile . 
Hypothyroidism responds well to treatment with replacement thyroid 
hormones . 
Understanding Why Your Thyroid Is Important
Your body is regulated by different hormones secreted by various
glands . Your adrenal glands pump out hormones such as cortisol
and adrenaline when you ’ re stressed or frightened . Your thyroid
gland pumps out hormones that regulate much of your body ’ s
metabolic functions . 
Because your thyroid is so crucial to metabolic functioning , many of
my patients assume that extra weight means they have low levels
of thyroid hormone , or hypothyroidism—which is very common , 
especially in women over the age of forty—and that fixing this means
their metabolism will automatically rev back up and the pounds
they ’ ve put on will melt away . I wish that were true , but it ’ s usually
not . Regaining normal thyroid levels does make you feel better , with
improved energy , but unless you address the MD Factor , you can
still gain weight and unwanted visceral fat . 
46 The MD Factor Diet
For Women Only : Menopause
For so many women , the hormonal changes that take place during 
perimenopause ( when the female hormones , estrogen and progesterone , 
start to decline ) and menopause ( when menstruation ceases ) are no joy . 
They can cause symptoms that range from mood swings , irritability , 
foggy thinking , hot flashes , night sweats , dry skin and hair , and lighter 
or heavier periods to depression , insomnia , low libido , and weight gain . 
Especially weight gain . In fact , the average woman puts on a whopping 
thirty pounds during menopause . And no , thirty is not a typo ! 
Many women will do whatever it takes to manage these symptoms , 
not only to try to lose weight but also to feel better . That leads them to 
hormone replacement therapy , or HRT . HRT has long been controversial , 
and it has been more so since a comprehensive trial undertaken by the 
Women ’ s Health Initiative and published in 2002 shockingly showed 
that women who took the hormone Prempro , made from synthetic 
estrogen and progesterone , increased their risk of heart disease , stroke , 
and breast cancer . 
Before that , doctors had thought that estrogen and progesterone 
protected a woman ’ s heart , based on epidemiological studies showing that 
women who used HRT lived longer and had less heart disease . Doctors 
often prescribed HRT with the intention to protect women ’ s hearts from 
coronary artery disease , as well as their bones from osteoporosis . Yes , 
there was a health risk trade-off , with a slight increase in the risk of breast 
cancer and uterine cancer in HRT users , but for many women , the benefit 
of improved bone and heart health made sense , as more women die of 
heart disease or hip fractures than from breast cancer . 
Since this study came out , however , HRT has been prescribed much 
less frequently , and only if symptoms are so severe as to affect a woman ’ s 
quality of life . If you ’ re considering HRT , discuss the risks and benefits with 
The average woman puts on 
a whopping thirty pounds 
during menopause . 
Chapter 3 | Triggers for the MD Factor 47
your physician so you can make an informed decision . Typically , HRT is 
prescribed in the lowest possible dose for the shortest possible time . 
But here ’ s what you need to know about HRT and weight gain : the 
average menopausal woman will gain that thirty pounds whether she 
chooses to use HRT or not ! Often those on HRT find that they don ’ t gain 
weight at first , but after several years they realize that the pounds are 
slowly piling on . And for all women , on HRT or not , the distribution of 
their fat shifts ; waists get thicker while hips and thighs seem somewhat 
smaller . This means that even if you haven ’ t gained a pound , your fat 
distribution is likely to change .  
( Hello , pooch !  ) Eventually , though , 
the weight is stored everywhere . 
In other words , replacing female 
hormones doesn ’ t prevent the 
MD Factor . 
So what is estrogen ’ s role in the 
MD Factor ? Scientists studying 
how estrogen receptors function in 
the hypothalamus—the part of the 
brain controlling body temperature , 
hunger , thirst , fatigue , and sleep 
cycles—finally cracked the code . 
The hypothalamus is basically 
a master switch to control food 
intake , energy expenditure , and 
body fat distribution . When these 
scientists disabled the estrogen 
receptors in lab rats ( which are 
used in studies like these because 
their physiology is similar to that of 
Hot Flashes and Hypoglycemia
When you ’ re going through perimenopause or menopause , one of
the easiest ways to trigger a hot flash is to eat a high-carbohydrate
meal—say , bread , a large bowl of pasta , a glass or two of wine , and a
sugary dessert . Even if you ’ re on HRT , this kind of eating will likely get
you all hot and bothered ! 
Hot flashes are a misreading by the temperature control of your
body , located in the hypothalamus , and hypoglycemia plays a huge
role in triggering them . Keeping blood sugar levels stable is , as you
know , a delicate balance . After you eat , your body absorbs sugar into
your bloodstream ; blood sugar rises steadily after a meal and begins
to fall as your cells take in sugar . When levels drop a few hours after
a high-carbohydrate meal , your body essentially panics in order to
prevent levels from dropping too low . If you already have naturally
low amounts of estrogen , the hypothalamus can be activated more
easily . The result is that you feel hot and flushed , which is followed by
a shaky clamminess once your body settles down . 
48 The MD Factor Diet
humans )  , the animals immediately began to eat more food , display lower 
energy levels and a lower metabolic rate ( they acted sluggish )  , and pack 
on pounds in the worst place possible ( visceral fat in their abdomen )  . 
Even when they were fed the same amount of food , they still gained a 
substantial amount of weight ! 
What I found stunning about these conclusions is that the weight 
issues women experience with menopause have not changed , even with 
the massive overhaul in how menopause has been treated . Before the 
Women ’ s Health Initiative study was published in 2002 , most of my 
perimenopausal or postmenopausal patients were on HRT . Ever since , 
only a few are . But all of them , then and now , told me that they are in 
a constant battle with their weight . The North American Menopause 
Society has also confirmed that HRT has no effect on weight gain . 
My patients are ecstatic with relief when they realize that their 
menopause metabolism caused their MD Factor . I believe them when they 
say that they have eaten less and exercised more but that nothing worked . 
And they were even more relieved when I explained why low-calorie plans 
and restrictive eating simply do not work on the menopause-triggered 
MD Factor , and in some cases can make the problem worse . 
When your estrogen levels drop , your metabolism shifts , too—and it 
needs to be treated differently and fed differently . The problem can ’ t be 
solved simply by replacing reproductive hormones . But it can be solved 
with the MD Factor Action Plan ! 
Not every hot flash in menopause is caused by unstable blood sugar , 
but my patients appreciate being able to decrease their episodes by 30 
percent or more with something as safe and effective as changing the way 
they eat . The MD Factor Action Plan is designed to stabilize the blood 
sugar fluctuations that so commonly occur with menopause . And women 
who lose just 9 percent of their starting body weight have fewer hot 
flashes compared to women who do not lose any weight . 
Chapter 3 | Triggers for the MD Factor 49
The More You Gain , 
The More You Gain ! 
Once you start gaining weight , you know how hard it is to get those 
pounds off . There is a very simple explanation : gaining weight results 
in changes to your body chemistry . Yes , your metabolism itself actually 
shifts . You might have thought that nothing ’ s different except your dress 
size , but ignoring this fact is one of the reasons losing weight is 
so frustrating . 
The body ’ s natural set point for weight differs from person to person , 
but once you cross the line that ’ s your trigger , that fat tissue you now have 
secretes chemicals that have diabolical effects . Yes , they cause your body 
to develop even more of the MD Factor . Your old metabolism is replaced 
with a totally different one . And this new metabolism is really , really good 
at storing fat . That means the old approach to weight loss—taking in 
fewer calories than you expend—doesn ’ t consistently work anymore . 
Most of my overweight patients find that their metabolism shifts 
noticeably when they ’ re about thirty or more pounds over their normal 
weight . The MD Factor has kicked in so strongly that they can ’ t lose any 
weight—and in fact often pack on more pounds even when eating the 
same ( or less )  . What might have once worked for weight loss is now a 
total failure . And , of course , my patients blame themselves when in fact 
it ’ s simple physiology making their lives miserable . 
As I said earlier in this chapter , the MD Factor typically causes weight 
to accumulate in your abdominal area . This is a double whammy , as the 
location where fat cells accumulate is crucial to the MD Factor . Fat isn ’ t 
just an inert blob of cells . It ’ s active tissue . And tissues have functions . 
Fat tissue ’ s function is to secrete hormones and inflammatory chemicals . 
The old approach to weight 
loss—taking in fewer calories 
than you expend—doesn ’ t 
consistently work anymore . 
50 The MD Factor Diet
Those substances travel throughout the body , telling other cells to damage 
cell membranes and leading into a deeper MD Factor state—and more
weight gain . 
Even thin people can have the MD Factor , however . It ’ s true that some 
people seem to have all the luck—they can eat whatever they want and 
never gain any weight . The explanation is that the genetic lottery blessed 
them with fewer fat cells to fill up . However , even they are not entirely 
off the hook . Their weight gain might not be as obvious , but even very 
thin people have a small amount of visceral fat cushioning their organs . 
So while thin people might only gain five to ten pounds , if it ’ s all visceral 
fat , it puts them at risk for the MD Factor as well as for all the medical 
complications the MD Factor causes . 
Michelle , for example , had always been thin at 5 ’ 4 ” and 118 pounds , 
but during menopause she initially gained ten pounds , nearly all of it 
visceral fat . Although she wasn ’ t close to being overweight at 128 pounds , 
she slowly continued to gain ( and you now know why that happens )  . She 
also developed high cholesterol and high blood pressure at levels usually 
seen in a much heavier person . Yes—she had the MD Factor ! 
How I Diagnose the MD Factor
Now that you know why you have the MD Factor , this section will tell 
you what you should discuss with your physician . I suggest you consider 
doing this before you start the MD Factor Action Plan , in order to assess 
your blood sugar levels , insulin levels , and other parameters of metabolic 
function . When you have baseline figures , you ’ ll be able to see how they ’ ll 
respond to the MD Factor Action Plan . 
1 . During my initial consultation with a patient , first I do a physical exam . 
Most of my patients have fat deposits in their abdomen , which is clearly 
obvious . One of the diagnostic criteria for the MD Factor is a waist 
Chapter 3 | Triggers for the MD Factor 51
measurement greater than 35 inches for a woman and 40 inches for a 
man . You can easily take your own waist circumference measurement 
by locating the top of your hipbone and then placing a tape measure 
evenly around your bare abdomen where you feel the bone . Make 
sure that the tape is snug but not pushing tightly into your skin , and 
measure yourself after breathing out normally .  ( In other words , sucking 
in your stomach will give you an inaccurate measurement !  ) 
2 . Sometimes I will find a dark coloration of the skin around the neck 
or in skin creases such as armpits and elbows . This condition , called 
acanthosis nigricans , is a pigment change , not dirt , and is a visible 
marker of the MD Factor . There might also be many small skin tags 
around the neck and head area , too . 
3 . Next , I take a blood pressure reading . Elevated blood pressure 
( 135 / 85 mm Hg or higher in adults without medication to lower it ) 
is an unwelcome sign . Whether or not your high blood pressure is 
responding to medication , just having it is a risk factor . 
4 . Finally , I do specific blood tests on all my patients , children included , 
for the MD Factor when I begin treating them for weight management .  
( You can see which ones I recommend in Appendix B .  ) I look for 
elevations of fasting blood sugar ( a level over 100 mg / dL )  , elevations 
of the fasting insulin level , and high triglycerides , which are a measure 
of fat in the blood . I often find mild elevations of liver function tests , 
suggesting that fat is being deposited in the liver . The cholesterol or 
lipid panel may also show low HDL or “ good ” cholesterol . This is 
usually seen in combination with high triglycerides . 
As I mentioned earlier in the section about the MD Factor quiz , 
almost 90 percent of the patients I see in my practice show clear evidence 
of the MD Factor in their blood work , and another 5 percent are very 
close to testing positive as well on one or more parameters of testing I 
use . Discuss these tests with your physician or nurse practitioner in order 
52 The MD Factor Diet
Do You Have Metabolic 
Syndrome ? 
Metabolic syndrome is the
advanced form of the MD 
Factor , and a very scary fact is
that 30 percent of all American
adults—and 47 percent of
adults over the age of fifty—
have it . You ’ ll need blood work
for a firm diagnosis and will
need to have at least three of
the five findings in this list : 
✔ Elevated fasting blood
sugar ( over 100 mg / dL ) 
✔ Elevated triglycerides 
( above 150 mg / dL ) 
✔ HDL cholesterol level of less
than 50 mg / dL for women
and less than 40 mg / dL
for men
✔ Elevated blood pressure 
( 135 / 85 mm Hg or higher ) 
✔ Waist circumference greater
than 35 inches for women
and greater than 40 inches
for men . 
to prove if you have the MD Factor , and then , most important , follow the 
values of the MD Factor plan to ensure continual improvement in your 
weight loss goals . In order for your metabolic dysfunction to be corrected 
for good , which allows you to keep your weight optimal long term , any 
abnormal laboratory tests need to normalize . 
How My Medical Practice 
Treats the MD Factor
Patients who come to my comprehensive weight management clinic 
work one-on-one with a clinical nutritionist for at least twelve weeks to 
develop and modify customized meal plans for weight loss . But that ’ s 
only the beginning . Everyone needs a long-term plan , and I firmly 
believe that understanding nutritional basics is extremely important for 
your continued success . This became clear to me many years ago , when 
I realized that my patients , so successful in other areas of their lives , had 
little accurate knowledge about nutrition and more specifically about 
how their metabolisms responded to food . Very few of the thousands 
of children , teens , women , and men I ’ ve treated had ever heard of the 
MD Factor , much less understood what blood sugar problems were 
doing to their dieting . 
In the remaining chapters in Part II , I ’ m going to teach you all the 
basics you need to know about the three main macronutrients—protein , 
carbohydrates , and fat—that provide most of your calories . You ’ ll also read 
about an additional source of calories : the alcohol you might be drinking . 
I ’ ll discuss vitamins , supplements , and exercise , too . 
53
CHAPTER 4
The Protein You Need 
Of all the nutrients our bodies need for various functions , protein 
is the most vital . You need it to build and maintain muscles , 
tendons , and ligaments ; to keep your circulatory system , brain , and 
all other organs functioning ; to keep your immune system healthy 
and your skin vibrant ; and just about everything else ! If protein isn ’ t 
available from food when your body needs it , your tissues start to 
break down and your organs aren ’ t able to function with optimal 
power . This can wreak havoc on your cells and your metabolism . 
Proteins are made from chains of up to twenty amino acids . Of 
these twenty , nine are considered to be “ essential ,  ” because our bodies 
can ’ t synthesize them . We can only get them by eating protein-rich 
food . The remaining eleven amino acids can be made in your body 
from remnants of leftover carbohydrates , fats , and other amino acids . 
54 The MD Factor Diet
Foods containing all nine essential amino acids are called complete 
or high-quality proteins . Those containing less than the essential nine 
are incomplete or low-quality proteins . Most animal proteins fall into 
the category of complete or high-quality proteins : meat , poultry , fish , 
eggs , milk , cheese , and other dairy products . With the exception of soy , 
proteins from plant sources , vegetables , grains , and fruits are incomplete . 
Vegetarians will be the first to tell you that it ’ s not necessary to eat 
animal protein to have a balanced and healthful diet . But you do have to 
combine incomplete or low-quality proteins so that you ’ re getting all nine 
essential amino acids . One of the classic examples is rice and beans . Rice 
is low in the amino acid lysine and high in the amino acid methionine , 
whereas beans are low in methionine but high in lysine . They ’ re 
complementary proteins : served together , they provide a complete 
protein meal . 
One of the challenges for vegetarians who want to lose weight 
is to take in the essential amino acids needed while limiting excess 
carbohydrate . Beans and rice are complementary proteins , but the starchy 
rice is not an ideal food when you have the MD Factor . Vegetarians who 
eat eggs and dairy products , and pescatarians who eat those plus fish , find 
it easier to regulate their MD Factor while getting enough daily protein . 
Facts & Myths about Protein
Very few of my patients understand how much protein they do or don ’ t 
need and how best to consume it . This isn ’ t their fault , of course . I can ’ t 
tell you how many times I ’ ve read articles that get information about 
protein totally wrong ! 
One of the easiest assumptions to make is that if a little protein is 
good , a lot must surely be better . Some people expect protein to create 
Very few of my patients 
understand how much protein 
they do or don ’ t need and how 
best to consume it . 
Chapter 4 | The Protein You Need 55
toned muscles , stamina , and athletic prowess . But that ’ s not true at all—
eating a hearty serving of red meat every night will not necessarily make 
you strong . 
These are the most important facts about protein : 
✔ Your body is in continuous need of protein , but your body can ’ t 
store it . In fact , the protein you eat at breakfast is pretty much 
used up by dinnertime . This makes protein a nutrient that is very 
different from carbohydrates and fat .  ( Carbohydrates , in the form 
of glucose , are stored in our liver and muscles , and of course we 
store fat in our fat tissue .  ) 
✔ Your body can only use a specific amount of protein at any time . 
✔ For each meal , you have to hit a certain level of protein to ensure 
that your body gets the right signals so that it can absorb the 
amino acids ( the building blocks of protein ) it needs . The magic 
number to allow for this absorption is 25–35 grams of dietary 
protein . This amount also prevents your muscles from being 
broken down to meet your needs for protein and amino acids 
when you ’ re trying to lose weight . 
✔ For adults , only 4 to 6 ounces of protein are needed at each meal . 
This is the equivalent of a small chicken breast—not an enormous 
burger or steak ! 
✔ If you eat more than 4 to 6 ounces of protein at a time , your body 
can ’ t use the extra for building and repair . Instead , your body 
converts it to glucose for energy—or stores it as fat ! 
56 The MD Factor Diet
Protein & Dieting
Wouldn ’ t it be wonderful if our bodies only burned the excess fat we are 
anxious to shed ? Unfortunately , nature hasn ’ t been that kind to us ! 
Not only is the protein we eat broken down to its individual 
amino acids , but body proteins are constantly being disassembled and 
reassembled . Muscle proteins , for example , are broken down and quickly 
re-formed into muscle tissue as well as into other protein-containing tissues 
such as tendons , blood , and even bone . During this process , called protein 
turnover , most amino acids are transformed into other amino acids and 
then used by the tissues in your body . Some , however , are discarded and 
excreted in your urine . This is why the protein you eat , which replaces 
these discarded amino acids , is so important in weight loss . If you don ’ t eat 
enough protein every day , your body will always perceive this as a threat 
to its survival . So it slows down your metabolism , conserving what protein 
there is , which makes it harder for you to lose weight . 
If you eat enough protein , however—in the proper amounts , at regular 
intervals during the day—this will help keep your metabolism running 
at an optimal level . And anyone following a low-calorie diet needs extra
protein to ensure that the body doesn ’ t break down muscle tissue . 
Chapter 4 | The Protein You Need 57
How Much Protein 
Do You Really Need Every Day ? 
Many people ask me if high-protein diets are bad . The first part of my 
answer is that you need to understand what “ high protein ” actually 
means . Some of my patients find the meal plans I suggest to be higher in 
protein than they are used to , but that ’ s usually because they ’ ve been on 
protein-deficient diets . 
When low-fat diets became popular in the 1980s , their proponents 
insisted that protein and fat were bad for weight loss and that the best 
way to lose weight was by eating lots of low-calorie carbohydrates . 
That way of thinking has , unfortunately , persisted—and if you have the 
MD Factor , that ’ s one of the main reasons it ’ s so hard for you to lose 
weight . When you ’ re not meeting your nutrient requirements each day , 
your body becomes metabolically hungry and goes into starvation and 
fat storage mode . At the same time , it sends out intense hunger signals . 
It ’ s a double whammy : a slower metabolism coupled with cravings for 
lots of food . The MD Factor Action Plan is designed to prevent that 
from happening . 
For about thirty years , the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
recommended that we get 15 percent of our calories from protein , 30 
percent from fat , and 55 percent from carbohydrate . These percentagebased recommendations make sense for only a small subset of the 
American population , and they never work for someone who is cutting 
calories in order to diet . 
For example , an active young man eating 3 , 500 calories a day will take 
in 130 grams of protein—enough to keep his muscles healthy—if he gets 
15 percent of his calories from protein . But if a woman consuming 1 , 200 
calories followed those same recommendations , she ’ d be getting only 
When you ’ re not meeting your 
nutrient requirements each 
day , your body becomes 
metabolically hungry and 
goes into starvation and fat 
storage mode . 
58 The MD Factor Diet
45 grams of protein every day . A man on an 1 , 800-calorie diet would be 
getting a mere 68 grams of protein . That is just not enough . It means you ’ ll 
lose muscle tissue as you lose weight . This is unbelievably disconcerting—
especially since the RDA ( Recommended Daily Allowance ) of protein 
simply to prevent deficiency is 63 grams per day , and that ’ s just a bare 
minimum . Talk about contradictory advice ! 
The truth is , most American women ingest an average of 68 grams of 
protein every day . This is just barely above the amount needed to prevent 
deficiency , and it ’ s certainly not enough to sustain a regular exercise 
routine that is meant to strengthen muscles . 
Getting back to the question about high-protein diets , it is crucial 
for you to see why your daily protein requirement is a lot higher than 
the ridiculously low 15 percent figure put out by the government all 
those years ago . It is important to note that several years ago , the 
recommendation changed to ranges : 10–35 percent of calories from 
protein , 45–65 percent from carbohydrate , and 20–35 percent from 
fat . This was done because there has been great controversy regarding 
the proper amount of macronutrients ( protein , fat , and carbohydrate ) 
and also because obesity has reached epidemic proportions among 
the American population in the past thirty years . In addition , research 
showed that one recommendation was not going to suffice for the entire , 
extremely varied population . 
What is interesting is that the new ranges fit very nicely into what I 
recommend for my patients in terms of protein amounts . If a woman 
eats 1 , 200 to 1 , 400 calories on a weight loss diet and gets 35 percent of 
those calories from protein , she is getting 105 to 122 grams of protein . Her 
carbohydrate intake will be just a little too high at the 45 percent mark 
and the fat may be just a little low , but those numbers are still pretty close . 
Chapter 4 | The Protein You Need 59
Since the focus of my entire career has been nutrition and metabolism , 
I was aware of these changes in recommended protein intake , but outside 
of my medical specialty , this news got very little press . Most people still 
think that a healthful balanced diet is composed primarily of starchy 
carbohydrates , because that ’ s what was depicted on the base of the Food 
Pyramid Guide , a graphic tool formerly used to illustrate how Americans 
should be eating . What a mistake ! I grew up looking at cereal and cracker 
boxes and bags of chips that had the Food Guide Pyramid graphic on 
them , showing that for an ideal diet we should be eating six to eleven 
servings of grains and starches and very little protein and fat . That 
visual has stayed with most people . No doubt the endless commercials 
advertising a bowl of cereal with two pieces of toast and a glass of juice as 
a “ complete and balanced breakfast ” have also played a lasting role in our 
perceptions of healthful eating . 
60 The MD Factor Diet
Protein Requirements Designed 
Specifically for Your Metabolism
I ’ ve found that the best way to determine your daily protein requirements 
is by using grams of protein , rather than a percentage of total calories 
in the diet . Whether you are in the initial weight loss phase or the 
maintenance phase of the MD Factor Action Plan , you will need to eat 
the same amount of protein . Just as you need calcium for strong bones , 
you need protein for a strong metabolism . 
For patients in my office , I can be very specific with their daily 
protein recommendations , based on specific parameters such as body 
composition , a physical exam , and blood work results . For you , the 
guidelines I ’ ll suggest here are just as helpful , based on calculations that I 
know are successful for maintaining lean muscle tissue . 
I set protein recommendations based on the amount of lean body 
mass a person has . The lean body mass is the weight of your muscle , 
organs , bones , and water—everything that ’ s not fat . The lean body mass is 
what we want to preserve during the process of weight loss . I don ’ t want 
you to lose bone mass , become dehydrated , or suffer a decline in organ 
function . The only thing I want you to get rid of is extra body fat . 
There will be variations in the amount of lean body mass from one 
person to another , but not as much as most people think . Women ’ s 
bones and internal organs are smaller than men ’ s and the size of their 
muscles is smaller as well . This is why women and men have different 
recommendations for protein intake . 
Your lean body mass should be the same whether you are normal 
weight or overweight . When we gain weight , we predominantly gain fat 
tissue , not muscle tissue and organ tissue . It is true that the muscles of 
Just as you need calcium 
for strong bones , you 
need protein for a strong 
metabolism . 
Chapter 4 | The Protein You Need 61
overweight people can become larger because they have to carry more 
weight around on a daily basis . However , the MD Factor can cause a loss 
of muscle tissue and even deposition of fat into muscle fibers as you age . 
The bottom line is , with a few exceptions , coming up with the amount 
of protein your body needs to defeat the MD Factor , lose fat , and 
maintain your muscle tissue is pretty easy . For a woman of average height , 
which in the United States is 5 ' 4 "  , I recommend 110–120 grams of protein 
per day . For a man of average height , which in the United States is 5 ' 11 "  , 
I recommend 130–140 grams of protein per day . 
Are there any exceptions ? 
✔ If a woman or man is between 5 ' and 5 ' 2 "  , I recommend 100 grams 
of protein . 
✔ If a woman is above 5 ' 10 "  , I recommend 130–140 grams of protein . 
I would also consider this higher protein intake for a woman who 
is 5 ' 8 " but very muscular . 
✔ If a man is taller than 6 ' 2 " or is very muscular , he may have a 
higher protein requirement , 150–160 grams . I don ’ t find we have 
to go too much higher than this in my practice , but our clientele 
doesn ’ t include many body builders ! 
In healthy people , the only known side effect of eating too much 
protein is what happens if you take in too many calories—you ’ ll gain 
weight . However , some people have to limit their protein intake due to 
the fact that their kidneys are not working properly . Protein is a large 
molecule , and if the kidneys are diseased , the extra work involved 
in processing it can further strain the kidneys . However , if you have 
normally functioning kidneys , protein intake does not damage them . For 
more information , see Appendix A , which discusses in more detail higher 
protein diets and health concerns . 
62 The MD Factor Diet
Why Eating Protein at 
Breakfast Is So Important
One thing nutritionists can agree on is that breakfast is the most 
important meal of the day . 
While you ’ re sleeping , your body is busy breaking down protein to 
meet its amino acid requirements . If you eat the right amount of protein 
after this overnight fast , this breakdown stops and , instead , your body 
primes your metabolism for fat breakdown . But if you don ’ t get enough 
protein at breakfast , your body will do anything it can to get the protein 
it needs . That means it ’ ll rob your muscle tissues for it , which is the last 
thing you want ! 
Your Protein Needs as You Age
We tend to become less active as we age , and when
our energy expenditure goes down , we typically
need fewer calories . But our protein needs actually
remain constant . This is the only way to preserve the
lean muscle tissue we have . 
In other words , the same man who needed 3 , 500
calories and 130 grams of protein every day when
he ’ s twenty years old and active still needs 130
grams of protein when he ’ s fifty . Unless he ’ s still
fantastically fit and active , however , he will not need
as many calories . As we all know , though , it can be
very hard to alter our eating habits after decades of
particular kinds of meals and portion sizes ! 
What you should do as you age is ensure your
consistent intake of protein but cut back on the
amount of carbohydrates you eat . You can also
slightly decrease your fat intake , but eating fewer
carbs will be more effective . You ’ ll see how to do
this in the MD Factor Action Plan . Increasing your
exercise and overall activity levels is also great for
your health and general well-being . 
Whatever you choose to do , don ’ t cut down on that
protein ! You need it now more than ever . 
Chapter 4 | The Protein You Need 63
In addition , there ’ s leucine , one of the twenty amino acids , to consider , 
because , as we ’ ve seen , it helps regulate the MD Factor . When you start 
the day with adequate leucine levels , you ’ ll have more efficient insulin 
regulation , which means stabilized blood sugar levels . This also means 
better weight loss and fewer cravings . 
In order to ensure that the right amount of leucine is available when 
it is most needed first thing in the morning , you must eat close to 25–30 
grams of protein at breakfast . This is essential . I know it can be tough , as 
many people just aren ’ t hungry when they get up . They don ’ t like eating 
breakfast . Plus , a typical breakfast of eggs , bacon , and sausage will meet 
your protein requirement but is laden with artery-clogging saturated fat . 
But what happens if you have a high-carbohydrate meal instead ? It 
triggers the MD Factor . Your cells lock out the glucose that is banging 
on the door to get in . This then trips the signal for more insulin to be 
released , which later drops blood sugar and sends “ I ’ m starving ! Feed 
me !  ” signals to your brain . These signals create intense cravings for sugars 
and carbs during the day . Then you ’ ve got a vicious cycle of hunger and 
cravings in place . Instead of maintaining lean muscle tissue , you ’ ll either 
break it down or put on fat tissue instead . 
My breakfast-resistant patients often balk at first , but they quickly 
learn that they will lose weight when they eat the right kind of breakfast . 
It ’ s non-negotiable ; it ’ s just a must-do . You must start your metabolic 
engine every morning . And it needs protein to run . These patients are 
also pretty amazed that once they start eating breakfast regularly , they 
actually look forward to fueling their bodies properly . 
In Chapter 11 , I ’ ll provide you with breakfast meal plans that show you 
exactly what to eat . 
One thing nutritionists can 
agree on is that breakfast is 
the most important meal of 
the day . 
64 The MD Factor Diet
65
CHAPTER 5
The Carbohydrates 
You Need 
Picture a twelve-ounce can of Coke . Pour half of it out . What ’ s left 
in the six ounces of Coke that remains is almost 20 grams of pure 
sugar . 
These 20 grams are equal to all the carbohydrates you should ever 
get from sugar every day if you want to lose weight , prevent diabetes , 
and live a long , healthy life . 
Shocking , right ? But overestimating your body ’ s need for carbs and 
sugar is as common as underestimating its need for protein . Too many 
carbs and too little protein mean you will find it nearly impossible to 
lose weight . 
66 The MD Factor Diet
Carbohydrates : You Don ’ t Need as 
Much as You Think
Carbs are the foundation of most American diets . Believe it or not , carbs 
are also the foundation of most packaged “ diet ” foods you can buy in the 
supermarket . Most Americans get more than half of their calories from 
carbohydrate sources—primarily sourced from sugar . 
Carbohydrates and sugars are practically impossible to avoid . They ’ re 
in nourishing , sugar-laden breast milk , naturally made tasty and sweet 
so babies will want to suckle ; in your grandmother ’ s famous peach pie 
and your mom ’ s comforting macaroni and cheese ; in the healthful apple 
you ’ re crunching on and the caramel dipping sauce that makes it taste 
even better . A heaping bowl of spaghetti and meat sauce is mostly carbs . 
Make a sandwich of turkey on whole-grain bread and you ’ re still getting 
more calories from the carbs in the bread than from any other nutrient , 
such as the protein in the turkey or the fat in the mayonnaise . 
Added sugars are also hidden in processed foods you might not think 
of as sweetened : ketchup , barbecue sauce , baked beans , fat-free salad 
dressings , granola bars , coleslaw , instant oatmeal , and crackers . These 
foods taste yummy and are so easy to eat . We are hard-wired to crave and 
delight in the sweet taste of sugar , and most of us are programmed from 
an early age to believe that sweets are a treat . You might have been told 
that if you ate up all your peas and carrots , you ’ d get a cookie as a reward . 
Really , who ever heard of getting a stalk of broccoli or a bowlful of raw 
kale as a treat ? Not me ! 
So what ’ s the big deal about carbs ? Why do you need to count them ? 
Because they become sugar when they enter your bloodstream . The MD Factor
is , as you know , set in motion when the excess sugar in your bloodstream 
can ’ t get into the cells where it ’ s needed . Instead , it ’ s readily stored in your 
body . This means you ’ ll gain weight or be unable to lose weight . 
Chapter 5 | The Carbohydrates You Need 67
Simple & Complex Carbohydrates
There are two kinds of carbohydrates : simple and complex . 
Simple Carbohydrates
Simple carbohydrates have single or double sugar molecules and are very 
easy to digest . Glucose and fructose are both simple carbohydrates . They ’ re 
found in white sugar , high-fructose corn syrup , milk , and fruit juice . 
A very common and metabolically dangerous simple sugar is highfructose corn syrup ( or HFCS )  . HFCS alters hormonal patterns in the 
body that promote increased body fat and increased appetite . It ’ s mostly 
metabolized by the liver , and unless you follow up HFCS consumption 
with exercise , it can get converted into fat stored in and around your liver . 
In fact , you can get a form of liver disease called non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease ( NAFLD ) just from consuming too much HFCS ! 
In addition , adults who consume 
25 percent of their daily calories as 
fructose- or HFCS-sweetened beverages 
( such as soda ) for two weeks experience 
increases in serum levels of cholesterol 
and triglycerides . The American Heart 
Association recommends keeping added 
sugars below 5 percent of your total 
calories . This is under 25 grams of sugar 
per day , or about the same amount that is 
in 8 fluid ounces of soda . 
The Most Common Simple Carbohydrates
•	 Baked goods , including
cakes , cookies , doughnuts , 
pastries , and pies * 
•	 Candy , like chocolate * 
•	 Candy , like jelly beans
•	 Chips * 
•	 Gum
•	 Dried fruit
•	 Fruit juice
•	 Frozen yogurt , ice cream ,  * 
ice pops , sherbet
•	 Gelatin desserts
•	 Jelly and jam
•	 Pretzels
•	 Processed / refined grains 
( white flour , white rice ) 
•	 Pudding * 
•	 Soft drinks and soda
•	 Syrups
•	 Yogurt , sweetened 
* Also high in fat
68 The MD Factor Diet
Complex Carbohydrates
Complex carbohydrates consist of long chains of sugar units , which make 
them taste starchy instead of sweet . Like sugar , complex carbohydrates 
provide energy . Unlike sugars , however , starches are often found in foods 
rich in vitamins , minerals , and fiber . Because of these nutrients , the body 
takes a longer time to digest them . This slows down your blood sugar rise 
and allows your body to utilize them better . In addition , your body is less 
prone to storing complex carbohydrates as fat , unless they are refined or 
eaten in large amounts all at one time . It ’ s always better to eat complex 
rather than simple carbohydrates . 
Moreover , eating nothing but a piece of fruit for what you think is a 
truly healthful snack can cause a larger spike in your blood sugar when 
you have the MD Factor . So what you thought was good for you can 
actually make you more hungry . 
And then there ’ s juice . One of the easiest ways to send your blood 
sugar soaring is by drinking fruit juice , particularly on an empty stomach . 
Despite the ads you ’ ve seen for years , fruit juice is not a healthful food . I 
never drink it and discourage everyone from even having it in the house , 
as it ’ s so tempting to drink a lot of it ( a normal serving of orange juice is 
meant to be only 4 ounces—and who drinks that little ?  )  . If you are a juice 
lover , try mixing veggie juices with fruit juice ; sweet vegetables like carrots 
and beets give lots of flavor without so much sugar . Then , gradually try to 
wean yourself off fruit juices altogether . 
When you ’ re in the mood for fruit , portion size matters—a lot . Always 
try to eat fruit with some form of protein ( this protein can be a few nuts 
or a small piece of cheese )  , as that will slow down its digestion and help 
moderate any blood sugar spikes . 
Chapter 5 | The Carbohydrates You Need 69
Sugar Hiding in Plain Sight
If you want to spot added sugars on food labels , it can require some detective work . When you
investigate the ingredients list , remember that all of the ingredients are listed in descending order
by amount . So the food listed first is present in the highest amount , and the ingredient listed last
makes up the smallest portion of that food . This list shows you ingredients that indicate added sugar : 
•	 Agave nectar
•	 Brown sugar
•	 Barley malt syrup
•	 Cane crystals
•	 Cane sugar
•	 Confectioner ’ s sugar
•	 Corn sweetener
•	 Corn syrup
•	 Corn syrup solids
•	 Crystalline fructose
•	 Dehydrated cane juice
•	 Dextrin
•	 Dextrose
•	 Evaporated cane juice
•	 Fructose
•	 Fruit juice
concentrates
•	 Glucose
•	 Glucose syrup
•	 High-fructose
corn syrup
•	 Granulated sugar
•	 Honey
•	 Invert sugar
•	 Lactose
•	 Maltodextrin
•	 Maltose
•	 Malt syrup
•	 Maple syrup
•	 Molasses
•	 Nectar
•	 Raw sugar
•	 Rice syrup
•	 Saccharose
•	 Sorghum
•	 Sorghum syrup
•	 Sucrose
•	 Sugar
•	 Syrup
•	 Treacle
•	 Turbinado sugar
•	 Xylose
How Your Body Uses Carbohydrates
As carbohydrates are digested , they are broken down into simple sugars . 
Your liver then processes them into a form all cells can use—glucose , 
or blood sugar , which then circulates throughout your body , supplying 
energy to all tissues and organs that need it . 
Glucose has two main destinations after you eat it : it can be absorbed 
into lean muscle and body cells to be used for energy , or it can be stored 
as fat . Let me explain . Sometimes your body takes in extra glucose that 
you don ’ t end up using at that particular time , so the excess is converted 
70 The MD Factor Diet
About High-Fructose Corn Syrup
High-fructose corn syrup ( HFCS ) is in the news these days , which is a
good thing—it helps draw attention to the fact the HFCS is terrible for
your body . Unfortunately , however , packaged-food manufacturers still
use it because it ’ s inexpensive . 
HFCS is bad for you not only because it ’ s sweeter than other forms of
sugar but also because it has a different effect on your appetite than
other sugars do . HFCS contributes to overeating because it doesn ’ t
signal your brain that your stomach is full and you ’ re no longer hungry . 
Food and drinks that contain regular refined sugar ( sucrose ) are able
to send these signals . 
to either glycogen or fat . Glycogen is a starch that is stored in the liver 
and muscles ; it ’ s stashed away in case your body needs it as a quick energy 
source . Think of it as linking up a bunch of glucose molecules in a row , 
and then your body breaks off one at a time to use for energy . 
But when your glycogen stores are full , the excess glucose takes a 
different route . It gets converted to fat . Unfortunately for all of us , there is 
no limit to the amount of fat that can be stored by our bodies . And eating 
excess carbohydrates creates a perfect equation for extra stored fat . 
Another important component has to do with carbohydrate tolerance , 
which is your body ’ s ability to metabolize and use nutrients from the 
carbs you eat . This is unique to each person and is determined by hepatic 
regulation ( how your liver processes it ) and peripheral usage ( which 
refers to how well your cells use energy and respond to blood sugar 
levels )  . The factors that affect carbohydrate tolerance are your diet , 
muscle mass , physical activity , age , and gender . 
Chapter 5 | The Carbohydrates You Need 71
For example , a twenty-two-year-old male athlete will have a high 
carbohydrate tolerance . He ’ ll have lots of muscle mass due to his youth , 
his gender ( high testosterone levels increase carbohydrate tolerance )  , and 
his high level of physical activity . His body processes those carbs as soon 
as he eats them ; his muscles will be sending out signals that they need 
a lot of fuel so they can exert a lot of energy . This is why so many elite 
athletes engage in carbohydrate loading before their events—they know 
that scarfing down bowls of pasta will lead them to peak performance . If 
you ’ re not an athlete , however , or if you don ’ t work in a profession with 
high energy needs , such as construction work , you likely won ’ t have high 
carbohydrate tolerance at all . 
It ’ s interesting to note that the recommendations on the old Food 
Guide Pyramid were unwittingly misleading because they were based on 
information gathered from active men in the military , for whom a high 
carbohydrate diet is ideal . But what about a middle-aged office worker 
who spends most of his time on a computer at his desk ? What about 
women , who on average will have significantly less lean muscle tissue 
than young men , regardless of activity level ? They ’ ll look to the Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans or the outdated Food Guide Pyramid for 
guidance and end up eating in a way that will pack the pounds right on . 
They need the MD Factor Action Plan to undo the damage ! 
72 The MD Factor Diet
The Most Common Complex Carbohydrates
VEGETABLES
The best choice of carbohydrates will always be vegetables . These all 
have very low carbohydrate content and are rich in fiber and nutrients . 
•	 Artichokes
•	 Arugula
•	 Asparagus
•	 Bean sprouts
•	 Beets
•	 Broccoli
•	 Brussels sprouts
•	 Cabbage
•	 Carrots
•	 Cauliflower
•	 Celery
•	 Cucumbers
•	 Eggplants
•	 Green beans
•	 Greens 
( collard , mustard , 
turnip ) 
•	 Kale
•	 Leeks
•	 Lettuce
•	 Mushrooms
•	 Okra
•	 Onions
•	 Peppers ( all colors ) 
•	 Radishes
•	 Sauerkraut
•	 Spinach
•	 Shallots
•	 Snow peas
•	 Spaghetti squash
•	 Squash 
( summer or winter ) 
•	 Tomatoes
•	 Wax beans
•	 Zucchini
BEANS AND LEGUMES 
The next best carbohydrates are beans and legumes . Chock full of 
amino acids , they ’ re particularly rich in fiber , which helps you feel full . 
•	 Black beans
•	 Black-eyed peas
•	 Chickpeas
•	 Green peas
•	 Kidney beans
•	 Lentils
•	 Navy beans
•	 Red beans
•	 White beans
Chapter 5 | The Carbohydrates You Need 73
FRUITS
Fruit is rich in phytonutrients , fiber , and the sweet sugar fructose .  
( See the sidebar on the right for more about how much fruit to eat .  ) 
Because fruit has a high sugar content , you don ’ t want to eat it in 
unlimited quantities . 
•	 Apples
•	 Applesauce , 
unsweetened
•	 Apricots
•	 Bananas
•	 Blackberries
•	 Blueberries
•	 Boysenberries
•	 Cantaloupe
•	 Cherries
•	 Clementines
•	 Cranberries
•	 Dates
•	 Grapefruit
•	 Grapes
•	 Honeydew
•	 Kiwis
•	 Mandarin oranges
•	 Mangos
•	 Nectarines
•	 Oranges
•	 Papayas
•	 Peaches
•	 Pears
•	 Persimmons
•	 Pineapple
•	 Plums
•	 Strawberries
•	 Raspberries
•	 Tangerines
•	 Watermelon
Watch Your Fruit 
Consumption !  
 “ Eat your fruit and vegetables !  ” 
How many times did you hear
that growing up ? 
Fruit is an amazing food , 
loaded with vitamins , minerals , 
fiber , and phytonutrients that
are great for your body . But
here ’ s the thing you need to
know : most fruits are laden
with simple sugars that are
easy to digest . You can eat a lot
of fruit before it makes you feel
full—and that means you are
eating a lot of sugar that can
WHOLE GRAINS AND STARCHY VEGETABLES trigger your MD Factor . 
Grains tend to have a higher carbohydrate count than other carbs , 
especially due to the enormous portions that are often considered 
to be a single serving . Most people with the MD Factor need to pay 
careful attention to their grain intake and eat appropriately sized 
portions of fiber-rich grains such as steel-cut oatmeal or whole-wheat 
bread . You ’ ll see exactly what ’ s best for you on the MD Factor Action 
Plan in Chapter 11 . 
•	 Barley
•	 Brown rice
•	 Corn
•	 Oats
•	 Potatoes
•	 Quinoa
•	 Rye
•	 Wheat
74 The MD Factor Diet
Facts & Myths 
about Carbohydrates
My patients often come to see me with a lot of misinformation about how 
much and what kind of carbohydrates to eat . It ’ s important to emphasize 
that carbohydrates are not a dieter ’ s enemy—all vegetables contain carbs , 
and so do all fruits . It ’ s eating the wrong kind of carbs at the wrong time 
that causes weight problems . The right type of carbohydrates , such 
as those found in vegetables , legumes , and low-sugar fruits , form the 
backbone of good nutrition . 
Nutritionally , there is no such thing as an essential carbohydrate . 
Carbs are not needed for our survival . It ’ s hard to believe , I know .  ( You 
should see my patients ’ faces when I tell them this !  ) But as long as the 
human body has stored fat and adequate muscle mass , we can live 
without carbs . However , we cannot live without protein and fat , as our 
bodies need specific amino acids from protein and fatty acids from fat 
that we cannot manufacture . Without carbs , on the other hand , your 
body makes glucose from protein and ketones from fat for the fuel 
it needs . For example , the Inuit peoples , native to Alaska and other 
northern areas , ate a high-protein , high-fat diet ( an average of 75 percent 
of calories from fat ) essentially devoid of dietary carbohydrates . They 
consume lots of fatty fish like salmon and halibut and hunt for walrus , 
whales , caribou , and seal , and are able to thrive . 
Another thing you may find hard to believe is that sugar is not the 
best thing to eat when your blood sugar drops . When you have the 
MD Factor , eating simple carbs is absolutely the worst thing to do ! Not 
only will it act like an appetite stimulant , but any excess sugar that you 
eat will be stored as fat . And then you ’ ll likely be even hungrier an hour 
after eating—hungrier , in fact , than if you ’ d eaten nothing at all . As you ’ ll 
Carbohydrates are not a 
dieter ’ s enemy—all vegetables 
contain carbs , and so do 
all fruits . 
Chapter 5 | The Carbohydrates You Need 75
see in the MD Factor Action Plan , keeping your blood sugar levels steady 
will prevent these intense hunger pangs , and eating snacks that are rich in 
other nutrients besides simple carbs will keep the MD Factor at bay . 
A last myth you may have encountered involves weight loss plateaus . 
Don ’ t allow plateaus to make you give up ! If you ’ ve tried a lowcarbohydrate diet before , you might have lost weight for several weeks 
or months and then hit a frustrating plateau . Don ’ t despair . In Appendix 
A ,  “ Why Other Diets Don ’ t Work ,  ” I ’ ll tell you why these diets failed for 
you—and why the MD Factor Action Plan will work . 
How Many Carbohydrates 
Do You Really Need Every Day ? 
When you have the MD Factor , the best sources of carbohydrates are 
vegetables , legumes , and low-sugar fruit . The next best sources are 
complex starches such as sweet potatoes or whole-grain bread . You ’ ll 
need to keep an eye on how many grams of carbohydrates you ’ re taking 
in . Intake is measured in grams , and food labels will list how many grams 
of carbohydrates and sugar are in each serving of food . Be sure to check 
the size of each serving , as eating too large a serving is an all-too-easy 
way of going over your carb target . In Appendix F , you ’ ll see a helpful list 
of the best carbs to eat , with a breakdown of their protein , carb , fat , and 
fiber contents . 
76 The MD Factor Diet
How to Calculate Your 
Daily Carbohydrate Intake
To correct the MD Factor , keep your total carb intake to between 60 and 
100 grams , spread throughout the day . This will keep insulin release to 
a minimum , maintain a stable blood sugar level , and stop those hunger 
pangs before they happen . It will also improve your energy level and 
ensure that these carbs don ’ t get stored as fat . 
Anytime you eat an apple , a bagel , a bowl of pasta , a piece of white 
bread , or a candy bar , your blood sugar or glucose level will go up . For 
example , a normal blood sugar level before eating is 80 mg / dL . For every 
15 grams of carbohydrate that gets absorbed into your digestive tract , 
your blood sugar will rise 30 points . An apple contains about 17 grams of 
carbohydrates , so when you eat it , your blood sugar will go up to 112 
mg / dL . But since the apple ’ s carb content is under the magic number of 
20 grams , no insulin is needed to lower your blood sugar , which will soon 
return to normal as the carbohydrates are metabolized . 
Eating or drinking simple carbs on their own , on the other hand—like 
a bowl of white rice or a large glass of orange juice—will cause blood 
sugar to rise dramatically , triggering a large insulin spike . If you eat the 
appropriate portions of high-fiber complex carbohydrates instead , their 
longer digestion time won ’ t trigger as large a spike in insulin . Even highfiber complex carbohydrates trigger insulin release if you eat a portion 
that ’ s too large . 
Foods high in lean protein—such as light cheese , low-sugar yogurt , 
and nuts—do not trigger insulin release . In addition , meals combining 
protein and carbohydrates cause less of an insulin spike than meals that 
are solely carb-based . Eating a plain white bagel with a bit of jam is not a 
good combo ; eating half a whole-grain bagel with a few slices of turkey 
and a slice of low-fat cheese is a much better idea ! 
Chapter 5 | The Carbohydrates You Need 77
Let ’ s Get Real about 
Carbohydrate Portions
Did you know that a single serving of carbohydrate is one 3-inch square 
of sliced bread ? What kind of sandwich can you make with that ? A very 
tiny one ! But at your favorite fast-food chain , a 6-inch sandwich contains 
the equivalent of three servings of bread—and you haven ’ t put anything 
on it yet . Grab the foot-long , and you ’ ll be eating six servings . That ’ s all 
the carbohydrates you need for the entire day . 
Or what about ordering a delicious bowl of spaghetti Bolognese at your 
favorite Italian restaurant ? A normal serving of pasta is ½ cup of dry pasta , 
cooked . The serving size you ’ re likely to get , on the other hand , will likely 
be closer to 4 cups of pasta , plus the sauce and toppings . 
Yes , that ’ s right . An entrée size of spaghetti Bolognese is the equivalent 
of eight servings ! Even if you only eat half and take the rest home for 
another meal , you still will have eaten four servings at once . Add in the 
restaurant bread , a few bites of your daughter ’ s cheesecake , and a glass or 
two of wine , and you ’ ve ingested enough carbs to last you for days ! 
Restaurants are a particular problem when it comes to serving sizes . 
Even the plates , glassware , and utensils have grown . Appetizer plates 
are the same size that dinner plates used to be , and dinner plates are 
practically platters . And restaurants that don ’ t supersize their servings 
to keep up with their competition are restaurants that soon go out of 
business . But everywhere food is sold—grocery stores , bakeries , delis , 
specialty stores , and especially fast-food chains—portions are ballooning . 
The one-size-only 7-Eleven soda grew into a Big Gulp and then a Super 
Big Gulp . Remember when a muffin was roughly the size of a cupcake , or 
a bagel was a scant 3 ounces ? Not anymore ! The muffin contains enough 
calories , fat , and carbs for two entire meals , and the bagel can practically 
78 The MD Factor Diet
be used as a paperweight . Yet researchers find we ’ re still eating the 
whole thing , without comprehending the alarming increase in our daily 
caloric intake . 
But perhaps the most important consequence of all this commercial 
supersizing is what it ’ s done to our perception of appropriate portions . 
As we get used to seeing those big portions when we eat out , we tend to 
re-create them in our home kitchens , so that even when we do our own 
cooking , we again serve ourselves more than we need . We ’ ve become a 
supersized nation , and we eat way more carbs than we think . My patients 
are often shocked to see their carbohydrate intake once they start to 
monitor and record it . 
Supersize portions wouldn ’ t be such an issue if we were better at 
walking away . An old adage about fitness says that the most important 
exercise to do is “ push backs ” —as in push back from the table when 
you ’ ve had enough . But many Americans were raised to feel guilty if we 
left food on our plates . Add that programming to a giant dish of pasta , 
and suddenly you ’ re stuffed ! 
The truth is , no matter how we were raised or whether we ’ re slim 
or overweight , if more food is put in front of us , we ’ ll eat more , period . 
Usually we ’ re not even aware of this fact—but researchers have proven 
it in countless studies . During one test , people who unknowingly ate 
from soup bowls that were surreptitiously being refilled from under the 
table ate 73 percent more soup than those who were given one normal 
serving .  “ How can I be full ?  ” the testers wondered .  “ I have half a bowl of 
soup left !  ” We judge how much we have eaten or how full we are by the 
amount of food that ’ s left on our plate or in the serving container . We will 
eat much more out of a larger box or bag or plate . 
As the key to carbs and weight loss is to shrink your portions , what 
can you do to retrain your brain to accept a smaller size portion of food 
as the new normal ? 
What can you do to retrain 
your brain to accept a smaller 
size portion of food as the 
new normal ? 
Chapter 5 | The Carbohydrates You Need 79
When You ’ re Eating Out
•	 Order two appetizers instead
of an appetizer and an entrée . 
•	 Use a salad fork instead of a
dinner fork . 
•	 Ask for the bread basket to
be taken away . It ’ s too easy
to overeat bread if it ’ s just
sitting there . 
•	 Eat half of what ’ s on your
plate , and ask your server to
pack the rest up for you to
take home . 
•	 Eat slowly and chew your
food well . 
•	 Drink a lot of water . 
It helps fill you up . 
When You ’ re at Home
•	 Use smaller plates . 
•	 Serve beverage with calories , such as juice or milk , out of a tall thin
glass . We perceive liquids in this shape of vessel as larger than they
really are . 
•	 Serve beverages without any calories , such as water or unsweetened
iced tea , out of a short , stout glass . We perceive liquids in this shape
of vessel as less than they really are . So many people find it hard
to get all the water they need—this trick can help you drink the 64
ounces ( at least ) of water you need every day . 
•	 Use smaller glasses , cups , and serving utensils , too . Swap that dinner
fork for a salad fork , and use a slender iced teaspoon instead of a
teaspoon or tablespoon . 
•	 Fill the plates from the stove and bring them to the table . Repeated
studies have shown that if the food is within arm ’ s reach , we ’ ll eat it . 
But if we ’ ve got to get up for seconds , we ’ re less likely to do so . 
•	 Eat slowly and chew your food well . There ’ s a lag between when your
stomach is full and when your brain receives the signal that you ’ re
full . If you eat more slowly , you give your brain a chance to catch up
with your stomach . 
•	 Don ’ t allow use of electronic devices during family dinners . This
means you ’ ll have to talk to each other—and it ’ s really hard to eat
a lot when you ’ re engrossed in conversation . Plus , it sets a great
example for your family members . 
80 The MD Factor Diet
Your Carbohydrate Needs as You Age
Most people become less active with age , and their muscle mass
declines along with their energy levels . These changes are most
noticeable in those who are sedentary . Even very fit and active seniors
will inevitably lose some muscle mass due to age and declining
growth hormone levels—but those losses are much lower than those
seen in the sedentary population . 
Less muscle mass means there is simply less tissue that needs glucose . 
That ’ s why the older you get , the less you need to eat . So downsize
those portions . 
81
Fat is not your enemy ! Fats provide support for your cardiovascular , 
reproductive , immune , and nervous systems . Not only is fat an 
important nutrient in your diet—it ’ s essential . Severely restricting fat 
could be life threatening . 
In my two decades of working with weight loss , I ’ ve learned 
that the misperceptions about fat are even more stunning than the 
misperceptions about sugar . Part of the reason for this is that even 
scientists and nutritionists have gotten it wrong . Back in the 1980s 
and 1990s , low-fat and non-fat foods were all the rage . Cookies , 
doughnuts , and candies were reformulated to become fat free and 
marketed as practically bursting with healthful goodness . Foods that 
contained healthful fats , such as nuts or avocados , were written off as 
diet-busters . I look back at this madness and shake my head , because 
what was the fat in all those foods replaced with ? Sugar . And what 
does eating all that sugar do to you ? It triggers the MD Factor , of 
course ! 
CHAPTER 6
The Fat You Need 
82 The MD Factor Diet
Facts & Myths about Fat
Certain types of fat are ones that our bodies can ’ t manufacture . These 
are the essential fatty acids ( EFAs )  , and we need to eat them in our food . 
EFAs are used by your body to create every other type of fat you need . 
There are two types of EFAs : eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA ) and 
docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA )  . This is what EFAs do : 
•	 They are crucial for proper
growth in children , particularly
for nerve development and
the development of sensory
systems . 
•	 They allow your brain to
function . Your brain is actually
60 percent fat , primarily DHA . 
Without fat , you literally can ’ t
think ! 
•	 They help increase circulation
and reduce blood pressure . 
•	 EFAs not only slow the
production of cholesterol but
also improve the delicate ratio of
HDL to LDL cholesterol , as well
as reducing the “ stickiness ” of
platelets in your bloodstream , 
which is essential to reducing the
risk of heart disease and stroke . 
Thinking that all fats will give you
high cholesterol levels is one of
the biggestfat myths out there ! 
•	 EFAs act as a carrier of vitamins
in your bloodstream . Without
it , the critically important
vitamins A , D , E , and K can ’ t be
transported properly . 
•	 Good fats protect cells against
invading toxins , bacteria , viruses , 
and allergens , which may help
reduce allergies and inhibit the
growth of malignant cancer cells . 
•	 EFAs have an important role
in your body ’ s biochemistry . 
You need them to produce
prostaglandins , hormone-like
substances that control every cell
of your body on a second-bysecond basis . ­Consequently , 
they ’ re essentialto body ­functions
such as heartrate , blood pressure , 
blood clotting , fertility , energy
production , ­oxygen ­consumption , 
and ­maintaining a proper
metabolic rate . 
•	 They elevate energy levels , 
creating stamina and decreasing
recovery time from fatigue . 
•	 EFAs also play a huge role in
immune function , the process
by which your body regulates
inflammation and fights
infection . 
•	 EFAs form a structural part of
all cell membranes . This means
they help regulate the traffic
of substances into and out of
your cells , ensuring that cells
can obtain optimal levels of
nutrients and expel harmful
waste products . This also plays
a role in the MD Factor , as cell
membranes are where your
insulin receptors are located . 
It ’ s vitally important to have
healthy cell membranes in
order to help reverse insulin
resistance . 
Chapter 6 | The Fat You Need 83
Why Do We Have Body Fat ? 
One of the most important roles of body fat is insulation and protection . 
Body fat insulates us from cold temperatures . Internally , fat provides a 
cushion for our vital organs , protecting them from trauma and keeping 
them from being jolted around . This is why even those who appear 
slender usually have at least 10 percent body fat . 
Another major role of body fat is the storage of energy from food 
for later use . A small amount is stored as carbohydrates ( in the form of 
glycogen ) in our liver and muscles , but the most significant source of 
stored energy is body fat . 
Body fat is perfectly designed for the job . It is compact , containing 
twice the energy of an equal amount of glycogen . And it doesn ’ t need 
water for storage , as glycogen does . But because our bodies are so 
remarkably efficient at storing fat , when you have the MD Factor , it ’ s all 
too easy to store fat . 
Why Is Enough Dietary Fat Helpful in 
Metabolism Correction ? 
Surprisingly enough , fat can also help you control your hunger . Fat takes 
a long time to digest , so we feel full longer . Fat does not require the 
release of insulin for digestion and does not trigger blood sugar swings 
unless the food containing fat also contains sugar . And fat often makes 
food taste better , which is why some dieters have a tough time cutting 
down on the amount of fat they eat . They can ’ t imagine a sandwich 
without mayo , corn on the cob without butter , a salad without a creamy 
dressing .  .  . or dessert without whipped cream on top ! 
Surprisingly enough , fat can 
also help you control your 
hunger . Fat takes a long time to 
digest , so we feel full longer . 
84 The MD Factor Diet
Some of the best sources of essential fatty acids are cold-water fish 
such as salmon , sardines , halibut , cod , tuna , striped bass , and herring . 
They are also found in oils of plant origin : walnut oil , flaxseed oil , olive 
oil , mango kernel oil , soybean oil , wheat germ oil , and canola oil . 
Good Fat vs . Bad Fat , or 
Unsaturated vs . Saturated
Not all fats are equal . Let ’ s see why . 
All fats are either saturated or unsaturated . The difference between 
them lies in their chemical structure , particularly the fatty acid chain of 
each molecule . This chain is made up of oxygen , carbon , and hydrogen 
atoms . When the spaces for hydrogen atoms are filled to capacity—
like the spaces for cars in a parking garage—the fatty acid is saturated . 
Unsaturated fats have a few parking spaces open , and this makes them 
more usable by your body . 
Saturated Fat
You can always tell a saturated fat , as it ’ s solid at room temperature . 
Saturated fats should be on your need-to-limit list . The qualities that 
make them saturated are the qualities that allow them to be deposited in 
our arteries , leading to diseases of the heart and blood vessels . They also 
tend to raise cholesterol levels in our blood . 
Meats and dairy products provide good-quality protein—but they also 
are responsible for the majority of saturated fat in the typical American 
diet . The protein choices listed in the MD Factor Action Plan are high in 
protein but also low in saturated fat . 
Foods High in 
Saturated Fats
•	 Bacon
•	 Beef
•	 Butter
•	 Cheese
•	 Cream
•	 Cream cheese
•	 Egg yolks
•	 Half and half
•	 Lamb
•	 Lard
•	 Milk ( whole ) 
•	 Pork
•	 Sour cream
•	 Veal
Chapter 6 | The Fat You Need 85
Two vegetable oils , palm oil and coconut oil , are highly saturated , but 
as they come from plants , they don ’ t have the same drawbacks as animalbased saturated fats . They ’ re medium-chain fatty acids , with a chemical 
structure that helps them maintain the integrity of your gastrointestinal 
tract ’ s lining . 
Unsaturated Fat
You can always tell an unsaturated fat , as it ’ s liquid at room temperature . 
It is much more heart-healthy than saturated fat ; some , such as olive oil , 
may even bring down blood cholesterol levels . 
In general , fats from vegetable sources , such as corn oil , cottonseed 
oil , soybean oil , safflower oil , and sesame oil , are less saturated than those 
from animals . But watch out—they are often found in processed or 
junk foods . 
Unsaturated fats can be either monounsaturated ( missing two 
hydrogen atoms ) or polyunsaturated ( missing more than two hydrogen 
atoms )  . Each affects your blood cholesterol differently . Monounsaturated 
fats are beneficial because they lower total blood cholesterol levels while 
increasing the “ good ” HDL cholesterol . And while some polyunsaturated 
fats contain beneficial EFAs and also reduce total cholesterol levels , 
some may have the additional unwanted effect of reducing “ good ” HDL 
cholesterol levels , too . 
For optimal health , get your vital EFAs from a mix of polyunsaturated 
and monounsaturated fats . These are the healthful oils made from nuts , 
seeds , and wild-caught cold-water fish . Be sure to look for minimally 
processed oils , such as cold-pressed oils . 
86 The MD Factor Diet
Unsaturated Fats Gone Bad : 
Trans Fats
Unsaturated fats become very unhealthful when they are converted into 
trans fatty acids , or trans fats . Although a small amount of trans fats are 
found naturally in foods such as meat , butter , and milk , most trans fat 
is formed when hydrogen is added to an oil to make it more solid—as 
is done in the manufacturing of shortening or margarine . This process , 
called hydrogenation , increases shelf life of these fats , which helps 
maintain the flavor and texture of processed foods . 
The chemical composition of hydrogenated trans fats provides a way 
of chemically providing the missing hydrogen atoms I mentioned earlier . 
But they ’ re added in a way that has negative effects on the body ’ s cells . 
As a result , trans fats are linked to many negative and potentially serious 
health conditions , including a higher risk for developing diabetes . Eating 
lots of partially hydrogenated vegetable fat can trigger the MD Factor . 
Trans fats also seem to suppress the levels of “ good ” HDL cholesterol , and 
they can elevate triglyceride blood levels as well . These are all markers for 
a higher risk of heart disease . 
Labels indicating the amount of trans fats in packaged foods became 
mandatory in 2006 . According to FDA regulations ,  “ If the serving 
contains less than 0 . 5 gram [ of trans fat ]  , the content shall be expressed 
as zero .  ” Talk about tricky packaging ! Manufacturers get around this by 
making the serving sizes small . If a food has 0 . 4 grams per serving and 
you eat four servings—not hard to do with junk food like potato chips , 
where a serving is only eight or nine chips ( and who eats so few ?  )  , or 
microwave popcorn—you ’ ve just unwittingly consumed 1 . 6 grams of 
trans fat , even though the package says there are zero grams of trans fat 
per serving ! 
Monounsaturated Fats
•	 Almonds
•	 Avocado
•	 Canola oil
•	 Cashews
•	 Olive oil
•	 Peanuts , natural peanut
butter , peanut oil
•	 Pecans
Polyunsaturated Fats
•	 Almonds
•	 Corn oil
•	 Cottonseed oil
•	 Flaxseed
•	 Safflower oil
•	 Sesame seeds
•	 Soybeans , soybean oil
•	 Sunflower seeds , sunflower
seed oil
•	 Walnuts , walnut oil
Chapter 6 | The Fat You Need 87
So if the label says zero trans fats , don ’ t believe it . If you see 
 “ hydrogenated oil ,  ”  “ partially hydrogenated oil ,  ” or “ shortening ” in the 
ingredients list , those are trans fats and you ’ ve been duped ! Your only 
recourse is to read labels carefully . 
You can ’ t do that when you eat out , of course . When you cook at home , 
you are in complete control of the kind of fat you use , but unless you ’ re 
in a restaurant ’ s kitchen while they ’ re making your food , there ’ s no way 
to be sure you are getting food prepared with healthful olive oil instead 
of unhealthful margarine or shortening . The most common source of 
dangerous trans fats is fried food . 
A small order of french fries can 
deliver anywhere from 4 to 7 grams 
of trans fat straight to your arteries . 
Even if these restaurants use liquid 
oil for frying , the potatoes are 
often pre-fried in hydrogenated 
fats before shipping . 
The FDA and the Surgeon 
General recommend that you 
eliminate all trans fats from your 
diet , and I agree . Many food 
manufacturers have replaced trans 
fats with saturated fats , but that ’ s 
still an extremely unhealthful 
choice with little nutritional 
improvement . Too much fat adds 
too many calories to your day , and 
too much trans fat adds all sorts 
of potential health problems to 
your body . 
Food Sources of Trans Fats
•	 Baked goods , packaged 
( cakes , cookies , crackers , 
muffins , pie crusts ) 
•	 Bread ( hamburger and hot
dog buns ) 
•	 Breakfast cereals , sweetened
•	 Candy bars
•	 Chips ( potato , corn , tortilla ) 
•	 Dough , packaged 
( bake-it-yourself rolls , 
pizza dough ) 
•	 Fried foods ( doughnuts , 
french fries , fried chicken
including chicken nuggets , 
hard taco shells ) 
•	 Frosting , canned
•	 Margarine 
( stick and some tubs ) 
•	 Mayonnaise
•	 Pasta with sauce , packaged 
( macaroni and cheese , 
rice dishes , side dishes , 
canned pasta ) 
•	 Popcorn , microwave
•	 Pre-mixed baking products 
( cake mix , pancake mix ) 
•	 Pre-mixed drink mixes 
( hot chocolate , flavored drink
mixes added to milk ) 
•	 Vegetable shortening
88 The MD Factor Diet
How Much Fat Can You Have While on 
the MD Factor Action Plan ? 
Just as sugar is hidden in food , so is a lot of fat . You can ’ t see the fat in a 
glass of milk , in a piece of cheese , or in a brownie . You can see fat in meat 
( if it is possible to trim it off your steak or roast , please do so )  , although 
it ’ s harder to notice in ground beef . This can make it a bit tricky to know 
how much fat you ’ re really eating . Ideally , you want to eat the right 
amount to give your body what it needs to function , but not too much so 
that it increases your weight . 
Each gram of fat contains nine calories , whereas protein and 
carbohydrate only contain four calories . Since fat calories are so 
concentrated , they can very quickly add up . Nuts , for example , contain 
protein and healthful fats , but usually twice as much fat as protein . And it ’ s 
incredibly easy to overeat them when you ’ re trying to lose weight . 
Women should take in no more than 30–40 grams of fat per day .  ( This 
is about 25–30 percent of the calories on a 1 , 200-calorie diet .  ) Men should 
consume 40–60 grams per day . 
It ’ s always best to eat foods containing EFAs and monounsaturated 
fats . Limit your consumption of saturated fats , and stay far away from 
trans fats as much as possible . 
The easiest way to limit the amount of fat you eat is by primarily 
eating real foods and avoiding processed foods . If you do need to rely on 
processed , packaged foods for convenience reasons , you have to become 
an expert label reader . Look at the Nutrition Facts label and read the 
ingredients list . Keep in mind that the front of the box or package can be 
deliberately misleading as a marketing ploy . 
Remember , you need to eat the right amount of protein , but to lose 
weight , calories still matter . And higher-fat foods have more calories . 
Your Fat Needs 
as You Age
You still need to ensure you
are meeting your essential
requirements for fat as you
grow older . However , as you
age , you also need to ensure
that you are not eating more
calories than your current
activity level allows . If you are
eating the protein you need , 
you will take in fat , as protein
foods from both animal and
plant sources ( meat , fish , 
nuts ) contain fat . Research
shows that it is healthier—and
reduces the MD Factor—to
replace carbohydrate calories
with calories from healthful
fats and protein . 
89
CHAPTER 7
The Vitamins and 
Supplements You Need 
Some nutrients are more important than others when it comes 
to weight loss and correcting your MD Factor . I specifically test 
magnesium levels , vitamin D levels , and vitamin B12 levels in my 
patients who have the MD Factor . These three nutrients are extremely 
powerful in their ability to fix your metabolism , making them the 
most relevant to weight loss . They help you regulate your blood sugar 
and improve your MD Factor in various ways . 
90 The MD Factor Diet
Why We Need Supplements
A vitamin is a small , complex compound that allows certain chemical 
reactions in the body to take place . We need them to extract energy from 
foods and to build and repair our bodies , as well as to keep our cells 
healthy and protected . 
When I was in medical school , we were taught that if we ate a 
healthful diet , we wouldn ’ t need to take any vitamins or supplements . 
And in an ideal world , all of our nutrients would be provided to us in 
the food we eat . But that rarely happens , and you can still be surprisingly 
deficient even if you have an excellent diet . There are several reasons : 
•	 Modern industrial farming practices often don ’ t transfer important
minerals back into the soil , so the produce from that soil can be
deficient in minerals . 
•	 The tomato you buy in Boston may have been picked in California
up to a week or two earlier , and fruit that doesn ’ t fully ripen on the
vine contains far fewer nutrients than fruit that is picked ripe just
before you consume it . 
•	 Certain medical conditions and / or medications affect absorption . 
Many people take acid-blocking medications to help decrease
stomach acid and heartburn symptoms . These medications affect
the absorption of important nutrients , such as vitamin B12 and
magnesium . In addition , Metformin , used for the treatment of the
MD Factor as well as diabetes , can also impair the absorption of
vitamin B12 .  ( For more about metformin , see Appendix E .  ) 
•	 High stress levels increase the excretion of nutrients . 
•	 Intense athletic training can deplete nutrients . 
•	 And then there ’ s dieting ! 
Chapter 7 | The Vitamins and Supplements You Need 91
The truth is , it ’ s hard to get all the vitamins and minerals you need 
from your food alone , so it ’ s a good idea to take a basic , high-potency 
multivitamin-mineral supplement daily . 
Furthermore , I ’ ve learned during my years in practice that for 
those who are constantly dieting , vitamin levels can fluctuate—a lot ! 
This has convinced me that many people need more than just a daily 
multivitamin . 
The trouble is , there is so much conflicting information in the media 
about supplementation that my patients are very confused about what ’ s 
best for them . You practically need a nutrition degree to decipher it all ! 
The Best Daily Supplements 
for Weight Loss 
Adding quality nutrients , especially if you have one or more deficiencies , 
will help supercharge your MD Factor Action Plan . Not only will they 
work synergistically to lessen the MD Factor ’ s effects on your cells , but 
they also promote a healthy detoxification of your liver , which is essential 
for successful weight loss . This list contains everything that I recommend 
for most of my patients . 
You can still be surprisingly 
deficient even if you have an 
excellent diet . 
Vitamins and Minerals
•	 Vitamin D3
•	 Vitamin B12
•	 Magnesium
•	 Chromium
•	 Folic acid ( as methylfolate ) 
Other Supplements
•	 Alpha lipoic acid
•	 Cinnamon
•	 ECGC ( from green tea ) 
•	 N-acetylcysteine
•	 Omega-3 oil ( from fish oil ) 
Herbal Supplements
•	 Berberine
92 The MD Factor Diet
Vitamin D Can Reduce 
the MD Factor
You would be amazed at how many Americans are severely deficient in 
vitamin D . My office is located in Naples , Florida , yet even local patients 
who are exposed to sunshine year-round are seriously lacking in this 
vitamin , much to their shock ! 
Vitamin D allows calcium to be absorbed and placed into your bones . 
It also is responsible for proper mood state , because it influences how 
certain neurotransmitters , such as serotonin , are produced . Most cells in 
your body have receptors for vitamin D , and there is an overwhelming 
amount of research related to vitamin D ’ s ability to reduce inflammation 
and to increase immune response . 
But most important for my MD Factor patients , vitamin D can 
improve your sensitivity to insulin . Countless studies have shown that 
this one vitamin has major benefits when it comes to the MD Factor . 
People with higher blood levels of vitamin D are less likely to have 
diabetes . Other studies have shown that increasing vitamin D levels from 
a low range to a normal range greatly improves insulin sensitivity by up 
to 60 percent . Improving insulin sensitivity is exactly what this book is all 
about . When you do that , you defeat the MD Factor . 
You would be amazed at how 
many Americans are severely 
deficient in Vitamin D . 
Chapter 7 | The Vitamins and Supplements You Need 93
Without enough vitamin D , you can have serious health issues , as this 
deficiency can lead to any or all of the following : 
•	 Autoimmune diseases
•	 Breast cancer
•	 Chronic pain
•	 Colon cancer
•	 Coronary artery disease
•	 Depression
•	 Diabetes
•	 Gum disease
•	 Heart attack
•	 Hypertension 
( high blood pressure ) 
•	 Osteoarthritis
•	 Osteoporosis
•	 Prostate cancer
•	 Stroke
Correcting a vitamin D deficiency is vitally important if you have 
the MD Factor . 
VITAMIN D For most adults , the recommended dose of vitamin D is
a highly contentious issue . While we know how harmful a vitamin
D deficiency is , doctors and nutritionists are not sure what an ideal
level should be . You should discuss your options with your physician . I
think it ’ s best to take around 2 , 000 IU per day , and make sure it ’ s D3 , 
not D2 . Your body should be able to get what it needs , and you won ’ t
be taking enough to have any type of overdose .  ( Note that you can ’ t
overdose on vitamin D through sun exposure , as after your body has
made what it needs , additional sun exposure breaks down any excess
of the vitamin .  ) If you ’ re taking a supplement , it ’ s a really good idea to
get your vitamin D level checked , to ensure that your level is not too
high , which can affect your blood calcium levels . 
94 The MD Factor Diet
Reasons for Vitamin D Deficiencies
One of the primary reasons for vitamin D deficiency is related to its 
ability to dissolve in fat . Because this vitamin is stored in fat tissue , 
the more weight people gain , the more their fat holds on to vitamin 
D , leaving less available for use in the bloodstream . This is especially 
pertinent for anyone who is seriously overweight ( meaning their body fat 
is 30 percent above a normal weight for their height ) and who does little 
outside activity exposing them to the sun . 
Sunscreen can also reduce your body ’ s production of vitamin D . While 
it ’ s important to protect the skin from the sun ’ s two types of ultraviolet 
rays , UVA ( which can cause skin damage and 
photoaging ) and UVB ( which causes sunburn and 
skin cancer )  , UVB is needed to produce vitamin D . 
Light-skinned individuals need only fifteen to 
twenty minutes of exposure to the sun each day ( and 
only a portion of the skin needs to be exposed , too , 
not the whole body ) to synthesize adequate amounts 
of vitamin D , about the equivalent of 10 , 000 IU . For 
those of us who have darker skin , we need about an 
hour of exposure . And the skin of older people can 
synthesize only 25 percent as much vitamin D as 
the skin of someone decades younger . 
Other factors that may contribute to vitamin D 
deficiencies include diet ( if you are lactose intolerant 
or a vegan , you will normally eat fewer foods 
fortified with vitamin D , such as dairy products ) 
and malabsorption illnesses ( if you have Crohn ’ s 
disease or cystic fibrosis , you will be at a greater risk 
of deficiency )  . 
Vitamin D2 or Vitamin D3 ? 
There are two forms of vitamin D available in
supplements : D2 and D3 . D2 is the inactive , 
inefficient form , synthesized from plants , and
is most commonly used in prescriptions for vitamin
D as well as in foods that can then claim to be 
 “ fortified with vitamin D .  ” Vitamin D3 is the active
form and typically is sourced from animal foods
such as cold-water fish or eggs ; this is the form your
body can more easily use . 
I often use much higher doses of pharmaceuticalgrade vitamin D3 to correct deficiencies—never D2 , 
as I ’ ve found that it doesn ’ t bring levels back up . If
you are prescribed a high dose , your blood levels
must be monitored to ensure your level is optimal
and not too high . Ask your physician to do a 25-OH
vitamin D test , and discuss your options . 
Chapter 7 | The Vitamins and Supplements You Need 95
Vitamin B12 Will Increase Your Energy 
& Your Metabolism
Vitamin B12 is required for energy production ; without enough , 
your metabolism can plummet . This explains why adequate vitamin 
B12 levels are crucial when you ’ re trying to lose weight . But because 
many medications impair its absorption—this includes acid blockers 
such as Prilosec , Prevacid , and other proton pump inhibitors , as well 
as metformin , which is used to treat diabetes , pre-diabetes , and the 
MD Factor—vitamin B12 deficiency is something I frequently diagnose 
in my practice . It ’ s especially prevalent in vegans , as they aren ’ t eating 
any animal sources of B12 . Just getting older also affects the absorption 
of B12 . Symptoms include fatigue , depression , a sore tongue and lips , and 
numbness and tingling in the hands and feet . 
Sometimes a vitamin pill with a higher dosage of B12 is all that ’ s 
needed to fix the deficiency , but that won ’ t work if your body has 
trouble absorbing the vitamin . If so , a sublingual tablet or drops gets 
the B12 vitamin directly into circulation via the blood vessels beneath 
your tongue . If this is still not enough , 1 , 000 mcg of B12 can be injected 
monthly . 
I always check the B12 level of all of my patients who are struggling 
with weight issues and monitor these levels over time to ensure they 
return to normal . Ask your doctor to check your own levels , especially if 
you have any of the symptoms mentioned . 
VITAMIN B12 The dose of
vitamin B12 suggested by the
FDA is 6 mcg daily . It ’ s best for
adults over the age of fifty to
obtain most of their vitamin
B12 from vitamin supplements
or fortified foods . However , I
recommend 500 mcg per day
to my patients , if not more . The
sublingual tablets are usually
1 , 000 mcg and injections are
1 , 000 mcg monthly . B12 is a
safe supplement to take , and
it is water soluble , so it does
not build up in your system
the same way a fat-soluble
vitamin such as vitamin D can . 
However , I would recommend
caution with taking these
higher doses of B12 if you
have kidney disease .  ( If you
have kidney disease , any
supplement you take must
be approved by your personal
physician .  ) 
96 The MD Factor Diet
Magnesium
Magnesium is needed to ensure the efficiency of more than three 
hundred enzymatic processes in your body . It ’ s necessary for proper 
blood flow , electrolyte balance , contracting and relaxing muscles , and 
proper glucose metabolism . For those with the MD Factor , it can help 
correct blood sugar regulation . 
Many foods today contain less magnesium than 
they did fifty years ago because of the changes 
in farming methodologies . As a result , many of 
my patients are deficient , especially those with 
poorly controlled diabetes . This is especially true 
for those who have chronic constipation , muscle 
tightness or spasms , high blood pressure , and 
environmental allergies . 
Magnesium comes in many forms , and it ’ s 
important to take the right kind . Many tablet 
multivitamins contain magnesium oxide , which 
is not very well absorbed . In addition , taking too 
much magnesium by mouth can cause diarrhea ; 
magnesium citrate is the most likely culprit , which 
is why it ’ s often used as a laxative . Magnesium 
glycinate or magnesium taurate are a bit gentler 
on your system . 
MAGNESIUM Recommended Daily Dose : 
120–320 mg of magnesium glycinate .  ( I may use
higher levels for specific medical conditions or
if someone is very deficient .  ) 
Keep Your Liver Healthy
We are continuously exposed to fat-soluble chemicals , 
preservatives , and pesticides—often without our
knowledge . Whatever the source , your body treats them
as toxins , and as a result they ’ re typically stored in your
fat tissues so your vital organs are protected from their
effects . But when you lose weight and metabolize fat
tissue , those toxins are released into your bloodstream . 
Your liver is the organ responsible for cleaning up
your bloodstream and detoxifying your body . A good
multivitamin , along with a few other key supplements , 
will give your liver additional support . That way , your
busy liver can spend less time struggling to process
toxins and more time metabolizing fat instead ! 
The best supplements for liver support contain
artichoke extract , broccoli concentrate , curcumin , 
methionine , methylfolate , silymarin , taurine , alpha
lipoic acid , n-acetylosteine , and B12 . You can find them
at your local health foods stores typically , but ensure
that you discuss any new supplement regimen with
your physician and your pharmacist first . 
Chapter 7 | The Vitamins and Supplements You Need 97
CROMIUM Recommended
Daily Dose : 100–400 mcg
Chromium
Chromium is an essential mineral that is important in carbohydrate 
metabolism , particularly blood sugar control mechanisms and stability . 
It helps cells become more sensitive to insulin . It may also help lower 
cholesterol levels . 
Wheat is the primary source of chromium for most Americans . But 
because 40–70 percent of chromium is lost when whole-wheat flour is 
refined into white flour , deficiencies are not uncommon . In addition , 
a diet high in refined sugars can cause you to excrete more chromium 
through your urine . 
Folic Acid ( Folate ) 
Folate , or folic acid , helps increase your energy levels , as well as helps 
with the metabolism of your cells . The most well-known form of folate 
is folic acid , which was added to our food supply when researchers 
discovered that neural tube birth defects were drastically reduced once 
pregnant women received added folic acid through supplements and 
through fortifying the food supply with folic acid . 
Some studies have shown that folate supplementation is associated 
with a lowered cancer risk—but others show that taking more than 800 
mcg of folic acid daily is linked to an increased risk of certain cancers , 
like colon cancer . Although the cancer link is still uncertain , it is known 
that up to 60 percent of Americans have genetic variations that prevent 
folic acid from being metabolized into its active form , called methylfolate . 
Perhaps the incomplete metabolism of synthetic folic acid is what causes 
potentially adverse effects . 
FOLIC ACID ( FOLATE ) 
Recommended Daily Dose : 
400–800 mcg sourced from
methylfolate ( 5-methyltetrahydrofolate ) 
98 The MD Factor Diet
Methylfolate is the best folate for weight loss . It is easy to metabolize , 
and because it is water-soluble , it is unlikely to cause any toxicity . 
Alpha Lipoic Acid
All of your cells have a boundary membrane to keep what ’ s inside the 
cell separate from what ’ s outside it . Alpha lipoic acid helps maintain the 
proper shape and function of this membrane , and this in turn helps your 
cells use the glucose they need more efficiently—important to control the 
MD Factor . 
Alpha lipoic acid is also extremely helpful for repairing damaged 
and aged cell membranes , promoting healthy vascular and blood vessel 
function , and protecting nerve cells from damage . 
It ’ s best to take alpha lipoic acid as a vegetarian capsule , without any 
added fillers or binders . 
Cinnamon
Several studies have shown that adding as little as ½ teaspoon of 
cinnamon to your diet daily can improve the MD Factor . In addition to 
improving your body ’ s blood sugar response , cinnamon can also lower 
your triglycerides , blood pressure , and LDL cholesterol . 
ALPHA LIPOIC ACID 
Recommended Daily Dose : 
100–300 mg ( higher if you
are diabetic ; discuss with your
physician ) 
CINNAMON Recommended
Daily Dose : teaspoon , in food
or as 100 mg capsule
Chapter 7 | The Vitamins and Supplements You Need 99
EGCG
The word “ antioxidant ” is used a lot in healthcare and skin care , but many 
people don ’ t know what it actually is . An antioxidant is a scavenger of 
damaging free radicals . A free radical is a molecule with an imbalance of 
electrons . Free radicals can wreak havoc on your cell membranes , causing 
the damaged cells to age prematurely , and on your DNA , possibly leading 
to cancer . 
Epigallocatechin gallate ( EGCG ) is a powerhouse antioxidant . Not 
only does it stop free radicals from forming , but it helps protect your 
DNA . Powerful enough to reduce inflammation in the walls of blood 
vessels by preventing the buildup of plaque , EGCG also blocks blood 
vessel cells from dividing into tumor cells . 
One of the best sources of EGCG is green tea . Green tea is a 
superfood that ’ s particularly loaded with catechins , plant metabolites 
with antioxidant capabilities—and EGCG is what you could call a 
supercatechin ! 
The antioxidant activity of green tea is twenty-five to one hundred 
times more potent than vitamin C and vitamin E . 
EGCG Recommended Daily
Dose : At least 10–50 mg of
mixed catechins , normally
found in 2 cups of green tea . 
Supercharge it with lemon or
other citrus juice , as the acid
helps the catechins survive
your digestive tract much
more successfully . If you
don ’ t like the taste of green
tea , take a supplement containing green tea extracted
from the leaf . Make sure to get
no less than 100 mg , which
provides approximately 23 mg
of EGCG . 
•	 A cup of green tea provides around 10–40 mg of polyphenols ( plant antioxidants ) and has
antioxidant activity greater than a serving of broccoli , spinach , carrots , or strawberries . 
•	 The EGCG in green tea improves your cardiovascular health by lowering LDL or “ bad ” 
cholesterol and can begin to lower your blood pressure after only three weeks of use . 
•	 It can break down fat tissue and promote weight loss by helping to control and regulate
insulin production . This is especially important if you have the MD Factor . In one study , 
those taking green tea supplements saw their waistlines and their fasting blood sugar
levels decrease , and they lost an average of thirty pounds , while those taking a placebo
only lost an average of eleven . That ’ s a big difference . 
100 The MD Factor Diet
N-Acetylcysteine
N-acetylcysteine ( NAC ) is a potent amino acid that functions as an 
antioxidant and free radical scavenger . This is extremely important , 
because fat tissue sends out inflammatory chemicals . This inflammation 
causes all kinds of problems , and the one most people tend to notice is 
belly bloat . 
NAC has many other health benefits . It can improve symptoms of 
polycystic ovarian syndrome ; helps remove toxic heavy metals such as 
mercury and lead from your body ; enhances nail growth and makes 
nails less brittle ; keeps the membranes of the respiratory system moist , 
which lessens irritation from dry air , dust , and pollutants ; and helps 
your immune system to do its job properly in your respiratory tract . In 
addition , your body uses NAC to create glutathione , your body ’ s most 
prevalent and important molecule for detoxification . Glutathione forms 
a complex with substances such as pesticides and pollutants to stabilize 
them and remove them from your body . 
Omega-3s 
There are several omega-3 fatty acids . One is ALA , or alpha linolenic acid , 
and it ’ s a component of plant foods such as walnuts and chia seeds . Since 
our body cannot produce omega-3 fatty acids , we have to consume them . 
Another important omega-3 fatty acid is gamma linolenic acid , or GLA , 
which is found in foods such as avocados , evening primrose oil , and 
sunflower seeds . Both ALA and GLA have powerful anti-inflammatory 
properties and can be helpful for repairing the cellular damage that 
occurs with the MD Factor . 
N-ACETYLCYSTEINE : 
Recommended Daily Dose
600–1 , 200 mg
OMEGA-3S : Recommended
Daily Dose 1 , 000–2 , 000 mg of
a combination of DHA and EPA . 
Chapter 7 | The Vitamins and Supplements You Need 101
Fish consume these same types of omega-3s and convert them a step 
further into more bioavailable forms called EPA and DHA . Consuming 
these healthful fats on a regular basis can reduce inflammation and 
blood clots and lower your triglyceride levels . They also help regulate 
vasodilation as well as vasoconstriction ( the expansion and contraction 
of your blood vessels )  . All of these things together reduce your risk 
of developing heart disease . Taking an omega-3 supplement of EPA 
and DHA can also lower blood pressure , lower triglyceride levels , and 
decrease the risk of sudden death from arrhythmia ( irregular heart 
beat ) in people with heart disease , which is why the American Heart 
Association recommends that adults with those conditions take omega-3 
supplements daily . 
Eating fish is a good way to get omega-3s , but farm-raised fish such as 
salmon have lower levels than wild-caught fish . And many people don ’ t 
like fish or avoid it due to concerns about mercury or ocean pollutants 
such as PCBs . 
It ’ s important to choose a top-quality fish oil . Make sure the label 
states clearly that the oil has been tested for purity , guaranteeing that 
it ’ s free of PCBs , dioxins , and mercury . A good test for fish oil quality is 
to break the capsule open . If it smells fishy , it is probably rancid , so you 
should replace it . It ’ s best to store fish oil in the refrigerator and only buy 
a one-to-two-month supply at a time . Check the expiration dates as well . 
102 The MD Factor Diet
Berberine as a Boost
Sometimes my patients follow the MD Factor Action Plan , take their 
supplements , and exercise regularly , but their MD Factor is stubborn 
and just doesn ’ t want to let go . When that happens , I often recommend 
berberine , an herbal insulin sensitizer that is widely used in China in the 
treatment of type 2 diabetes . 
What Kind of Vitamin or Mineral Capsule Is Best ? 
I prefer vitamins and minerals in vegetarian capsules . This dissolves 
quickly and readily , allowing the supplements to be more readily 
absorbed by your body . Tablets normally have a coating that makes it 
a little harder for your body to digest , and many of them contain fillers 
and binders , which are needed to hold the tablet together or to stabilize 
the ingredients . These fillers and binders provide no health benefits , and 
some people have sensitivities to them . 
A Note of Caution
The recommendations in this chapter are prescribed to my patients while 
under my care . Always consult your physician before beginning any type 
of vitamin or supplement . 
BERBERINE : Recommended
Daily Dose 350–500 mg per
capsule and slowly increase up
to three times a day 
103
What was that ?  ” I can hear you say .  “ I don ’ t need to exercise 
to lose weight ?  ” This may be hard to believe , but if you 
are currently not exercising regularly , don ’ t start—yet . The reason 
is simple : research shows that changing your diet is much more 
important than changing your exercise level when you want to lose 
weight . Or , to put it in the terms I ’ ve been using , changing your diet 
to have it work with your metabolism is much more important than 
changing your exercise . 
Think about it . You ’ ve read in the preceding chapters about how 
your metabolism falls if you don ’ t eat adequate protein throughout 
the day , and how if you have the MD Factor and eat too many 
carbohydrates , your body stores as fat all the glucose your body can ’ t 
use right away . This fat-storing metabolism needs to change—and this 
is the most important objective . 
CHAPTER 8
The Exercise 
You Don ’ t Need—Yet 
104 The MD Factor Diet
When you want to lose weight , the typical thinking is that you must 
eat fewer calories . If you eat enough protein to spare your muscles and eat 
less calories overall , you will lose fat . As you know already , some of my 
patients have to eat more protein and sometimes even more calories than 
they have been eating , and only then are they able to lose weight . 
But what about exercise ? Doesn ’ t exercise burn calories ? 
Of course it does , and exercise is great for overall health and to 
strengthen your cardiovascular system and muscles . Many of my patients 
are highly motivated to lose weight , and they want to start the dietary 
program and get going in the gym or with a trainer . When I test them 
and find they do have the MD Factor , however , I ask them to hold off on 
the exercise at first and focus their energy on the meal plan to defeat the 
MD Factor . 
Because the MD Factor Action Plan requires a change in eating habits 
and a bit more planning than most people are used to , I want everyone to 
concentrate on getting their meal plans correct first . Usually after about 
three weeks on the MD Factor Action Plan , everything clicks , and the 
new way of eating has become a fabulous new habit . Other patients need 
a slightly longer adjustment time ; their lives are complicated and they 
need a little more time to work out the meal planning , snack planning , 
and food preparation . And some patients who are very overweight need 
to lose at least twenty or thirty pounds before they can resolve some of 
the physical issues that make exercise difficult for them . 
I have patients in wheelchairs or with injuries and health conditions 
that preclude them from exercising , and they still are able to lose 
weight simply by following the MD Factor Action Plan and taking the 
supplements you read about in the previous chapter . In fact , you don ’ t 
need to start exercising when you start your MD Factor Action Plan , and 
you will still lose weight as the result of your much-improved diet . 
Chapter 8 | The Exercise You Don ’ t Need—Yet 105
So , in contrast to what you ’ ve doubtless heard umpteen times—that 
you should start exercising when you want to lose weight—I want you to 
wait . Focusing on your diet first is more important . 
For example , if you described yourself to me as a couch potato , and 
then you start to walk for half an hour every other day , that will become a 
pretty big time commitment . You may burn 200–300 calories , but if you 
aren ’ t yet confident about and accustomed to your new meal planning 
and snacks , you could return home hungry and tired , and reach for a 
glass of orange juice and a few crackers . If so , you ’ ll be ingesting more 
calories ( of pure sugar !  ) than you just burned . That is not the kind of 
exercise routine that will bring you the results you seek . 
If , on the other hand , you exercise regularly already , don ’ t stop ! You ’ ve 
already found a way to incorporate regular exercise into your daily life , 
so the only added adjustment for you is the meal plan . You ’ ll soon find 
that your new way of eating will give you more energy so you can exercise 
stronger and harder . If so , you can push yourself a little further , but don ’ t 
make any big changes to your exercise plan yet . Adjust gradually to avoid 
injury and overdoing it . 
Does That Mean You Never 
Need to Exercise ? 
Sorry ! You will lose weight faster when you add exercise to your 
total MD Factor Action Plan . Just make sure you have the meal plan 
down first . 
There ’ s a stronger correlation between additional weight loss and 
regular exercise in men , more so than for women . Many of my male 
patients have told me that their weight management strategy has always 
been to go back to the gym when their belts started getting a little tight . 
Focusing on your diet first is 
more important . 
106 The MD Factor Diet
But even they found that once they develop the MD Factor , extra time in 
the gym isn ’ t enough to shift the weight as easily as before . 
Women do lose weight from increasing their exercise , though it may 
not be as significant as what men experience . But it ’ s still worth doing , 
because while exercise might not be necessary for initially losing weight , 
it is mandatory for keeping the weight off once you ’ ve lost it . 
We All Need to Move More
The technological marvels of modern society have made our lives 
so much easier in so many ways . You don ’ t have to get up to change 
the channel on the TV set—just hit a button on the remote . No more 
walking into the bank or the fast-food restaurant or the gas station—just 
order from the drive-up window or pay at the pump . No more push 
lawnmowers or vacuum cleaners—just plug it in and watch the mower 
self-propel or have a robotic device suck up the dust . No more washing 
the dishes by hand—load the dishwasher . Why , we don ’ t even have to wait 
a few more seconds to dial a telephone ( remember that ?  )  . 
For example , I drive my kids to school , as do most parents in my 
Florida community . Back when I was younger , my parents wouldn ’ t have 
dreamed of giving me a ride to school . I walked to all my schools , and 
in high school it was over a mile just to get to my bus stop . There was no 
choice given—I had to do it . My friends and classmates all had to do it . 
As a result , we burned calories and stayed strong without even thinking 
about it . 
Fast-forward a generation . We now need to think about how to go out 
of our way to incorporate regular exercise into our lives . It ’ s especially 
important to incorporate regular exercise into your new MD Factor
Action Plan lifestyle , because exercise is a very powerful tool for correcting 
the MD Factor and losing weight , and to keep it from coming back . 
While exercise might not be 
necessary for initially losing 
weight , it is mandatory for 
keeping the weight off once 
you ’ ve lost it . 
Chapter 8 | The Exercise You Don ’ t Need—Yet 107
The Best Exercise for You
Once you get going , you will be amazed at how much better you feel , how 
much energy you have , and how drastically your appetite can decline 
with regular exercise . Still , many people understand the benefits of 
exercise—but the reality of starting is something else entirely . 
Here are some tips for beginning your exercise routine : 
✔ Create a music playlist and make sure your headphones won ’ t fall 
out of your ears ( which can be very frustrating )  . For some people , 
this playlist might be soothing , with calming tunes to walk to so 
you can unwind after a busy day . This is hugely beneficial for stress 
relief and clearing your system of cortisol , the hormone released 
by your adrenal glands when you are stressed . For others , more 
energetic and invigorating music is motivating and empowering . 
There ’ s nothing like dance music to really get your mood up and 
help drive you to push yourself just a little bit harder . 
✔ Invite a friend along to go with you . Workout buddies are 
terrific , as you keep each other motivated . Be sure , however , to 
have a backup plan in case your workout buddy has to cancel . A 
good playlist of music you love can help replace the conversation 
you were planning to have . 
✔ Ignore everyone else . If you have a membership at the gym , 
make sure you really feel comfortable there . Ignore everyone else . 
The worst thing you can do when in a gym is compare yourself 
to others , leaving yourself feeling inadequate , uncoordinated , or 
frustrated . 
✔ Wear a pedometer all day . Try tracking how many steps you ’ ve 
taken . Write down the results to track your progress . Aim to 
increase your steps by two hundred each day . Ten thousand steps a 
Once you get going , you will 
be amazed at how much 
better you feel , how much 
energy you have , and how 
drastically your appetite 
can decline . 
108 The MD Factor Diet
day , which equates to five miles , can provide drastic improvements 
in your health . 
✔ Morning exercise tends to produce the best results for fat burn 
because you have been fasting while sleeping and your body is 
already breaking down fat to provide glucose to your body . This 
might help motivate you when the alarm goes off ! I have also 
found that exercising first thing allows you to get it done before all 
the other many responsibilities and commitments of your day get 
piled on . 
✔ Prepare the night before . If your workout time is first thing in 
the morning , set out your workout clothes and shoes before you go 
to sleep . As soon as you see them , change right away and get going 
rather than hitting the snooze button ! If your workout time is in the 
afternoon , change into your workout clothes right after work . You ’ ll 
be more likely to go if your tennis shoes are already on—and if you 
don ’ t change , you ’ re more likely to skip the workout . Grab a water 
bottle and do not make a detour to your home first . Once you arrive 
there , it ’ s too tempting to find other tasks to do that are seemingly 
more pressing than exercise . 
✔ Schedule your exercise . Treat it like a doctor ’ s appointment—in 
other words , one that you are not going to cancel without serious 
repercussions ! 
✔ Start with a small , doable amount of time . Even five minutes 
is much better than zero minutes . Increase your exercise time 
very slowly , too . For example , if you ’ re watching a one-hour TV 
show , do some exercising during the commercials . Without even 
realizing it , you ’ ll have done about twenty minutes ’ worth of 
workouts each hour . 
Chapter 8 | The Exercise You Don ’ t Need—Yet 109
✔ Record each time and for how long you exercise . Make a graph 
and post it somewhere visible in the house so you can see how 
much you are doing and how well you ’ re progressing . 
✔ Hire a pro . If you can afford it , I recommend hiring a personal 
trainer for at least a few sessions . Interview potential candidates 
first to be sure you ’ ll click with their personality and training 
style . A certified trainer will teach you the right way to exercise , 
which is especially important for anyone starting a weight training 
program .  ( Believe me , most people lifting weights in my local gym 
are using incorrect form ; not only is this ineffective training , but 
they ’ re putting themselves at risk for injuries )  . A good trainer will 
motivate you in the right way and keep you going through the 
entire length of your session . If finances are an issue , try hiring a 
trainer for a small group , as you ’ ll still get personalized attention . 
✔ Don ’ t overdo it . Don ’ t try to run a mile if you haven ’ t run one 
before , or if it ’ s been years since you did . Your muscles need to get 
strong first . If you overcommit , chances are high that you will either 
get hurt , get frustrated , or get angry that you ’ re not progressing the 
way you think you should . Setting much smaller goals and then 
achieving them will be much more satisfying and productive . 
The Best Forms of Exercise
The best type of exercise is the exercise that gets your heart beating with a 
smile on your face . In other words , the best type of exercise is the exercise 
that you really like and that you will keep on doing . 
110 The MD Factor Diet
My Own Exercise Routine
Exercise for me is not a chore or
something I have to get done . 
It ’ s my much-needed time for
me , and it ’ s important not only
for my health but for my family
members to see how vital it is for
me to do—so they ’ ll be regular
exercisers , too . 
I ’ ve always loved to exercise at
the end of the day as a way to
de-stress . It helped me get
through some rigorous years
in medical school where I had
to sit in over-air-conditioned
classrooms or lecture halls for up
to ten hours a day . Getting my
body moving helped me clear my
head , and it helped me get back
to my studies later in the evening . 
After I was a practicing physician
and my children were born , 
exercising in the evening
became impossible . I wanted to
spend time with my little ones , 
especially as I hadn ’ t seen them
all day . And there was dinner
to be made , baths to run , and
homework to check . If I took the
time to exercise in the evening , 
our entire family routine would
come crashing down ! 
I needed to transition to
exercising first thing in the
morning . While I don ’ t always
love getting up at 5 : 00 a . m .  , 
no one else in my family is up
then , and no one else needs me . 
I can do what I need to do for
myself , get my workout done
without any interruptions , and
start the day invigorated . My
routine includes a forty-fiveminute spinning class three
times a week at the YMCA with
great music and an equally
great group of supportive
people . In addition , I do a fortyfive-minute group personal
training class that focuses on
core strength , balance , and
functional training of all the
major muscle groups in short
one-minute intervals , two to
three times a week . This class
in particular is marvelously
supportive , and the joy I get
from being around my fellow
exercisers helps when some
days we are not fully awake
until fifteen minutes into it ! 
I ’ ve found that being consistent
with exercise and my own selfcare makes me a better mother , 
wife , doctor , boss , friend , and
daughter . Because I have so many
responsibilities , I know I can ’ t
handle them all effectively and
efficiently if I don ’ t make time to
take care of myself first . 
Chapter 8 | The Exercise You Don ’ t Need—Yet 111
There are countless ways to get your body moving . Exercise should 
be fun . If you ’ re not having fun , then find a sport or activity that you ’ re 
going to love . For some people this is solitary running ; for others , tennis 
or basketball or soccer provide not only exercise but also the camaraderie 
of playing with other teammates . Bike riding , roller skating , walking , 
jogging , or even throwing a Frisbee can be good ways to get outside and 
get moving . If you live in a metropolitan area , try taking a spinning class 
or a beginner yoga or Pilates class . Try martial arts or boxing , as hitting 
things is a fantastic way to thwack the stress out of your body ! Dance 
classes are extremely effective for strengthening your core muscles and 
making you feel good about learning a terrific new skill . 
Another type of exercise that might be enticing is interval training . 
This kind of workout puts large demands on your body for short periods 
of time . Not only isn ’ t there a huge time commitment , but any exercise 
that requires short bursts of intense energy can help you release natural 
human growth hormone , which helps build lean muscle tissue and speed 
up your metabolic rate . 
Don ’ t forget to add strength training to your regular cardiovascular 
exercise routine . It ’ s best to do a workout with weights at least twice a 
week . And regular weight training adds lean muscle mass , which helps 
raise your metabolism . This is especially good for women , as it helps keep 
bones and muscles strong . And because women have smaller amounts of 
muscle mass to begin with , adding lean muscle definitely helps lessen the 
MD Factor . 
So next time you ’ re exhausted , tell yourself that there ’ s no downside to 
exercise—aside from doing too much too fast , which could lead to getting 
hurt . Start slow , write it all down , gradually increase your workout time , 
and challenge yourself . Before you know it , your fatigue will be gone , 
you ’ ll be amazed at your toned muscles , and you ’ ll be feeling great . 
I ’ ve found that being 
consistent with exercise and 
my own self-care makes me 
a better mother , wife , doctor , 
boss , friend , and daughter . 
112 The MD Factor Diet
When to Eat When You ’ re 
Exercising Regularly
Doctors and trainers often disagree about the best time to eat when 
exercising . Some exercise specialists insist on exercising on an empty 
stomach in order to take advantage of the fact that your body has been 
breaking down fat for fuel , and then eating something afterward like a 
protein shake or a meal . Other research shows that drinking a protein 
shake before you exercise causes muscle-building amino acids to be 
delivered straight into your bloodstream , and fewer amino acids are lost 
in the process of protein turnover . 
While differences in the timing of eating and exercise may matter for 
serious athletes , I find it makes no clinical difference for my patients . 
I recommend having a light protein shake 
before weight training workouts if that is 
convenient . I don ’ t recommend having a large 
full meal before a workout , as blood flow 
that needs to go to your muscles for exercise 
gets diverted to your stomach when you ’ re 
digesting a lot of food . 
The composition of what you eat in the 
hours before and after exercise is what matters 
the most . You need to replace the amino 
acids broken down by exercise by eating 
enough protein in your meals . When you eat 
carbohydrates , you want the complex , slowly 
digested type such as vegetables , fruit , nuts , or 
small amounts of whole grains—exactly what 
you ’ ll find on the MD Factor Action Plan ! 
What to Do When You ’ re Just Too Tired to Move
If you are constantly tired—and way too tired to exercise—
guess what ? That ’ s the best time to exercise ! A mere ten
minutes more of exercise each day can replenish your
energy levels and beat the blahs better than a ten-minute
sprawl on the sofa , as tempting as that may be . 
Exercise gets your blood flowing . Even something as simple
as a leisurely stroll can boost your energy levels by about 20
percent . Light workouts fight fatigue even more , while also
boosting your mood and improving your stress load and
your health . Since exercise releases endorphins , the feelgood hormones , it makes you feel good , and it can improve
your memory , sex drive , and , best of all , help you reverse
the MD Factor . 
113
Drinking alcohol is part of our culture . Good or bad—and there 
are both pluses and minuses to drinking—alcohol consumption 
and the marketing of alcohol as a seductive , pleasurable pastime 
are not going anywhere . Just look to the failure of Prohibition at the 
beginning of the twentieth century for an example ! 
If you do drink , however , it ’ s very important to understand what 
alcohol does to your body , so you can make an informed decision 
about how much will give you potential health benefits and how 
too much can make you seriously ill and wreak havoc on your 
MD Factor . It ’ s very easy to get confused , what with all the seemingly 
contradictory reports that come out about drinking . Is moderate 
drinking good for you ? What ’ s moderate ? What is too much ? Does it 
increase your risk of cancer or help prevent the disease ? Likewise with 
heart disease . And what about the studies that have shown that men 
and women who drink moderately often weigh less than those who 
don ’ t drink at all ? 
CHAPTER 9
The Alcohol 
You Need to Watch
114 The MD Factor Diet
Drinking wine in moderation , particularly red wine , has been shown 
to decrease your risk of heart attacks . It can also lower your blood sugar . 
Having a drink can also be a pleasurable way to de-stress and unwind , 
or to savor a relaxing meal with friends . 
What Is Moderate 
Alcohol Consumption ? 
It ’ s very important to understand what moderate consumption really 
means , as it is a much lower level than many people assume . 
For men , a maximum of ten glasses of wine ( or the equivalent ) per week 
is considered a moderate alcohol intake . Men who have three drinks each 
day , seven days a week , are doubling the recommended amount . 
For women , five glasses of wine ( or the equivalent ) per week is 
considered a moderate alcohol intake . Women ’ s livers are much smaller 
than men ’ s , which makes it harder to detoxify higher alcohol levels . This 
is why women can get intoxicated more quickly if they have the same 
amount of alcohol as men . 
A standard drink is defined as : 
✔ 12 ounces of beer
✔ 5 ounces of wine
✔ 1 . 5 ounces of spirits ( vodka , whiskey , etc .  ) 
I ’ m sure you ’ ve already realized from looking at this list that many 
drinks you ’ re served in a social setting or at home contain much more 
than one serving . You can unwittingly be drinking more servings than 
you intended in one glass of wine , if the glass is large . 
Some of my female patients are absolutely shocked when I discuss this 
with them . They ’ re smart and savvy and are often brilliant at deciphering 
Chapter 9 | The Alcohol You Need to Watch 115
food labels and understanding fat and calorie content so they can buy 
the best food for their families . They ’ re pros at counting calories for food . 
When it comes to alcoholic beverages , however , they often falter , because 
they just don ’ t know how to count those types of calories . 
For example , if a woman has two glasses of wine every night , she ’ s 
drinking an average of fourteen drinks per week . That is almost three 
times the recommended moderate consumption level of five drinks . 
And those calories quickly add up . 
The Alcohol Calorie Count
Alcohol is not a nutrient . It ’ s a toxin . Whenever you drink alcohol , it first 
goes to your liver to be detoxified and is then processed as sugar . This is 
why drinking alcohol can make it so hard for you to lose weight . 
Each gram of alcohol contains seven calories ( remember , each gram of 
fat contains nine calories )  .  * Patients of mine who would never dream of 
eating cheesecake are shocked when I tell them that drinking two glasses 
of wine is the equivalent of eating a small piece of that dessert ! Your body 
doesn ’ t care if the calories are liquid or solid—they ’ re still calories . 
In other words , each serving of alcohol contains approximately the 
same calories as 10 grams of fat . That translates to about 100 calories for 
each serving . Add in the sugar from the grapes in wine , the mixers in 
your margarita , or the additives in beer , and if you have a large drink—or 
more than one—these calories very quickly add up . 
Part of the problem is that , in general , your stomach registers calories 
from food much more quickly than it registers calories from liquids . It ’ s 
easy to drink a lot of lemonade or soda or wine and not feel full at all , 
even if you ’ ve just put 800 calories into your body . When you do the 
math , those liquid calories really do count . 
Alcoholic 
Beverage Calories
4 oz . martini 275
12 oz . daiquiri 675
12 oz . margarita 750
5 oz . red wine 125
5 oz . white wine 120
10 oz . Long Island ice tea 580
12 oz . piña colada 655
12 oz . regular beer 145
12 oz . light beer 110
1½ oz . vodka with 
cranberry juice
150 
* A standard drink contains 14 grams of alcohol . 
116 The MD Factor Diet
Why Drinking Alcohol 
Makes It So Hard to Lose Weight
Having a few drinks isn ’ t just about ingesting additional calories you 
underestimated . Alcohol has many effects on your body : 
Toxicity
As I mentioned previously , your
body treats alcohol more like a
toxin than like a nourishing food . 
This explains why patients of
mine who were eating only about
1 , 000 calories each day—including
alcohol—still couldn ’ t lose weight . 
As you know , your liver is the organ
responsible for ridding your body
of toxins . It also needs to be able to
detoxify and breakdown fat tissue . 
Whenever you drink , your liver
makes the breakdown of the
alcohol a priority . As long as your
liver is busy detoxifying alcohol , 
it can ’ t focus on metabolizing fat
tissue as efficiently . 
MD Factor trigger
Many of my patients have told me
that having a drink or two helps
them fall asleep easily , but then
they often wake up after only a few
hours and can ’ t fall back asleep . 
They ’ re exhausted and out of sorts
the next day . This happens because
alcohol lowers blood sugar levels . 
When you have the MD Factor , you
see big surges in insulin after you
eat or drink , but then when your
cells finally do get the sugar they
need , your blood sugar levels drop
into relative hypoglycemia . Your
body perceives this as so stressful
and potentially life-threatening
that it wakes you up . Even if you
do fall back asleep , you ’ ll probably
wake up again an hour or two later
as this cycle repeats itself . 
Chapter
9 
| The Alcohol You Need to Watch 117
Lowered inhibitions
One of the reasons it ’ s enjoyable
to drink is that it ’ s relaxing and
often lowers inhibitions . This is fine
if you need to unwind , but not so
fine when you are in
a restaurant , 
where after the first drink that
bread basket suddenly looks
amazingly tempting—and after
the second or third , dessert doesn ’ t
sound so bad . Don ’ t forget the
coffee with cream and sugar . Skip
the wine or cocktails and it ’ s easier
to skip all of those dinnertime
extras . 
Hormonal effects I often joke with my ­perimenopausal
or menopausal patients that the
easiest way to trigger
a hot flash
is to have
a drink and then eat
some simple carbohydrates , like a bowl of pasta , white rice , or a
baked ­potato . Declining hormonal
levels already make blood sugar
regulation more difficult , and
having
a drink or two can become
the tipping point for hot flashes . 
Water retention 
and dehydration
Alcohol causes water retention , 
leaving you bloated and puffy and
feeling uncomfortable . In what
might seem like
a contradiction , 
alcohol can dehydrate you at the
same time . 
Serious medical issues
Excessive , chronic alcohol
consumption can lead to heart
disease , strokes , cancer ( particularly
breast , liver , pancreas , esophagus , 
and throat )  , cirrhosis of the liver , 
and dementia . Alcohol addiction
can kill you . 
Bottom line
You don ’ t need to stop drinking
if you enjoy it—and if you can
control the amount of alcohol you
consume rather than it controlling
you . When you ’ re trying to lose
weight , it ’ s
a good idea to limit
your servings to one to two drinks
per week for women and two to
four drinks per week for men . You
can use measuring cups when
you ’ re at home , and that will
give you
a good idea of the right
amount to drink in social settings . 
118 The MD Factor Diet
119
We ’ ve all heard the advice : to lose weight , choose diet soda , pick 
low-calorie foods , and go for low-carb drinks . Food marketers 
have responded to public demand and now cram artificial sweeteners 
in countless products , seemingly every bar , shake , cereal , or beverage 
on grocery shelves . It ’ s simple : artificial sweeteners reduce calories 
while maintaining a sweet taste , right ? With our nation ’ s epidemic of 
obesity , how could that be so bad ? 
CHAPTER 10
The Artificial Sugars
You Need to Watch
120 The MD Factor Diet
To Be—or Not to Be—
Artificially Sweet
Artificial sweeteners aren ’ t necessarily bad , although there have been 
contradictory studies about whether they can cause cancer or other 
problems in research studies using animals . The more immediate 
problem is that there ’ s no good answer about how artificial sweeteners 
affect your metabolism . 
For example , an analysis of health data from a large number of nurses 
followed for twenty-five years showed no weight gain for those who 
drank beverages with artificial sweeteners . Other small , short-term trials 
show that drinking diet sodas instead of sugar-sweetened beverages 
reduces weight gain or increases weight loss in controlled settings . 
Another study showed that normal-weight children who consumed 
artificially sweetened beverages had decreased weight gain compared to 
children who drank sugar-sweetened beverages . 
On the other hand , there have also been studies that show that people 
who use artificial sweeteners are more likely to be overweight and have 
many of the diseases caused by the MD Factor , like diabetes and heart 
disease . It was unclear from the studies if the artificial sweeteners 
caused the weight gain , or if people who are overweight to begin 
with use more products with artificial sweeteners than people without a 
weight problem . 
However , recent studies from the Washington School of Medicine 
have shown that artificial sweeteners can have a powerful effect on 
insulin levels and , unfortunately , on blood glucose levels as well . One 
study looked at seventeen very overweight people ( 100 pounds or more 
overweight ) who didn ’ t consume any artificial sweeteners and were free 
from diabetes . Volunteers were given one of two things prior to a glucose 
Chapter 10 | The Artificial Sugars You Need to Watch 121
challenge test : either a glass of water or a drink made with the artificial 
sweetener sucralose ( Splenda )  . The researchers wanted to discover if 
drinking sucralose before a glucose challenge test would affect insulin or 
blood sugar levels . Each volunteer was tested twice , first just by drinking 
just water , and then a week later with just a sucralose beverage . 
The results were very surprising . Compared to water only , the 
sucralose drink caused approximately a 20 percent increase in peak 
insulin levels , creating a higher peak plasma glucose concentration . As 
you know , higher insulin and glucose levels both stimulate and aggravate 
the MD Factor . 
Researchers suspected that our taste buds might be responsible . 
Artificial sweeteners such as sucralose interact with receptors on your 
tongue , which in turn give your brain a signal that you ’ re consuming 
something sweet . But your body doesn ’ t necessarily know if what you ’ ve 
just consumed is calorie-free or not , so it prepares for the oncoming 
arrival of sugar . When this happens , your body never really gets the sugar 
it thinks is coming . You can see how this may affect your appetite—it 
leaves you wanting more . 
Scientists already know that digestive hormones can be released just 
by seeing food ; a commercial for a juicy steak or doughnut can cause 
even the most self-controlled of us to salivate a little . The same thing can 
happen with tasting something sweet . Signals from our tongue get sent 
to our digestive organs , and these organs react , of course—particularly 
your pancreas , where insulin is produced and released . In other words , 
digestive hormones are triggered even when you consume a very low 
dose of artificial sweeteners . With regard to sucralose , this happens at 
a dose as low as 48 mg , which is about what you would find in a single 
1-gram packet of Splenda . The bottom line is that even small amounts 
of artificial sweeteners can play tricks on your body , causing it to 
overrespond to signals from your taste buds . And there may be some 
evidence that this effect can actually cause weight gain—some studies that 
There ’ s no good answer about 
how artificial sweeteners 
affect your metabolism . 
122 The MD Factor Diet
have looked into artificial sweeteners ’ ability to help consumers limit their 
calories each day found that these artificial sweeteners made people gain 
weight in some settings . 
Bear in mind that the most significant source of artificial sweeteners 
in the American diet comes from diet beverages , which are often 
consumed in place of food . For example , many of my patients have 
told me that they drink four or five Diet Cokes a day instead of eating 
breakfast and lunch , and only eat dinner . They ’ re trying to restrict their 
calories , and they have diet sodas to try to curb their hunger . Often 
the one meal they do eat at dinnertime is not overloaded with calories , 
containing on average maybe 500–800 calories . But even though their 
daily caloric intake is very low , they are still overweight . Worse , they often 
find themselves gaining weight . 
I grew up in a family with weight problems and have a sweet tooth of 
my own , so I had used artificial sweeteners for years . I often drank diet 
sodas to get a sweet taste without adding extra calories , as many women 
do . As I became more educated about sugar metabolism over the years , 
I ’ ve stopped using artificial sweeteners personally and have been able 
to maintain my weight without difficulty . I have , it must be said , also 
gotten into the habit of eating consistent and regular meals , all containing 
adequate protein and the right mix of healthful carbohydrates and fats 
that work with my metabolism . 
Skip the diet sodas , which 
have no nutritional benefit 
at all , and eat real food . 
Chapter 10 | The Artificial Sugars You Need to Watch 123
Over the years , my dietitians and I have taught our patients to eat 
more lean protein , fewer simple carbohydrates , and , of course , fewer 
simple sugars . But we were not sticklers about avoiding artificial 
sweeteners , because some patients just needed something sweet and we 
knew that protein products such as shakes or puddings—even those 
sweetened with an artificial sweetener—were a better choice than large 
quantities of simple sugars or no protein at all . Many of my patients 
have found that protein shakes and puddings are a useful tool for them 
as they correct their MD Factor , as they ’ re some of the lowest-calorie 
ways to take in lean protein . They ’ re also quick and convenient when 
you ’ re working or traveling and the ability to prepare or order a meal 
with adequate lean protein is challenging .  ( It ’ s much harder to carry a 
few slices of turkey breast in your purse than a protein bar !  ) I knew it was 
often much more important that these patients lose their extra pounds at 
first than to watch the amount of artificial sweetener they were ingesting . 
But because I do worry about the effect of artificial sweeteners on the 
MD Factor , my team and I are always looking for new protein products 
without artificial sweeteners to add to our recommended foods and 
products .  ( You can see an updated list at www . MDFactorBook . com .  ) 
My advice is to skip the diet sodas , which have no nutritional benefit 
at all , and eat real food . If it is very hard to lose weight , though , protein 
products with artificial sweeteners could be a useful tool to get the 
protein you need without too many calories . 
Grilled chicken with red pepper sauce and cauliflower mash
PART III
THE MD FACTOR
ACTION PLAN
CHAPTER 11
The MD Factor 
Daily Action Plan
The best way to reverse the MD Factor is to change the way you 
feed your cells . They need lots of energy-rich protein and far fewer 
carbohydrates , especially grains , starches , and sugars . 
Symptoms of the MD Factor can resolve very quickly once you 
start eating on a meal plan designed to improve it—usually after only a 
few days to a few weeks . Most people find that their cravings go away 
after the first few days , and they are no longer hungry . Obviously , it ’ s 
much easier to lose weight when you ’ re no longer craving sugar and 
carbohydrates . 
125
126 The MD Factor Diet
What to Expect When You Start the 
MD Factor Action Plan
On the detailed meal plans you ’ ll find in this chapter , you ’ ll see that you 
start your Action Plan with three Reclaim days before moving on to the 
Transformation , or weight loss , days . You need to follow the plan exactly 
for maximum results . The Reclaim days are the only part of the meal 
plan that are really restrictive , and these are undertaken for a reason : 
to clear your bloodstream of insulin and jump-start your metabolism . 
My patients have no problem doing this , as nearly all of them find their 
cravings are so much better after a few days and they know that in three 
days they will have both more food and a greater variety of food . 
As you undoubtedly know , the trouble with most diets is that it ’ s 
very hard to find one that helps you shed pounds quickly without 
compromising the nutritional quality of your meals—and ultimately your 
health and vitality . Literally thousands of people who had the MD Factor
have been treated at my medical center , and they ’ ve gotten results . They 
lost weight , reversed their MD Factor , and feel great . 
Eat More to Lose Weight
My dietitians and I are often told that the MD Factor Action Plan , with 
the exception of the Reclaim days , contains too much food . It ’ s usually 
women who tell us this . We know that many of these women are so used 
to starving themselves that they think the only way to lose weight is by 
eating next to nothing . They keep detailed dietary logs meticulously 
listing their drastically low caloric intakes from their carefully weighed 
and measured portions . They ’ re distraught because they continue to 
gain weight , even though the numbers show they should be losing 
weight . What I explain to them is that the MD Factor has altered their 
MD Factor
Action Plan Goals
✔ Increase lean protein intake
so that your body gets what
it needs and can enter a
fat-burning mode . 
✔ Reduce your carbohydrate intake
so that your body taps into its
supply of stored fat . 
✔ Accomplish rapid weight loss at
the start , so that you have the
incentive to keep going . 
✔ Lose your cravings for sugar , 
sweets , refined carbohydrates , 
and other foods that trigger the
MD Factor . Once you ’ ve broken
the cycle , your body will simply
not crave them anymore . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 127
metabolism to predominantly store fat . Eating the right balance and 
volume of nutritious food on the MD Factor Action Plan will correct 
your metabolism , stop you from feeling you need to starve , and allow you 
to finally start losing weight . 
An Overview of the Structure 
of the Plan
There are three different types of days for you to follow to correct the 
MD Factor . 
As I ’ ve noted , you start with three Reclaim days . These will clear your 
bloodstream of insulin and jump-start your metabolism . 
Reclaim days are followed by Transformation days , which you will 
remain on for three and a half weeks . Transformation days are designed 
to keep your energy level high , your appetite satisfied , and your body 
locked into a fat-burning mode . 
The only difference between the Reclaim days and Transformation 
days is the amount of carbohydrates you can eat . The protein and fat 
requirements remain the same . 
The Transformation days are followed by the Stabilization days , where 
you ’ ll be eating more carbs for six days . These six Stabilization days are 
then followed by one Reclaim day . This stabilization cycle is repeated 
twice , over a two-week time frame . 
You may have reached your goal weight at the end of this six-week 
cycle , depending on how strong your MD Factor is and how much 
weight you needed to lose . If you have made great progress and want to 
lose more body fat , this cycle can be repeated with up to four weeks of 
Transformation days followed by the Stabilization phase again . This can be 
repeated as many times as is necessary to arrive at your goal weight . 
3
RECLAIM
DAYS
25 
TRANSFORMATION
DAYS
6
STABILIZATION
DAYS
128 The MD Factor Diet
Your Weight Loss Calendar
The easiest way to keep track of your MD Factor Action Plan schedule is 
with a calendar . Use this template to help you with your schedule . 
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
Day 1
R
Day 2
R
Day 3
R
Day 4
T
Day 5
T
Day 6
T
Day 7
T
Day 8
T
Day 9
T
Day 10
T
Day 11
T
Day 12
T
Day 13
T
Day 14
T
Day 15
T
Day 16
T
Day 17
T
Day 18
T
Day 19 * 
T
Day 20
T
Day 21
T
Day 22
T
Day 23
T
Day 24
T
Day 25
T
Day 26 * 
T
Day 27
T
Day 28
T
Day 29
S
Day 30
S
Day 31
S
Day 32
S
Day 33 * 
S
Day 34
S
Day 35
R
Day 36
S
Day 37
S
Day 38
S
Day 39
S
Day 40 * 
S
Day 41
S
Day 42
R
Day 43
T
Day 44
T
Day 45
T
Day 46
T
Day 47 * 
T
Day 48
T
Day 49
T
Day 50
T
Day 51
T
Day 52
T
Day 53
T
Day 54 * 
T
Day 55
T
Day 56
T
Day 57
T
Day 58
T
Day 59
T
Day 60
T
Day 61 * 
T
Day 62
T
Day 63
T
Day 64
T
Day 65
T
Day 66
T
Day 67
T
Day 68 * 
T
Day 69
T
Day 70
T
Stabilization days , for weight maintenance : 
between 100 and 150 grams of carbs
Transformation 
Day
Stabilization 
Day
Reclaim Day Reclaim days , for insulin sensitizing : 
less than 60 grams of carbs
Transformation days , for weight loss : 
between 60 and 100 grams of carbs 
* Represents a structured break from the program , called “ My Night .  ” Our research shows that this enables
you to make healthy choices on your own . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 129
The MD Factor Plan Cheat Sheet
3 RECLAIM DAYS
Women : 120 grams of protein , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 30 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 40 grams of fat
25 TRANSFORMATION DAYS
Women : 120 grams of protein , between 60–100 grams of net carbs , 30 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , between 60–100 grams of net carbs , 40 grams of fat
6 STABILIZATION DAYS
Women : 120 grams of protein , 100–150 grams of net carbs , 30–40 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , 100–150 grams of net carbs , 40–60 grams of fat
1 RECLAIM DAY
Women : 120 grams of protein , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 30 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 40 grams of fat
6 STABILIZATION DAYS
Women : 120 grams of protein , 100–150 grams of net carbs , 30–40 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , 100–150 grams of net carbs , 40–60 grams of fat
1 RECLAIM DAY 
Women : 120 grams of protien , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 30 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 40 grams of fat
RESUME TRANSFORMATION DAYS FOR 28 DAYS
Women : 120 grams of protein , 60–100 grams of net carbs , 30 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , 60–100 grams of net carbs , 40 grams of fat
Continue this cycle until you reach your goal weight . At this point , you will add in more 
healthy fats and more healthy carbohydrates as you successfully create the new you . 
130 The MD Factor Diet
The Prep : Before You Begin
Clean Out the Refrigerator 
Look in your refrigerator . Get rid of any old or expired foods . We all 
have these . 
Section off a part of the refrigerator that will be designated for your 
foods . Other members of the family must ask if you want to share any of 
your designated food , before they eat it ! 
If there are foods in the fridge that typically tempt you , put them 
in the back or on the bottom shelves , where they are less visible or 
accessible . For example , put sugar-sweetened jams , jellies , ketchup , rich 
dressings , butter , and sweets on a separate shelf for others to use . 
Discard or finish off open bottles of wine . Remove the unopened ones 
and put them away in a cupboard or bar . Avoid drinking any alcohol until 
you have mastered the Action Plan and have learned how to integrate 
these items into your diet . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 131
Clean Out the Freezer
Give away or discard temptations such as ice cream , waffles , candy , ice 
pops , frozen potatoes , or frozen bread items . If other members of your 
household eat these foods , designate a freezer space just for you . 
Put Aunt Jane ’ s homemade cookies in a freezer bag at the bottom of 
the freezer . Do this with any special dessert item that you love and that 
you will be able to eat once you have lost weight , but don ’ t go out and buy 
those desserts now for later . 
Fill your section of the freezer with frozen veggies , chicken breasts , 
and fish . 
Clean Out the Pantry and Cupboards
Partition your pantry and cupboards into spaces for “ usable ” and 
 “ unusable ” foods . Try to find a space that is hard to reach for the 
unusable items . 
In the usable section , stock canned tuna , salmon , sardines , and 
chicken , along with canned veggies such as beets , artichoke hearts , green 
beans , tomatoes , and your other favorites . In the unusable section , place 
your baking supplies , such as flour , sugar , and oils . 
Give away or discard sugared Jell-O ; cake , brownie , cornbread , 
pancake , or cookie mixes ; crackers and cookies ; potato chips , cheese 
curls , and corn chips ; boxed macaroni and cheese ; packaged rice or side 
dishes ; and fruit chews , candy , and chocolate . These might be tasty , but 
they are nothing more than highly processed and empty carbohydrates 
and sugars . 
In the unusable section , also put fruit juice and drink mixes . Avoid 
them until you have mastered the Action Plan and have learned how to 
integrate these items into your diet . 
132 The MD Factor Diet
The Day Before You Start : 
Getting Ready for Your Action Plan
✔ Drink plenty of water today . Try to drink eight glasses , or four 
16-ounce bottles .  ( Coffee and diet soda don ’ t count , as these are 
diuretics and deplete your body of water .  ) 
✔ Brew some green tea and try a cup hot and a cup iced , to see what you 
prefer . I personally like organic jasmine green tea . 
✔ If you are already exercising , keep it up ! If you are not currently 
exercising , we will not add anything just yet , as described in 
Chapter 8 . 
✔ Take your daily multivitamin ( see Chapter 7 )  . 
✔ Try to limit yourself to no more than two cups of coffee per day . If you 
are drinking lots more than this , gradually decrease it and replace it 
with refreshing water . 
✔ Stock up on items you can eat . 
✔ Check your calendar for upcoming special events such as birthdays , 
anniversaries , graduations , and important business meetings or 
dinners . Prepare for these by mentally agreeing to stick with your 
program as best you can . The MD Factor Action Plan allows you to 
eat free meals at times that we call “ My Nights ”  , so you might want to 
save those for your important events . 
✔ Read through the meal plans later in this chapter . It will be a lot easier 
to follow the MD Factor Daily Action Plan closely at first , so you can 
get used to it without having to spend any extra time planning what 
to eat . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 133
Starches
•	 Bagels
•	 Bread or rolls
•	 Cereals
•	 Corn
•	 Cornbread
•	 Cornstarch
•	 Crackers
•	 Croissants
•	 Flour
•	 Granola
•	 Muffins
•	 Noodles
•	 Pancakes
•	 Pita bread
•	 Potatoes
•	 Rice
•	 Taco shells
•	 Tortillas
•	 Hamburger or hot dog buns
MD Factor Stimulant Foods That Increase Your MD Factor
and Make Your Metabolism Store Fat
These foods should be eliminated , even if they are whole-grain . Their 
carbohydrate counts are all too high for your metabolism right now . 
Sweets
•	 Candy
•	 Doughnuts
•	 Corn syrup
•	 Dried fruits
•	 Ice cream
•	 Fruit juice
•	 Italian ice , sherbet
•	 Jam or jelly
•	 Honey
•	 Molasses
•	 Pastries
•	 Pie
•	 Cookies
•	 Pudding
•	 Sweetened Sodas
•	 Sugar ( white , brown ) 
•	 Frozen Yogurt
•	 High-fructose corn syrup
Others
•	 Corn chips
•	 Egg rolls
•	 Sausage
•	 Hot dogs
•	 Pizza
•	 Potato chips
•	 Popcorn
•	 Pretzels
•	 Waffles
•	 Margarine
•	 Fried food
•	 Rice cakes
•	 French fries
•	 Fruit juice
•	 Lemonade
134 The MD Factor Diet
Ready to Start
Reclaim Days
The Reclaim days are designed to jump-start your metabolism . The 
carbohydrate level on these days is very low . In our office we instruct our 
patients to keep their carbohydrate intake to below 50–60 grams per day . 
I will not ask you to keep track of your grams of carbohydrates , because 
if you follow the template for these three days , you will not exceed this 
carbohydrate level . 
It is very important to be aware that this is three days of a restrictive 
diet . It is not meant to be followed for any longer than this . It is designed 
to clear your bloodstream of high insulin levels , which is very effective for 
reducing cravings . After you complete these three days , you never need 
to do three days again except for special circumstances ( see the sidebar 
 “ What Should I Do If I Get Off Track ?  ” on page 168 )  . In the stabilization 
phase you will do one Reclaim day each week for two weeks . 
After the first three Reclaim days , you can expect to feel lighter . Most 
people notice their cravings for carbs and junk food have decreased . 
Normally , any water weight will drop off during this time as well , as your 
system clears itself of the high insulin levels that had been circulating in 
your bloodstream . 
As you already learned in Chapter 4 , the most important piece of 
the weight loss puzzle is protein . Without the basis of lean protein to 
make up the majority of your meals , your metabolism will not begin 
to regroup and retrain your system to burn fat . This doesn ’ t necessarily 
mean you must eat more meat . On the contrary—some of my patients are 
vegetarians , and they do well with the recommended food choices . 
IMPORTANT NOTE : 
If you have diabetes , severe 
migraine headaches , or heart 
disease , or if you are over sixtyfive years old , I recommend you 
skip the Reclaim days entirely 
and begin your meal plan with 
Transformation Days . If you 
have another serious medical 
condition , please get your 
physician ’ s approval before 
starting the MD Factor
Meal Plan . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 135
To prepare your food , you can broil , bake , boil , barbecue , microwave , 
roast , or “ fry ” using a quick spritz of cooking spray . Limit red meat to 
twice per week . 
The ideal serving of protein is 25–35 grams at every meal . This meets 
the protein threshold you need so that your body can begin absorbing 
all the amino acids it needs , which helps regulate insulin . It is crucial to 
hit that 25–35 gram mark at every meal . If you fall short , you may be a lot 
hungrier , and your body will resist weight loss . 
I have listed protein foods into portion sizes that provide 25–35 grams 
of protein . Some protein foods you can eat alone , such as chicken breast 
or lean beef . But other protein foods have too much fat to stand alone 
as your sole source of protein for a meal . For example , most cheeses 
are on this list . If you were to get 30 grams of protein from cheese , it 
A Word about Math
I don ’ t want to make this meal plan an exercise in complicated math . 
However , doing some simple math really gives you access to keys for
metabolism correction . At my office , patients work one-on-one with
the same dietitian for several weeks in a row . In these weekly meetings
we can instruct and reinforce any concepts about the meal plan that
may have been confusing . As a reader of this book , you don ’ t have a
specially trained dietitian sitting next to you , but I know you can do it . 
In order to be successful , most women need to get close to 25–30
grams of protein at each of three meals and then get another 20–30
grams during the day in snacks . For most men , the protein goal for
meals is 25–35 grams and 40–50 grams during the day in snacks or
another mini-meal . 
136 The MD Factor Diet
would be accompanied by way too much fat . So I suggest some protein 
combinations that keep fat at reasonable levels but still provide that 
critical 25–35 grams of protein . 
Here ’ s where the math comes in . You can make your own protein food 
combinations as long as the amounts add up to 25 to 35 grams of protein . 
Find your own favorite combos—correcting a metabolism dysfunction 
and losing weight does not require you to have boring or bland food ! 
The carbohydrate content of Reclaim days is approximately 50–60 
grams per day . If you follow the Reclaim day templates in this book , you 
will not exceed 60 grams per day . Some of my patients really want to 
monitor their daily carbohydrate intake as well as their protein intake . 
Just like with the protein , you can calculate your own carb combos . 
On the website , www . MDFactorBook . com , I list all the approved 
proteins , carbohydrates , snacks , and condiments with their grams 
of protein and carbohydrates for the serving sizes shown . This list is 
continually being updated with new products . 
While spices and most condiments will not add too many 
carbohydrates , sauces and side dishes made from fruits and grains and 
other starches will . Remember , the Reclaim period lasts only three days . 
In Part IV , I have included some of the very flavorful Reclaim day meals 
created for my program by the chefs of bistroMD . Try these if you have a 
flair for cooking . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 137
Reclaim Days for Women * 
Breakfast : 25–30 g protein , vitamin and mineral supplement , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–15 g protein , 8 oz . water
Lunch : 25–30 g protein , 1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 2 cups salad with 
approved dressing , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–15 g protein , 8 oz . water
Dinner : 25–30 g protein , 1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 2 cups salad with 
approved dressing , 16 oz . water
Reclaim Days for Men * 
Breakfast : 25–35 g protein , vitamin and mineral supplement , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein , 8 oz . water
Lunch : 25–35 g protein , 1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables ( see list )  , 2 cups 
salad with approved dressing , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein , 8 oz . water
Dinner : 25–35 g protein , 1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 2 cups salad with 
approved dressing , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein from the approved list 
* See lists later in this chapter for types and serving sizes . 
138 The MD Factor Diet
The Best & Leanest Protein Meals 
Super-Easy Breakfast
Four options , choose one of the following . 
Cottage Cheese Mixer
1 cup of 1% or fat-free
cottage cheese with
1–2 tablespoons
sugar-free jelly or
sugar-free syrup
Greek Yogurt with Bacon
1 cup plain Greek yogurt with
sugar-free syrup , 
with a side of 3 slices
Canadian bacon
Energy Smoothie
1 smoothie ( 30 g protein ; look
for a top-quality whey protein
powder or a complete vegan
protein powder without added
sugar ) with 1 serving of fruit 
( or try different extracts , like
peppermint or hazelnut )  , 
blended with ice
½ Egg Whites with Sausage 
1 cup liquid egg whites
and 2 vegetarian
sausage patties
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 139
Easy Breakfast
Three options , choose one of the following . 
Egg White Omelet
1 cup liquid egg whites
plus 1 oz . light shredded
Mexican cheese , 1 tablespoon
low-fat sour cream , 
and 2 tablespoons salsa
English Muffin with Smoked Salmon
1 toasted light English muffin topped with
a mixture of 3 oz . chopped smoked salmon , 
1 slice turkey bacon , 2 tablespoons fat-free cream cheese , 
1 tablespoon chopped red onion , and 1 tablespoon chopped
cucumber , finished off with a tomato slice 
( make extra smoked salmon mixture so you can
have this again the next day ) 
Egg Scramble
1 low-carb tortilla
with egg scramble 
( 1 / 2 cup chopped spinach , 
diced tomatoes , 1 / 4 cup
reduced-fat feta cheese , 
3 / 4 cup liquid egg whites ) 
140 The MD Factor Diet
Tuna Salad
One 6-oz . can chunk
light tuna in water , drained , 
on a bed of lettuce and topped
with 2 tablespoons light salad
dressing ( or lemon juice , 
salt , and pepper ) 
Greek Salad
3-oz . sliced deli turkey or
chicken breast topped with
1 tablespoon reduced-fat feta
cheese , 2 olives ( sliced )  , and
a squeeze of lemon , served
on a bed of lettuce
Chicken Salad
One 4-oz . pouch or
can cooked chicken breast , 
mixed with 1 tablespoon of
reduced-fat mayo , 
1 teaspoon of relish , and
1 tablespoon lemon juice , 
rolled up inside
large lettuce leaves
Super-Easy Lunch
Four options , choose one of the following : 
Salmon Salad
One 6-oz . can pink salmon in
water , drained , mixed with
1 tablespoon whole grain
mustard , 1 teaspoon dill , and a
splash of lemon juice served
on a bed of lettuce
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 141
Mexican Wrap
4 oz . lean ground sirloin cooked
with taco seasonings , topped
with 1 tablespoon
sour cream and
3 tablespoons of salsa , 
served on a bed of lettuce or
inside a low-carb wrap
Shrimp Salad
Spinach salad topped
with 4–5 large grilled
shrimp and 2 tablespoons
low-fat salad dressing
Fish with Steamed Vegetables
5 oz . grouper or salmon
with steamed veggies , 
topped with lemon juice
Easy Lunch
Four options , choose one of the following : 
Italian Chicken Breast
4–5 oz . baked chicken breast
seasoned with Italian herbs , 
topped with 2 oz . of marinara
sauce and a sprinkle of
reduced-fat Parmesan cheese , 
served with a salad of fresh
green beans
142 The MD Factor Diet
Dinner
Six options , choose one of the following : 
Fish with Spinach Salad
4–5 oz . salmon or other fish , 
1 cup of yellow squash
with 1 / 2 cup red onion , 
fresh spinach salad
on the side
Pork with Sauerkraut
4 oz . pork tenderloin
with 1 cup sauerkraut and
1 cup green beans , 
accompanied by a
side salad with
2 tablespoons low-fat
salad dressing
Light Cheeseburger
4 oz . ground beef mixed with
1 teaspoon Worcestershire
sauce , shaped into a patty and
grilled , topped with 1 slice
of low-fat cheese , mustard , 
and tomato , with salad and
fresh carrots
Italian Turkey Breast with 
Vegetables
4 oz . turkey breast or
tenderloin marinated with
1 / 4 cup Italian dressing , 
with 1 / 2 cup artichoke hearts , 
8 asparagus stalks , and
a small side salad
Cheesy Chicken
3–4 oz . chicken breast topped
with 1 / 4 cup tomato sauce and
1 slice reduced-fat
provolone cheese , 
with steamed zucchini
and a salad
Asian-Inspired Chicken Breast
4–5 oz . chicken breast , diced , 
with 2 teaspoons low-sodium
soy sauce , sauteed with
2 sliced carrots , water
chestnuts , and snow peas
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 143
EATS—otherwise known as Essential & Tasty Snacks
Protein Bars
An extremely easy and convenient protein snack is the protein bar . But 
not just any protein bar—there are some out there that contain more 
calories than a candy bar ! A good guideline for a protein bar is that it 
should be less than 180 calories for the whole bar and should contain 
a minimum of 10 grams of protein and ideally no more than 20 grams 
of carbohydrates . There are many protein bars on the market and more 
added each week . Some are better than others . 
Please note that some people need to watch their intake of protein bars , 
as they contain more calories and carbohydrates than other snacks such as 
a protein drink or lean deli meat . I usually recommend no more than one 
Please go to
www . MDFactorBook . com 
for updated lists of protein
bars available . 
Real Food Protein Choices
Each of these real food protein choices are 10–15 grams of protein and less than 200 calories . 
•	 1 / 4 cup nuts
•	 2 oz . low-fat cheese
•	 2 light string cheese
•	 6 oz . light Greek yogurt
•	 1 / 2 cup low-fat cottage cheese
•	 1 tablespoon peanut butter on celery stalks
•	 1 / 2 cup ricotta cheese
•	 2 tablespoons light cream cheese on vegetables
•	 1 / 4 cup dry roasted edamame
•	 1 tablespoon hummus and 1 oz . lean deli meat
In order to keep the MD Factor at bay and your blood sugar levels stable , 
it is absolutely essential that you eat every two to three hours . Snacks 
containing between 10–15 grams of protein ( for women ) or 10–20 grams 
( for men ) and that are low in carbohydrates are the best way to combat 
the MD Factor . 
If you miss a snack , make sure you eat it later , or else it will be a 
challenge to meet your daily protein goal . 
144 The MD Factor Diet
Common Protein Portions
This chart gives you visual hints that will help you choose proper portion sizes for your proteins . This makes it 
easy—no scale is needed ; just follow the visual hint . 
Protein Source Serving Protein ( g ) Visual Hint
Chicken breast 4–5 oz . cooked 25–30 g Size and thickness of your palm
Chicken meatballs 4 medium 25–30 g Golf ball size
Chicken sausage 2 sausages 25–30 g Size of a hot dog
Lean beef 3 oz . cooked 25–30 g Size of a computer mouse
Canadian bacon 5 pieces 25–30 g Diameter of a hockey puck , but thin
Fish 4–5 oz . cooked 25–30 g Size and thickness of your palm
Pork tenderloin 4–5 oz . cooked 25–30 g Size and thickness of your palm
Greek yogurt , plain 1 container 18 g See approved brands
Cheese , low fat 1 slice 6–7 g 2-by-2-inch coaster
Cheese , low fat 2 cubes 6 g Game dice
Cheese , string , low fat 2 sticks 12 g Two thick highlighter markers
Deli meat 3 slices 20 g Deck of cards
Peanut butter 2 tbsp . 9 g Ping-pong ball
Beef jerky 2 strips 14 g 12-inch ruler
protein bar per day while trying to correct the MD Factor and lose weight . 
Some of my patients prefer to split a larger protein bar , such as one that 
contains 20 grams of protein , in half and have a half twice a day . 
Some protein bars contain sugar alcohols , which decrease their net 
carbohydrate count ( see Appendix C ) but can cause gas and bloating in 
some people . Other protein bars have high levels of saturated fat . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 145
Food Choice Serving Protein ( g ) 
Chicken
Chicken breast , boneless , skinless 4–5 oz . 25–30
Chicken breast , canned 5 oz . 25–30
Chicken breast , grilled 1 cup 25–30
Chicken meatballs and sliders ( low fat ) 3 meatballs or sliders 35
Chicken sausage ( low fat , large ) 2 links 25–30
Deli meat ( roasted chicken breast ) 4–5 oz . 25–30
Turkey
Deli meat 4 oz . 25–30
Turkey breast , ground 
( 99% fat free ) 
4 oz . 25–30
Turkey breast , skinless 4–5 oz . 25–30
Turkey burger ( 98% fat free ) 1 burger 25–35
Pork
Deli ham , extra lean 4–6 oz . 25–35
Pork chops , extra lean 4–6 oz . 25–35
Pork tenderloin , extra lean 4–6 oz . 25–35
Beef
Beef , 98% lean 4–5 oz . 25–30
Beef , tenderloin 4–5 oz . 25–30
Beef , sirloin 4–5 oz . 25–30
Beef , top round 4–5 oz . 25–30
Deli meat , 97% lean 4 oz . 25–30
Veal , top round 4–5 oz . 25–30
146 The MD Factor Diet
Serving Protein ( g ) 
Other
Bison , steak medallions 1 steak 30–35
Lamb loin , lean 4–5 oz . 25–30
Venison 4–5 oz . 25–30
Seafood
Bass 4–5 oz . 25–30
Bluefish 4–5 oz . 25–30
Catfish 4–5 oz . 25–30
Clams , canned in water 1 cup 25–30
Clams , fresh 20 25–30
Cod 4–5 oz . 25–30
Crab 4–5 oz . 25–30
Flounder 4–5 oz . 25–30
Grouper 4–5 oz . 25–30
Haddock 4–5 oz . 25–30
Halibut 4–5 oz . 25–30
Lobster 4–5 oz . 25–30
Mahi mahi 4–5 oz . 25–30
Orange roughy 4–5 oz . 25–30
Oyster 1 ¼ cup 25–30
Perch 4–5 oz . 25–30
Salmon 4–5 oz . 25–30
Salmon , canned , wild , Atlantic 1 / 2 cup 25–30
Sardines , in spring water , no salt added 5 oz . 25–30
Scallops 4–5 oz . 25–30
Sea bass 4–5 oz . 25–30
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 147
Serving Protein ( g ) 
Seafood ( continued ) 
Shrimp 4–5 oz . 25–30
Snapper 4–5 oz . 25–30
Swordfish 4–5 oz . 25–30
Tilapia 4–5 oz . 25–30
Tuna , canned in water , white albacore 4–5 oz . 25–30
Tuna , yellow-fin 4–5 oz . 25–30
Turbot 4–5 oz . 25–30
Whitefish 4–5 oz . 25–30
Vegetarian ( see website for updated brand information ) 
Vegetarian soy breakfast links 4 links 16
Vegetarian soy burger such as 
tomato basil pizza burger
2 patties 22
Chicken-less strips 13 strips 30
Jumbo veggie links 2 links 30
Veggie breakfast patties 3 patties 30
Soy meatless tenders 1 . 5 tenders 30
Soy meatless burgers 3 patties 24
Beef-less ground beef-textured 
vegetable protein
1 cup 30
Edamame ( blanched , shelled ) 1 / 2 cup 13
Dry roasted edamame 1 / 4 cup 14
Powdered peanut butter 4 tbsp . 10
Dairy
1% cottage cheese 1 cup 28
148 The MD Factor Diet
Proteins for Combinations 
or Snacks Serving Protein ( g ) 
Meat
Canadian bacon 2 slices 11
Turkey bacon 2 slices 12
Turkey sausage 4 links 10
Breakfast sausage ( chicken and apple ) 3 links 14
Chicken burgers ( lean or low fat ) 1 burger 22
Beef jerky 1 stick 8–10
Turkey pepperoni ( low fat ) 1 oz . 10
Chicken or turkey jerky 1 stick 12
Eggs
Liquid egg substitute 1 / 2 cup 12
Egg combo 
( 1 large egg plus 3 egg whites ) 
See item 17
Egg whites 5 17 . 5
Egg whites , liquid 1 / 2 cup 14
Eggs , whole 2 large 13
Hard-boiled egg whites 3 large 18
Milk and milk substitutes
Almond milk 
( unsweetened vanilla flavor ) 
1 cup 1
Half and half , fat free 2 tbsp . 1
Soy milk , unsweetened 1 cup 7
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 149
Serving Protein ( g ) 
Cheese
Light Swiss cheese 1 oz . 8
Light cheese , in small rounds 2 rounds 12
Light cheddar cheese 1 oz . 8
Shredded cheese , 2% milk 1 oz . 8
Singles , fat free American 2 slices 8
Light cheese , triangles 4 wedges 10
Light ricotta cheese ½ cup 5
Light shredded cheese 1 oz . 8
Light or low-fat string cheese 2 sticks 12
Greek yogurt
1% plain 6 oz . 18
In addition , there are many preprepared protein foods on the market : 
protein shakes , protein soups , protein oatmeal , protein coffee drinks , hot 
chocolate . See the website for more information . 
150 The MD Factor Diet
Vegetable Choices
Eat two cups of vegetables at lunch and two servings at dinner . If you 
prefer , you can also spread your vegetable servings out into different 
times during the day . It ’ s perfectly fine to throw some onions or green 
peppers into your morning omelet . You will notice that , unlike the 
protein choices , there are no specific serving sizes listed . That is because 
I find it most unlikely that you will eat such an excessive amount of the 
vegetables on this list that it will impact your carbohydrate intake . Some 
people need more volume to feel full , and if that is the case , have more 
broccoli or cauliflower . 
Vegetables
•	 Artichoke hearts
•	 Arugula
•	 Asparagus
•	 Bean sprouts
•	 Beets
•	 Broccoli
•	 Brussels sprouts
•	 Cabbage
•	 Carrots
•	 Cauliflower
•	 Celery
•	 Cucumber
•	 Eggplant
•	 Green beans
•	 Greens ( collard , 
mustard , turnip ) 
•	 Leeks
•	 Lettuce ( romaine
or iceberg ) 
•	 Mushrooms
•	 Okra
•	 Onion
•	 Peppers ( any color ) 
•	 Radishes
•	 Sauerkraut
•	 Shallots
•	 Snow peas
•	 Spaghetti squash
•	 Spinach
•	 Tomato
•	 Wax beans
•	 Zucchini
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 151
Ideal Salads
Make sure your salads contain 1–2 cups of lettuce , and you can add fresh 
low-carb vegetables like cucumbers , radishes , onions , and tomatoes to 
make them even more delicious . 
If you ’ re not a lettuce lover : 
y Try using shredded coleslaw mix
y Turn a large lettuce leaf into a wrap
y Thinly slice cucumbers and marinate them in rice vinegar . 
For salad dressings , make sure the dressing you use contains no more 
than 5 grams of fat and 10 grams of carbs or less per 2 tablespoons . Use 
spritzer dressings , which coat and cover the salad nicely without using 
too much dressing . 
Try these easy salad dressing ideas : 
y 2–4 tablespoons of your favorite salsa
y Squeeze a lemon wedge with 1 tablespoon olive oil and a pinch
of salt
y Rice vinegar with a pinch of ginger powder
The recipes in Part IV will give you many more enticing ideas . 
If you dislike lettuce or if it doesn ’ t agree with you , you can substitute 
more of the vegetables from the approved list . During the three reclaim 
days , do not add fruit , grains , or vegetables that are not on the list . 
152 The MD Factor Diet
Beverages on the Reclaim Days
y Strive for 64 ounces of water
each day . 
y Have up to 2 cups of coffee , but
do not add sugar . You can add
up to a cup of unsweetened
almond or soy milk from the
dairy substitute list , as their
carbohydrate content is low . 
You can add a splash of dairy
milk , but avoid adding more
than 1 / 8 cup due to the higher
carbohydrate count . If fat-free
half and half is desired , keep the
serving to 2 tablespoons . 
y Have up to 2 cups of
black tea , with the same
recommendations as above
for coffee with regards to
the addition of milk . Do not
add sugar . 
y You can also have green tea , hot
or iced , or try herbal tea . Do not
add sugar . 
y Seltzer , as much as you like . 
y As for calorie-free beverages
with artificial sweeteners : you
know my recommendations on
this from Chapter 10 , but if you
cannot do without them , easing
into changes is fine . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 153
Reclaim Days Meal Plan Examples
Reclaim Day 1
Breakfast : 3 turkey sausage links , 1 cup cottage cheese with stevia or sugar-free jam
Snack : 2 oz . reduced-fat cheese ( 2 light cheese rounds ) 
Lunch : 4–6 oz . grilled turkey burger , lettuce , tomato , mustard , 1 tablespoon light mayo
Snack : 2 oz . deli turkey or chicken
Dinner : 4 oz . scallops or 6 oz . sirloin steak , garden salad , 2 tablespoons low-fat dressing 
* Snack : 1 tablespoon reduced-fat peanut butter and celery sticks
Reclaim Day 2
Breakfast : 1 egg and 3 egg whites scrambled , 3 slices of Canadian bacon , 1 / 2 cup chopped 
red peppers , onions , mushrooms
Snack : 2 oz . reduced-fat cheese or 1 scoop of protein powder with water
Lunch : 4–6 oz . lean ground turkey with taco seasoning , 2 tablespoons guacamole , 
2 tablespoons salsa , 2 cups shredded lettuce
Snack : 2 oz . deli meat , 1 dill pickle
Dinner : 4–6 oz . roast pork tenderloin , sauerkraut or green salad 
* Snack : 1 / 2 cup plain non-fat Greek yogurt with cinnamon and stevia 
Reclaim Day 3
Breakfast : ½ cup liquid egg whites , 2 turkey sausage patties
Snack : 2 pieces light string cheese
Lunch : 4–6 oz . canned tuna , packed in water , mixed with 1 tablespoon low-fat mayo , 1 
teaspoon relish , 1–2 tablespoons lemon juice , 2 cups mixed greens , 2 tablespoons 
light , fat-free dressing
Snack : 3 hard-boiled egg whites with cayenne pepper
Dinner : 4–5 oz . chicken breast , 2 cups spinach greens , 2 tablespoons reduced-fat dressing 
* Snack : ½ protein bar ( see approved list )  
* Men should choose from the larger serving sizes . For example , if the meal suggestion calls for 4–5 oz .  , men should choose 
5 oz . Additionally , men receive a third snack . 
154 The MD Factor Diet
Reclaim Day 4
Breakfast : ½ cup plain Greek yogurt with sugar-free syrup , 3 slices Canadian bacon
Snack : 2 turkey deli rolls
Lunch : 5 oz . canned salmon in water , 2 cups of mixed greens , 2 tablespoons light 
dressing
Snack : ¼ cup dry roasted edamame
Dinner : 4–5 oz . chicken breast , 1 cup fresh green beans , ½ tomato , balsamic vinegar to 
taste 
* Snack : 2 light cheese rounds
Reclaim Day 5
Breakfast : 1 ¼ cups liquid egg whites , 1 oz . light shredded cheese
Snack : 2 oz . lean deli meat
Lunch : 2 vegetarian soy burgers ( see website for recommendations )  , 1 slice reduced-fat 
cheese , 1–2 cups mixed greens , 2 tablespoons light dressing
Snack : ½ cup reduced-fat cottage cheese with sliced tomato
Dinner : 4–5 oz . grouper , 1 cup mixed greens , 2 tablespoons light dressing , 1 cup roasted 
zucchini 
* Snack : 2 tablespoons light cream cheese and vegetables 
* Men should choose from the larger serving sizes . For example if the meal suggestion calls for 4–5 oz .  , men should choose 
5 oz . Additionally , men receive a third snack . 
Reclaim Day 6
Breakfast : 2 vegetarian soy sausage patties , ½ cup liquid egg whites
Snack : 3 hard-boiled egg whites
Lunch : 4–5 oz . grilled shrimp , 1–2 cups mixed greens , 2 tablespoons light dressing
Snack : 2 pieces light string cheese
Dinner : 4–5 oz . pork tenderloin , 1 cup mixed greens , 2 tablespoons light dressing , 
1 cup steamed broccoli / cauliflower 
* Snack : 1 tablespoon peanut butter with celery
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 155
Transformation 
Congratulations ! You have completed the Reclaim Days . You are now 
ready to proceed with the Transformation days . 
Transformation days are designed to keep your energy level high , your 
appetite satisfied , and your body locked into a fat-burning mode . As you can 
see from the weight loss calendar , the majority of your days are spent in this 
cycle until you reach the new you , which is lifelong health and well-being . 
The most important concept during Transformation days is that you 
still must get 25–35 grams of protein with each meal and 10–20 grams 
of protein with each snack and that your carbohydrate amount at each 
meal and over the course of the entire day must be balanced to keep the 
MD Factor symptoms away . This will allow you to lose weight without 
being hungry , nip cravings in the bud , and keep you energized all day . 
The way you ’ ll be eating is : 
y Choose protein five to six times per day
y Choose vegetables four times per day
y Green salads with fresh vegetables two times per day
y Choose fruit or healthful carbohydrates from the list no more than
two times per day
In other words , you ’ ll be eating a lot of protein , including meat , 
poultry , eggs , and fish ; a large variety of vegetables ; and some fruit 
and fats , both of which will add sweetness and flavor to your diet . 
You ’ ll be limiting carbohydrates by initially cutting out white bread , 
white potatoes , pasta ( even whole-grain pasta )  , rice ( even brown rice )  , 
chocolate , baked goods , sugary desserts , and sweets . 
156 The MD Factor Diet
The Transformation Key
y You need to eat sufficient protein at every meal ( 25–35 grams ) and
watch your carbohydrates so the daily total is 100 grams or less per day . 
y Eat meals and snacks every two to three hours . Don ’ t skip any meals or
snacks during the day ! 
Protein Is Paramount
It bears repeating : the most important piece of the weight loss puzzle 
is protein . Without the basis of lean protein to make up the majority of 
your meals , your metabolism will not begin to regroup and retrain your 
system to burn fat . The ideal serving of protein is 25–35 grams at every 
meal . This meets the protein threshold you need so that your body can 
begin absorbing all the amino acids it needs , which helps regulate insulin . 
It is crucial to hit that 25–35 gram mark at every meal . If you fall short , 
you may be a lot hungrier , and your body will resist weight loss . Toward 
that end , please pay careful attention to the serving sizes I ’ ve listed on the 
protein choices for the Transformation days . Yes , if you choose cottage 
cheese , I want you to have 1 cup of cottage cheese , not the ¼ or ½ cup 
that ' s listed as the serving size on the container " You need to get as close 
as you can to 25–35 grams at each meal . 
Just like in the Reclaim phase , in the Transformation phase there are 
two ways to get the amount of protein I suggest for each meal . First , you 
can choose one of the protein foods I ’ ve listed here—the serving sizes 
will give you that necessary 25–35 grams . You can also choose to combine 
protein foods to give you some variety while still ensuring that you get the 
right amount of protein . For example , you could have 1¼ cups of liquid egg 
whites , which will give you 30 grams of protein , or you could have ½ cup 
of liquid egg whites ( which provides 12 grams of protein ) plus 2 slices of 
The most important piece 
of the weight loss puzzle 
is protein . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 157
turkey bacon ( for another 12 grams of protein ) and then 1 cup of skim 
milk , 1% milk , or soy milk ( which has 7–8 grams of protein )  . With that 
combination you are at 32 grams of protein . 
Transformation Carbohydrates
Certain foods encourage your pancreas to release a huge amount of 
insulin . You know what the culprits are—the kind of foods that are full of 
sugar and fat and empty carbs and are very hard to stop eating ! But you 
also know that when you have the MD Factor , your metabolic signals get 
all mixed up , and any excess sugar that comes from these carbs will be 
stored as fat . 
You can easily stop this mix-up from happening at all if you eat less 
than 100 grams of carbohydrates per day . Your body will not release 
much insulin when carb levels are that low . 
Please note : Your carbohydrates need to be spread over the day , just as 
your proteins are . If you eat all 100 grams of your carbohydrate allotment 
at one sitting , you will have a large release of insulin to handle all those 
carbs . This big surge of insulin will probably be followed by a blood 
sugar dip that will both induce and increase your appetite . We don ’ t want 
appetite stimulation , so spread out your healthful carbs and stick to the 
portion sizes given for the fruits , starches , and grains . 
Understand How to Count Net Carbs
All carbohydrates are not created equal . Many foods are called 
carbohydrates , but the only ones you need to limit are the carbs that 
trigger your MD Factor and raise your blood sugar . 
For example , sugar alcohols such as maltitol , sorbitol , and erythritol are 
added to foods to create a sweet flavor , and they ’ ll be listed on food labels 
as carbs—but they don ’ t raise your blood sugar when you eat them . 
158 The MD Factor Diet
Nor does fiber . This includes dietary fiber , which is sometimes listed as 
soluble or insoluble fiber . Soluble fiber , found in fruits such as apples 
and in beans , is digestible and can help remove cholesterol from your 
bloodstream . Insoluble fiber is found in green leafy vegetables and is not 
digestible . It gives bulk and roughage and helps move food through your 
digestive system . 
For more information about the exact amount of carbohydrate 
in various foods and to learn how to calculate net carbs , please see 
Appendix C . You will not exceed the carbohydrate recommendation of 
100 grams per day necessary for the Transformation phase if you eat the 
recommended serving sizes listed for fruits and healthful carbohydrates . 
You can still eat as much of the vegetables and salads on the approved list 
as you want . 
Appendix F contains a more complete list of the carbohydrate counts 
in food . If you are a numbers person , you may want to track your total 
for each meal and the day . This may also help you if you have a very 
stubborn MD Factor , as keeping a closer tab on the carb total will make 
a difference in your weight loss . 
Snacks 
Just like during the Reclaim days , during the Transformation days it 
is absolutely essential that you eat every two to three hours in order to 
keep the MD Factor at bay and your blood sugar levels stable . Snacks 
containing between 10 and 20 grams of protein are the best way to 
combat the MD Factor . 
If you miss a snack , make sure you eat it later , or else it will be a 
challenge to meet your daily protein goal . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 159
Transformation Days for Women
Breakfast : 25–30 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
vitamin and mineral supplement , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–15 g protein from snack list , 8 oz . water
Lunch : 	 25–30 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables from approved list , 1–2 cups salad , 
16 oz . water
Snack : 10–15 g protein from the approved list , 8 oz . water
Dinner : 25–30 g protein , 1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 1–2 cups salad , 
16 oz . water
Transformation Days for Men
Breakfast : 	 25–35 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
vitamin and mineral supplement , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein from snack list , 8 oz . water
Lunch : 25–35 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables from approved list , 1–2 cups salad , 
16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein from the approved list , 8 oz . water
Dinner : 25–35 g protein , 1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 1–2 cups salad , 
16 oz . water 
* Snack : 10–20 g protein from the approved list 
* Men should choose from the larger serving sizes . For example if the meal suggestion calls for 4–5 oz .  , men should choose 
5 oz . Additionally , men receive a third snack . 
160 The MD Factor Diet
Healthy Complex Carbohydrates
Fruits
Apple 1 baseball-size Mango ½ cup , diced
Apricots 4 halves , dried Nectarine 1 medium 
Banana ½ medium size Orange 1 small
Blackberries 2 / 3 cup Papaya ½ cup , cubed
Blueberries 2 / 3 cup Peach 1 baseball-size
Cantaloupe 1 cup Pear ½ light-bulb-size
Cherries 10 grape-size Persimmon 1 medium size
Dates 2 dried Pineapple ½ cup , cubed
Grapefruit ½ fruit Plum 1 medium
Grapes 15 small Raspberries 2 / 3 cup
Honeydew 1 / 8 melon Strawberries 1 cup , sliced
Kiwi 1 medium size Tangerine 1 medium size
Mandarin orange 1 tennis-ball-size Watermelon 1 cup , cubed
Beans and Grains 
Black beans ½ cup cooked
Black-eyed peas ½ cup cooked
Lentils ½ cup
Quinoa ½ cup
Garbanzo beans ½ cup cooked
Hummus ¼ cup
Red beans ½ cup cooked
Kidney beans ½ cup cooked
Brown rice ½ cup
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 161
Beverages on Transformation Days
y Strive for 64 ounces of water each day . 
y Have up to 2 cups of coffee , but continue to avoid sugar . Dairy , soy , or
almond milk are okay . 
y Have up to 2 cups of black tea . Dairy , soy , or almond milk are okay . 
Continue to avoid sugar . 
y You can also have green tea , hot or iced , or try herbal tea . Do not
add sugar . 
y Seltzer , as much as you like . 
y As for calorie-free beverages with artificial sweeteners : you know
my recommendations on this from Chapter 10 , but if you cannot do
without them , easing into changes is fine . 
162 The MD Factor Diet
Transformation Days Meal Plan Examples 
* Men should choose from the larger 
serving sizes . For example , if the meal 
suggestion calls for 4–5 oz .  , men 
should choose 5 oz . Additionally , men 
receive a third snack . 
Transformation Day 1
Breakfast : 2 eggs scrambled , 2 turkey sausage links , 2 / 3 cup blueberries
Snack : 5 oz . plain or vanilla low-fat or non-fat Greek yogurt
Lunch : 5 oz . canned tuna , mixed with 1 tablespoon of light mayo , served over lettuce 
and tomato , with a side of tomato tabbouleh salad ( see page 203 ) 
Snack : ¼ cup walnuts , almonds , or pecans ( limit to 2 times per week ) 
Dinner : Spaghetti squash with chicken and vegetable stuffing with green bean and 
tomato salad ( see page 195 )  
* Snack : 2–3 slices of lean low-sodium deli meat , wrap around a dill pickle
Transformation Day 2
Breakfast : 1 cup low-fat or fat-free cottage cheese , 1 cup strawberries
Snack : 1 oz .  , about 1 slice , of smoked salmon rolled with 1–2 tablespoons reduced-fat 
cream cheese
Lunch : 4–5 oz . grilled chicken with French Lentil Salad ( page 204 ) 
Snack : 1 oz . reduced-fat cheese , 7 slices turkey pepperoni
Dinner : Halibut and spinach ( see page 189 ) with Cauliflower Rice ( see page 202 )  
* Snack : Edamole High-Protein Guacamole ( see page 211 ) 
Your goals are 120–140 
grams of protein , 60–100 
grams of carbohydrates , 
and less than 40 grams 
of fat . 
Chapter 11 | The MD Factor Daily Action Plan 163
Transformation Day 3
Breakfast : Broccoli and cheese omelet ( ½ cup egg whites , ¼ cup cooked broccoli , ¼
cup low-fat shredded cheese , salt and pepper to taste )  , served with 1 cup 
cubed cantaloupe
Snack : 10–15 grams of whey or rice protein powder with 8 oz . water / skim milk or 
unsweetened rice / almond milk , add cinnamon or fresh nutmeg
Lunch : Stir fry made with 1 cup fresh or frozen mixed vegetables , 4 oz . shrimp or 
chicken , served over ¼ cup brown rice or quinoa
Snack : 2 light string cheese sticks
Dinner : Eggplant Rollatini ( see page 198 ) with side of arugula salad , add several 
cherry tomatoes , mushrooms , and 1 oz . shaved Parmesan cheese , 1–2 
teaspoons olive oil , 1–2 teaspoons fresh squeezed lemon juice , salt and 
pepper to taste 
* Snack : One serving of high protein breakfast cereal dry or with skim milk or 
unsweetened almond milk
Transformation Day 4
Breakfast : Oatmeal cottage cheese pancakes : combine ¼ cup oatmeal , ¼ cup low-fat 
or non-fat cottage cheese , ½ teaspoon vanilla , 2 egg whites in a blender . 
Spray skillet with cooking spray , and cook batter in silver dollar sizes . Serve 
with 3 slices of Canadian bacon
Snack : ½ cup skim milk ricotta cheese , choose either cinnamon or cocoa power to 
taste , add Stevia , ¼ cup canned pumpkin , and 1 teaspoon pumpkin pie spice
Lunch : Chef Salad with 1 . 5 oz . ham , 1 . 5 oz . turkey , 1 oz . low-fat cheese , 1 hard-boiled 
egg white , ½ cup cucumber , ½ cup carrots , ½ cup sliced red bell pepper , 
½ cup tomatoes , thinly sliced red onion , 2 cups romaine lettuce , 1–2 
tablespoons light dressing , plus a side of one serving of fruit
Snack : 1 . 5 oz . turkey , chicken , salmon , or bison jerky
Dinner : Chicken Cacciatore with Italian Green Beans ( see page 193 )  
* Snack 1–2 tablespoons of peanut butter or almond butter with celery
164 The MD Factor Diet
Transformation Day 6
Breakfast : Mexican Omelet ( ½ cup egg whites , ¼ cup red and green peppers , ¼ cup 
mushrooms , ½ cup onion , ½ oz . shredded Mexican cheese )  , topped with ¼
cup salsa
Snack : Lightly salted edamame , choose from 1 cup in pods , ½ cup shelled , or ¼ cup 
dry roasted
Lunch : 3 oz . turkey breast , low-carb pita , lettuce , tomato , mustard , and dill pickles 
with a Greek salad of tomato , red onion , 3 Kalamata olives , and ½–1 oz . feta 
cheese crumbles 
Snack : 2 reduced-fat cheese rounds
Dinner : Lemon and Rosemary Chicken with Turkey Bacon Brussels Sprouts 
( see page 194 )  
* Snack ¼ cup lightly salted sunflower or pumpkin seeds
Transformation Day 5
Breakfast : Pumpkin Delight Smoothie : 2 scoops of vanilla whey or rice protein powder , 
½ cup canned organic pumpkin , 1 teaspoon pumpkin pie spice , vanilla 
extract , 8–12 oz . of water or unsweetened almond milk blended
Snack : ½ cup fat-free or low-fat cottage cheese sprinkled with cinnamon
Lunch : English muffin pizza made on a light English muffin , tomato paste , 
oregano , ½ cup light shredded mozzarella cheese , 2–3 oz . of shredded 
chicken or turkey pepperoni , peppers , and mushrooms . Add an Italian salad 
of lettuce , tomato , cucumber , mushrooms , and 3 olives with light balsamic 
vinaigrette 
Snack : 1–2 tablespoons of hummus with chips made from thinly sliced 
cucumbers , squash , or zucchini 
Dinner : Turkey Burgers and Slaw ( see page 188 ) with slices of fresh cucumbers and 
tomatoes 
* Snack : 3 hard-boiled egg whites with salt , pepper , and paprika 
* Men should choose from the larger 
serving sizes . For example , if the meal 
suggestion calls for 4–5 oz .  , men 
should choose 5 oz . Additionally , men 
receive a third snack . 
Chapter 12 | Keeping Track of Your Progress 165
CHAPTER 12
Keeping Track 
of Your Progress
When my patients start working with me on their MD Factor
Action Plan , they follow up with their dietitian to assess their 
progress , have any questions answered , get more ideas for meal plans , 
and also to help with accountability . Think of this chapter as your own 
personal session , as I ’ m including all the information shared oneon-one with patients . Take the Well-Being & Metabolism Correction 
Quiz located on page 17 , write down your answers , and recheck 
yourself every week to track the improvement in your well-being and 
metabolism . 
165
166 The MD Factor Diet
Week 1 Check-In
Checklist
Place a check mark next to each of the things you accomplished this week . 
❑ I wrote down all the food I consumed each day in my log
❑ I followed the 25–35 gram protein rule and chose my carbs from the
approved lists
❑ I ate my snacks each day
❑ I ate every two to three hours
❑ I took my multivitamin each day
❑ I drank at least eight glasses or four 16-oz . bottles of water
❑ I did not feel hungry this week
❑ I slept well this week
❑ I had energy this week
❑ I had regular bowel movements this week
❑ I lost weight after seven days of following the meal plan
❑ I lost _____ pounds since I began following the meal plan
If you did not accomplish every item on the checklist , don ’ t get 
discouraged . Mastering the MD Factor Action Plan is a new skill , and all 
new skills take time to learn and do . If you got derailed , or if someone 
convinced you to order dessert , don ’ t beat yourself up . Make a new 
agreement and commitment and move forward . 
Chapter 12 | Keeping Track of Your Progress 167
Week 2 Check-In
By now you should have far fewer cravings for sugar and the carbs you 
used to eat , as well as a more stable energy level throughout the day . You 
may be noticing that you ’ re sleeping better , with a lot less fatigue in the 
afternoon when you used to want to nap . Most people also feel more 
level , with a satisfying mental clarity . 
Most important , you should have noticed that you have lost weight—
anywhere between four and ten pounds is normal . 
If you haven ’ t lost weight yet , review what you ’ ve been eating and see 
if there is anything you can change to make it more like the meal plans 
in this book , which are proven to work . If you are eating less or skipping 
snacks , you are likely slowing your metabolic rate , and this can definitely 
slow your weight loss . 
If you are not moving your bowels regularly , this can also slow weight 
loss significantly . I recommend that you take a fiber supplement , such 
as any product with psyllium husk or other powdered fiber you mix 
in water , as well as a magnesium supplement , which you read about 
in Chapter 7 . Also ensure you are drinking at least 64 ounces of water 
every day . 
At this point , I recommend strapping on a pedometer and beginning 
to record the number of steps you take each day . As you know , I don ’ t 
recommend throwing yourself into a full-bore exercise plan right away 
when you start the program , but becoming aware of how much you move 
each day is really helpful . 
Studies show that getting fewer than five thousand steps a day 
is associated with being overweight . Your goal is to move up to ten 
thousand steps or more each day . You can easily add to your total steps 
by parking your car farther away in the lot from your destination , taking 
stairs , and going for short walks . 
168 The MD Factor Diet
During the Transformation phase , it ’ s best to get on the scale in the 
morning no more than once per week . Record your weight and compare 
it to the previous week ’ s weight . A weigh-in every day can be misleading , 
because your body will always have natural fluctuations from water , fat , 
and gas . Some people get incredibly discouraged if they don ’ t lose weight 
every day , but they still may be losing fat and showing no movement due 
simply to water retention . These weight fluctuations are very common 
when you start the MD Factor Action Plan . 
I urge you to stick to the MD Factor Action Plan meal plan long 
enough to see your body fat change—I have many years of clinical data 
showing how well it works . You will have significant fat loss while lean 
muscle mass is maintained . Don ’ t give up even before you really started 
because the scale seems so stubborn ! A much better way to measure your 
progress is when your clothes suddenly feel loose and your waistline is 
smaller . If you follow the meal plan closely , you will lose body fat and that 
is your ultimate goal . 
What Should I Do If I Get Off Track ? 
If you get off track—perhaps you were traveling on business , had
important family events , had a cold , or just needed a break—restarting
the Reclaim days for up to three days maximum is the perfect way to
regroup . They are also very helpful if you find sugar cravings beginning
to creep back in . It is also helpful to download a meal plan template
from the website , www . MDFactorBook . com , and start tracking your
carbs as well as protein . You may find that you have inadvertently had
more than 100 grams on some days . 
Chapter 12 | Keeping Track of Your Progress 169
Week 3 Check-In
Free Meals
An important part of the MD Factor Action Plan is a Free Meal or 
 “ My Night .  ” This is one meal , once each week , where you can indulge ! 
Have a dessert , or go for that popcorn at a movie . 
Your Free Meal is a great way to help you avoid feeling deprived , or 
as if you are always “ on a diet .  ” The key is to follow up a Free Meal by 
restarting your next meal with a Transformation meal . It ’ s a great way to 
get back to your metabolism-correcting meal plan . 
Start your Free Meals after three weeks on the MD Factor Action Plan . 
By then , you should be in a groove with your meals and snacks , and your 
MD Factor should be going away . 
Some patients , however , are afraid that adding a Free Meal or even 
one “ cheat ” food will trigger cravings and send them back to old habits . If 
you feel this way , wait a few more weeks or even a month or two and then 
try it . By then , your MD Factor should be under control , and eating a 
higher-carbohydrate meal won ’ t trigger large blood sugar fluctuations . 
Free Snacks on Transformation Days
If you ’ ve had a sweet tooth for many years and are struggling with 
needing a sweet flavor or a satisfying substitute for your favorite dessert , 
try adding one of these low-cal , low-sugar cookie , pudding , ice pop , or 
ice cream choices to your meal plan . This does not take the place of 
any meal or snack , so please be sure you eat this in addition to your 
recommended meals . Check www . MDFactorBook . com for updated lists 
of these low-sugar treats . 
170 The MD Factor Diet
Week 4 Check-In
After nearly a month , you should be feeling a lot better , with improved 
energy , mood , sleeping habits , stamina , and mental clarity . Your weight is 
steadily coming off , your cravings are way down , and you ’ re thrilled . 
But this is also the point in the MD Factor Action Plan where the 
honeymoon often begins to end . 
This is the ideal time to make your meals and snacks even more 
interesting . Don ’ t stick with the meals you ’ ve been eating so faithfully , 
unless you find it easier that way . Keep it fun ! My patients see my 
dietitians every week in part to keep it fresh . They share lots of incredibly 
yummy recipes and different flavor combinations . 
Now is the time to use the recipes in Part IV . They ’ ve been tested by 
my experienced team of dieticians and chefs , so you get maximum weight 
loss as well as an incredible range of deliciousness . 
For continually updated recipes and food combinations , please visit 
www . MDFactorBook . com . 
Chapter 12 | Keeping Track of Your Progress 171
BistroMD : Delivers the MD Factor Diet 
Directly to Your Door
Over my many years of fine-tuning , I know that the meal plans work . 
My patients feel better within a week or two , and their intense cravings 
for sugar and junk food carbs have significantly decreased . They ’ ve 
learned to enjoy eating real food in appropriate portion sizes without ever 
feeling starved or deprived . 
The only negative comment I sometimes receive is that eating this way 
takes a lot of planning and a lot of work . Especially for those who aren ’ t 
used to cooking ! 
This comment is valid , because eating well does take more time than 
many of us have . I know how hard it can be to shop for , prepare , and 
cook meals around specific parameters when you are strapped for time .  
( There ’ s a reason fast-food restaurants are so popular , and the time factor 
is a big part of it .  ) I ’ ve always been incredibly busy with my education , 
a demanding career , and a family with four children , so I share the 
crazy schedule many of my patients have . We ’ ve all got work , homework 
help , the endless pickups and drop-offs at sports and school events and 
play dates , shopping , housework , maybe trying to see our spouses once 
in a while , and trying to fit in time to exercise and have a moment to 
ourselves . I ’ m sure you know the feeling ! 
I must also confess that I ’ ve never enjoyed cooking or meal 
preparation , especially if it involves trimming or cooking meat . I never 
manage to time everything so all the components of the meal come out 
at the same time . I was like so many of my patients and ate primarily for 
convenience until about seventeen years ago , when my husband and I 
tucked our toddlers ( who are now teenagers ) into bed one night , hurried 
into the kitchen , and then polished off an entire pizza . We looked at each 
other , and that was it . 
172 The MD Factor Diet 
 “ We are killing ourselves ,  ” we said , and we knew we had to make some 
real changes . 
So , yes , there are many days when it would be so much easier for me 
to just eat a bowl of cereal and then graze on fruit or crackers , or eat out . 
But these are exactly all the things I know trigger the MD Factor and put 
me at risk for future medical problems . 
I don ’ t want my patients to fall into a rut of chicken and broccoli with 
a salad every night , because creating sauces and side dishes with low carb 
counts takes time . It ’ s worth it to have the meal be special—but that won ’ t 
work if you can ’ t find the time to concoct such meals ! 
To tackle this situation , I created bistroMD several years ago . I brought 
the protein , carbohydrate , and fat requirements for each meal and snack 
to several chefs and asked them to create meals that would not only fit the 
nutritional numbers but also taste sensational . I was thrilled to be able 
to create a program that unchains the user from the pressure and stress 
of eating healthy while still providing all of the benefits of correcting 
metabolism dysfunction . I eat these meals for my lunches and dinners 
many nights of the week to help me maintain my weight in a healthy range . 
BistroMD is a labor of love , as the meals are created with high-quality 
ingredients without nitrates , phosphates , other chemicals or additives , 
or even the ridiculously and dangerously high sodium levels frequently 
found in frozen or other convenience meals . My philosophy has been that 
if I won ’ t eat it or feel good about feeding it to my children or my patients , 
there is no way it will be allowed onto the bistroMD menu ! 
The bistroMD diet delivery program differs slightly from the MD Factor
Action Plan outlined in this book . To learn more , see Appendix H on 
page 239 . 
For more information , go to www . MDFactorBook . com . 
Chapter 13 | The MD Factor Maintenance Plan 173
CHAPTER 13
The MD Factor 
Maintenance Plan
After you ’ ve been following the MD Factor Action Plan for 
four weeks , you move on to the Stabilization Phase . This is 
designed to prevent your body from getting too used to eating fewer 
calories than normal and slowing down your metabolic rate . When 
this happens , even if you are following the MD Factor Action Plan 
perfectly , your weight can plateau . This is one of the reasons people on 
low-calorie diets get frustrated and quit . 
There is an easy way to prevent this , and that ’ s precisely what the 
Stabilization phase will do over a two-week cycle . 
✔ During each Stabilization Day , eat two to three more servings of 
healthful carbohydrates . 
✔ Add these carbs into your meals . 
✔ You should be eating between four and five servings of healthful 
carbs on these days . 
173
174 The MD Factor Diet
Stabilization Phase Schedule
6 STABILIZATION DAYS
Women : 120 grams of protein , 100–150 grams of net carbs , 30–40 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , 100–150 grams of net carbs , 40–60 grams of fat
1 RECLAIM DAY 
Women : 120 grams of protein , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 30 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , less than 60 grams of net carbs , 40 grams of fat
6 STABILIZATION DAYS
1 RECLAIM DAY
RESUME YOUR TRANSFORMATION DAYS 
Women : 120 grams of protein , 60–100 grams of net carbs , 30 grams of fat
Men : 140 grams of protein , 60–100 grams of net carbs , 40 grams of fat
Continue this cycle until you reach your goal weight . Then move on to 
the Maintenance Phase . 
Most of my patients continue to lose weight during the Stabilization 
phase . If , however , you follow the Stabilization phase and gain more than 
1½ pounds per week , you may have a stubborn MD Factor . Wait another 
cycle or two before trying it again ; sometimes it takes a few cycles for 
your body to adjust . If it doesn ’ t , read about the supplements helpful to 
defeat the MD Factor in Chapter 7 . Also look at the information about 
the medication metformin and discuss that with your physician , as you 
might need an extra boost to help reverse the MD Factor . 
Chapter 13 | The MD Factor Maintenance Plan 175
Stabilization Days
Stabilization Days for Men
Breakfast : 	 25–35 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
vitamin and mineral supplement , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein , 8 oz . water , option of healthful carb serving
Lunch : 25–35 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 1–2 cups salad , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein , 8 oz . water
Dinner : 25–35 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 1–2 cups salad , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–20 g protein , option of healthful carb serving
Stabilization Days for Women
Breakfast : 	 25–30 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
vitamin and mineral supplement , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–15 g protein , 8 oz . water , option of healthful carb serving
Lunch : 25–30 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 1–2 cups salad , 16 oz . water
Snack : 10–15 g protein , 8 oz . water
Dinner : 25–30 g protein , 1 serving healthful carbs from the approved list , 
1–2 cups cooked or raw vegetables , 1–2 cups salad , 16 oz . water
176 The MD Factor Diet
Stabilization Phase : Additional Food to Eat
Serving Protein Net carbs Fat Fiber
Cereals and Breads
High fiber cereals * ½ – 3 / 4 cup 2–4 8–18 1–1 . 5 10–14
Protein-supplemented cereal * ½ – 3 / 4 cup 10 9 3 5
100% whole-wheat bread 1 slice 3–4 8–10 1 2
Whole-wheat English muffin ½ muffin 3 11 0 . 5 2
1 low-carb wrap 1 wrap 9 8 2 . 5 9
1 low-carb pita 1 pita 6 4 2 4
STARCHES Serving Protein Net carbs Fat Fiber
Whole-Grain and Starchy Carbs
Whole-wheat macaroni , cooked 1 / 2 cup 4 16 . 5 0 . 5 2
Whole-wheat spaghetti , cooked ½ cup 4 15 . 5 0 . 5 3
Couscous , cooked ½ cup 3 . 5 20 Trace 1 . 5
Brown rice , cooked ½ cup 2 21 . 5 0 . 5 1 . 5
Wild rice , cooked ½ cup 3 17 Trace 0 . 75
Baked Potato with skin 3 oz . 1 . 5 20 . 5 0 1 . 5
Baked sweet potato with skin 3 oz . 1 . 5 18 . 5 0 2 . 5
Mashed potatoes ½ cup 2 15 . 5 4 2
Oat bran bagel ½ bagel 4 18 1 1
Whole-wheat pita , 6-inch diameter ½ pita 3 15 1 2 . 5
Whole-wheat tortilla 1 tortilla 4 24 2 . 5 2
Whole-wheat roll 1 small 2 . 5 12 . 5 1 2
Whole-wheat bread 1 slice 4 10 1 2
Corn ½ cup 2 13 . 5 1 1 . 5
Quinoa ½ cup 5 . 5 27 2 . 5 2 . 5
Oatmeal ( uncooked ) 1 / 4 cup 3 11 . 5 1 . 3 2 
* Check the website www . MDFactorBook . com for brands and updated nutritional information . 
Chapter 13 | The MD Factor Maintenance Plan 177
Stabilization Days Meal Plan Examples
Your goals are 120 grams of protein , 100–150 grams of net carbohydrates , and less than 40–60 grams of fat . 
Stabilization Day 1
Breakfast : 1 whole-wheat English muffin , 2 egg whites ( or ½ cup of liquid egg substitute )  , 1 slice low-fat cheese , 
1 slice lean Canadian bacon
Snack : sliced apple , 2 oz . light cheese
Lunch : 1 slice whole-wheat bread , 3–5 oz . deli ham , 1 oz . cheese placed in toaster for an open face melt , deli pickle , 
fresh carrots and cucumber
Snack : protein bar with 10 g protein , low carb
Dinner : 3–5 oz . shredded chicken with cup salsa , ½ cup black beans , 1 tablespoon low-fat sour cream , ¼ cup reduced-fat 
Mexican cheese , bed of lettuce 
* Snack : 3 hard-boiled egg whites with a little salt and pepper , 20 grapes 
Stabilization Day 2
Breakfast : ½ cup oatmeal , 3 pieces Canadian bacon , 2 hard-boiled egg whites
Snack : 1 . 5 oz . beef jerky
Lunch : 1 low-carb wrap , 3–5 oz . chicken , ¼ cup Parmesan cheese , 1 cup chopped lettuce or baby spinach leaves , 
1 tablespoon low-fat Caesar dressing , ¼ cup hummus with carrots or celery
Snack : 7–8 wheat thins or nut thins with 2 tablespoons light cream cheese
Dinner : ½ cup whole-wheat pasta with ¼ cup red sauce ( measure the pasta carefully )  , 5–10 large shrimp sautéed in 
1 tablespoon light olive oil with ½ cup zucchini , ½ cup yellow squash , and ¼ cup chopped onion 
* Snack : 1 light yogurt 
Stabilization Day 3
Breakfast : Breakfast Frittata ( see page 197 )  , 2 slices turkey bacon , 2 slices whole-wheat toast , 1 tablespoon light or sugar-free jelly
Snack : ½ cup 1% plain Greek yogurt with 2 / 3 cup blackberries
Lunch : Curry Chicken Salad ( see page 199 ) over 1–2 cups greens , 1 toasted low-carb pita , 15 grapes
Snack : ¼ cup dry roasted edamame
Dinner : 4–5 oz . salmon served with Pepper Coulis ( see page 209 )  , ¼ cup cooked quinoa blended with chopped spinach 
and olives 
* Snack : 1 oz . lean deli meat , 1 oz . reduced-fat cheese , 3 MD Factor approved crackers 
* Men should choose from the larger serving sizes . For example , if the meal suggestion calls for 4–5 oz .  , men should choose 5 oz . 
Additionally , men receive a third snack . 
178 The MD Factor Diet 
* Men should choose from the larger serving sizes . For example , if the meal suggestion calls for 4–5 oz .  , men should choose 5 oz . 
Additionally , men receive a third snack . 
Stabilization Day 4
Breakfast : 2 veggie sausage patties , 2 eggs ( or ½ cup egg substitute )  , 2 / 3 cup raspberries
Snack : ½ cup 1% cottage cheese , ½ cup diced pineapple
Lunch : Grilled Mediterranean Kabobs ( see page 197 )  , 1 low-carb wrap , 1 cup Dill Cucumber Salad 
( see page 201 ) 
Snack : 1 stick beef jerky , ¼ cup hummus with raw vegetables
Dinner : Lemon Chicken Picatta with Squash Ribbons ( see page 190 )  , 1 small whole-wheat roll , 1 cup spinach 
salad with 2 dried apricots 
* Snack : 1 tablespoon peanut butter with celery stalks
Stabilization Day 5
Breakfast : 3 / 4 cup high fiber cereal with ½ medium banana , ½ cup skim milk . 1 cup liquid egg whites blended 
with ½ cup vegetables ( see page 150 )  , 1 oz . light shredded cheese
Snack : ¼ cup nuts , 1 cup strawberries
Lunch : 4–5 oz . chicken breast with Garlic Velouté ( see page 208 )  , ½ cup French Lentil Salad ( see page 204 )  , 
1–2 cups of fresh greens . Combine all ingredients . 
Snack : 2 light cheese rounds , 1 small apple
Dinner : Pork chops with onion-mushroom gravy and Cauliflower Mash ( see page 191 )  , 1 cup roasted 
Brussels sprouts , ½ cup cooked wild rice 
* Snack : ½ protein bar from MD Factor approved list
Stabilization Day 6
Breakfast : 2 slices turkey bacon , egg combo ( 1 large egg + 3 egg whites )  , 1 cup cantaloupe
Snack : 2 tablespoons light cream cheese on vegetables
Lunch : 4–5 oz . turkey burger , 1 slice reduced-fat swiss cheese , ¼ cup Mango Salsa ( see page 207 ) for burger 
topping , 1 whole-wheat bun , 1 cup fresh salad greens with ¼ mango salsa
Snack : 1 cup light ricotta cheese mixed with cinnamon , 1 medium sliced peach
Dinner : Old-Fashioned Beef Stew ( see page 196 )  , 1 small baked potato with skin , 1–2 cups fresh salad greens 
* Snack : 1 tablespoon hummus , 1 oz . deli meat
Chapter 13 | The MD Factor Maintenance Plan 179
Moving from the Stabilization Phase 
to the Maintenance Phase
Stabilization days form the backbone of your Maintenance Phase . Eating 
the right amount of lean protein every day will keep the weight off , and 
most people are able to reintroduce healthful portions of carbohydrates 
and fats spread throughout the day and not gain weight . 
Follow these guidelines : 
y The best way to add these important additional calories is by
slowly increasing your servings of fruit , vegetables , beans , and
some whole grains . 
y Nuts are a healthful snack , containing protein and healthful fat . 
y Occasional treats such as desserts , chocolate , and wine are
important to add—but remember , most people can ’ t eat dessert
every day and keep the pounds off . 
y You might want to weigh yourself daily instead of weekly , as your
weight shouldn ’ t be fluctuating very much at this point . 
y If a few pounds are starting to creep back , you have added too
much to your plan , or you might still have the MD Factor . Restart
your three Reclaim days . Then go back on Transformation for two
more weeks until your weight is where you want it to be . 
y Make sure to exercise ! 
180 The MD Factor Diet
The MD Factor Action Plan Schedule
3 RECLAIM DAYS
25 TRANSFORMATION DAYS
6 STABILIZATION DAYS
✔1 RECLAIM DAY
6 STABILIZATION DAYS
✔1 RECLAIM DAY
Repeat the Metabolism-Correcting Meal Plan Rotation
✔28 TRANSFORMATION DAYS
✔6 STABILIZATION DAYS
✔1 RECLAIM DAY
✔6 STABILIZATION DAYS
✔1 RECLAIM DAY
Chapter 13 | The MD Factor Maintenance Plan 181
Your Maintenance Calendar
The easiest way to keep track of your MD Factor Action Plan schedule is 
with a calendar . Use this template to help you with your schedule . 
R = Reclaim days , for insulin sensitizing : less than 60 grams of net carbs
S = Stabilization days : between 100 and 150 grams of net carbs
T = Transformation days , for weight loss : between 60 and 100 grams of net carbs 
* Represents a structured break from the program , called “ My Night .  ” Our research shows that this enables you
to make healthy choices on your own . 
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
Day 1
R
Day 2
R
Day 3
R
Day 4
T
Day 5
T
Day 6
T
Day 7
T
Day 8
T
Day 9
T
Day 10
T
Day 11
T
Day 12
T
Day 13
T
Day 14
T
Day 15
T
Day 16
T
Day 17
T
Day 18
T
Day 19 * 
T
Day 20
T
Day 21
T
Day 22
T
Day 23
T
Day 24
T
Day 25
T
Day 26 * 
T
Day 27
T
Day 28
T
Day 29
S
Day 30
S
Day 31
S
Day 32
S
Day 33 * 
S
Day 34
S
Day 35
R
Day 36
S
Day 37
S
Day 38
S
Day 39
S
Day 40 * 
S
Day 41
S
Day 42
R
Day 43
T
Day 44
T
Day 45
T
Day 46
T
Day 47 * 
T
Day 48
T
Day 49
T
Day 50
T
Day 51
T
Day 52
T
Day 53
T
Day 54 * 
T
Day 55
T
Day 56
T
Day 57
T
Day 58
T
Day 59
T
Day 60
T
Day 61 * 
T
Day 62
T
Day 63
T
Day 64
T
Day 65
T
Day 66
T
Day 67
T
Day 68 * 
T
Day 69
T
Day 70
T
Day 71 
S
Day 72 
S
Day 73 
S
Day 74 
S
Day 75 * 
S
Day 76 
S
Day 77
R
Day 78 
S
Day 79 
S
Day 80 
S
Day 81 
S
Day 82 * 
S
Day 83 
S
Day 84
R
182 The MD Factor Diet
Getting the Support You Need
Many couples join my weight management program together . 
Committing to a healthful lifestyle with a partner provides invaluable 
support . Keeping our own weight at a health-promoting level is crucial , of 
course—but so is helping our loved ones manage their own weight . 
Of course , there can be frustration at times , as men typically lose 
weight faster than women . One of the primary reasons has to do with 
body composition . Women will always have a higher percentage of body 
fat , which is needed during the childbearing years to ensure proper 
energy conservation for pregnancy and breastfeeding . Men typically have 
more lean muscle tissue , which burns more calories , even at rest . 
This muscle-to-fat ratio is very important , as you know . A young , 
athletic man needs a good amount of quality lean protein and can tolerate 
more carbohydrates due to his larger muscle mass and activity level . This 
shifts slightly as he gets older and is less active . Women , particularly 
after menopause , need adequate protein but also must confront a more 
drastically reduced tolerance to carbohydrates . 
As a result , I ’ ve found it useful when working with couples to make 
just a few simple changes . It ’ s important that both parties agree to work 
together and that health decisions are mutually agreed on . It ’ s also 
important that no one turns into the food police ! 
Many couples often go out to eat , sharing food and drinks , as this is 
a highly pleasurable thing to do . As you will likely be eating out a lot less 
when you are in the early stages of the MD Factor Action Plan , try to 
find a non-food-related interest to share , such as a hobby or an activity 
( maybe bike riding or hiking )  . Preparing healthful food at home is also 
a great way to experiment and explore your talents as a cook as well as 
spend time together . 
Chapter 13 | The MD Factor Maintenance Plan 183
It ’ s also very helpful to arrange your schedules so both partners can 
exercise without missing obligations or slacking on responsibilities . 
Families , especially those with children , typically have to work hard at 
time management and shared chores to be able to slot in the time to 
exercise while still caring for everyone else ’ s needs . 
For example , my husband and I make arrangements so I can go to the 
gym in the morning and he can go in the afternoon . We divide our family 
responsibilities—which isn ’ t always easy when you have four children—
and I try to make my husband ’ s health time just as important as my own . 
Even better , if you can exercise together , celebrate what your bodies can 
do and get stronger as a couple . 
Keep in mind that it ’ s very easy to sabotage your own or your partner ’ s 
efforts by skipping workouts or overindulging in food and drink . Do your 
best to support each other , because eating well and exercising regularly 
are the best ways to maintain your health and vitality . 
Update : Jennifer , Steve & Michelle
Now let ’ s take a look at the three patients you read about at the beginning 
of this book . 
Jennifer , Triumphant
It is amazing ! I am at 135 pounds and thinner now than I was when I was 
in high school . My friends and relatives who haven ’ t seen me in a while 
can ’ t believe I look this good after having a child . 
It took fourteen months to lose ninety-five pounds . I felt great during 
the entire process , and my energy level is amazing . I ’ ve maintained my 
weight loss for more than six months and have been able to come off the 
metformin . I ’ m planning to conceive this year and I know I am not going 
Eating well and exercising 
regularly are the best ways 
to maintain your health 
and vitality . 
184 The MD Factor Diet
to gain too much weight . My meal plan will be modified for my pregnancy , 
of course , but I will eat the same healthful foods that have become my new 
way of life . I will be monitored for gestational diabetes , since I have had it 
before , but I know I can control it . 
My entire family is feeling better and my husband , Rob , lost forty 
pounds just because we eat better in general . We are great role models for 
good nutrition for our son and his friends , too . 
When I was almost a hundred pounds heavier , I thought my only 
option was weight loss surgery . I am so happy I went to see Dr . Cederquist 
and her team , because I understand my metabolism now and how I need 
to take care of myself to stay healthy and not become diabetic like my 
mother . I should also be able to get pregnant now without worrying about 
my body having trouble absorbing vitamins , which happens after weightloss surgeries and is a real problem during pregnancy . 
Seeing Dr . Cederquist and figuring out my metabolism was one of the 
best decisions I have ever made . 
Steve , Triumphant 
I learned so much about my body and metabolism by coming to see Dr . 
Cederquist . I never realized how important my diet was to my health 
and my weight . I ’ ve always believed that if I just worked out , I could eat 
whatever I wanted and still keep my weight down , but clearly that was not 
the case with me with getting older . 
I don ’ t feel like I ’ m stuck on any type of diet . This is my new lifestyle . I get 
enough protein at all meals and snacks , and I keep an eye on my carb intake . 
It ’ s easy . I still eat out at lunch , but now I just eat the right things . I am now a 
tried-and-true breakfast eater . Eating my snacks really helps , too . I don ’ t get 
overly hungry at mealtimes if I am consistent with eating my snacks . 
The most important thing is that my cholesterol profile is so much 
better . My good cholesterol went up . My triglycerides went into the 
normal range . My blood pressure is also perfect again . I didn ’ t have to 
Chapter 13 | The MD Factor Maintenance Plan 185
start any medications to do it , either . I lost thirty pounds and am back to 
a great weight for me at 190 pounds ; on some of the height / weight tables 
the 190 may still seem high , but I am very muscular . Dr . Cederquist has 
confirmed that my body fat is low and where it should be , and she says 
the proof is in my awesome blood work . My health is back in my control 
and I am so grateful . 
Michelle , Triumphant 
I have my metabolism , my body , and my life back ! 
I was at wits ’ end when I came to see Dr . Cederquist last year . I was 
doing everything possible to lose weight and instead was gaining . I was 
working so hard and had nothing to show for it . I was getting depressed 
and felt my body was letting me down . I thought this is just what I have to 
look forward to with getting older and being postmenopausal . 
When Dr . Cederquist tested my blood , she found that my cholesterol 
was up and so was my test of three-month blood sugar control—the 
HAIC . My blood pressure was also a little high at 140 / 90 . Dr . Cederquist 
recommended that I not take cholesterol-lowering pills or blood pressure 
medication . Instead , I followed the MD Factor Action Plan . 
She also found I was low in vitamin B12 , magnesium , and vitamin D . 
I changed my diet to what she recommended and took my supplements . 
At the end of four months I was back to my perfect weight of 118 . I have 
kept the weight off for almost a year now . 
I am so thrilled . I look like myself again and have my energy back . I 
am no longer craving sugars . My hot flashes decreased as well and now 
they are very infrequent . Dr . Cederquist was very excited to see that my 
cholesterol level is absolutely perfect and so is my blood pressure . I am on 
no medications and doing well . I still work and still travel for work . Eating 
the right way for my metabolism is very doable . It ’ s just not doable if you 
don ’ t have the right information . And now I do ! 
Salmon with red and yellow pepper coulis sauce
PART IV
RECIPES
Main Course Meals 188
Sides 200
Sauces , Toppings , 
Salad Dressings 206
Snacks 211
188 The MD Factor Diet
Main Course Meals 
Turkey Burgers and Slaw
Serves 6 | 30 grams protein | 17 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
Burger
INGREDIENTS
2 pounds lean ground turkey
1 cup oats
3 garlic cloves , minced
2 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce
1 ½ teaspoons dried oregano
1 teaspoon dried basil
dash of salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat grill or large frying pan . Mix all ingredients 
together and form six 1 / 4-inch-thick patties . 
2 . Cook about 6 minutes on each side . 
Slaw
INGREDIENTS
½ small red cabbage and ½ small green cabbage , 
thinly sliced
8 radishes , thinly sliced
1 carrot , grated
1 stalk celery , chopped
dash of garlic powder
2 tablespoons of olive oil
2 teaspoons of vinegar
1 teaspoon lemon juice
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Mix all ingredients together in a bowl and allow to 
chill in the refrigerator . 
2 . Stir before serving . 
Part IV | Recipes 189
Main Course Meals 
Macadamia and Oat-Crusted Halibut 
with Sautéed Spinach
Serves 4 | 33 grams protein | 11 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
Halibut
INGREDIENTS
1 cup old-fashioned oats
½ cup macadamia nuts , chopped
1 tablespoon fresh thyme , chopped
1 teaspoon garlic , minced
dash of salt
3 tablespoons water
1 egg white
4 halibut fillets , or other white fish ( 4 ounces each fillet ) 
spritz of olive oil
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat oven to 400 degrees F . Combine oats , 
macadamia nuts , thyme , garlic , and salt in a large dish . 
In another medium-size dish , beat water and egg white 
until frothy . Dip the halibut fillets into the egg mixture 
and coat the fillet . Then dip into the oat mixture and 
coat on both sides . 
2 . Spritz a casserole dish with olive oil and place the 
halibut fillets in the dish . Bake for 10–12 minutes or 
until the fish flakes easily with a fork . 
Sautéed Spinach
INGREDIENTS
1 tablespoon olive oil
¼ cup onions , chopped
1 garlic clove , minced
4 cups of fresh spinach leaves
dash of salt
¼ teaspoon of white pepper
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . In a large skillet , heat the olive oil on medium 
heat . Add in the onions and garlic until onions are 
translucent . 
2 . Add the spinach and sauté until leaves become wilted . 
3 . Sprinkle with salt and white pepper . Stir before 
serving . 
190 The MD Factor Diet
Main Course Meals 
Lemon Chicken Picatta with Squash Ribbons
Serves 4 | 32 grams protein | 20 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
Chicken
INGREDIENTS
4 boneless , skinless chicken breast fillets 
 ( about 4–5 ounces each ) 
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 large sweet onion , chopped
2 garlic cloves , minced
¼ cup all-purpose flour
dash of salt
1 cup low-sodium chicken broth
juice of 2 lemons
1 tablespoon capers
2 tablespoons fresh parsley , finely chopped
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Pat each chicken breast dry . 
2 . Place a piece of plastic wrap across a cutting board . 
Then , lay the chicken breast on top of the plastic 
wrap and place another piece of plastic wrap over the 
chicken . Using a mallet , flatten the chicken breast until 
it is about 1 / 4 " thick . Repeat with remaining 3 breasts . 
3 . Heat a large sauté pan over medium-high heat and add 
the olive oil . 
4 . Add the onion and garlic to the sauté pan and cook 
until onions are translucent , about 2 minutes . Remove 
from pan and set aside . 
5 . In a shallow , elongated dish , combine the flour and a 
dash of salt . 
6 . Coat both sides of the chicken breast with the flour 
mix and add them one at a time to the hot pan . Cook 
2–3 minutes per side or until they are golden brown . 
7 . Remove chicken breasts from pan and set aside on 
a plate . 
8 . To make the sauce , add the chicken broth , lemon juice , 
capers , and previously sautéed onion and garlic to the 
pan and heat . 
9 . Return the chicken to the pan , bring the liquid to a 
boil , lower the heat , and simmer for about 3 minutes 
or until the mixture has reduced . Add the chopped 
parsley at the end and serve . 
Squash Ribbons
INGREDIENTS
2 medium zucchini
2 medium yellow squash
½ tablespoon olive oil
½ teaspoon garlic , minced
dash of red pepper flakes
½ teaspoon salt
1 / 8 teaspoon black pepper
sprinkle of Parmesan cheese , reduced fat
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Cut zucchini and squash thinly using a vegetable 
peeler down the length of the squash . 
2 . In a large sauté pan on medium heat , add the olive oil , 
garlic , and red pepper flakes . 
3 . Add the zucchini , squash , salt and pepper and cook 
for 3–4 minutes until tender . Sprinkle with reduced-fat 
Parmesan cheese and serve . 
Part IV | Recipes 191
Main Course Meals 
Pork Chops with Onion-Mushroom Gravy 
and Cauliflower Mash
Serves 4 | 34 grams protein | 13 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
Pork Chops
INGREDIENTS
1 pound of button mushrooms , thinly sliced
2 medium shallots , thinly sliced
2 garlic cloves , thinly sliced
spritz of olive oil
4 boneless center cut pork chops , fat trimmed 
( 5 ounces each ) 
1 ½ cups low-sodium beef stock or vegetable broth
3 sprigs of fresh thyme
1 tablespoon olive oil
black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat large sauté pan over medium-high heat . 
2 . Clean and slice mushrooms . 
3 . Add mushrooms to the dry pan and cook for about 
4 minutes until caramelized . 
4 . Slice shallots and garlic and set aside . 
5 . Remove mushrooms from pan and set aside . 
6 . Spritz pan with olive oil and add shallots and garlic to 
the pan . Cook for 2–3 minutes or until caramelized . 
Remove from pan and set aside with the mushrooms . 
7 . Add the pork chops to the pan and brown both sides , 
about 5 minutes per side . Remove the pork and set 
aside . 
8 . Increase the heat of the pan to high and add stock to 
pan and stir . 
9 . Reduce heat to medium . Add the thyme and allow the 
stock to reduce by half . 
10 . Return pork chops to the pan and reduce heat to low . 
Cover and cook the pork for 5 minutes or until the 
pork is fully cooked through . 
11 . Remove pork chops and set aside . Discard the thyme 
stems . Add olive oil to the pan and stir until well 
combined . Then add mushrooms , shallots , and garlic . 
Stir together in the pan to make the gravy . Add black 
pepper to taste . 
12 . Pour the gravy over the pork chops and serve . 
Cauliflower Mash
INGREDIENTS
1 head of cauliflower , cut into large florets
4 garlic cloves
1 ( 14-ounce ) can of reduced-sodium chicken broth
2 ounces of cream cheese , reduced fat
salt and black pepper , to taste
chives , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Combine cauliflower , garlic , and broth in a large 
saucepan and bring to a boil . 
2 . Reduce heat to low and simmer for 15 minutes . 
3 . Remove cauliflower from the pan and drain . 
4 . Place the cauliflower and garlic in a food processor 
and blend until smooth . 
5 . If needed , add 1 tablespoon of the chicken broth until 
desired consistency . 
6 . Add in the cream cheese and season with salt and 
black pepper to taste . 
7 . Fold in chives and serve . 
192 The MD Factor Diet
Main Course Meals 
Stuffed Chicken with Green Bean 
and Tomato Salad
Serves 4 | 32 grams protein | 8 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
Chicken
INGREDIENTS
2 ounces of Canadian bacon , diced
4 light Laughing Cow cheese wedges , garlic and 
herb flavored
4 boneless , skinless chicken breasts 
( about 4–5 ounces each ) 
black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat oven to 400 degrees F . 
2 . Combine the diced Canadian bacon and light 
Laughing Cow cheese wedges in a bowl and mix 
together . 
3 . Cut a slit in each chicken breast to form a pocket and 
stuff about 2 tablespoons of the cheese mixture into 
each breast . Close the opening with a toothpick , if 
needed . Sprinkle with black pepper . 
4 . Bake for 30–35 minutes or until the chicken is cooked 
through . 
Green Bean and Tomato Salad
INGREDIENTS
2 cups fresh green beans , trimmed
1 cup cherry tomatoes , cut in half
1 red bell pepper , thinly sliced
¼ cup red onion , sliced
2 garlic cloves , minced
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Using a small saucepan , boil green beans for 5 minutes 
or until al dente . 
2 . Drain water , place green beans in a medium-size bowl 
and set aside . 
3 . Once the green beans are cooled to room temperature , 
add the cherry tomatoes , red bell pepper , onion , garlic , 
olive oil , balsamic vinegar , and salt and black pepper . 
Mix together until all ingredients are evenly combined . 
4 . Let marinate in refrigerator for 30 minutes to 1 hour 
and serve cold . 
Part IV | Recipes 193
Main Course Meals 
Chicken Cacciatore
INGREDIENTS
spritz of olive oil
1 pound boneless , skinless chicken breast
1 yellow onion , diced
1 green bell pepper , cut into 1-inch pieces
1 red bell pepper , cut into 1-inch pieces
2 garlic cloves , minced
1 ( 28-ounce ) can , diced tomatoes , no salt added
3 tablespoons capers , drained and rinsed
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1 teaspoon dried basil
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Heat a large skillet to medium-high heat and spritz 
with olive oil . 
2 . Add the chicken to the skillet and cook until browned 
and cooked through . 
3 . Once cooked through , remove the chicken from 
the skillet and place on a plate . Add the onions , 
bell peppers , and garlic to the skillet and cook over 
medium heat until onions are translucent . 
4 . Add the tomatoes , capers , oregano , basil , and salt and 
black pepper to taste and mix . 
5 . Return the chicken to the skillet and increase the heat 
to high to bring contents to a boil . 
6 . Reduce heat to low . Cover and simmer for 30 minutes . 
Italian Green Beans
INGREDIENTS
1 teaspoon olive oil 
1 garlic clove , minced
1 pound Italian flat beans , frozen
1 tablespoon Italian seasoning
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Heat oil over medium heat in a medium sauté pan . 
Add the garlic and sauté for 2 minutes . 
2 . Add the flat beats and continue to cook for about 
5 minutes . 
3 . Add the Italian seasoning and salt and black pepper to 
taste and continue cooking until beans are al dente . 
Chicken Cacciatore with Italian Green Beans
Serves 4 | 29 grams protein | 18 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
194 The MD Factor Diet
Main Course Meals 
Lemon and Rosemary Chicken 
with Turkey Bacon Brussels Sprouts
Serves 4 | 34 grams protein | 7 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
Chicken
INGREDIENTS
4 garlic cloves , minced
4 tablespoons fresh rosemary , chopped
4 tablespoons lemon juice
2 teaspoons lemon zest
salt and black pepper , to taste
4 boneless , skinless chicken breasts 
( about 4–5 ounces each ) 
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F . 
2 . Using a food processor , pulse the garlic , rosemary , 
lemon juice , lemon zest , salt and pepper until blended . 
3 . Coat each chicken breast with the mixture and place 
them in a baking dish . 
4 . Bake for 25–30 minutes or until juices run clear . 
Brussels Sprouts
INGREDIENTS
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 pound of Brussels sprouts , trimmed and cut in half
salt and black pepper , to taste
4 slices of turkey bacon
1 cup of chicken broth , low sodium
zest of 1 lemon
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Heat a large sauté pan over medium heat . Add the 
olive oil and the Brussels sprouts and sauté until lightly 
browned . Add salt and black pepper to taste . 
2 . In the meantime , cook the 4 slices of turkey bacon . 
3 . Add the chicken broth to the Brussels sprouts , turn the 
heat to low , and cook uncovered for about 15 minutes 
or until Brussels sprouts are tender . 
4 . Remove from the pan and place in a serving dish . 
Crumble the turkey bacon on top with the lemon zest 
and serve . 
Part IV | Recipes 195
Main Course Meals 
Spaghetti Squash and Chicken 
and Vegetable Stuffing
Serves 2 | 32 grams protein | 18 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
INGREDIENTS
1 spaghetti squash , cut in half lengthwise , seeds removed
1 teaspoon olive oil
2 boneless , skinless chicken breasts 
( about 4–5 ounces each ) 
2 small yellow onions , chopped
3 garlic cloves , minced
4 plum tomatoes , diced
1 green bell pepper , diced
1 red bell pepper , diced
1 cup fresh mushrooms , sliced
¼ cup tomato puree
2 tablespoons fresh basil , chopped
1 tablespoon oregano
1 tablespoon parsley , fresh
3 tablespoons mozzarella cheese , reduced fat , shredded
3 tablespoons Parmesan cheese , reduced fat , grated
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F . Cut the spaghetti 
squash in half lengthwise and place cut side down on 
a baking sheet . Bake for 40–45 minutes or until the 
squash can be easily pierced with a fork . 
2 . Set aside the squash and allow it to cool . 
3 . Heat a large saucepan over medium heat and add the 
olive oil . 
4 . Cut the chicken into small chunks and add to the 
saucepan . Cook until browned and cooked through . 
Remove from pan and set aside . 
5 . Add the onions to the saucepan and sauté until 
translucent , then add the garlic and sauté one minute . 
6 . Add the tomatoes , bell peppers , mushrooms , tomato 
puree , basil , oregano , and parsley . Simmer for 20 
minutes . 
7 . Once the squash is cool enough to handle , use a fork 
to separate the squash into strands . Keep the hollowed 
squash halves . 
8 . Place the spaghetti strands in a large bowl and add 
the sautéed vegetable mixture and chicken . Mix all 
ingredients together . 
9 . Use the hollowed squash halves and stuff each half 
with the mixture and place on a baking sheet . 
10 . Top each stuffed squash with the mozzarella and 
Parmesan . 
11 . Bake in the oven until the cheese is melted and slightly 
brown , about 15 minutes . 
196 The MD Factor Diet
Main Course Meals 
Old-Fashioned 
Beef Stew
Serves 4 | 31 grams protein 
13 grams of net carbohydrates per serving 
INGREDIENTS
1 pound boneless top sirloin
1 large sweet onion , diced
2 cups mushrooms , sliced
4 garlic cloves , chopped
drizzle of olive oil
2 teaspoons tomato paste
2 cups reduced-sodium beef broth
4 cups sliced carrots
1 cup green beans , cut into 1-inch pieces
1 teaspoon cornstarch
1 teaspoon cold water
½ cup fresh parsley
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Dice sirloin into small cubes and cook in a large sauté 
pan until cooked through . 
2 . In a large soup pot add the onions , mushrooms , garlic , 
and a drizzle of olive oil and sauté for about 5 minutes . 
3 . Add the cooked beef to the onion and mushroom 
mixture and stir in the tomato paste and beef broth . 
4 . Add enough water to just cover the contents . Bring to 
a boil . 
5 . Add the carrots and green beans . Cover the pot 
partially and simmer for 30 minutes . 
6 . In a separate bowl , mix the cornstarch and cold water 
together and then stir into the stew . 
7 . Increase heat of the stew and boil uncovered for 
1 minute or until stew thickens . 
8 . Ladle into soup bowls and garnish with fresh parsley . 
Part IV | Recipes 197
Main Course Meals 
Grilled
Mediterranean Kabobs
Serves 2 | 30 grams protein 
12 grams of net carbohydrates per 2 skewer serving 
INGREDIENTS
2 ( 12-ounce ) cans artichoke hearts , packed in water , cut in 
half
2 red , orange , or yellow bell peppers , cut into 1-inch pieces
8 green olives
1 package fully cooked chicken sausage , cut into 1-inch 
pieces
4 wooden skewers
½ cup light Italian dressing
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Slide the vegetables , green olives , and chicken sausage 
pieces onto water-soaked wooden skewers , dividing 
the ingredients equally among each skewer . 
2 . Place kabobs in a baking dish and drizzle with Italian 
dressing to marinate . 
3 . Place the kabobs on the grill until heated through , 
rotating every couple of minutes . 
NOTES
• Serve over a bed of fresh salad greens if enjoying on 
the Reclaim Phase . 
• You may serve with ½ cup cooked quinoa , ½ cup 
cooked brown rice , ½ cup of cooked beans , or 
¼ cup hummus as a healthy complex carb for both 
transformation and stabilization phases . 
Breakfast Frittata
Serves 6 | 16 grams of protein 
4 grams of net carbohydrate per serving
INGREDIENTS
1 ( 10-ounce ) package chopped , frozen spinach
spritz of olive oil
1 teaspoon olive oil
3 teaspoons raw onion , minced
4 fully cooked chicken sausage links , diced into small 
pieces
2 whole eggs
1 cup egg whites
1 cup cheese , reduced fat
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F . Thaw spinach and 
drain the excess water . 
2 . Spritz a pie pan with olive oil . 
3 . In a small skillet over medium heat , heat the teaspoon 
of olive oil , then add in the onion , sauté until 
translucent , and set aside . 
4 . In a mixing bowl , beat the eggs and egg whites . 
5 . To the eggs , add the onion , sausage , spinach , and 
cheese . 
6 . Pour mixture into pie pan and bake for 20–30 minutes 
until the eggs set . 
198 The MD Factor Diet
Main Course Meals 
Eggplant Rollatini
Serves 4 | 24 grams protein 
25 grams net carbohydrates per serving 
INGREDIENTS
spritz of olive oil
1 large eggplant , cut lengthwise into 8 slices
1 ( 10-ounce ) package of chopped , frozen spinach , thawed 
and squeezed to remove excess water
1 ½ cups reduced-fat ricotta cheese
½ cup fresh basil , chopped
2 eggs , whisked or ¼ cup egg substitute
2 cloves garlic , chopped
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1 / 8 teaspoon salt
2 cups marinara sauce
1 cup part-skim mozzarella cheese , shredded
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat oven to 350 degrees F . Spritz 2 baking sheets 
and a 9-by-13-inch baking dish with olive oil . 
2 . Place the sliced eggplant onto the baking sheets and 
bake 10 minutes , and then flip the slices and bake 
another 10 minutes . 
3 . While the eggplant bakes , mix spinach , ricotta cheese , 
basil , egg , garlic , pepper , and salt in a large bowl . 
4 . Remove the eggplant from the oven and distribute 
spinach-ricotta mixture among the bottoms of the 
eggplant slices and roll up each slice around the 
mixture . Place the rolled eggplant pieces in the baking 
dish , seam-side down . 
5 . Liberally cover the rolls in the baking dish with 
marinara sauce . Cover pan with aluminum foil and 
bake for 20 minutes . 
6 . Remove foil and sprinkle rolls with mozzarella cheese . 
Bake uncovered , until cheese has melted and is 
bubbling , about 10–15 minutes . 
Part IV 
| Recipes 199
Main Course Meals 
Curry
Chicken Salad
Serves 4 
| 27 grams protein 
8 grams net carbohydrates per serving 
INGREDIENTS
1 pound of boneless , skinless chicken breast
¼ cup reduced-fat plain Greek yogurt
¼ cup reduced-fat sour cream
1 teaspoon of curry powder , or to taste
½ cup apple , diced
½ cup mango , diced
½ cup celery , diced
1 tablespoon fresh cilantro , chopped
1 teaspoon scallion , chopped
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Place chicken breast in a medium sauce pan and add 
just enough water to cover the chicken . Bring the 
water to a boil and let boil for about 15 minutes until 
chicken is cooked through . 
2 . Remove from heat , drain the water , and allow chicken 
to cool . 
3 . In a large bowl , whisk together Greek yogurt , sour 
cream , and curry powder . Set aside . 
4 . Add the diced apple , mango , celery , cilantro , and 
scallion to the yogurt mixture . 
5 . Once chicken has cooled , dice into small pieces 
and add to the yogurt and fruit mixture . Toss all 
ingredients until thoroughly combined . Cover bowl 
and chill in refrigerator until ready to serve . 
6 . Enjoy on a bed of greens . 
200 The MD Factor Diet
Sides
These delicious sides and the 
sauces that follow can be combined 
with any lean protein choice for 
delicious and endless combinations . 
Swiss Chard and 
Tomato Sauté
Serves 4–6 | 3 grams of protein 
5 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 pound red Swiss chard
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 garlic clove , minced
dash of red pepper flakes
2 small tomatoes , diced
dash of salt
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Separate the stems of the Swiss chard from the leaves . 
2 . Cut the stems and the leaves into ½-inch slices . 
3 . Heat 1 tablespoon of olive oil in a large skillet . Add 
garlic and red pepper flakes and stir occasionally for 
1–2 minutes . 
4 . Add the stems and cook until tender , about 6–7 
minutes . 
5 . Add the Swiss chard leaves and cook until slightly 
wilted , about 1–2 minutes . 
6 . Add the tomatoes and dash of salt . Cook until heated 
through and then serve . 
Part IV | Recipes 201
Sides
Edamame and 
Artichoke Salad
Serves about 9 | 7 grams of protein 
6 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 2 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 ( 16-ounce ) package frozen edamame , shelled
1 tablespoon olive oil
4 shallots , thinly sliced
1 ( 14-ounce ) can of artichoke hearts , packed in water
¼ cup sun-dried tomatoes
¼ cup fresh-squeezed lemon juice
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Heat the shelled edamame in the microwave for about 
2 minutes , until heated through . 
2 . Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat 
and add the shallots . Cook until slightly brown and 
soft . 
3 . Chop the artichoke hearts in half and place in a 
medium-size bowl . Add the cooked edamame , 
shallots , sun-dried tomatoes , and lemon juice . Stir to 
evenly combine all ingredients and serve . 
Dill Cucumber Salad
Serves approx 3 | 2 grams of protein 
5 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 large cucumbers , peeled and thinly sliced
2 scallions , thinly sliced
1 tablespoon lemon juice
¼ cup low-fat plain yogurt
¼ teaspoon garlic powder
¼ teaspoon salt
black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Combine all ingredients in a large bowl and mix . 
2 . Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate until ready 
to serve . 
202 The MD Factor Diet
Sides
Cauliflower Rice
Serves 6 | 3 grams of protein 
4 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium yellow onion , diced
1 cup celery , finely diced
1 head of cauliflower , trimmed and coarsely chopped
¼ teaspoon salt
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . In a large skillet , heat olive oil over medium heat . 
2 . Sauté onion over medium heat until translucent . 
3 . Add celery and sauté for 5 minutes . 
4 . Meanwhile , pulse the cauliflower in a food processor 
until it develops the texture of rice . 
5 . Add cauliflower to the skillet , cover , and cook 5–10 
minutes , until soft . Add salt or other seasonings 
to taste . 
Zucchini Pasta
Serves 4 | 3 grams of protein
4 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 pounds zucchini
2 tablespoons olive oil
salt and black pepper , to taste
¾ cup tomato sauce ( optional ) 
¼ cup reduced-fat Parmesan cheese , grated ( optional ) 
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Using a vegetable peeler , cut zucchini into lengthwise 
ribbons . Peel off several from one side , then turn the 
zucchini and peel off more . Continue to turn and peel 
away ribbons until you get to the seeds at the core of 
the zucchini . Discard the core . You may also do this on 
a mandolin , adjusted to a very thin slice . 
2 . Cook zucchini strips in two batches . Heat 1 tablespoon 
of the oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat . 
When hot , add the zucchini ribbons and a dash of 
salt . Cook by tossing the zucchini for 2–3 minutes , 
until softened and beginning to turn translucent . Add 
additional salt and black pepper to taste . 
3 . Transfer to a serving dish and repeat with remaining 
olive oil and zucchini . 
4 . Serve , topping with tomato sauce and Parmesan , 
if desired . 
5 . This dish is best served right away . However , enjoy 
leftovers with lemon juice and a drop of olive oil . 
Part IV | Recipes 203
Sides
Tomato Tabbouleh
Serves 6 | 2 grams of protein 
5 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 4 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 cup baby vine tomatoes , deseeded , diced , and drained
1 cup flat leaf parsley , rough chopped
¼ cup raw sesame seeds
4 tablespoons olive oil
juice from 2 lemons
4 teaspoons local honey
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Place tomatoes in a bowl and stir in the parsley 
and sesame seeds . Whisk together the remaining 
ingredients and drizzle onto the tomato mixture and 
toss together . 
Roasted Cauliflower 
with Pesto
Serves 4 | 2 grams of protein 
2 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 head of cauliflower , cut into bite-size florets
3 tablespoons olive oil
salt and black pepper , to taste
3 tablespoons pesto , homemade or store bought
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat oven to 425 degrees F . 
2 . Toss the cauliflower with olive oil . Spread on a 
parchment lined baking sheet , sprinkle with salt and 
black pepper . 
3 . Roast until golden brown and tender . 
4 . Transfer to a serving bowl and add pesto . Toss and 
serve . 
204 The MD Factor Diet
Sides
French Lentil Salad
Serves 8 | 6 grams of protein 
10 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 2 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 cup white onion , diced
½ cup carrot , diced
½ cup celery , diced
2 cloves garlic , minced
2 tablespoons white cooking wine
1 ( 18-ounce ) package cooked French lentils
¼ cup low-sodium chicken stock
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . In a medium sauté pan , heat the olive oil on medium 
heat . Add the onions , carrots , and celery and sauté 
until soft , about 5–7 minutes . Add the garlic and cook 
another 2 minutes . 
2 . Deglaze the pan with white wine and allow to boil for 
1–2 minutes . 
3 . Add French lentils until warm . 
4 . Add the chicken stock to moisten the lentils , but not 
drench . Add salt and black pepper to taste . 
White Beans with Pesto
Serves 11 | 6 grams of protein 
14 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 2 cup serving 
INGREDIENTS
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 white onion , diced
2 garlic cloves , minced
2 tablespoons white cooking wine
2 ( 14 . 5-ounce ) cans cannellini beans , drained and rinsed
½ cup pesto , homemade or store bought
2 tablespoons sun-dried tomatoes , chopped
salt , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . In a medium sauté pan over medium heat , add the 
olive oil and sauté onions until translucent . 
2 . Add the garlic and cook another 2 minutes . 
3 . Deglaze the pan with white wine and allow to boil for 
1–2 minutes . 
4 . Add cannellini beans , pesto , and sun-dried tomatoes 
and heat until warm throughout . 
5 . Add salt to taste and serve . 
Part IV | Recipes 205
Sides
Edamame Caviar
Serves 8 | 5 grams of protein 
6 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 2 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 cups frozen shelled edamame , thawed
½ cup carrot , finely diced
½ cup zucchini , finely diced
1 red bell pepper , finely diced
½ cup yellow corn kernels
½ cup red onion , finely diced
1 garlic clove , minced
¼ cup fresh parsley , chopped
2 tablespoons fresh basil , chopped
Dressing
1 / 3 cup fresh lemon juice
2 tablespoons Dijon mustard
2 tablespoons olive oil
¾ teaspoon sea salt
¾ teaspoon black pepper
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Prepare edamame according to package directions . 
Drain and rinse with cold water . Set aside to drain 
thoroughly . 
2 . Combine all ingredients except the dressing . Mix 
gently . 
3 . In a separate bowl , whisk together dressing 
ingredients . Slowly add dressing to the vegetable mix 
until covered to desired amount . Refrigerate until 
ready to serve . 
Ratatouille 
Serves 8 | 1 gram of protein 
3 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 2 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 teaspoon olive oil
1 green bell pepper , diced
2 cups eggplant , diced
1 zucchini , diced
1 ( 14 . 5-ounce ) can diced tomato , fire roasted
1 teaspoon fresh thyme , chopped
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . In a sauté pan , heat 1 teaspoon of olive oil over 
medium heat . When oil is heated , add the bell pepper , 
eggplant , and zucchini and sauté for about 10 minutes , 
until vegetables become soft . 
2 . Add the diced tomatoes and thyme , turn the heat to 
medium-low , cover , and let simmer for another 10 
minutes . Add salt and black pepper to taste . 
Grilled chicken breast with garlic velouté ratatouille and carrots
206 The MD Factor Diet
Sauces , Toppings , 
Salad Dressings
These flavorful combinations 
can be combined with any 
lean protein choice . 
Pineapple Salsa
Serves 8 | 1 gram of protein 
4 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 2 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 ½ cups tomatoes , diced
½ cup red onion , diced
½ cup pineapple , diced
1 red chili , deseeded and diced ( optional ) 
½ garlic clove , finely chopped
2 tablespoons olive oil
juice from one lime
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Place all ingredients in a bowl and toss until 
thoroughly combined . 
Grilled chicken with pineapple salsa topping
Part IV | Recipes 207
Sauces , Toppings , Salad Dressings
Mango Salsa
Serves 5 | 1 gram of protein 
6 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 4 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 ripe mango , diced
2 tablespoons fresh cilantro , chopped
1 jalapeno , diced ( optional ) 
¼ cup red bell pepper , diced
¼ teaspoon ground cumin
1 tablespoon lime juice
salt , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Place all of the ingredients together in a mixing bowl 
and gently toss until combined . Refrigerate until ready 
to serve . 
Tahini Salad Dressing
Serves 6 | 2 grams of protein 
3 grams of net carbohydrate per 2 tablespoon serving
INGREDIENTS
¼ cup tahini
2 tablespoons low-sodium soy sauce
1 tablespoon red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon lemon juice
1 teaspoon fresh ginger , minced
1 garlic clove , minced
¼ cup Italian dressing , reduced fat
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Blend all ingredients up to Italian dressing in a 
blender or food processor until smooth . Slowly 
add the Italian dressing until you reach a desired 
consistency and flavor . 
208 The MD Factor Diet
Sauces , Toppings , Salad Dressings
Garlic Velouté 
Serves 6 | 1 gram of protein 
4 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 4 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 heads of garlic
olive oil , a few drops to oil pan
1 teaspoon flour
1 ½ cups low-sodium chicken stock
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Cut the base of the head of garlic , wrap it in aluminum 
foil and bake at 400 degrees F for 30–35 minutes , 
until tender . Let cool slightly then remove the foil and 
extract the roasted garlic paste . 
2 . Heat a sauté pan with a few drops of olive oil and add 
the garlic paste . Stir as you sprinkle in the flour . Stir 
again and let cook for a few second . Moisten with the 
chicken stock and cook until it reaches the desired 
texture . Season to taste with salt and pepper . 
Marsala Sauce
Serves 9 | 1 gram of protein 
2 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 4 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 tablespoon olive oil
¼ cup white onion , diced
1 clove garlic , chopped
½ pound mushrooms , washed and sliced
1 tablespoon flour
¼ cup Marsala wine
¾ cup low-sodium beef stock
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Add olive oil to a medium sauce pan and heat over 
medium heat . When heated , add onions and garlic and 
cook until onions become translucent . 
2 . Add the mushrooms and sauté until tender . 
3 . Add flour and cook for about 1 minute , and then 
deglaze the pan with Marsala wine . 
4 . Add the beef stock and cook until thickened . Season 
with salt and pepper to taste . 
Part IV | Recipes 209
Sauces , Toppings , Salad Dressings
Pomodoro Sauce
Serves 5 | 1 gram of protein 
2 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 4 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 garlic cloves , minced
2 tablespoons yellow onion , diced
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 tomatoes , chopped
3 tablespoons of fresh herbs ( oregano , basil , parsley )  , 
chopped
salt and black pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . In a saucepan over medium heat , sauté garlic and 
onion in the olive oil for about 2 minutes . 
2 . Add the tomatoes and herbs and continue to cook for 
about 5 minutes until the tomatoes soften . Season with 
salt and black pepper . 
Pepper Coulis
Serves 6 | 1 gram of protein 
2 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 4 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 large red bell peppers
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium shallot , thinly sliced
1 tablespoon red wine vinegar
salt and white pepper , to taste
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Roast the red bell peppers under the broiler , turning 
occasionally until the peppers are blackened all over . 
2 . Transfer the peppers to a bowl and let cool completely . 
Once cooled , peel the peppers and discard the skins , 
seeds , and cores , and then coarsely chop . 
3 . In a food processor , combine the peppers with the 
olive oil , shallot , and vinegar and puree until smooth . 
Season the coulis with salt and white pepper as 
desired . 
210 The MD Factor Diet
Sauces , Toppings , Salad Dressings
Red Thai Curry Sauce
Serves 5 | 1 gram of protein 
2 grams of net carbohydrate per 1 / 4 cup serving
INGREDIENTS
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons Thai red curry paste
1 cup unsweetened light coconut milk
1 lime , juiced
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Place a small sauce pan over medium heat and add 
olive oil . Stir the red curry paste into the pan until 
aromatic . 
2 . Slowly pour in the coconut milk and continue stirring . 
Add the lime juice and cook for about 5–10 minutes 
to thicken . 
Part IV | Recipes 211
Baked Kale Chips
Serves 4 | 3 grams of protein 
6 grams of net carbohydrate per cup serving
INGREDIENTS
1 bunch / bag of kale ( about 5 cups ) 
spritz of olive oil
salt or seasoning to taste ( chili flakes , paprika , cayenne 
pepper , garlic powder ) 
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Preheat oven to 350 degrees F . 
2 . Line a baking sheet with parchment paper . 
3 . With a knife or kitchen shears , carefully remove the 
leaves from the thick stems and tear into bite size 
pieces . Wash and thoroughly dry kale . Spritz with olive 
oil until leaves have a nice coating and sprinkle with 
desired seasonings . 
4 . Bake until the edges brown but are not burnt , about 
10–15 minutes . 
Edamole High-Protein 
Guacamole
Serves 4 | 17 grams of protein 
9 grams of net carbohydrate per serving
INGREDIENTS
2 cups of frozen edamame , shelled and thawed
1 teaspoon salt
2 limes , juiced
dash of cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon cumin
¼ cup fresh cilantro , chopped
1 garlic clove
¼ of a sweet onion
INSTRUCTIONS
1 . Combine all ingredients in a food processor and blend 
until smooth . 
2 . Serve with raw vegetables of your choice . 