Introduction
Carl Lewis
Can a world-class athlete get enough protein from a vegetarian diet to compete ? 
I ’ ve found that a person does not need protein from meat to be a successful
athlete . In fact , my best year of track competition was the first year I ate a vegan
diet . Moreover , by continuing to eat a vegan diet , my weight is under control , I
like the way I look ( I know that sounds vain , but all of us want to like the way
we look )  , I enjoy eating more , and I feel great . Here ’ s my story . 
When I grew up in New Jersey , I always enjoyed eating vegetables and was
influenced by my mother , who believed in the importance of a healthy diet even
though we ate meat regularly because my father wanted it . At the University of
Houston I ate meat and tried to control my weight the wrong way—by skipping
meals . Frequently I would skip breakfast , eat a light lunch , and then have my fill
at dinner—just before I went to bed . Not only is skipping meals the wrong way
to diet , but the way I did it is the worst way because your body needs four hours
to digest its food before you go to sleep . 
In May of 1990 I decided to change the way I ate when I realized that
controlling my weight by skipping meals was not good for me . Within the space
of a few weeks , I met two men who changed my way of thinking and eating . The
first was Jay Cordich , the Juice Man , whom I met at the Houston radio station
where I worked in the early morning . He was there to talk about his juicer , which
makes fresh juice from fruits and vegetables . He said that drinking at least
sixteen ounces of freshly squeezed juice each day will increase a person ’ s
energy , strengthen the immune system , and reduce the risk of disease . A few
weeks later while doing publicity for a track meet in Minneapolis , I met Dr . John
McDougall , a medical doctor who teaches about the link between good nutrition
and good health and was promoting his latest book . Dr . McDougall challenged
me to make a commitment to eating a vegetarian diet and then to just do it . 
I remember vividly making the decision in July of 1990 to become a vegan . I
was competing in Europe and ate a meal of Spanish sausage on a Saturday and
on the following Monday started eating vegan . The hardest thing for me was
changing my eating habits from skipping meals to eating throughout the day—
which is much healthier . I also missed salt , so I substituted lemon juice for
flavor . 
In the spring of 1991—eight months after beginning to eat vegan—I was
feeling listless and thought I might need to add protein from meat to my diet . Dr . 
McDougall , however , explained that my listlessness was due to my needing
more calories because I was training so many hours each day , not because I
needed more animal-based protein . When I increased my calorie intake , I
regained my energy . I was drinking twenty-four to thirty-two ounces of juice a
day . I ate no dairy products . And I had my best year as an athlete ever ! 
You have total control over what you put in your body . No one can force you
to eat what you don ’ t want to eat . I know that many people think that eating a
vegetarian diet—and especially a vegan diet—will require sacrifice and denial . 
Jannequin Bennett demonstrates in this book that eating vegan does not have to
be tasteless and boring . As she says ,  “ vegan eating is a truly indulgent way of
life , as vegans regularly partake of the very best foods that nature has to offer .  ” 
Here are recipes that will excite your taste buds . By the way , a few of my own
recipes are included . 
Keep in mind that eating vegan does require a commitment to being good to
your body and to acting responsibly toward the world around you . Most of us are
not aware of how much damage we do to our bodies and to our world by the way
we eat . I challenge you to write down everything you eat and drink for one
week . You will probably be amazed at the amount of snacks you eat , the
different ways in which milk and cheese are a part of your diet , and—worst of
all—how much fast food you consume . 
Most snacks such as cookies , chips , candy , French fries , and soft drinks are
highly processed foods that have lost many of their useful nutrients . Worse still , 
most of these foods are loaded with fat , salt , and chemicals . For instance , a 1 . 5-
ounce bag of barbeque potato chips has the same number of calories as a
medium baked potato , but 70 times the amount of fat and 20 times the amount of
salt . Cheese and other dairy products are loaded with artery-clogging saturated
fat and cholesterol . Most cheeses get 70 to 80 percent of their calories from fat . 
You have to be especially careful when you eat in fast food restaurants . As the
consumption of unhealthy fast food has increased , so has obesity , which is now
second only to smoking as a cause of death in the U . S . Eric Schlosser reported in
Fast Food Nation that the rate of obesity among American children is twice as
high today as it was twenty-five years ago . Moreover , it seems that wherever
people eat unhealthy fast food , waistlines start to expand . Between 1984 and
1993 , for instance , the number of fast food restaurants in Great Britain roughly
doubled . And so did the obesity rate among adults . Overweight people were
once a rarity in Japan . Fast food restaurants arrived there thirty years ago , and
today one-third of all Japanese men in their thirties are overweight . 
Your body is your temple . If you nourish it properly , it will be good to you and
you will increase its longevity . Being good to your body , however , requires
diligence and determination . I began eating vegan for health reasons and
continue primarily because of that . Others eat vegan for ethical or spiritual
reasons . Whatever your reasons are for eating a plant-based diet , Very Vegetarian
will help you do it with style and taste . 
More information about Carl Lewis can be found on his website
www . carllewis . com . 
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the entire staff at the Jefferson Hotel for their generous
support , especially Pat Manning , Assistant General Manager and Food and
Beverage Director ; Joseph Longo , General Manager ; and the staff of TJ ’ s , in
particular my peeps Angel Fields , Charlie Peebles , and Marion Coe . Thanks also
go to David Bunger , Amber Marchant , Jackie Chan for his enthusiasm about
seitan , and Melanie Schoof for getting the ball rolling . 
I would also like to thank my family : my sister Kyryn for planting the
cookbook-writing seeds years ago , my brother Christian for our earliest
experiments in the kitchen , my brothers Damian and Gregg , and my sisters
Liane , Hilary , and Meaghan for being my first taste testers . 
I am grateful to my friends : Laura Southerland for her vintage seventies
cookbook collection and interest in all things edible , Cheryl Stockton for her
unflagging hospitality and strong coffee , Lorraine Kendrick for her good spirit
and for being a model of perseverance , Janet Dix and Sue Washko for tolerating
my literary hibernation , and Bev and Jim Southerland for being my culinary tour
guides to Washington , D . C , and environs . 
In addition , I thank Larry Stone , publisher at Rutledge Hill Press , for initiating
this project ; Jennifer Greenstein for her patient editing ; and Gordon Bennett for
being my mentor and sharing his editorial insights . 
I thank Villeroy and Boch for the use of china , Lois Bennett for her vintage
serving pieces , and Susan Delgado and Nicolas Timmons for their props and
good natures . 
My thanks also go to my culinary mentors Sinath Phae and Sambeth Enn , the
staff at Rococo ’ s in Charlottesville for their consistent warmth , Susan O ’ Reilly , 
Richard Kelsey for his enthusiastic forays into vegan baking , and all the
wonderful cooks , dishwashers , owners , and servers I ’ ve had the pleasure of
working with through the years . 
Getting Started
Choosing a Vegan Diet
Vegan food is , quite simply , an indulgence . When you indulge , you give yourself
permission to enjoy the very best . Vegan eating is a truly indulgent way of life , 
as vegans regularly partake of the very best foods—the most nutritious , 
appealing , and tasty—that nature has to offer . As you ’ ll find when you explore
the recipes in this book , vegan food is enticing and exciting . A well-crafted
vegan plate offers a festival of flavors , textures , and colors that makes every
meal an aesthetic celebration . 
You may be surprised to read about indulgence in a vegan cookbook . You may
even think of a vegan diet as Spartan or odd . Indeed , vegan diets are still
uncommon in many circles . But vegan / vegetarian eating is no longer on the
cultural fringe . Today we have more information on the vital link between diet
and health . Our shrinking world invites us to rub elbows with more cultures and
experience their cuisines . Our concern about the condition of our environment
grows and our frantic lifestyles send us in search of simplicity . Today , eating a
vegan diet makes more and more sense for those who seek to make personal
choices that have a positive impact on their own lives and on the world at large . 
Good health and feeling good about our choices enable us to be more effective in
our relationships and our work . When we treat ourselves to a healthy and
thoughtful lifestyle , we have the energy to tackle tasks large and small with
renewed vigor . Sometimes a little indulgence goes a long , long way . 
For those readers for whom vegan eating is a new idea , this book will provide
a variety of reasons for giving it a try . For all readers , including experienced
vegetarians and vegans , we offer exciting recipes to whet your appetite for food
and life even further . The bottom line is that vegan eating is about living well—
in health , harmony , and joy . 
What Is a Vegan Anyway ? 
Simply stated , vegans ( pronounced VEE-guns ) are vegetarians who do not eat
any food that comes from animals . Obviously , that means they don ’ t eat beef , 
chicken , pork , or fish . It also means that dairy products , eggs , and even honey
aren ’ t on the menu . 
What Do Vegans Eat ? 
Years of eating meals that shine the spotlight on meat and relegate vegetables
and grains to supporting roles have limited our awareness of their nutritional
talent . On the vegan table , barley , bulgur , and millet share billing with the more
familiar rice and wheat . The healthy vegan demands full lusty performances
from all grains . 
The palette of produce offered is varied as well . Green beans , corn , peas , and
white potatoes—vegetables of our childhood table—now share billing with a
host of other options , creatively and enticingly prepared . 
Legions of legumes—lentils , beans , and peas—grace many a vegan plate . And
soy , so frequently touted in medical circles and the media today , is , in its varied
forms , an increasingly important part of vegan cuisine . 
Though you may not have thought about it , you ’ ve probably been eating
vegan foods all your life . Perhaps they never took center stage , but they have
been there in the background . If your family never ate green beans without
fatback , potatoes without sour cream , or salads without mayonnaise , you are in
for a treat when you try vegan renditions of these foods . Even if you ’ ve been a
vegetarian for years , chances are you have relied on cheese , butter , and eggs to a
large extent , often allowing them to overpower the other elements in the meal . 
The recipes in this book are designed to showcase the essence of the vegetables , 
grains , beans , and fruits that go into them . You will be amazed at the results that
can be obtained with just these ingredients . 
So , while vegans may be defined in conversation by what they don ’ t eat , 
healthy vegan living is all about what they do eat . Vegan eating isn ’ t about
deprivation—it ’ s about fulfillment . 
Why Vegan ? 
Vegans choose to eat as they do for a variety of reasons . Good health is a big
reason . Ethical , ecological , and spiritual reasons come into play as well . This
chapter offers information and reflections on these issues , along with basic
nutritional guidelines , shopping tips , and strategies for changing eating patterns . 
But the main feature here is the recipes . This is , after all , a cookbook ! We ’ re
dishing up food that is delicious , healthy , and inviting , for anyone who is hungry
for really great food . 
Nutritional Issues
You don ’ t need this book to tell you about the importance of eating healthy
foods . Powerful voices such as the American Cancer Society and the American
Heart Association have weighed in on the link between nutrition and health . The
shift toward highly refined foods , with little fiber and more fat , combined with
our more sedentary lives , has taken a toll on our health . As our diets and
lifestyles have changed dramatically over the last one hundred years , heart
disease and cancer become closer to all our lives . 
Much of the increase in fat consumption comes with hefty support from the
meat and dairy industries . In the typical diet of developed nations , slightly more
than a quarter of the fat comes from meat , a quarter from butter and margarine , a
quarter from milk and cooking fats , and a quarter from cheese and the fats in
sweets . Cheese consumption in the United States has risen 300 percent since
1970 , making cheese the leading source of saturated fat in the American diet .  
( For more information on saturated fats , see page 25 .  ) The foods we eat have
often been processed in a way that reduces fiber and vitamin content . A potato is
rich in complex carbohydrates , fiber , folate , and vitamin C before its
transformation into French fries . Potatoes destined for the fryer are often aged in
warehouses so the complex carbohydrates become simple sugars . This helps the
potatoes become brown and crunchy . The peeling , washing , frying , and salting
dramatically change the nutritional profile . One serving of French fries , about 10
to 15 ( who really eats only 10 to 15 ?  )  , has almost 4 times the calories of a
medium baked potato but only one-quarter of the vitamin C and fiber , one-half
of the iron and carbohydrates , and 180 times as much fat and 25 times as much
sodium . 
Processing takes away and , unfortunately , it adds as well . A wide variety of
chemicals not naturally found in our food—pesticides , preservatives , artificial
flavor , and color additives—are added regularly for preservation and
presentation . And when we eat “ futher up the food chain ” to include animal
products in our diets , we consume not only the chemicals used to process and
preserve these foods , but also the chemicals fed to the animals , such as growth
hormones , antibiotics , and the pesticides sprayed on the plants they eat , which
all concentrate in animal fat . We also add items that we should be limiting , such
as salt , fat ( especially hydrogenated fat )  , and sugar . 
Choosing a vegan diet won ’ t magically shield you from nutritional and
chemical pitfalls . But changing your eating pattern to exclude animal products
and embrace whole foods can go a long way toward preserving your health . 
When you say goodbye to animal products and highly processed foods , you
remove all of the cholesterol and much of the saturated fat from your diet . Your
total fat intake will fall from the 36 to 40 percent consumed by the typical
American omnivore to about 30 percent or less . Most of the fats you do consume 
( and yes , fat is necessary for overall health ) will actually be good for you ! 
The fiber content of your diet will increase as well , providing defense against
cancer and heart disease . Increased fiber intake helps regulate blood sugar levels 
( a particular benefit if you are hypoglycemic or diabetic )  . Fiber consumption
also helps you maintain a healthy weight : because fiber makes us feel full , we
actually may take in fewer calories . 
A wide range of vitamins and minerals , including cancer-fighting antioxidants , 
will find their way into your body , and not just in pill form . The traces of
hormones , steroids , antibiotics , and other chemicals fed to animals to speed up
maturation or increase body size will disappear from your diet . If you choose
primarily organic foods , your intake of trace amounts of pesticides and agrichemicals will decrease as well . 
In short , if you decide to change to a vegan diet , if you do away with animal
products and choose varied and less-processed foods , you ’ ll do your health a
favor . 
Ethical Considerations
Though many vegans choose their diet on the simple premise that killing is
wrong , the ethical issues that surround vegan eating are really quite complex . 
Concern for the ethical treatment of animals starts well before the
slaughterhouse . Inhumane practices designed to meet the massive demand for all
animal products are rampant throughout agribusiness—mistreatment of which
the average consumer is often quite unaware . 
The Saga of the Dairy Cow
Think your life is stressful ? Forty years ago the life expectancy of a dairy cow
was twenty years . Today , Bossie can expect to live only four years—four very
hard years . Modern industry practices keep the cows in a nearly continual state
of pregnancy through artificial insemination . Rarely allowed to roam free , 
Bossie and her bovine companions are fed synthetic hormones to increase milk
production by as much as 40 percent , which necessitates frequent milking . She is
also subjected to a steady diet of antibiotics and animal refuse ( the latter linked
to mad cow disease )  . These “ advancements ” in dairy cow productivity have
created a glut of milk , which , in turn , has generated increased marketing
campaigns to create demand . 
Bossie ’ s calves are removed from her side very shortly after birth and shipped
to veal factories . There they are chained in a stall , fed a diet without roughage or
iron to ensure nicely textured and colored meat , and injected with hormones and
antibiotics to support survival until the calf is large enough to slaughter . The old
standard for veal was a calf , six months or younger , fed exclusively mother ’ s
milk . The modern farm industry is able to raise a calf almost to maturity , 
resulting in higher profits from a larger animal whose flesh is like that of a
newborn . 
Productivity at Great Cost
Cows aren ’ t the only ones to suffer . Chickens are often caged so tightly that
they can hardly stretch their wings . Packed in tightly with others , they tend to
peck and claw in desperation—so producers cut off their beaks . Extreme lack of
exercise causes brittle bones that break with the slightest stress . Wire mesh
floors cause foot deformities . Starvation forces molting , which renews egg
production . As a result of pressure from animal rights activists , in 2000 , 
McDonald ’ s agreed to stop buying chicken from suppliers that debeak or starve , 
and required that each egg-laying hen have an eight-by-nine-inch cage . Recently
McDonald ’ s and Denny ’ s have committed to supporting growers who use
controlled atmosphere killing ( CAK )  , which is thought to be the most humane
way to harvest the birds . In this method , nitrogen or other gas replaces a normal
atmosphere and the chickens are said to die with much less trauma . While this
represents a step toward more reasonable treatment , the end can hardly be called
compassionate or humane . Hard to believe that these guidelines represent
improvements ! 
In the business of agriculture , animals are fed , kept , and medicated with an
eye to increased production , not their well-being . And the conditions under
which animals are shipped to slaughterhouses and put to death are far from
humane . When we consume animal products , we lend support to these practices . 
Sharing the Wealth , Maintaining Our Treasures
Raising animals for food is an inefficient use of our world ’ s resources . Grain
is the primary source of nutrition for most of the world ’ s population . Of the land
that is used to produce grain , about a quarter provides feed for livestock . 
Furthermore , acres and acres of tropical rain forests—forests vital to the health
of our planet—are being destroyed daily to make room for cattle to graze . 
Chemical and biological waste runoff from livestock production pollutes our
waterways . When you add up the costs to humanity , raising livestock for food is
a losing proposition . 
Spiritual Reflections
We rarely think of food as spiritual , but there is a strong spiritual aspect to
eating . This is because food is , at its very essence , life giving . The fact that food
is spiritually significant plays out in religions across the human spectrum . In the
Roman Catholic tradition , Benedictine monks and Carmelite nuns maintain
vegetarian diets in conjunction with their contemplative lives . Orthodox
Christian sects require abstinence from animal products during the Lenten
season , a time of prayer and penitence . Many sacred scriptures instruct their
followers to avoid senseless killing . The best known connection between
vegetarianism and religion is ahimsa , or the ideal of harmlessness , which is
common to Buddhism , Jainism , and Hinduism . 
Deciding to pursue a vegan diet can be an active choice to do what is good . In
seeking to do no harm—to ourselves , to other beings , and to the earth—we draw
from the spirit and feed the spirit . 
The Bottom Line
There are myriad reasons to embrace a vegan diet . A vegan diet will improve
your health . It is healthier for the environment . Eating only plant-based food
speaks against the cruelties often perpetrated against other beings for the sake of
commerce . Eating vegan is a peaceful choice , one that may feed us spiritually
and improve our lot as human beings . Vegan eating is also delicious . It
introduces a creative aspect to the act of eating , enriching our day-to-day
existence . At the very basis of the choice of a vegan diet is respect : respect for
your own life and the lives of others . Inherent in the choice is a desire to live
mindful of the consequences of our daily decisions , and an acknowledgment of
the connection linking humans , animals , and the earth . 
All the rhetoric and arguments aside , veganism is a joyous celebration of life . 
A decision to live in a healthful and compassionate fashion feeds not just the
body but the soul . Surround yourself with what you need to continue on this
journey to health and wholeness . 
Eating Vegan with Ease : 
Seasoned Advice
Living vegan in a meat and dairy world sometimes seems like a tough fit . 
Dinner parties , dinners out , even a foray to the local grocery store may at times
seem daunting to the unpracticed . Planning meals may present particular
challenges to those long accustomed to offering vegetable “ sides ” to accompany
a meat-based main dish . Furthermore , vegans often find themselves explaining
their food choices to others . Vegan eating should be a celebration , not a chore . 
Here are some simple tips to help the novice or seasoned vegan fully enjoy the
vegan celebration . 
Learning to Think Vegan
If a vegan diet is new to you , allow yourself time for transition . It takes time
to change your perception of what a meal should include . It takes time to master
the nutritional knowledge that allows you to fully benefit from the foods you
choose . Changing a lifetime of eating habits will not happen overnight . 
Identifying why you want to change your eating habits can help you stay
motivated when those familiar temptations arise . People come to this dietary
lifestyle for a wide variety of reasons . Your goal may be as general as “ I ’ d like to
feel better ” or as specific as “ I ’ d like to reduce my risk of heart disease , cancer , 
and Type II diabetes .  ” Being clear on why you want to make this change can
help you stay focused should the going get rough . 
Setting specific goals for yourself can give a sense of accomplishment . If all
your meals currently contain meat , you may want to declare one day “ meatless .  ” 
If you don ’ t eat meat but have dairy products every day , you will need a plan to
wean yourself from them . Clearly stated reasoning and goals can help ensure
success . 
In the beginning , you may want to stick with familiar foods that you know
you like . Some people like to start off with meat substitutes . This may be helpful
in keeping your resolve , but keep in mind that some of these are highly
processed . When you can , check out other cuisines . In many cultures , meat is
scarce and reserved for special occasions and whole cuisines have been built on
the bedrock of beans and grains . 
Liberate yourself from seeing a meal as a main dish and sides . Instead , think
about enjoying an assortment of foods rich in nutrients at each meal . Think
balanced , appetizing , and satisfying . A vegan meal , from preparation to
presentation to consumption , provides an aesthetic experience that is nourishing
to both body and spirit . 
Revel in the preparation . Read cookbooks . Experiment . Taste and smell and
touch . Use the freshest ingredients you can find , including fresh herbs . Broaden
your culinary horizons by introducing yourself to unfamiliar produce and
seasonings .  ( Have you enjoyed an artichoke lately ?  ) Shopping for the Vegan
Kitchen
Eating Close to Home
Most of us have no difficulty finding a wide selection of produce . More and
more grocery stores are offering organic selections that provide a healthy
foundation for your meals . Look for “ USDA Organic ” on the label . 
An even fresher approach is to “ eat close to home .  ” Consider growing your
own kitchen garden featuring your favorite vegetables and a wide variety of
herbs . In a number of areas around the country , small organic farms are
sprouting up—big enough to serve the immediate community , but not big
enough to market broadly . Buying from one of these small-scale organic farmers
not only puts great-tasting and wholesome food on your table , but also helps to
reduce the quantity of pesticides that seep into the ground and water near your
home . 
You can find local organic farmers at area farmers ’ markets , open from early
spring and into the fall in most areas . Make the trip to the farmers ’ market a
special treat in your week . Sniff and touch ripe produce , and buy a fresh-cut
flower or two . Take in the colors and sights and sounds of people enjoying the
earth ’ s bounty . Try to find a vegetable with which you are unfamiliar , and give it
a try . Talk with the growers—ask questions about varieties , storage , and even
cooking . If you find a grower whose wares you particularly like , see if there is a
way to buy from him or her on other days of the week . 
You may be able to buy local produce through Community Supported
Agriculture ( CSA )  . With this arrangement , farmers take “ subscriptions ” or offer
consumers a “ share ” of their crops . As the crops come in , you receive produce in
season , fresh from the field . No matter how you approach it , eating close to
home is healthier , tastier , less expensive , and bushels of fun . 
Grocery Store Logic
You ’ ll be amazed at how many convenience foods are available at your
grocery store to get you started as you learn how to put together meatless meals . 
Most supermarkets have a health food section that makes it easier for you to find
things . Make sure to look there and in the produce section when searching out
soy products . One of our local stores has begun to keep plain and flavored tofu
near the organic produce and sprouts , along with seitan , vegan cheeses , and fresh
Asian noodles . 
Next to the vegan cheeses are the almost-vegan products—the tofu cheeses
with casein , the margarines with whey . You may already be an inveterate label
reader . Perhaps before you concentrated on the nutrition data ; now you will want
to look for animal products masquerading as chemical additives . By far the most
common are albumin ( egg white protein )  , whey ( milk derivative )  , lactose ( milk
sugar )  , casein ( isolated milk protein )  , and gelatin . Lard and suet are obviously
from meat , but stearic acid , a saturated fat , can come from beef or cocoa butter . 
There are plenty of other additives , but it ’ s best to avoid foods whose ingredient
lists read like the index to a chemistry text . Try to find the least-processed foods
possible . Avoid items with the words “ hydrogenated ,  ”  “ modified ,  ” or “ artificial .  ” 
Some foods will state on the packaging if they are vegetarian , which usually
means they contain some egg and / or dairy products , or vegan . While there may
be a few new terms to learn—such as carrageenan ( a thickener made from Irish
moss ) and inulin ( a sweetener made from vegetable starch ) —the labels on the
foods you choose should be easy to understand , with ingredients you recognize
as food . 
Once you ’ ve explored your grocery store , locate the local health food store or
natural foods market . The selection of organic produce , flours , sweeteners , and
soy foods is usually extensive . Don ’ t be afraid to ask questions . If the shopper
next to you seems experienced , ask his or her advice if you ’ re confused . People
love to talk about food . 
Off the Beaten Path
Don ’ t forget the little specialty market down the street . Cuisines from other
cultures are an exciting source of great vegan food , and shopping at the local
source is an enriching experience . Larger cities will offer a variety of such
adventures : Asian , Indian , Middle Eastern , Latin American , and more . And you
never know what is just around the corner in smaller communities . Take a walk ! 
You may discover a culinary treasure . 
Leaving Home Without Your Lunch Box
Adopting a vegan diet does not mean the end to eating in restaurants or going
to parties . A little planning can help prevent awkward or embarrassing situations . 
Restaurant Savvy
The restaurant industry has become increasingly attuned to its vegetarian
diners . Many restaurants have vegetarian dishes on the menu , though they often
feature dairy or eggs . With the proliferation of different dietary regimes in the
last few years , most restaurants have grown accustomed to accommodating
guests ’ requests for special diets . You are paying for the food and should be able
to have a dish prepared to your liking . Restaurants want happy guests , so if you
are courteous and patient , your server and the cooks will most likely treat you to
an enjoyable dining experience . Here are some tips for selecting a meal and
communicating your needs : • Many people in the restaurant industry are not
familiar with the word “ vegan .  ” If you merely describe yourself as vegan , you
run the risk of being misunderstood . Gently stating your needs to the server
makes it easier on everyone . Inform your server that you don ’ t eat any meat , 
fish , eggs , or dairy products . 
• Ask the server to recommend something . Many restaurants train their servers to
know which dishes are vegetarian or can be easily adapted to accommodate
different diets . 
• Make sure to ask about hidden ingredients . Often chicken broth or butter are
the clandestine components . Lard is sometimes an issue in Mexican
restaurants , and Indian food may be cooked with ghee , a type of clarified
butter . Japanese , Vietnamese , Thai , and Chinese dishes often include fish , 
clam , or oyster sauce . If you ask whether a dish contains animal products and
your server says he doesn ’ t think so or isn ’ t sure , ask politely ,  “ Would you
check on that for me , just to make sure ?  ” A polite request is almost always
greeted willingly , and may help to communicate just how serious you are
about avoiding animal products . Many dishes can be easily adapted to vegan
standards , and most restaurants are willing to do so . 
• Many dishes are prepared only when ordered by a guest . Look for menu items
with lots of ingredients and determine which ones might be tasty without the
meat , fish , or dairy . For instance , penne tossed with grilled chicken , roasted
vegetables , and red pepper sauce is great without the chicken—or the cheese
that may be sprinkled on top . Filet mignon served with roasted fingerling
potatoes , fiddlehead ferns , and grilled spring onions is wonderful without the
filet—as long as the potatoes are not roasted in butter . In restaurants with
elaborate accompaniments , I often ask for a plate of just the accompaniments
to a dish . Otherwise , I will pick and choose from side dishes listed with
various menu items and ask for a vegetable plate . 
• If your server has no suggestions , and the menu gives no clue what might be
available , determine what you want to eat . It is helpful to let the kitchen know
what you may be in the mood for—a huge plate of grilled vegetables ; a bowl
of pasta with broccoli and garlic ; rice with steamed vegetables , soy sauce , and
ginger ; a burrito with refried beans and spinach , topped with pico de gallo . The
more guidance you give , the easier it will be for the server and the kitchen to
put together a satisfying meal . 
• Understand that your request may take some extra time . Kitchen crews spend
hours each day preparing ingredients for specific menu items . Special requests
may be a challenge to accommodate , especially at busy times . 
Don ’ t forget to reward your server for the extra effort by saying a genuine 
 “ thank you ,  ” and leaving a healthy tip . 
You can avoid a lot of discussion at the table if you call ahead before you
dine . Simply phone the restaurant and ask if they can accommodate a vegan diet . 
If the person who answers seems confused , you might want to ask to speak to the
manager or chef . Make sure that the person to whom you are speaking
understands that you don ’ t eat any animal products . Try calling early in the day
to allow the chef to plan . 
Get to know the food ingredients and options at restaurants you frequent . 
When some crafty server or chef comes through with a delicious variation on a
standard menu item , make that specific variation part of your next order . 
Though more and more people today are choosing foods that truly nourish
them , your order may be met with more than a little bit of curiosity on the part of
your waiter . Be ready for questions and field them politely . You may be helping
the next vegan diner who comes in the door . 
What about fast food ? 
While fast food chains are probably not your first choice for eating out , there are times
when circumstances may find you waiting in line with your friends or family , wondering what
you can possibly eat . Fast food chains have increasingly tried to make provisions for their
vegetarian customers . Your best bets in the fast food world are salads ( not Caesar , though ) and
salad bars , baked potatoes , tostadas or tacos with vegan refried beans , subs with only
vegetables , and “ burgers ” with no meat or cheese—just the bun and all the fixings . Be aware
that salad dressings may contain gelatin , flour tortillas may contain dairy products , rolls and
buns may contain eggs or egg whites , and beans may contain lard . Do not expect the counter
people to be able to answer questions reliably about vegan options . Many of the larger chains
have vegetarian information on their websites . While these foods may be vegan , do not expect
healthful preparations . Ultimately , a little planning can eliminate the need to depend on fast
food . For specific information , check out the website for the Vegetarian Resource Group 
( www . vrg . org )  . They offer a state-by-state guide of vegetarian and vegan friendly restaurants
along with a thirty-two-page guide to vegetarian menu items at restaurant and fast food chains . 
Parties
Food plays a central role in the way we traditionally celebrate life ’ s
milestones , but the food is not the reason for the gathering . There will be times
when the menu doesn ’ t match your needs , but go—and enjoy the celebration for
the main event , not the culinary sideline . 
Casual get-togethers and cookouts are perhaps the easiest settings to manage . 
If each guest is bringing a dish to share or meat to grill , you can share a large
bowl of vegan potato salad or a platter of hummus and veggies , or bring your
own veggie burgers—just make sure to be the first one at the grill . 
If the invitation is to a dinner party at someone ’ s home , after telling that host
how delighted you are at the invitation , slip in a gentle reminder that you are a
vegan . You might want to assure your host that a plate of the side dishes or a
large salad is sufficient . If you know your host well enough , offer to bring a dish
to share with the entire group . My hosts have welcomed contributions from my
own kitchen ( who refuses food from a chef , after all ?  ) and have appreciated the
opportunity to try something new . 
Food plays a central role in more formal gatherings such as wedding
receptions , so these occasions often pose a quandary . It would be a shame to
miss a lovely occasion because the menu doesn ’ t meet your needs . If you have
been invited to a banquet or catered event , contact your host or the facility in
advance so a meal may be prepared for you . This will save you and your host
embarrassment during the function . 
Celebrating in Your Own Home
Serving a Crowd
Those of us who love to entertain know sharing a meal with friends is one of
life ’ s greatest pastimes . Inviting a casual acquaintance over to eat is a great way
to establish a true friendship . Cooking for “ meat eaters ” can be great fun because
you get a chance to introduce them to the tantalizing flavors , colors , and textures
of vegan food . Share what you love and serve it with style . Your guests will
come back for more—again and again . 
Eating at Home
Don ’ t forget that the most important meals you cook and share are those you
enjoy with your family . Giving loving attention to whole , hearty , and satisfying
vegan meals can make a world of difference in the well-being of those you love . 
A Guide to Vegan Nutrition
Choosing to embrace a vegan diet requires careful consideration . Carrying out
that decision is a thoughtful process as well . The healthy diner—vegan or
otherwise—must know something about nutrition in order to plan nourishing and
enticing meals . The information in this section will provide you with a wealth of
information that you can use to make sound nutritional decisions . 
The USDA introduced the food pyramid in 1992 as a graphic depiction of
dietary guidelines . The latest version can be found at www . mypyramid . gov , 
where recommendations are given based on age , gender and activity level . There
are specific suggestions in the Tips and Resources section for those following
vegetarian diets . Whatever the guidance , each plan is built on a strong
foundation of complex carbohydrates , fruits , and vegetables . 
Many of us are familiar with the term RDA , Recommended Dietary
Allowance . This was the intake level of a particular nutrient that was deemed
adequate for all the known needs of healthy people . In 1995 , this was expanded
to incorporate a broader understanding of the role that nutrition has in preventing
chronic disease , promoting health and performance . 
So the RDA has been replaced by the DRI , Dietary Reference Intakes . This
number is comprised of four different reference values and is thought to give
more accurate guidelines for nutrients in a wider range of settings and personal
circumstances . 
In 1997 the American Dietetic Association officially endorsed vegetarian
diets , and vegan diets specifically , as being nutritionally sound and providing
health benefits in the prevention and treatment of certain diseases . Vegans take
in significantly higher amounts of fiber , vitamin C , potassium , magnesium , 
vitamin B-6 , and folate than even lacto-ovo-vegetarians . A sound vegan diet , 
however , must be planned to meet specific nutritional requirements . Guidelines
for vegans include 6 to 11 servings of grains ( including breads , pastas , and
cereals )  ; 3 to 5 servings of vegetables ; 2 to 4 servings of fruit ; and 4 to 5
servings of beans , legumes , seeds , and nuts . The ADA recommends that special
attention be paid to getting enough iron , vitamin B-12 , vitamin D , calcium , and
zinc . Iodine consumption may be a concern as well . While these nutrients may
concern dietitians , the question most often asked by those considering changing
to a vegan diet is ,  “ Will I get enough protein ?  ” 
What ’ s in a Serving ? 
For one serving of grain , you
might eat .  .  . 
1 slice bread ½ cup
cooked pasta
1 ounce dry or ¾
cup cooked cereal
2 tablespoons
wheat germ
For one serving of vegetables , 
you might eat .  .  . 
1 cup salad greens ½ cup
cooked
vegetable
1 medium carrot ¾ cup
vegetable
juice
For one serving of fruit , you
might eat .  .  . 
1 medium orange , 
banana , or apple
2 apricots or
plums
½ cup cooked or
fresh fruit
¾ cup juice
For one serving of beans or
legumes , you might eat .  .  . 
1 cup soymilk or ½ cup
soft or medium tofu
1 cup lentil
soup
½ cup hummus or
cooked beans
2 tablespoon
peanut butter
Getting All You Need
Protein
We all know how important proteins are : they build muscle , repair cells , and
make the enzymes responsible for basic bodily functions like eating , breathing , 
and moving . It is not necessary to consume animal products to get adequate
protein into your diet . What many people don ’ t realize is that they get plenty of
protein from grains , beans , and vegetables . 
Between 23 and 54 percent of the calories in beans and legumes ( lentils and
tofu , for example ) come from protein . Spinach is 49 percent protein , and wheat
germ , 31 percent . If you are eating enough calories and a varied diet , you are
almost guaranteed to be getting enough protein . 
Protein Providers
1 cup cooked lentils 18 grams
1 cup cooked chickpeas 14 . 5 grams
1 cup cooked brown rice 5 grams
2 tablespoons peanut butter 8 grams
1 baked potato 4 . 5 grams
½ cup firm tofu 20 grams
cup soy nuts 12 grams
Many plant foods , however , do not contain all the essential amino acids , the
building blocks of proteins . Most grains , for example , lack the amino acids
lysine and threonine , while many beans lack methionine . This is why a varied
diet is so important . When all essential amino acids are consumed throughout the
day , the body uses the protein more efficiently , meaning that less overall protein
needs to be consumed . 
The daily reference intake ( DRI ) of protein is 56 grams for men and 46 grams
for women . Pregnant women are encouraged to increase their intake to 50 grams
and lactating women to 60 grams per day . Your individual needs may vary
depending on your body size and activity level . Considering the rich assortment
of foods in the vegan diet , meeting protein needs is a snap . 
Iron
Most of the iron in our bodies is found in hemoglobin , which ferries oxygen
from our lungs to our cells . Anemia results when daily iron requirements are not
met and the body ’ s iron stockpile is depleted . The DRI for iron is 8 milligrams
for men and 18 milligrams for women ( 8 milligrams after menopause )  . The
problem in vegan diets is not the amount of iron consumed , but the amount of
iron the body absorbs . While “ heme iron ” from animal sources is readily
absorbed by the body , nonheme iron is much more temperamental . For example , 
a cup of tea can cut iron absorption by half , whereas a glass of orange juice can
increase absorption fourfold . Phytates , chemicals found in whole grains , bind
iron so tightly that it is all but unavailable to the body , but vitamin C largely
counteracts the action of phytates . Phytates are also destroyed by cooking or
fermenting , as in yeast breads . 
You probably naturally pair foods that optimize your body ’ s uptake of iron : 
cream of wheat with strawberries , five-bean chili with tomatoes , a soymilk
smoothie made with pineapple and kiwi , whole grain bread with a slice of
tomato . Eating these foods in combination , and saving your coffee and tea for
other times , can help your body make efficient use of these iron-rich foods . 
Vitamin B-12
This water-soluble vitamin is unique because it is stored in the body . In fact , 
most of us are walking around with a five-year supply in our livers . Our bodies
treat vitamin B-12 as a precious commodity , reabsorbing about 70 percent of
what we use every day .  ( Vitamins are cofactors—they assist in chemical
reactions but are not used up by them .  ) As a result , our vitamin B-12
requirements are very small—perhaps as little as 1 microgram a day , although
the DRI is 2 . 4 micrograms . This is a good thing , since neither plants nor animals
can synthesize vitamin B-12 . 
Many plant-based foods—tofu , greens , legumes , seaweed , and tempeh—
contain a form of B-12 slightly different from the one our bodies can use . To
ensure optimum health , vitamin B-12 should be supplemented in the vegan diet . 
The most reliable vitamin B-12 supplement is cyanocobalamin . The cyanide
ion stabilizes the vitamin until we put it in our mouths , where enzymes remove
the cyanide and attach to the cobalamin . Vitamin B-12 is then escorted through
the digestive tract , changing partners along the way until it reaches the small
intestine where it can be absorbed . This is why chewable and sublingual tablets
are more effective supplements than pills that are swallowed . 
You will need to choose a reliable source of vitamin B-12 . Fortunately , many
common foods are now supplemented . Check the nutrition labels of soymilk , 
veggie burgers , and breakfast cereals . It ’ s best if the label specifies
cyanocobalamin so you know that you are getting an active form of the vitamin .  
( When checking nutritional labels on cereals , be sure to read the values for
cereal alone , without milk .  ) The most fun source of active vitamin B-12 is
nutritional yeast . This handy kitchen helper has a toasted , nutty taste perfect for
sprinkling on popcorn , stirring into hummus , mixing into lentil stew , or making
into mushroom gravy . Try mixing it with ground almonds and a little salt to
make a Parmesan cheese substitute . Nutritional yeast is often used to impart a
cheesy flavor ( see , for instance , Macaroni and Cheeze , page 193 )  . 
Red Star Vegetarian Support Formula ( T6635 +  ) is the only brand of
nutritional yeast that guarantees the active form of vitamin B-12 . Half a
tablespoon contains enough vitamin B-12 to meet the daily nutritional needs of
two people . As a bonus , you ’ ll also get zinc , selenium , protein , and the full
complement of B vitamins . The yeast is grown on cane and beet molasses and is
certified kosher ( except during Passover when no yeast may be consumed )  . For
those concerned , Red Star nutritional yeast is inactive and guaranteed to contain
no candida albicans , a yeast that can cause debilitating infections . 
Vitamin D
If vitamin D worked in corporate America , its title might be CEO of Calcium
Uptake and Relocation . There would be branch offices all over the body and
corporate headquarters located in the intestines , regulating the absorption of
calcium and phosphorus . The central office would then allocate the minerals to
the branches for deposit in bones and teeth . 
Vitamin D is produced in our skin when we are exposed to sunlight . A lightskinned person can meet vitamin D requirements with just ten to fifteen minutes
of exposure two or three times a week in the summer . Darker skin requires up to
six times more exposure for similar results . However , smog and sunscreen
prevent vitamin D production . In high-fiber diets , the vitamin D found in
fortified foods may be ushered right through our system without being absorbed . 
So even though we could theoretically store enough vitamin D in the summer to
carry us through a long , dark winter , it ’ s best to look for supplementation . 
While rickets is not as common as it once was , this vitamin D deficiency
disease is still reported , especially in elders and home-bound individuals . A
breakfast of fortified soymilk and granola would start your day off right by
providing 5 micrograms , your entire day ’ s requirement , of vitamin D . Fortified
breakfast cereals are other good bets . If you choose to take a supplement , 200 IU 
( international units ) will provide the 5microgram requirement . Because vitamin
D is fat soluble and is readily stored in the body , you should be very careful not
to exceed the Tolerable Upper Intake Level ( UL ) for Vitamin D , 50 micrograms
or 2000 IU . Overloading on vitamin D can cause calcium deposits in soft tissues , 
including the kidneys ( ouch ! kidney stones ) or the eardrum ( which may cause
deafness )  . 
Calcium
Calcium is well known as the builder of strong bones and teeth . But did you
know that calcium is also necessary for the transmission of nerve impulses and
for muscle movement ? The good news is that vegans tend to absorb and retain
calcium better than non-vegans do . Some good sources of calcium are green
leafy vegetables ( kale , mustard greens )  , tahini , tofu ( when prepared with calcium
salts )  , almonds , figs , and sunflower seeds . In addition , there are several calciumfortified foods that make it easy to meet the RDA of 1 , 000 milligrams . Most
soymilk is enriched with calcium , providing 300 to 400 milligrams in just 1 cup . 
Tofu processed with calcium salts can provide 300 milligrams in a ½ cup
serving . 
Calcium-Rich Foods
You need 3 to 5 servings of calcium rich foods every day . Here are some great choices : 
1 cup fortified soymilk ( 350 mg ) 
1 cup calcium-fortified orange juice ( 300 mg ) 
5 figs ( 258 mg ) 
2 cups raw or ½ cup cooked collards ( 178 mg ) 
2 tablespoons sesame seeds ( 176 mg ) 
½ cup edamame—green soybeans ( 130 mg ) 
½ cup cooked navy beans ( 128 mg ) 
Some dark leafy greens ( spinach , beet greens , Swiss chard ) contain oxalates
that bind calcium ( and iron )  , making it unavailable to the body . Salt , caffeine , 
and phosphorus can also inhibit the assimilation of calcium . While clearly there
is value to spinach , going easy on salt , salty snacks , and caffeinated beverages is
a good general practice . 
Zinc
Zinc , a trace mineral , is involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates , 
proteins , and fats , and the basic processes of bodily repair and maintenance : cell
reproduction and tissue growth and recovery . Children have a particularly critical
need for zinc in order to maintain normal growth and development . 
The USDA ’ s recommended daily allowance of zinc is 11 milligrams for men , 
8 milligrams for women ( 11–12 milligrams during pregnancy and lactation )  , and
3 milligrams for toddlers , 5 for children 4 to 8 years old and 8 milligrams after 9
years of age )  . 
Eating foods high in zinc is just the beginning of getting enough . The amount
of zinc your body actually absorbs can vary from 8 to 38 percent of what makes
it to your belly . The zinc intake of the average person with a diet including
animal and dairy products is 8 . 6 to 14 milligrams per day . In such a diet , 70
percent of the zinc comes from animal sources . Furthermore , with a diet high in
animal products and low in fiber , a large percentage of the zinc that is consumed
is absorbed . 
Zinc Sources
1 cup bran flakes 5 milligrams
1 cups Special K 3 . 7 milligrams
¾ cup Nutrigrain 3 . 7 milligrams
½ cup Grape-nuts 1 . 2 milligrams
2 tablespoons toasted wheat germ 3 . 2 milligrams
2 tablespoons peanuts 1 . 8 milligrams
2 tablespoons pumpkin seeds 1 . 2 milligrams
2 tablespoons tahini 1 . 3 milligrams
½ cup cooked chickpeas 1 . 3 milligrams
½ cup cooked tempeh 1 . 5 milligrams
½ cup cooked TVP 1 . 4 milligrams 
( texturized vegetable protein ) 
Plant-based diets , emphasizing whole grains , may actually contain more than
the recommended amount of zinc , but much of it is not in a form that the body
can use . Phytates , a compound found in whole grains , and fiber both bind zinc
and other minerals , making them inaccessible to the body . 
You may say to yourself ,  “ I ’ ll just keep eating dairy if animal sources are a
good source of zinc .  ” Actually , a diet high in calcium makes phytates bind
minerals more effectively , so lacto-ovo vegetarians may need more zinc than
vegans . 
Zinc lozenges aren ’ t the answer , either . Zinc is more effectively absorbed in
small doses . Large doses of zinc may elevate cholesterol by affecting the balance
of LDL and HDL proteins , the bad and good lipoproteins that regulate
cholesterol . Excess zinc can also cause copper deficiency by out-competing
copper for its binding sites , which in turn can impair immune function . Besides , 
many zinc lozenges contain compounds such as mannitol , sorbitol , and citrate
that actually bind the zinc , keeping it inaccessible . 
Many high-fiber foods contain a correspondingly high amount of zinc , so
while much of the zinc isn ’ t available , a reasonable amount makes it to the
bloodstream . Also , phytates are fairly easy to circumvent . Cooking and
fermentation destroy phytates , making the zinc available to the body . So yeasted
whole grain breads are excellent sources of zinc . Only 5 percent of the zinc may
be absorbed from an unprocessed whole grain cereal , but once two-thirds of the
phytates are destroyed through fermentation , 20 percent of the zinc is absorbed . 
Some cereals also may be malted , increasing the availability of the minerals in
the grains . Fermented soy foods—miso , tempeh , soy sauce—are good sources of
trace minerals with high bio-availability . 
To be safe , the USDA is now recommending that vegetarians get one-and-ahalf times the RDA of zinc—making the requirements 22 milligrams for men , 18
milligrams for women , and 15 milligrams for children—since we don ’ t know
precisely how the body handles zinc from plant sources . What a great excuse to
eat some of the great-tasting and satisfying foods high in zinc . 
Iodine
Since the introduction of iodized salt in 1924 , little notice has been given to
this essential trace mineral . The incidence of endemic goiter , an iodinedeficiency disease , had dropped dramatically in this country . Infant formulas
were supplemented with iodine beginning in the 1960s . Iodized oils have been
introduced in countries where salt isn ’ t commonly used . The RDA for iodine , set
at 150 micrograms , is well below the 250 and 170 micrograms that American
men and women , respectively , consume every day . 
All was quiet on this salty front until the USDA was deciding whether foods
containing soy proteins could make special health claims . Soy contains
compounds that can prevent the body from using iodine , an integral part of
thyroxin , a thyroid hormone that helps regulate your body ’ s energy usage . 
After careful consideration , the USDA observed that no link has been
demonstrated between soy consumption and thyroid disorders , as long as
sufficient quantities of iodine are included in the diet . Persons with low thyroid
function or marginal iodine intake may want to consult a doctor , dietitian , or
nutritionist . 
Raw flaxseeds also contain a substance known to inhibit the use of iodine by
the thyroid . Cooking inactivates these compounds , so baked goods containing
flaxseeds are not a cause for concern . It is advised that no more than 3
tablespoons of raw flaxseeds be consumed each day . 
The most secure way to address these health concerns is to make sure you are
eating an iodine-rich diet . One-half teaspoon of iodized salt provides 200
micrograms of sodium , or 133 percent of the RDA . Sea vegetables have very
high levels of iodine—and they are tasty , too . Kelp powder is widely available in
natural foods markets . Gomaiso , a Japanese blend of seaweed and sesame seed , 
can be found in Asian markets . 
Soy ! 
Everybody ’ s talking about soy .  .  . with good reason . In October 2000 , the
USDA determined that consuming 25 to 30 grams of soy protein each day as part
of a diet low in saturated fat and cholesterol may reduce the risk of heart disease . 
Clinical studies have shown that soy protein reduces total LDL cholesterol 
(  “ bad ” cholesterol ) levels . Intriguingly , researchers have found that in Asian
countries , where soy foods have been a staple of the daily diet for centuries , 
incidences of heart disease , breast cancer , and unpleasant menopausal symptoms
are significantly lower than in the United States . Soybeans contain some
interesting phytochemicals ( plant chemicals ) called isoflavones . These
molecules have structures similar to estrogen , a hormone produced by the
ovaries , and may play a significant role in protecting women ’ s health . Additional
protection against disease is believed to be provided by isoflavones ’ antioxidant
properties . 
Soybeans contain 42 percent protein and eight essential amino acids . They
also contain high concentrations of fiber and minerals . While the nutritional
benefits of soy are clear , the disease-fighting mechanisms are not yet clearly
understood . Research is underway on several fronts , including prostate cancer , 
breast cancer ( where there is controversy about whether soy provides a benefit or
a harm )  , diabetes , and kidney disease . 
What is well understood is that soy is a tasty , healthful food available in a
style to suit almost every taste . Here is an overview of soy products available . 
For recipes and details on how to prepare these products , see “ Soy Foods ”  ( page
241 )  . 
Edamame ( ú-da-MA-may ) is the name given to soybeans when they are eaten
fresh . Similar in size to a butter bean , fresh soybeans have a crunch and sweet
taste something like English peas . They have a very high protein content , so they
do not have the grainy , starchy texture of lima beans . Sold shelled or in the pod , 
edamame should be briefly blanched ( page 205 )  , then refreshed in cold water
before use . A good addition to salads and stir-fries , edamame can also be used
much like English peas or fava beans—tossed into rice for a quick pilaf , strewn
over a salad , or puréed . For edamame recipes , see pages 249–250 . 
Lecithin , extracted from soybean oil , is used as an emulsifier , that is , a
substance that allows fats to be evenly distributed in foods . Lecithin extends the
shelf life of many processed foods by helping them remain moist and preventing
spoilage . 
Miso , a fermented soybean paste , is a staple of Japanese cuisine . Made from
soybeans , grain , or beans and sea salt , miso is inoculated with a mold , 
fermented , then aged for six months to three or more years . Unpasteurized miso
contains natural digestive organisms , like Lactobacillus , the culture found in
yogurt . There are three main varieties of miso : blond , red , and brown . Blond
miso is made with rice , barley , or soybeans only and has a mild nutty flavor and
moderate saltiness . Red miso is made with adzuki beans for a slight sweetness
but sturdy flavor . Dark miso has been aged longer and has a sharper saltiness and
full-bodied flavor . 
Each tablespoon of miso has 35 calories and contains 2 grams of protein along
with vitamin A , folate , niacin , and potassium . Use miso as you would bouillon
cubes or mixed with water in place of homemade stock . Because miso contains
live cultures , it should be added to dishes after cooking is finished . Lighter miso
may be whisked into hummus or added to creamy sauce or salad dressings . 
Darker miso can be added to veggie burgers , stews , or hearty sauces . 
All miso is very high in salt , so wait until after miso has been added to adjust
the final seasonings in any recipe . 
Natto , made from fermented cooked whole soybeans , is used in miso soup
and sushi and as a topping for rice or vegetables . Sometimes compared to blue
cheese in pungency , natto has a very strong flavor to which the Western palate is
not accustomed . Natto has a nutritional profile similar to miso , but with a lower
sodium content . 
Okara is the pulp left after the initial processing stage of tofu or soymilk
production . While it has less protein than whole soybeans , the protein is more
digestible and of higher quality . Okara is high in fiber , with a slightly sweet
flavor . It is used to make sandwich patties and is added to granola , cookies , or
other baked goods . It is also used in soy sauce and as the basis for TVP , a
trademarked brand of soy protein . 
Soybean oil is extracted from whole soybeans . This widely used oil is low in
saturated fat ( 15 percent ) and high in unsaturated fat ( 61 percent
polyunsaturated , 24 percent monounsaturated )  . As with all highly unsaturated
oils , soybean oils are often hydrogenated to extend shelf life . Soybean oil ’ s mild
flavor makes it suitable for salad dressings or sautéing . 
Soy cheese is made from soymilk and can be found in a variety of flavors . 
Soy flour is a high-protein , low-gluten flour made from toasted soybeans . 
Available in de-fatted and full-fat versions , the full-fat type should be
refrigerated to ensure the freshness of the oils . Soy flour may be substituted for
up to 25 percent of wheat flour in most recipes without further adjustments . 
Because of its high fat content , full-fat soy flour will cause baked goods to
brown more quickly . 
Soy grits are made from soybeans that have been toasted and cracked into
pieces . While normally not eaten by themselves , soy grits can be added to rice , 
grains , casseroles , and stews or substituted for flour in some recipes . 
Soy yogurt is made from soy milk , live active cultures , evaporated cane juice , 
and flavorings with a small amount of thickener , usually tapioca or cornstarch . 
Soy yogurt is creamy and satisfying , though a bit thinner than cow ’ s milk yogurt . 
Soy isoflavones are isolated phytochemicals sold as dietary supplements . It is
uncertain whether any benefit is derived from these compounds by themselves . 
Your best bet is to consume these powerful antioxidants in their natural state as a
part of some other soy product . 
Soymilk is made by grinding soybeans into a thick paste with water . Boiling
water is added to the paste , the mixture is cooked , and the soymilk strained off . 
Much homemade soymilk ( mine included ) has a decidedly beany flavor . 
Commercial soymilks have overcome this and are produced in a wide range of
flavors and richness . Most soymilk is fortified with vitamin D and calcium . 
Some soymilk is further fortified with isolated soy protein and thickened with
carrageenan . There is even soymilk coffee creamer that won ’ t curdle when it hits
the hot coffee . 
Soymilk can be found in aseptic packaging on a shelf in the health food
section or in the dairy case . The producers of refrigerated soymilks have made
an effort to replicate the flavor , consistency , and nutrition of cow ’ s milk . Most
brands of soymilk are good enough to drink cold , straight out of the carton—but
make your mom happy and use a glass . Warming the soymilk , either in coffee , 
cocoa , or sauces , tends to underscore its beany beginnings . 
Use soymilk as you would cow ’ s milk . You can even curdle it with lemon
juice for a reasonable substitute for buttermilk . 
Powdered soymilk is available in whole-fat or low-fat versions . It is best used
rehydrated in smoothies , puddings , or cooked dishes as it has a raw , beany flavor
when consumed plain . 
Soy nuts are a high-protein , low-fat snack made from whole soybeans that
have been soaked and then baked or roasted . Soaking the soybeans makes the
proteins more easily digestible . Soy nuts can be found plain in most bulk-foods
departments or packaged in plain , smoked , or barbecue flavors . 
Soy nut butter is made from crushed , roasted soy nuts blended with soy oil to
produce a smooth peanut butter substitute . 
Soy protein can include okara , the pulpy byproduct of tofu or soymilk
production , or simply be processed soy flour . Either coarse or fine , all
formulations are high in protein and fiber . Also called TSP ( texturized soy
protein ) or TVP ( texturized vegetable protein )  , this meat substitute is easily
rehydrated with boiling water and used in chilies , burgers , lentil loaf , or
spaghetti sauce . Manufacturers are increasingly inventive with their
formulations , which include tofu hot dogs , pepperoni , sliced tof-urkey , and
sausage . 
Soy protein concentrates are highly refined , containing about 70 percent
protein ( compared to 38 percent for soybeans )  . These were designed as a food
additive and can be found in many packaged foods . The processing removes
many of the isoflavones . 
Soy protein isolates are a more refined product than concentrates , containing
90 percent protein in a very digestible form . A highly fractionated food , protein
isolates have not been shown to have the same health benefits as eating whole
soy foods . 
Soy sauce , a liquid made from okara or fermented soybeans , is available in
three main types : tamari ( soy byproduct of miso production )  , shoyu ( soy sauce
and wheat blend )  , and teriyaki ( soy sauce plus sugar , vinegar , and spices )  . 
Soy sprouts are packed with protein and vitamin C . They are fairly delicate
and are best eaten raw or quickly sautéed . 
Tempeh , originally from Indonesia , is a fermented soy food . The beans in
tempeh are kept whole , giving it a substantial texture that can withstand most
cooking methods . Use tempeh as you might portobello mushrooms . It is
particularly good barbecued and served with rice and grilled vegetables . For
tempeh recipes , see pages 251–252 . 
What do I do with tofu ?  
 “ But tofu doesn ’ t have any flavor ,  ” is a familiar refrain . Of course , tofu has a flavor ; it is
just subtle . This is what makes it so versatile . You can use it in hearty entrées to show off
intense spices or blend it with fresh fruit to make a tasty , nutritious smoothie . You can fashion
it into meatballs , mix it with ground nuts for a reasonable cheese substitute , or enjoy it very
simply , marinated with soy sauce , sesame oil , ginger , and garlic .  ( For recipes and details on
how to prepare tofu , see pages 243–248 .  ) 
You will find tofu refrigerated in the produce section of the grocery store , or in aseptic
packaging on the shelves of the health food section or the Asian food aisle . The refrigerated
tofu has an expiration date . Once you get it home , remove it from its packaging and change the
water . The tofu tastes fresher if the water is changed every day .  ( I realize that almost no one
does this , but it really does help .  ) 
Asian markets and health food stores often sell fresh tofu in bulk . This tofu is often made
locally or at least close by . Make sure the tofu is immersed in clean water , not sitting out in the
air . The tofu should have a clean , white appearance . 
There are three basic types of tofu . Note that any tofu can be made firmer by pressing it for
a few hours or overnight to remove some of the water ( for instructions , see page 244 )  . 
Soft or silken : Silken tofu is soft , with a creamy texture that melts in the mouth . Use it for
dressings , dips , shakes , puddings , and sauces . It substitutes for yogurt , sour cream , or milk . 
When used in baked goods , it helps keep them moist . 
Regular or medium-soft : The all-around tofu , medium is used for fillings , cheesecakes , 
pies , and salads , or whenever you want a firm texture . 
Firm : The sturdiest tofu , firm is used in soups , on the grill , marinated and roasted , in
casseroles , and on sandwiches . It retains its shape through many cooking methods . 
With the explosion in the soy foods industry , you can now find barbecued , jerked , fried , 
and other flavors of tofu in vacuum-sealed packages . Some of these are delicious ; you ’ ll have
to discover your preferences by trial and error . Look for products that have been minimally
processed and have the fewest possible chemical additives . 
Does tofu grow on trees ? 
Tofu is made by soaking soybeans in water . Soaking the beans activates enzymes that begin
to break down the proteins and carbohydrates , making the beans more digestible . The beans
are then ground , cooked , and kneaded with water to extract the soymilk . The water extracts
much of the protein , phytochemicals , and isoflavanoids , and some of the carbohydrates . The
soymilk is boiled , and then curdled with salt or acid . Calcium and magnesium salts are most
common . The delicate curds are gently placed in a large flat sieve , which allows the whey to
drain . The curds are then pressed . The more the tofu is pressed , the denser it becomes . Some
silken tofu is not pressed at all and has the consistency of yogurt . Firmer tofu is more caloric
but more nutritious . 
Some tofu manufacturers have begun to add soymilk powder to the whey . This process
increases the nutrient level and improves shelf life . It does , however , impart a slightly off
flavor detectable by tofu aficionados . Baked goods , salad dressings , and the like do not suffer
from its addition , though . 
The Skinny on Fat
While most of us need to reduce fat in our diets , it is important not to cut fat
out completely . Fats serve many functions vital to our health . Sixty percent of
our nervous systems , including our brains , are made of fats . Fat-soluble
vitamins , white blood cells , and cell membranes rely on fat for proper
functioning . 
Our bodies can make most of the fats we need for all of these functions except
for two : alpha-linolenic acid ( Omega-3 fatty acid ) and linoleic acid ( Omega-6
fatty acid )  . Since we must get these two fats from our diets , they are called
Essential Fatty Acids ( EFAs )  . Omega-6 fatty acids are found in seeds and
legumes , such as corn , peanuts , and soybeans . Omega-3 fatty acids are found in
pumpkin seeds , walnuts , flaxseeds , and leafy vegetables . 
So how much fat do you need every day ? Chances are that you would
consume sufficient fat if you never added any to the food you prepare . Most
whole grains and beans contain fats of various types . Nuts and nut butters , 
soybeans and soy foods , sesame seeds and tahini , corn , and coconut are also
sources of fat in our diets . Using the USDA standard of 30 percent of all calories
from fat , a 2 , 000-calorie diet should include 600 calories from fat , or 67 grams . 
A low-fat diet that has only 10 percent of calories coming from fat would include
only 200 calories from fat , or 22 grams . 
Saturated , Unsaturated , Hydrogenated : 
A Chemistry Lesson
A little bit of chemistry can be helpful in understanding the differences in oils . All oils are
fats . All fats are made of fatty acids , long chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms with an acidic
group at one end , attached to a chemical backbone called glycerol . Simple fats , or
triglycerides , are formed when three fatty acids combine with one glycerol molecule . 
When the carbon atoms are full of hydrogen , the fat is called “ saturated .  ” When one or
more of the carbon atoms has an extra bond to another carbon atom instead of a hydrogen
atom , the fat is called “ unsaturated .  ” A fat with one carbon double bond is monounsaturated ; 
with more than one , polyunsaturated . 
The saturated fats have long , straight chains that are easy to pack and are usually solid at
room temperature . Palm kernel oil and cocoa butter are examples of naturally occurring highly
saturated fats . Saturated fats raise blood cholesterol levels , one of the risk factors for heart
disease . Saturated fats promote high levels of low-density lipoproteins , or LDLs . These
compounds transport cholesterol to the arterial walls and body tissues . This is why LDLs are
referred to as “ bad ” cholesterol . 
Unsaturated fatty acids have bends in the carbon chains at the double bonds , which make
them difficult to pack . These fats tend to be liquid at room temperature , so we call them oil . 
Unsaturated fats reduce the production of cholesterol and LDLs . Olive and canola oil are
excellent sources of mono-and polyunsaturated fats . 
Super-poly-unsaturated oils have the highest concentration of essential fatty acids . These
oils are found refrigerated in opaque containers . They are very sensitive to heat and light and
react with oxygen very quickly . Flaxseed , primrose , and borage oils are all excellent sources of
EFAs . 
While it is important to consume both Omega-3 and Omega-6 fatty acids , it is important
that they be in the proper ratio . Primitive diets probably contained equal amounts of these
essential fatty acids , but today we may consume ten times more Omega-6 than Omega-3 . This
is important , since these compounds compete in the body . High levels of alpha-linolenic 
( Omega-3 ) acid are thought to reduce the risk of heart disease . However , a high level of
linoleic acid ( Omega-6 ) relative to alpha-linolenic acid has been associated with increased
incidence of cancer . 
Most vegetable shortenings and margarines contain oils that have been hydrogenated , that
is , the carbon-carbon double bonds are broken and hydrogen atoms are added . Hydrogenation
of oils reduces their polyunsaturated nature and produces trans–fatty acids . Trans–fatty acids
raise LDL levels and reduce HDL levels , much as saturated fats do . It is generally thought that
these isomers , normally found in insignificant quantities in oils , have damaging effects on cell
membrane integrity and immune function . 
However , there are some solid vegetable shortenings with no hydrogenated fats . These
products usually contain palm or coconut oil .  ( see glossary following ) To make matters more
confusing , some shortenings claim to have 0 grams of trans fat yet still contain hydrogenated
oil . The catch here is that the level of trans-fatty acids is low and the amount per serving is
considered negligible so the manufacturer can legally claim that there are no trans fat per
serving . This does not mean that they ’ re not there ! 
The best way to avoid trans–fatty acids is to eat a low-fat diet and minimally processed
foods . Hydrogenated oils must be listed separately on the ingredients list of packaged foods . 
By law , ingredients are listed by weight , so the lower down the list of ingredients
hydrogenated oil appears , the less the product contains . This will be of importance when you
are shopping for margarine . Another good rule of thumb is that the harder the margarine , the
more hydrogenated the oil . 
Know Your Oils
Supermarket shelves are painted with a delicate palette of oils , from almost
clear peanut oil to pale canola oil , straw-colored sunflower oil , sun-bright corn
oil , and deep green olive oils . Fats and oils enrich and lubricate foods , make us
feel full , and help control appetite . 
Each oil has a distinct profile , but which oil you use and how are largely a
matter of personal preference . The only exceptions are the oils meant for
flavoring . Walnut , hazelnut , toasted sesame and extra virgin olive oils lose their
fragrance and become slightly bitter when heated . Since these are significantly
more expensive than oils meant for cooking , there should be little temptation to
misuse them . Certain oils sold as dietary supplements , such as flaxseed oil , 
should never be heated . Try adding these to grain salads , salad dressings , and
smoothies . 
Canola oil is a light , pleasant-tasting oil derived from rapeseed , a member of
the mustard family . The tangy mustard flavor , from erucic acid , was selectively
bred out of the rapeseed plant to obtain the canola plant . 
Canola was bred specifically to produce a favorable fatty acid profile : 6
percent saturated fat , 62 percent monounsaturated fat , and 32 percent
polyunsaturated fat . Of these , 10 percent is alpha-linolenic ( Omega-3 )  , 24
percent is linoleic ( Omega-6 )  , and 60 percent is oleic ( Omega-9 )  . 
Canola oil can be used at medium-high heat for sautéing , roasting , baking , and
some stir-frying . 
Coconut oil has a pleasant flavor and may be used for either cooking or
baking . It is often used to give a rich mouth feel reminiscent of butter . While the
fact that it is 87 percent saturated fat concerns some , others believe that the high
lauric acid content and medium chain triglycerides have health benefits . 
Corn oil is pressed from corn kernels and has medium weight , with 13
percent saturated , 24 percent monounsaturated , and 59 percent polyunsaturated
fat , and a high concentration of Omega-6 fatty acid . Corn oil has a light taste and
is excellent for frying . 
Flaxseed oil has a high concentration of EFAs and a delicate nature . It is used
as a dietary supplement . Find flaxseed oil in the grocery or health food store . 
Never heat flaxseed oil . Use it as a healthful addition to salad dressings , on
popcorn , in cereal , in smoothies , or straight out of the bottle . This oil has a
wheaty , slightly bitter flavor . Because it is highly polyunsaturated , it can become
rancid and smell fishy . Use flaxseed oil within 2 months of opening . 
Grapeseed oil is virtually tasteless , with 72 percent polyunsaturated fat and
68 percent linoleic acid ( Omega-6 )  . Its high vitamin E content protects it from
oxidation and increases the shelf life . Its bland background makes it perfect for
infusion with truffles or herbs . Grapeseed oil can be used over medium-high heat
or in cold cuisine . Some manufacturers claim a smoke point as high as 425° , but
experience says 350° . Grapeseed oil is more expensive than most general
cooking oils . 
Hazelnut oil is an excellent source of vitamin E . It has a delicate flavor that is
destroyed by heating . Use it as a flavoring in salad dressings or drizzle it on
cooked vegetables , grains , beans , or stews just before serving . It is rich in
monounsaturated oils , and 1 tablespoon contains half of the RDA of vitamin E . 
Olive oil is pressed from the fruit of the olive tree , which was a gift from the
goddess Athena to the people of Athens and has been cultivated for 5 , 000 years . 
I am tempted to believe that there would be no civilization without olive oil and
garlic . This is an unreasonably biased view , but olive oil , high in
monounsaturates , has been implicated in the good health of Mediterranean
peoples . 
Cold-pressed olive oil is produced without the benefit of steam or chemical
solvents . As the name implies , simple physical force is used to press the oil from
the olives . 
Extra virgin olive oil is made from the first cold pressing of olives , which
yields a deep green oil with a full , fruity flavor . Extra virgin olive oils should not
be heated to high heat , since the delicate fragrance will be diminished . Try
weaning yourself from bread with butter by combining extra virgin olive oil , 
sliced garlic , salt , and pepper as a dip for bread . Extra virgin oil is used like a nut
oil , drizzled over raw or cooked vegetables , grains , beans , or stews just before
serving . 
Many countries require olive oils to carry the acid content on their labels since
this is the way olive oils are distinguished . Acidity contributes a bitter flavor and
hastens rancidity . Extra virgin olive oil may be no more than 1 percent acid . 
Virgin olive oil is 1 to 3 percent acid and also comes from the first pressing of
the olives . Virgin olive oils include a wide variation in color and flavor , from
deep green and fruity to light yellow and mild . 
Olive oil can mean a mixture of virgin oil and oil refined through steaming or
chemically processing the olives . 
Light olive oil has been filtered to produce an oil with a light fragrance . 
Pomace oil is a low-grade oil produced by treating the seeds and pulp of
olives after most of the oil has already been extracted , with steam or chemical
solvents . It can have a slightly bitter , chemical taste . 
Palm oil should not be confused with palm kernel oil . This is a pure white , 
neutral shortening with many uses . Palm oil is 50 percent saturated fat , 38
percent monounsaturated fat and 12 percent polyunsaturated , giving it a healthier
profile than butter ! 
Palm kernel oil , sometimes used in the Caribbean for frying , rivals coconut
oil in saturation . This strong-flavored fat has little to recommend it . 
Peanut oil is versatile , with 17 percent saturated , 46 percent
monounsaturated , and 32 percent polyunsaturated fats . It is excellent for high-
heat frying or stir-frying . Its light flavor makes it adaptable for both cold and hot
dishes . It is an excellent source of vitamin E . 
Safflower oil would be the nutritional heavyweight , with its 75 percent
polyunsaturates , but it lacks vitamin E . Safflower oil remains fluid when
refrigerated , which makes it excellent for salad dressings . It can also take high
heat without smoking , making it a good choice for frying . 
Sesame oil , whether raw or toasted , is high in polyunsaturates . The raw oil is
light in color , with a high smoke point , making it suitable for frying and most
culinary applications . Nutty brown toasted sesame oil imparts a delightful flavor
to Asian dishes , as well as dishes from other cuisines . Use it only for flavoring , 
adding it to hot dishes at the last minute . Never use toasted sesame oil for
sautéing . It is also called “ dark ” or “ Asian ” sesame oil . 
Sunflower oil is highly polyunsaturated and smokes at very low temperatures , 
making it suitable for low-to medium-temperature cooking and salad dressings . 
Sunflower oil is very high in vitamin E . 
Vegetable oil , a term used on many labels , often means soy oil . Soy oil is high
in polyunsaturates ( 38 percent )  , alpha-linolenic acid ( Omega-3 )  , and vitamin E . 
This is a good general cooking oil . It can stand medium-high heat but also has a
light enough flavor for salad dressing . 
Walnut oil is one of the best plant sources of EFAs , especially alpha-linolenic
acid ( Omega-3 )  . Walnut oil may be added to salad dressings or drizzled over
vegetables , grains , beans , or stews just before serving . 
Blended oil is the name given by oil packaging companies to oils that are a
combination of varieties . Oils are blended to improve their nutritional and
cooking profiles . I prefer a blend of 75 percent canola and 25 percent virgin
olive oil as my general cooking oil . Manufacturers will normally explain the
advantages of each blend on the bottles . There are even blends of supplemental
oils , with flaxseed oil mixed with pumpkin seed oil and others to produce a
favorable blend of essential fatty acids . 
Cocoa butter is a fat extracted from cocoa beans during the processing of
chocolate . It is particularly useful in vegan baking to simulate the texture of
butter . Cocoa butter is highly saturated and not recommended for general
consumption . 
Margarine was developed in the late 1800s as a butter substitute . While there
are some brands of both stick and tub margarine made entirely of naturally
occuring fats , most margarines contain hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated
oil . Generally , the harder the fat , the more hydrogenated it is . Many margarines
are fortified with vitamins , particularly A and D . Milk solids and whey are often
added to improve the flavor profile of margarine ; check the label carefully if you
want to avoid these . For all the applications in this book , a softer , stick
margarine will work well . Find a brand with oil listed before hydrogenated oil
and few additives . Try replacing tub , whipped , and liquid margarines with olive
oil , hummus , or white bean spread , or simply omit it from pancakes and waffles . 
Shortening is fat which is solid at room temperature and can stand relatively
high heats . Spectrum and Earth Balance both produce shortenings made entirely
of naturally occurring fats . However , most shortening is made from highly
hydrogenated oil . White and virtually flavorless , shortening does not have the
water inherent in butter and added to margarine . When substituting , add 2
tablespoons of water along with 1 cup of shortening to replace 1 cup of
margarine or butter . 
Fat replacers , such as tofu , applesauce , or mashed banana , contribute a rich
flavor and maintain moisture in low-fat baked goods . Your choice of fat replacer
depends on the recipe . 
How Sweet It Is : Choosing Sweeteners
Taste buds for sugar are located at the tip of the tongue . Perhaps this accounts
for the primacy of sweetness in our cravings and the heated debates that spring
up around our choices of sweeteners . Sucrose , a disaccharide composed of one
glucose molecule and one fructose molecule bound together , is commonly
referred to as sugar . White sugar is processed from either sugar cane—a large , 
bamboo-like plant grown in tropical climates—or sugar beets , a root vegetable
that can be grown in a wider range of climates . Our bodies use various minerals
and B vitamins to metabolize sugar . While some of these nutrients are found in
the cane or beet , refining sugar removes these . In the refining process , char from
animal bones may be used to filter out impurities from the sugar , so vegans
generally try to avoid this form of sweetener . 
Fortunately , a wide range of sweeteners is available , some with interesting
flavors and more substantial nutrition than refined sugar . 
Barley malt syrup is processed from fermented grain . It has an attractive
nutritional profile of soluble complex carbohydrates , maltose , and small amounts
of glucose and fructose . 
Brown rice syrup has a mild , butterscotch flavor that is very pleasant in
baked goods . The nutritional composition—soluble complex carbohydrates , 
maltose , and a small amount of glucose—is not believed to cause the swings in
blood sugar associated with simple mono-and disaccharides . Brown rice syrup is
made by fermenting rice to break down the starches , straining the liquid from
this process , and boiling it to the desired consistency . 
Brown sugar is a widely used name for many sugars that are not white . Much
of the brown sugar sold commercially is refined white sugar with molasses
sprayed on it to give it a deeper flavor and light tan color . 
Concentrated fruit juice is higher in complex carbohydrates than refined
sugar . White grape juice , while acidic , has a mild , tart flavor and can be used in
recipes where leavening is not required . Other concentrated fruit juices make
good bases for smoothies , sorbets , or seltzer drinks . Some fruit juices can be
found dehydrated , in powdered form . 
Confectioners ’ sugar is a finely ground refined sugar used to make frostings
and for dusting baked goods . In the United States , the sugar is mixed with
cornstarch to prevent clumping . In the United Kingdom , it is called “ icing sugar ” 
and has no cornstarch . 
Date sugar is made from ground dates and is composed primarily of fructose . 
The flavor is deep and not suitable to all applications . 
Demerara sugar is a raw sugar from Guyana that is light brown and has a
mild taste . 
Evaporated cane juice is made by dehydrating freshly pressed cane juice
then milling the resulting crystals to provide a uniform product . This requires
much less processing than traditional white sugar while retaining more of the
essential vitamins and minerals . Turbinado , Demerara , and light tan sugar
crystals are more refined than evaporated cane juice . Evaporated cane juice
retains the vitamins and minerals found in cane juice . 
Fructose , also called fruit sugar , is a monosaccharide . This simple sugar is
more easily absorbed by the body than sucrose or glucose . Sometimes found
refined in crystal form , fructose is sweeter than sugar , but loses some of its
sweetening power when heated . 
High fructose corn syrup ( HFCS ) is made by an enzymatic process that
changes the glucose in regular corn syrup to fructose . It has become the
sweetener of choice for most sodas , candy , and snack foods . Because fructose is
a simple molecule , easily absorbed by the body , it is readily converted into fat
when its carbohydrates are not used immediately for energy . There are many
consumer advocate groups trying to ban HFCS from school lunch programs , 
cereals , and snacks . Some health food stores will not carry products made with
it . Does yours ? 
Glucose is a monosaccharide that does not easily form crystals , making it
especially useful in jams , preserves , baked goods , candies , and frozen desserts . 
Corn syrup is composed primarily of glucose . Light corn syrup has been refined
and has a mild flavor . Dark corn syrup has added caramel flavor and coloring ; its
taste is stronger . 
Honey , the product of our industrious apiary inhabitants , is not considered
vegan . It is composed of roughly equal amounts of the simple sugars fructose
and glucose . 
Maltose , a disaccharide , is a natural product of the fermentation of grains , 
making it important to the brewing industry . 
Mannitol is found naturally in small amounts in fruits . It is made by
processing sucrose , glucose , or starch to make a sugar with good sweetening
power and fewer calories . These sugars are not easily digestible and may cause
stomach cramping or diarrhea . Mannitol is not generally sold for home use , 
though it is included in many processed foods , particularly reduced-calorie
products . 
Maple syrup is the boiled down sap of the maple tree . To make 1 gallon of
maple syrup , 20 to 40 gallons of sap are needed . This pleasant-tasting , amber
syrup is graded according to color and flavor intensity : AA is the lightest and
mildest , A is a medium amber and fuller flavored , B is dark and hearty , and C is
a deep brown-black with a molasses-like quality . Maple sugar is also available . 
Both maple syrup and maple sugar are significantly sweeter than refined white
sugar . 
Molasses is the liquid that remains when sugar crystals are extracted from
cane juice . When sugar cane has been allowed to ripen in the sun , the juice is
merely clarified and concentrated , producing unsulfured molasses . Unsulfured
molasses is the mildest and most highly prized . Green or immature sugar cane
requires treatment with sulfur fumes to extract the sugar . The juice is boiled once
to remove sugar , then a second time . The molasses obtained from the first boil
has a higher sugar content and is milder . Both forms of molasses are called
sulfured . The molasses left after the third boiling of the syrup is called blackstrap
molasses . This very dark , bitter syrup is used primarily for cattle feed and
industrial uses , though it is sometimes recommended as a good source of iron , 
magnesium , or potassium . Blackstrap molasses can add interesting dimensions
to hearty breads and desserts when used prudently . 
Raw sugar is a name often applied to products inaccurately . Raw sugar is a
byproduct of sugar production . It is the residue left when both refined sugar and
molasses have been removed from the sugar cane juice . Raw sugar can be full of
bacteria and is not legally used or sold in the United States . The term “ raw
sugar ,  ” however , is often used to refer to any of the light tan to brown sugars on
the market today . 
Sorbitol , see Mannitol . 
Substituting for Sugar
1 cup sugar equals : 
1 cup Succanat
1 cups brown rice syrup . When used in baking , reduce the total amount of liquid in the
recipe by ¼ cup and increase the baking powder by ¼ teaspoon . 
1½ cups barley malt syrup . When used in baking , reduce the total amount of liquid in the
recipe by ¼ cup and increase the baking powder by ¼ teaspoon . 
cup maple syrup . When used in baking , reduce the total amount of liquid in the recipe by
¼ cup and increase the baking powder by ¼ teaspoon . 
1 cup date sugar . When used in baking , dissolve date sugar in the liquid called for in a recipe
to ensure even distribution . 
cup powdered fructose
½ cup blackstrap molasses and ½ cup mild syrup such as brown rice or corn
1 cup turbinado , Demerara , or light brown sugar
½ cup corn syrup . When used in baking , reduce the total amount of liquid in the recipe by ¼
cup . 
Stevia and concentrated fruit juice will vary widely in sweetening power , depending on the
form you use . Follow the manufacturers ’ instructions or experiment before committing a
recipe ’ s outcome to the sweetener . 
Stevia is called the sugar plant , because its leaves are 150 to 400 times
sweeter than sugar and impart no calories to the foods to which they are added . 
Found as a plant , liquid extract , pure powder , and a powder mixed with
extenders to give a profile closer to that of sugar , stevia is suitable for cold
dishes and for adding to coffee or tea . It is not recommended for baking as it
turns bitter on heating . 
Succanat is the brand name for a popular sweetener made by mixing sugar
and molasses back together after initial processing . The resulting brown granules
mix very easily and have a full , mellow flavor , a sucrose content lower than that
of refined sugar , and trace elements found in sugar cane . 
Sugar is the common name for sucrose , a sugar both reviled and loved . 
Turbinado sugar is a raw sugar that has been washed to remove the surface
molasses , making it closer to refined white sugar . Turbinado sugar is light tan in
color with a mild taste . 
At Your Fingertips : 
The Efficient Vegan Kitchen
It ’ s been a long day for everyone , and dinnertime is just around the corner . 
What will you eat ? A well-stocked pantry , efficient equipment , and a little knowhow can make preparing healthy vegan meals a snap and a pleasure . Here are
some tips for setting up a kitchen that will work for you . 
Preparing the Pantry
You ’ ll want to have a rich assortment of ingredients on hand . I ’ m not
suggesting that you buy everything on this list—you ’ d probably have to move to
a bigger place—but buy enough to keep meals lively and you prepared . 
Canned Goods
Canned beans are essential for spontaneity at mealtimes . Canned tomatoes and tomato sauce
can also make meals happen quickly . 
Chickpeas
Kidney beans
Vegetarian baked beans
Refried beans , vegetarian
Lentil soup
Vegetable broth , low sodium
Pasta sauces
Tomato sauce
Diced tomatoes
Diced tomatoes with chilies
Roasted red peppers
Chipotle chilies
Coconut milk
Artichoke hearts
Hominy
Grains
Start with grains you know you like , and then get adventurous . Buying grains from the bulk
section lets you test in small amounts . 
Rice
Millet
Quinoa
Barley
Bulgar
Polenta
Corn Grits
Wild rice
Oils
Choose one or two oils for cooking , then accumulate small bottles of oils for flavoring .  ( See
pages 26–29 for descriptions of oils .  ) 
Canola oil
Olive oil
Extra virgin olive oil
Walnut , flaxseed , or hazelnut oil
Hot chili oil
Toasted sesame oil
Dried Beans / Legumes
Make sure to have some quick-cooking beans like lentils and split peas . Look for smooth
unblemished surfaces . 
Lentils
Black-eyed peas
Black turtle beans
Chickpeas
Pinto beans
Split peas
Fruits / Juices / Teas
Applesauce
Canned fruit in juice
100 percent fruit concentrates
Green tea
Mint tea
Condiments
There ’ s only so much room in the door shelves of the refrigerator , so buy in small quantities
that you can use in a reasonable amount of time . Yeast , vinegar , and soy sauces do not require
refrigeration . 
Nutritional yeast
Ketchup
Mustard
Pickles
Salsa
Salsa verde
Barbecue sauce
Hot sauces
Balsamic vinegar
Rice wine vinegar
Apple Cider vinegar
Raspberry vinegar
Red wine vinegar
Tarragon white wine vinegar
Soy sauce
Mushroom soy sauce
Garlic chili sauce
Red curry paste
Green curry paste
Noodles / Pasta
If you are new to Asian pasta , start with whole wheat or buckwheat ramen noodles .  ( See pages
196–197 .  ) 
Ramen
Rice noodles , broad and slender
Cellophane noodles
Penne
Orecchiete
Spaghetti
Angel hair
Fettucine
Couscous
Soy , Nut , and Grain Milks
Plain
Vanilla , coffee , chocolate , etc . 
Coffee creamer
6-ounce “ juice ” boxes
Sea Vegetables
If you have a friend who uses seaweed regularly—or who has some sitting on a shelf—ask to
borrow some to experiment . A little seaweed goes a long way . Asian markets generally have
better prices on seaweed . Store seaweed in a cool , dry place away from direct sunlight . 
Hijiki
Wakame
Kombu
Dulse
Kelp
Nuts
Hazelnuts
Pumpkin seeds
Pine nuts
Pecans
Pistachios
Sunflower seeds
Sesame seeds
Almonds / almond butter
Peanuts / peanut butter
Cashews / cashew butter
Soy nuts / soy nut butter
Dried Fruits
Apricots
Dates
Cranberries
Cherries
Raisins
Prunes
Sun-dried tomatoes
Spices
Buy spices you plan to use and store them in a cool , dry place— not above the stove , please . 
Spices have a limited shelf life , so don ’ t ruin your best cooking efforts with ingredients well
past their prime . 
Baking Essentials
All-purpose flour
Whole wheat pastry flour
Whole wheat flour
Wheat germ
Wheat bran
Soy flour
Oat bran
Egg Replacer
Cornmeal
Cornstarch
Potato starch
Tapioca starch
Baking powder
Baking soda
Cocoa
Chocolate
Gluten-free
Baking Mix
Sweeteners
There are so many sweeteners ! If possible , buy them in small quantities from the bulk section
to see which you prefer .  ( For more on choosing sweeteners , see pages 29–32 .  ) 
Brown rice syrup
Malted barley
Blackstrap molasses
Succanat
Stevia
Corn syrup
Brown sugar
White sugar
Demerara ( turbinado ) sugar
Evaporated cane juice
Maple syrup
All-fruit preserves
Snacks
For the cost of one brand name package of microwave popcorn , you can buy two pounds of
bulk popping corn and fifty brown paper lunch bags , which should keep you in popcorn for
quite some time . Then you can toss the popcorn with a teaspoon of olive oil and sprinkle with
nutritional yeast . 
Pretzels
Corn for popping
Flatbreads
Freezer
Frozen foods can save your sanity on a busy day . Frozen fruits are convenient for making
smoothies with intense flavors . While a steady diet of meat analogues would get tiresome , they
are perfect for quick dinners . 
Vegetables
Fruit
Juice concentrates
Veggie burgers
Veggie sausage
Refrigerator
Be careful not to stuff the refrigerator so full that some precious vegetable gets lost in the
hinterlands . Pre-cut vegetables either from the salad bar or the produce section can reduce
preparation time dramatically , especially if you are not so adept with a knife . 
Fresh vegetables
Fresh fruit
Prepared vegetables
Seitan
Bread
Rolls
Fresh pasta
Soy foods
Asian Ingredients
A number of recipes in this book call for Asian ingredients that may be
unfamiliar to you . 
Black beans are dried , fermented black soybeans . They have a salty , pungent , 
slightly sweet and nutty flavor . 
Black bean sauce is a spicy reddish brown sauce made with chilies , garlic , 
and black beans . It can be chunky with whole soybeans or puréed . 
Chili oil is a light sesame oil infused with very hot , red chilies . Use it
sparingly as a flavoring agent only , never for sautéing . 
Chili paste with garlic is a spicy mix of soybeans , chilies , and garlic . A little
bit goes a long way . 
Coconut milk in this book always refers to the unsweetened kind used as a
base for Thai curries .  ( Sweetened cream of coconut contains dairy products .  ) 
Look for brands with as few ingredients as possible . The coconut milk will
separate in the can , so shake the can vigorously before opening . 
Five spice powder is a mixture of fennel , star anise , cloves , cinnamon , and
Szechuan peppercorns . 
Fresh ginger has a unique flavor . Look for ginger with an unblemished , light
tan skin . If the ginger is withered at the ends , it is old and will not give much
flavor . Peel ginger with a standard vegetable peeler or scrape the peel off with a
spoon . To slice ginger , cut crosswise to shorten the tough fibers . To sliver , cut
the slices into matchsticks . To grate ginger , use a ginger grater or the finest side
of a box grater . If you are grating a large quantity , clean the grater of the fibers
periodically . 
Hoisin sauce is made with soy beans , chilies , garlic , and spices to produce a
thick , slightly sweet , slightly spicy sauce . Hoisin is nice to have around for
spontaneous stir-frying . 
Miso is a thick fermented soy bean paste used as a base for soup . See pages
20–21 for further information . 
Mushroom soy sauce , also called dark or thick soy sauce , is Chinese soy
sauce with molasses mixed in . It is used much like Kitchen Bouquet to add color
and deepen flavors . Use sparingly—too much imparts a burnt flavor to the dish . 
Rice wine vinegar has a mild flavor and is less sharp than cider or white
vinegar . 
Seitan is a concentrated form of wheat gluten often used as a meat substitute . 
Wheat flour is kneaded with water and rinsed repeatedly until most of the starch
is washed out , leaving a ball of dough . The dough is then boiled in broth for at
least forty minutes and sometimes a few hours , until it is tender . The spongy
texture of seitan allows it to absorb the sauce used in its preparation . 
Sesame oil in this book means toasted sesame oil , an amber oil with a nutty
flavor used for seasoning , never for sautéing . 
Soy sauce is a generic term for the dark , salty sauce central to Asian cuisine . 
Though we tend to think of Chinese and Japanese styles of soy sauce , Indonesia
and Korea also make distinctive versions . 
Shoyu is a Japanese soy sauce brewed with more wheat than Chinese soy
sauce . It is less salty than Chinese soy sauce , with a hint of sweetness . 
Tamari is a thick , Japanese soy sauce brewed with no wheat . 
Wonton skins are small squares or circles of pasta . Sold fresh or frozen in
packs of three dozen , wonton skins will keep well wrapped in the refrigerator
several days after opening . If fresh , the extras can be wrapped tightly and frozen . 
Wonton skins make excellent ravioli without the fuss of making fresh pasta . 
Equipment : The Right Stuff
No special gadgets are needed to prepare fabulous plant-based meals , but
good equipment makes the job easier . A restaurant supply store or specialty
kitchen shop will carry the less familiar utensils . 
This is not a complete list , just a few items you may find particularly useful
when making the recipes in this book . Plan on acquiring equipment as you
acquire skills . 
Knives : Most cooks can survive with just three good knives : a chef ’ s knife , a
paring knife , and a serrated slicer . The chef ’ s knife should be large enough to
handle big jobs like acorn squash , but small enough for everyday onion dicing . 
The paring knife should be able to handle delicate tasks like peeling a kiwi and
small cutting tasks like dicing a shallot . The slicer should cut tomatoes and bread
with equal ease . 
Zester : These small devices quickly and efficiently remove only the zest , the
colorful part of a citrus skin , leaving the bitter pith behind . They do have a sharp
cutting surface and will dull if thrown into the jumble of a kitchen drawer . 
Ginger grater : These small , hand-held graters have lots of little barbs that
catch the ginger fibers but let the pulp and juice run free . They can be ceramic or
steel . 
Box grater : This old standby is quite versatile . One side can be used to grate
nutmeg or lemon zest , another for slicing thin planks of vegetables , and the other
two for coarse or fine grating . 
Japanese mandoline : This is just for fun . Similar to a box grater , but more
versatile , these vegetable “ planers ” come with three blades to make different size
shreds . Long thin “ noodles ” can be cut from cucumbers , zucchini , or carrots . 
Heat-resistant spatula : When this rubber utensil was first introduced , a
colleague of mine threw one into the fryer at 375° . After 3 or 4 minutes , he
removed it , rinsed it off , and indeed , it was a bit greasy but still like new . While I
don ’ t recommend this trial by fryer , these rubber spatulas will become an
indispensable part of your kitchen arsenal . Heat-resistant spatulas , or “ high heat
scrapers ,  ” while not cheap , last for years—much longer than regular rubber
spatulas—even with constant use . They are particularly helpful when reheating
soups and stews , making sauces or puddings , or making thick soups or stews . 
More efficient than a spoon , these effectively scrape the bottom and edges of
pots for more even cooking with fewer lumps and less burning . 
Spring-loaded tongs : Most professional cooks cannot imagine life without
tongs . It ’ s an extension of the hand , turning foods on the grill or in the fryer , 
removing vegetables from boiling water , pulling pans out of the oven , and
snapping emphatically at other cooks who may have gotten too rowdy . Tongs are
available in different weights and lengths . Eight to ten inches is a good general
length ; twelve to sixteen inches is normal for use on the grill . Some models have
a small ring around them that keeps them closed when they are in the drawer . 
Spider : The original spiders were round sieves whose wires resembled a
spider web . Whether round or square , these almost-flat strainers are perfect for
removing tomatoes from boiling water , pears from their poaching liquid , or
falafel from a fryer . Use a spider when tongs might bruise or break an item . A 
 “ skimmer ” or “ wok strainer ” will also do the job . 
Nonstick saucepan : A good nonstick skillet with a heavy-duty surface lets
you use very little oil and prevents waste , since food can ’ t adhere to the bottom
of the pan . Nonstick surfaces should not be heated dry over high heat or they
will degrade . 
Cast-iron skillet : This pan retains an even heat longer and better than
stainless steel or cast aluminum ones . Cast-iron can be heated dry at high heat , 
making it perfect for quick searing with very little oil . Once seasoned , the
surface is almost nonstick as long as it is not scoured with abrasive scrub pads . 
Soup pot / Dutch oven : A heavy bottom is essential for the long cooking times
that soups and stews require . An eight-quart capacity is sufficient for most home
purposes . It is important that you have enough room to stir the soup without its
splashing . A Dutch oven can double as a casserole , allowing you to do all the
prep work on the top of the stove , then cover it and slide it into the oven . 
Immersion blender : This device looks a little bit like the workings of a milk
shake machine encased in plastic and made portable . Use it to purée soups and
sauces , or to make rice milk . 
Food processor : No other appliance does a better job of processing tofu into
its myriad incarnations . Tofu mayonnaise , puddings , and baked goods all benefit
from the food processor . And of course it ’ s also great for slicing , grating , and
puréeing other ingredients . 
Coffee grinder : Reserve one of these for grinding spices and grains . The
most basic models are strong enough to process barley into flour , or most spices
into powder . Peppercorns are better off in a peppermill . 
Rice cooker : Everyone has some cooking task that defeats even the best
effort . I can ’ t make toast , even with a toaster . If making perfect rice is an
insurmountable challenge for you , invest in a rice cooker . It miraculously
produces perfect rice every time you follow the simple instructions . Rice cookers
are also great for those with limited space on the stovetop . 
Cutting Vegetables : A Little Know-how
Cutting vegetables into different shapes provides visual and textural interest . 
Here are some basic techniques used in preparing vegetables . 
Dice : to cut into uniform cubes . A fine dice is ¼ inch ; medium , to ½ inch ; 
and large , ½ to 1 inch . 
To dice an onion : Peel the onion and cut the root end off . Cut the onion in half
from stem to root . Place each half flat on a cutting board . Securely holding the
top of the onion , make several cuts parallel to the cutting board . Make similar
cuts perpendicular to the cutting board to create a checked pattern on the onion . 
Holding the stem end , cut across the onion , making perfect little squares . Use
this same basic technique when dicing other vegetables . 
Chop : to cut in an irregular fashion . This is done when dicing would be a
waste of effort . For example , chopping is used for large greens that will be
cooked or soup ingredients that will be cooked and then puréed . 
Mince : to chop in an irregular pattern until the pieces are very small . This
technique is used when the pieces of food must be small enough to fit on a small
space , such as vegetables on a soup spoon , or salsa ingredients on a chip . 
Cut on a bias : to cut long vegetables diagonally . This cut is particularly good
for zucchini , carrots , asparagus , celery , and peeled broccoli stems . 
Matchstick : to cut into long , square pieces . Slice the vegetable evenly on the
diagonal . Cut the slices into thin strips . This is a stylish alternative to shredding
carrots . 
Julienne : to cut into long strips . This cut is very similar to the matchstick but
is more widely applied . For example , one can julienne green peppers without
first cutting them on a diagonal . 
Chiffonade : to cut leaves into thin , uniform shreds . This is the way iceberg
lettuce is cut for tacos , to use a familiar example . Stack the leaves on top of each
other , and then roll them up . Using a sharp knife , cut widthwise slices off the
roll , no more than ¼ inch thick . 
appetizers 
& snacks
Dips and Spreads
Tuscan White Bean Spread
Black Bean Dip
Refried Bean Dip
Curried Lentil Dip
Guacamole
Skordalia
Caponata
Baba Ganoush
Artichoke Dip
Pâtés and Terrines
Roasted Vegetable Terrine
Vegan Chopped Liver
Pancake-Like Appetizers
Tostones
Sweet Potato Falafel
Spinach and Mushroom Quesadillas
Panelle ( Italian Chickpea Patties ) 
Spicy Corn Blini with Red Peppers and Shiitakes
Filled Appetizers
Phyllo Triangles with a Choice of Fillings
Vegan Chilies Rellenos
Fresh Spring Rolls
Bruschetta
Bruschetta with SunDried Tomato Pesto and Portobello Mushrooms
It ’ s fine to whirl together some tofu and onion soup mix and serve it with
potato chips as an appetizer or snack . But why not explore the world of
possibilities for beginning a meal ? Fancy restaurants serve a very small dish at
the start of a meal called an amuse bouche , or amuse the mouth . This small bite
whets the appetite for the feast to come . As you begin to choose your food more
consciously , you will grow to treasure the little gems proffered before a main
meal . In the Middle East , many small dishes , or mezze , are presented as gifts to
guests , demonstrating the generosity of the host . Often these are the meal . 
Once you remove meat from the center of the plate and allow yourself to
conceive of an “ entrée ” as a vegetable-based creation , the whole notion of
appetizer becomes fuzzy . You could serve most of these dishes in larger portions
as the centerpiece of a meal , or you could conceive an entire meal around a
number of small dishes—even moving from cuisine to cuisine , should you
choose . 
DIPS & SPREADS
Tuscan White Bean Spread
This recipe benefits from a very fruity olive oil . If fat content is not a concern , 
you may want to add an extra couple of tablespoons for a fuller flavor . I also like
to add some raw garlic to this for a little extra bite . You may want to add a little
of your favorite hot sauce , too . 
For an easy but elegant appetizer , spread this on some good Italian bread and
top with some roasted red peppers , fresh tomato slices , or grilled portobellos . 
Use fresh sage leaves as a garnish . 
2 cups cooked white beans ( Great Northern or cannellini ) 
1 teaspoon oil
2 small onions , thinly sliced
4 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
1 tablespoon lemon juice
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon chopped fresh sage
Sea salt
Purée the beans in a food processor . Put the oil in a saucepan over high heat . 
Add the onions and garlic , and stir constantly until the onions develop a light , 
golden brown color . To the puréed beans in the food processor , add the cooked
onions and garlic , lemon juice , and olive oil . Purée all the ingredients . Add sage
and sea salt to taste . Adjust the seasonings . Adjust the thickness with water . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Black Bean Dip
Chipotles are dried , smoked jalapeños that add a hot , smoky dimension , 
complementing the deep , earthy flavors of the black beans . If you prefer a milder
flavor , the recipe works well without them , too . 
2 cups cooked black beans
1 teaspoon oil
¼ teaspoon cumin seeds
1 small onion , diced
1 or 2 cloves garlic , minced
¼ teaspoon chili powder
½ chipotle chili , canned or dried , or ¼ teaspoon chipotle powder
2 tablespoons lime juice
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro
Sea salt
Mash or purée the beans in a food processor . Heat the oil in a saucepan over
medium heat . Add the cumin seeds , onion , and garlic , and cook until the onion
just begins to soften . Add the chili powder and mix well . Cook just until the
onion is soft . Add the mixture to the beans along with the chipotle , lime juice , 
and cilantro . For a smoother dip , purée the mixture . Add sea salt to taste and
adjust the seasonings . Adjust the thickness with water . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Refried Bean Dip
2 cups cooked pinto beans
2 teaspoons oil
4 cloves garlic , minced
1 medium onion , diced
1 jalapeño , fresh or canned , minced
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon ground coriander
½ teaspoon chili powder
½ medium red bell pepper , diced
1 medium green bell pepper , diced
1 tablespoon lemon juice
Mash the beans either in a food processor , with a potato masher , or with the
back of a wooden spoon . Reserve . Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium-high
heat . Sauté the garlic , onion , and fresh jalapeño just until the onion begins to
soften . Add the cumin , coriander , and chili powder . Sauté until the spices are
fragrant and the onion is soft . Add the peppers to the pan and stir until they are
coated with the spices . When the peppers are hot , reduce the heat to low , add the
beans to the pan , and mix well . Add the lemon juice and adjust the consistency
with water . Cook until the beans are hot . Taste and adjust the seasonings . Serve
warm or at room temperature . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Curried Lentil Dip
2 teaspoons oil
1 small onion , diced
4 cloves garlic , minced
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
1 teaspoon curry powder
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon ground coriander
teaspoon dried mustard or ¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper
teaspoon white pepper
2 cups cooked yellow or red lentils
2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons tahini
Sea salt
Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium-high heat . Add the onion , garlic , and
ginger . Cook just until the onion begins to soften . Add the spices and cook at
least 3 minutes or until the spices begin to release their fragrance . Remove from
heat . Add the lentils to the pan and mix thoroughly . If the lentils are cold , warm
them slightly . Mash the lentils with a potato masher or pulse in a food processor
until coarsely mashed . Stir in the lemon juice and tahini . Taste and season with
sea salt . 
Makes about 2½ cups . 
Guacamole
There are endless variations on guacamole . I prefer the simple approach to
allow the flavor of the avocado to shine through . However , some chopped fresh
tomatoes do add a nice touch . If you want to stretch the guacamole , add some
soy mayonnaise . 
4 ripe avocados
2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 cloves garlic , minced
½ small onion or 4 green onions , thinly sliced
1 small jalapeño , fresh or canned , minced
1 tablespoon chopped fresh cilantro
Sea salt
Mash the avocados against the side of a small mixing bowl . Add the rest of the
ingredients . Taste , add salt , and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes about 2½ cups . 
Skordalia
Garlic and potatoes—two of the most versatile foods—are combined to make a
pungent sauce good with raw vegetables or toasted pita triangles . For those who
enjoyed mashed potato sandwiches as a kid , it can also be used as a base for a
sandwich , with some thinly sliced red onion and grilled vegetables . 
2 cups mashed potatoes
1 tablespoon minced garlic
½ cup extra virgin olive oil
2 tablespoons white wine vinegar or lemon juice
Salt and pepper
Mix all the ingredients in a medium mixing bowl . Taste the mixture and adjust
the seasonings with salt and pepper . 
Makes 2½ cups . 
Caponata
I wish more people loved eggplant as much as Sicilians do ! Perhaps this recipe
will help convert a few more . Although traditionally green olives are used , I
prefer kalamatas . If you can ’ t get good fresh tomatoes , use diced canned
tomatoes . 
1 pound eggplant , cut into 1-inch cubes
4 to 6 teaspoons oil
2 stalks celery , cut on the diagonal into ½-inch pieces
1 medium onion , chopped
3 cloves garlic , chopped
½ cup red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon sugar
1½ cups seeded , diced tomatoes
1 tablespoon capers
2 tablespoons pitted , slivered kalamata olives
teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 tablespoon pine nuts , lightly toasted
2 tablespoons minced fresh parsley ( optional ) 
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh basil ( optional ) 
Salt
Generously salt the eggplant cubes and place them in a colander . Allow the
eggplant to drain for 30 minutes . The eggplant should have released a fair
amount of light brown liquid . Rinse the eggplant briefly under cold water and
pat dry . 
Heat 2 teaspoons of the oil in a large sauté pan over medium-high heat . Add
the celery , onion , and garlic and sauté until the onion is just softened . Remove
the onions and celery from the pan and reserve in a large mixing bowl . Heat 2
more teaspoons of the oil in the pan over medium-high heat . Add the eggplant
cubes in a single layer and cook until they are lightly browned , about 8 minutes . 
Cook the eggplant in batches if necessary . If you overcrowd the pan , the
eggplant will not cook evenly . Add the eggplant to the bowl with the onions and
celery . 
Add the vinegar and sugar to the sauté pan , bring to a boil , and reduce the
mixture by half . Pour the vinegar mixture over the eggplant mixture and toss
until the vegetables are coated . Let the mixture cool slightly . When the mixture
is still warm , add the remaining ingredients . Taste and adjust the seasoning with
salt . Let the caponata stand for at least 30 minutes or overnight ( refrigerate if
letting stand more than 30 minutes )  . Serve chilled or at room temperature . 
Makes 4 to 5 cups . 
Baba Ganoush
A vegetarian classic , baba ganoush is a good vehicle for introducing the
glorious eggplant into your diet . Serve this with warm pita triangles ( for Whole
Wheat Pita Bread , see page 271 )  . 
2 medium eggplants , about 3 pounds
Oil
¼ cup tahini
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon minced fresh parsley
Salt and pepper
Preheat the oven to 400° . Prick the skins of the eggplants with a fork . Lightly oil
the eggplants and place them on a baking sheet . Roast the eggplants in the oven
until they look withered and the flesh is soft , about 30 to 45 minutes . Remove
the eggplants from the oven and let them cool . 
When the eggplants are cool enough to handle , remove the pulp from the
skins . Squeeze the pulp gently to remove excess water . Chop the pulp very fine . 
Combine with the remaining ingredients in a medium mixing bowl . Taste the
mixture and adjust the seasonings with salt and pepper . 
Makes 3 cups . 
Artichoke Dip
This dip can be eaten cold or hot . You can easily extend it by adding ½ cup of
cooked spinach or 8 ounces of chopped tofu . 
½ cup sliced almonds
3 cloves garlic , minced
1 14-ounce can artichoke hearts , drained
1 small onion , diced
cup soy mayonnaise
2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons snipped fresh dill
1 tablespoon minced fresh parsley
Pinch white pepper
Sea salt
In the bowl of a food processor , coarsely chop the almonds . Add the garlic and
pulse a few more times until well blended . Gently squeeze any excess water
from the artichoke hearts . Add the artichoke hearts to the almond mixture and
pulse until coarsely chopped . Add the remaining ingredients and mix well . Taste
and season with sea salt . 
Alternatively , chop the almonds with a chef ’ s knife . Gently squeeze any
excess water from the artichoke hearts and chop them fine . In a mixing bowl , 
mix the almonds , artichoke hearts , and remaining ingredients . Taste and season
with sea salt . 
Makes about 2½ cups . 
PÂTÉS AND TERRINES
Roasted Vegetable Terrine
Plan ahead to dazzle your guests with the jeweled layers of this special treat . 
The techniques used in this recipe are basic , but the result is stunning . The leeks
provide a frame for the lines of color . Substitute seasonal vegetables as you like : 
asparagus , sorrel , sweet onions , or sugar snap peas in spring ; eggplant , 
portobellos , or red peppers in summer ; cauliflower , fennel , or celery root in fall . 
In winter , thin slices of sweet potatoes , white potatoes , rutabagas , and beets can
be layered in a pan , seasoned as the terrine , baked slowly , and pressed to make a
beautiful side dish . 
2 or 3 medium leeks , green and white parts
2 teaspoons salt , divided
1 pound young green beans or asparagus , trimmed
2 medium zucchini
2 medium yellow squash
½ cup seasoned oil , approximately
½ pound shiitake mushrooms
Salt and pepper
¼ cup chopped garlic chives or green onions
¼ cup chopped fresh tarragon
1 cup roasted red peppers
Tomato-Tarragon Dressing ( page 115 ) or Roasted Red Pepper Coulis ( page 131 ) 
Tarragon leaves or garlic chives for garnish
Preheat the oven to 375° . Trim any browned or dried leaves from the leeks . Cut
the leeks into halves lengthwise , leaving the roots attached . Wash the leeks well
under running water , being careful to remove any sand between the leaves . 
Carefully put the leeks into a Dutch oven or a soup pot , curling the leeks
around the edges . Add enough cold water to the pot to cover the leeks by 2
inches . Add 1 teaspoon of salt to the water . Bring the water to a boil over high
heat . Reduce the heat to medium and simmer the leeks until tender , about 6
minutes . Drain the leeks and cool under gently running cold water . When the
leeks are cool enough to handle , remove the root end and separate the leaves . 
Reserve . 
In the same pot , bring two quarts of water with 1 teaspoon of salt to boil . Add
the green beans or asparagus to the water and blanch them for 2 minutes . Using a
slotted spoon or a pair of tongs , remove the beans or asparagus from the pot and
cool under gently running cold water . Reserve . 
Cut the zucchini and yellow squash lengthwise into ¾-inch strips . Brush the
squash strips with seasoned oil . Lightly salt and pepper the squash as desired . 
Place in a single layer on either a baking sheet covered with parchment paper , a
nonstick baking sheet , or a baking sheet sprayed with nonstick cooking spray . 
Roast the vegetables for 10 minutes . Carefully turn the vegetables and roast for 5
minutes longer or just until tender . 
While the squash are roasting , remove the stems from the shiitakes . Brush any
dirt from the mushrooms , but do not rinse the mushrooms with water . In a
medium bowl , toss the mushroom caps with ¼ cup of seasoned oil and salt and
pepper to taste . Place the mushroom caps , gill side up and in a single layer , on
either a baking sheet covered with parchment paper , a nonstick baking sheet , or a
baking sheet sprayed with nonstick cooking spray . Roast the mushrooms for 10
to 15 minutes or until they are tender . Drain in a colander placed over a bowl .  
( Save any liquid in the bowl for making stock , if you wish .  ) Reduce the oven
temperature to 325° . 
Oil a 9x5-inch loaf pan . Line with parchment paper or waxed paper . Using the
longest leek leaves , lay them widthwise in the loaf pan , making sure to line the
bottom of the pan evenly and leaving a 2-to-3-inch overhang on each side . You
should have a single layer of leek leaves covering the width of the pan . 
Beginning in the middle of the pan , lay leek leaves lengthwise to cover the ends
of the pan , leaving a 2-to-3-inch overhang . Repeat until you have two layers of
leeks completely covering the ends . If you have extra , add another layer of leeks
to the width of the pan . 
Combine the garlic chives and tarragon in a small bowl . Sprinkle 1 tablespoon
of the herb mixture over the leeks . Layer half of the shiitakes in the bottom of
the loaf pan . Top with half the zucchini , then half the yellow squash , then half
the red peppers . Sprinkle 1 tablespoon of the herb mixture over the red peppers . 
Layer on all of the green beans or asparagus . Sprinkle with 1 tablespoon of the
herb mixture . Layer the remaining vegetables : peppers , yellow squash , zucchini , 
and shiitakes . Sprinkle the shiitakes with the remaining tablespoon of herb
mixture . Fold the overhanging leeks over the terrine to cover . 
Cover the terrine with parchment paper or waxed paper , then with aluminum
foil . Place the loaf pan in a larger roasting pan . Place the pans in the oven and
pour enough hot water into the bottom pan to come 1 to 2 inches up the sides of
the loaf pan . Bake for 40 minutes . Remove from the oven and let cool , covered . 
When the terrine is cool , keeping the covers on , place another loaf pan on top
of it . Stack jam jars , cans , potatoes , or bricks in the top loaf pan to weight it . 
Place the terrine in a small baking dish to catch any liquid . Refrigerate , covered , 
for 12 hours or more . Liquid will accumulate on the top of the terrine . To prevent
a mess in your refrigerator , keep the terrine in a baking dish to catch any
overflow . Drain any liquid from the terrine as it accumulates . 
Remove the foil and waxed paper . Invert the terrine onto a cutting board or
flat platter to unmold it . Using a sharp knife , carefully cut the terrine into 8
slices . To serve , place 2 tablespoons of Tomato-Tarragon Vinaigrette or Roasted
Red Pepper Coulis on each plate . Place the terrine in the center of the plate and
garnish with whole tarragon leaves or garlic chives . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Vegan Chopped Liver
If you are concerned with fat content , reduce the oil to 1 teaspoon and omit the
olive oil . Be careful not to overprocess this dish . The slightly coarse texture is
pleasing—better than that of the original chopped liver ! 
2 tespoons oil
1 medium onion , sliced
2 cloves garlic , minced
1 cup sliced button mushrooms
½ teaspoon dried basil
teaspoon dried marjoram
½ teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon white pepper
½ cup dry red wine
½ cup walnut pieces
2 cups green beans , cooked until just soft
¼ cup minced fresh parsley
8 ounces tofu
½ cup matzoh meal or breadcrumbs
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil , or 1 tablespoon flaxseed oil and
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon lemon juice
Heat the oil in a large sauté pan over high heat . When the oil begins to smoke , 
add the onion and garlic . Cook , stirring every minute or two , until the onion is a
deep golden brown . Add the mushrooms , basil , marjoram , salt , and pepper . Cook
until the mushrooms have released their liquid . Continue cooking until the
mixture is dry . Add the wine to the hot pan and cook until the liquid is reduced
by half . Add the walnuts and cook until the mixture is dry . Remove the pan from
the heat . 
Coarsely chop the green beans and parsley in a food processor . Add the
mushroom mixture and process until well blended but still coarsely chopped . 
Crumble the tofu into the mixing bowl . Add the matzoh meal , olive oil , and
lemon juice . Pulse until all the ingredients are well mixed and the texture is
slightly coarse . Taste and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes 4 cups . 
PANCAKE-LIKE APPETIZERS
Tostones
If you are not accustomed to working with plantains , you should know that there
are no bad plantains .  ( Okay , the moldy ones are probably too far gone .  ) When
they are green and somewhat hard , they can be fried as tostones ( fritters ) or
plaintain chips , or baked and mashed like potatoes . Just about anything that you
might want to do with a potato can be done with a plantain . When the skin turns
to yellow-brown , they can be sautéed and served as a side dish that combines a
fruity sweetness with the starchiness of a potato . When they are black , plantains
make some marvelous desserts . Look for them in the produce section with Latin
American items . 
4 plantains , yellow-green and somewhat hard
Oil for frying
Sea salt
Chipotle Ketchup ( page 121 )  , Pico de Gallo ( page 137 )  , or prepared salsa
To peel the plantains , remove the top and bottom with a sharp paring knife . Cut
long slits down the plantain just deep enough to go through the peel . You may
prefer to cut the plantain into halves or thirds before trying to peel it . 
Heat ½ inch of oil in a wide skillet over medium-high heat .  ( If you have a
thermometer or are using a fryer , adjust to 350° .  ) Cut the plantains into 1-inch
slices . Fry the plantains in a single layer , turning once , for about 2 to 3 minutes
on each side . Remove the plantains to a paper towel and drain . 
Flatten the plantain slices using the flat side of a meat mallet ( what are you
going to do with it now , anyway ?  ) or a small , heavy pan . The flattened slices
should be about ½ inch thick . If the plantains crumble when flattening , they are
not cooked enough and should be refried , roasted , or microwaved until they
become a little softer . 
Return the slices to the skillet or fryer , and fry until golden brown and crispy . 
Season with sea salt . Reserve in a warm oven or serve immediately with
Chipotle Ketchup , Pico de Gallo , or prepared salsa . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Sweet Potato Falafel
This is a quick and easy recipe using falafel mix , which you can find in the
health food section of most grocery stores . The sweetness of the sweet potato
begs for a hot , spicy foil , such as Chipotle Salsa , Harissa Dipping Sauce , or
Meshwiya . 
1 cup falafel mix
1 tablespoon chopped fresh cilantro
1 teaspoon ancho chili powder
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon cayenne
1 teaspoon lemon juice
1 cup mashed sweet potatoes
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons oil
Chipotle Salsa ( page 137 )  , Harissa Dipping Sauce ( page 139 )  , 
or Meshwiya ( page 139 ) 
Pour 1 cup of boiling water over the falafel mix in a medium bowl . Cover and
let stand for 15 minutes or until all the water is absorbed and the ground
chickpeas in the mix are relatively soft . Add the cilantro , chili powder , cumin , 
cayenne , and lemon juice to the falafel mix and mix well . Add the sweet
potatoes . Taste the mixture and adjust seasonings with salt and pepper . 
Heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a wide , heavy skillet or nonstick pan over
medium-high heat . Drop the falafel mix by heaping tablespoons into the pan . 
Flatten the falafel with a metal spatula to ensure even cooking . These are more
delicate than regular falafel , so do not crowd them in the pan or they will be
difficult to turn . Cook the patties on one side until golden brown , about 4
minutes . Turn the patties with a metal spatula and cook the other side for 3 more
minutes . Repeat with remaining oil and falafel mixture . Season with salt and
pepper . Serve immediately , reserve in a warm oven , or refrigerate and reheat
later . Serve with Chipotle Salsa , Harissa Dipping Sauce , or Meshwiya . 
Makes 24 patties . 
Caponata ( page 46 )  , Tuscan White Bean Spread ( page 43 )  . 
Tofu Boursin ( page 154 )  , Tofu Boursin Lavosh ( page 154 )  . 
SunDried Tomato and Lentil Burgers ( page 155 )  , Macaroni and Cheeze 
( page 193 )  . 
Next page , clockwise from top : Corn Chowder ( page 81 )  , Spicy Sweet
Potato Soup ( page 73 )  , Vegetable Soup with Lemon and Dill ( page 79 )  . 
Spinach and Mushroom Quesadillas
Quesadillas without queso ?  ( That ’ s Spanish for cheese .  ) While you can substitute
vegan cheese for cow ’ s milk cheese , why not try using one of the delicious bean
dips given on pages 43–44 to hold the ingredients together inside the tortilla ? 
Quesadillas lend themselves to many variations—usually depending on what ’ s
left over in the fridge . Have fun with them ! Served with a bowl of black bean
soup , these can make a very hearty meal . 
4 teaspoons oil
1 pound spinach , washed , brown or wilted leaves discarded
2 teaspoons minced garlic
Pinch salt
1 medium onion , sliced or diced
8 ounces mushrooms , sliced
½ cup plus 1 tablespoon Black Bean Dip ( page 44 ) or refried beans
6 10-inch flour tortillas ( choose those made without lard ) 
Pico de Gallo ( page 137 )  , or prepared red or green salsa
Heat 1 teaspoon of the oil in a wide ( 11 or 12 inch )  , heavy skillet over mediumhigh heat . Add spinach and 1 teaspoon of the garlic . Season with a pinch of salt . 
Cook until the spinach wilts . Remove the spinach to a colander and reserve . 
Heat another teaspoon of oil in the pan , and add the remaining 1 teaspoon of
garlic , onion , mushrooms , and salt . Sauté the vegetables until the mushrooms
release their liquid , and then cook the mixture until it is dry . 
Squeeze the spinach dry and combine with the mushroom mixture . Sauté for
another minute to ensure that the mixture is dry . Place the vegetable mixture in
the colander . 
Wipe the skillet clean and heat 1 teaspoon of oil until it is quite hot . Soften
each tortilla by heating it in the skillet for about 10 to 15 seconds on each side . 
Remove the skillet from the heat while you assemble the quesadillas . 
Spread 1½ tablespoons of Black Bean Dip or refried beans on each tortilla . 
Place 1 . 6 of the vegetable mixture on half of the tortilla . Fold the tortilla in half
so you have a half moon shape . Repeat until all the tortillas are filled . 
Return the skillet to high heat . Heat 1 teaspoon of oil in the skillet . Lightly
brown each quesadilla on both sides . Reserve in a warm oven or cut each
quesadilla into 3 wedges and serve immediately with Pico de Gallo or prepared
green or red salsa . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Panelle ( Italian Chickpea Patties ) 
1 cup chickpea flour ( also called gram flour ) 
½ teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
Oil for frying
Salsa Cruda ( page 138 )  , 
Caponata ( page 46 )  , Roasted Red Pepper Coulis ( page 131 )  , or Aioli ( page 120 ) 
In a medium saucepan , whisk 3 cups of cold water into the chickpea flour and
salt , making sure that no lumps form . Place the pan over medium-high heat and
bring the mixture to a boil , stirring constantly . Reduce the heat to medium-low
and continue cooking the mixture until it pulls away from the sides of the pan , 
about 30 minutes . Stir in the parsley . 
Spread the mixture in a greased jellyroll pan so you have an even layer about
½ to ¾ inch thick . This will not fill the entire pan . Allow the mixture to cool
completely . Cut into 8 squares and then cut each square into 2 triangles . 
Heat the oil in a wide saucepan . You can use a minimum of oil or ½ inch of
oil . The more oil you use , the crisper the panelle will be . Over medium-high
heat , fry the panelle in a single layer until they are golden brown . Drain on paper
towels . Repeat until all the panelle are fried . Serve immediately or reserve in a
warm oven . Serve with Salsa Cruda , Caponata , Roasted Red Pepper Coulis , or
Aioli . 
Makes 5 servings . 
Spicy Corn Blini with
Red Peppers and Shiitakes
The heat in the blini is balanced by the sweetness of the red peppers . You could
serve these little pancakes with Sweet Onion Caviar ( page 229 )  . 
½ cup fine cornmeal
½ cup flour
2 teaspoons baking powder
¼ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon ancho chili powder
teaspoon cayenne
Pinch ground cumin
¼ teaspoon sea salt
¼ cup corn , fresh or frozen ( not canned ) 
1 tablespoon oil
½ cup soymilk
1¼ teaspoons rice wine vinegar or cider vinegar
1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley
2 tablespoons sliced green onions
4 ounces shiitake mushrooms
1 large red pepper , washed , seeds and pith removed
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 tablespoon julienned fresh basil
Sift the cornmeal , flour , baking powder , baking soda , chili powder , cayenne , 
cumin , and salt together in a medium bowl . Coarsely chop the corn with a knife
or in a food processor . In a small bowl , beat together the corn , oil , soymilk , 
vinegar , and 2 tablespoons of water . Combine the wet and dry ingredients and
mix well . Stir in the parsley and green onions . 
Choose a skillet that is good for making pancakes . Heat the skillet over
medium heat and add ½ teaspoon of oil . Tilt the skillet to evenly distribute the
oil . Drop the blini batter by scant tablespoons into the hot skillet . Cook the blini
until small bubbles appear around the outer edge on the top , about 1 to 2
minutes . Flip the blini and cook on the other side until the blini has puffed up
and the second side is golden brown , about 1 minute . Remove the blini from the
pan and reserve on a platter . Cover with a clean kitchen towel if you will use
immediately , or reheat later in a warm oven . 
Slice the shiitakes as thinly as you can . Cut the red pepper into very thin
strips . Heat another teaspoon of oil in the skillet . Add the garlic and shiitakes . 
Sauté the mixture until the mushrooms begin to release their liquid , about 4
minutes . Add the peppers to the pan and cook until the mixture is mostly dry . Do
not overcook or the peppers will begin to fall apart . Stir in the basil . 
To serve , place a small amount of the mushroom mixture on top of each warm
blini . Serve immediately . 
Makes 18 to 24 blini . 
FILLED APPETIZERS
Phyllo Triangles with
a Choice of Fillings
Greek cuisine is a natural source for vegan dishes because during the Lenten
season , the eating of animal products is prohibited . The following recipe
includes two filling variations . The basic technique of making triangles can be
used for any reasonably dry filling . A soggy filling will result in flimsy phyllo . 
1 pound phyllo leaves
About 1 cup fruity olive oil
Spiced Seitan Filling , or Artichoke and Spinach Filling ( recipes follow ) 
Thaw the phyllo for 8 hours or more in the refrigerator . 
Preheat the oven to 375° . Clean your work surface and dry thoroughly . Any
residual moisture will make the phyllo stick . Pour the oil into a bowl and have
handy a 2-inch pastry brush . Have the baking sheet ( s ) at hand . You will need to
work quickly so the phyllo does not dry out and become brittle . 
Unroll or unfold the phyllo leaves . Carefully remove one sheet and place it on
the work surface . Cover the remaining phyllo with plastic wrap .  ( Some books
recommend a damp kitchen towel , but this can make the leaves soggy and the
towel tends to dry out in the course of making the triangles .  ) Brush the phyllo
lightly with oil . You do not want to soak the phyllo . It is not necessary that every
inch of phyllo be covered . Cover the first sheet with a second and brush it with
oil . 
Cut the phyllo leaves into thirds lengthwise . Put 1 teaspoon of filling 1 inch
from the end of the strip . Lift one corner near the filling and fold it over the
filling so that the other corner has come to a point . Continue folding the pastry
over , flag-style , keeping the edges even . You should now have a cute little
triangle . 
Place the triangles seam-side down on an ungreased baking sheet . Brush the
tops lightly with oil . Place the triangles about 1 inch apart ( in case they split
while cooking )  . Bake the triangles for 20 minutes or until they are golden brown . 
Makes 36 triangles . 
Spiced Seitan Filling
1 pound prepared seitan
1 teaspoon oil
1 minced shallot
¼ cup red wine
½ cup currants or coarsely chopped raisins
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
Pinch of black pepper
Sea salt to taste
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon water
2 tablespoons pine nuts
Coarsely chop the seitan . Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat . Add the
shallot and cook for 1 to 2 minutes or just until it begins to soften . Add the seitan
and warm through . Add the wine , currants , and spices . Cook until the liquid is
reduced by half . Add the cornstarch and cook until thickened . Stir in the pine
nuts . Cool . 
Makes enough for 36 triangles . 
Artichoke and Spinach Filling
1 pound fresh spinach or 1 10-ounce package frozen spinach
1 teaspoon oil
1 medium red onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 cup canned artichoke hearts , well-drained and coarsely chopped
Zest of 1 lemon
2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill
½ to 1 cup breadcrumbs
Sea salt and pepper
If you are using frozen spinach , thaw it completely . Squeeze as much water out
of it as you can with your hands . Put it into a clean , sturdy kitchen towel ( not
terry cloth ) and twist it until all the water has come out . 
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat . Add the onion and the garlic . Sauté
the mixture for 3 or 4 minutes or until the onion begins to soften . Add the
spinach and cook just until it is wilted . Remove from the heat . Drain any liquid
that has accumulated in the pan . Add the artichoke hearts , lemon zest , dill , and
breadcrumbs , using only ½ cup of breadcrumbs to start . If the mixture still seems
wet , add more breadcrumbs . Taste the mixture and season with salt and pepper . 
Makes enough for 36 triangles . 
Vegan Chilies Rellenos
This is a low-fat version of a perennial favorite . For a more traditional version , 
you can stuff the peppers with vegan cheese , dredge them in flour , then soymilk , 
then flour , and fry them in oil . 
18 jalapeño peppers or 6 poblano peppers
½ cup slivered almonds
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 tablespoon nutritional yeast
¾ cup mashed potatoes
Salt and pepper
Oil
Mild Tomato Sauce ( page 185 )  , Pico de Gallo ( page 137 )  , or prepared salsa
Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut a slit down the side of each pepper . Cook the
peppers in a pot of boiling salted water for 3 to 6 minutes or just until they are
tender . Drain and cool under gently running water . Cut a slit down the length of
each pepper . Wearing gloves , cut or scrape the seeds and pith from the peppers . 
Grind the almonds in a food processor or spice mill , or cut them very fine with
a knife . Mix the garlic , yeast , and potatoes with the almonds . Season with salt
and pepper . 
Fill each pepper with the mixture . Place the peppers in an oiled glass baking
dish . Brush the tops of the peppers lightly with oil . Bake the peppers for 25
minutes or until the filling is bubbly . Serve with Mild Tomato Sauce , Pico de
Gallo , or prepared salsa . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Fresh Spring Rolls
If you know how to roll a burrito , you can make spring rolls . This version uses a
delicate rice paper wrapper which can be served fresh or fried . 
Unless you really like working with your knife , a Japanese mandoline or food
processor with a variety of discs comes in handy here . You can use a good box
grater if you are careful . 
1 ounce mung bean threads ( glass noodles ) 
1 teaspoon sesame oil
2 ounces shiitake mushrooms ( about 4 medium ) 
1 teaspoon canola oil
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
4 ounces inari , or dried or smoked tofu
3 green onions , thinly sliced
2 small carrots , shredded into long threads
2 tablespoons chopped Thai basil , or 1 tablespoon chopped sweet basil and
1 tablespoon chopped mint
1 tablespoon toasted sesame seeds
12 rice papers , 6 to 8 inches in diameter or square
Simple Soy Dipping Sauce ( page 138 )  , Sweet and Sour Dipping Sauce ( page 138 )  , 
or Vietnamese Lime Dipping Sauce ( page 139 ) 
Put the bean threads into a small bowl . Cover with 3 cups of boiling water . 
Cover the bowl and let the noodles stand for about 15 minutes . Drain the noodles
in a colander and rinse under gently running cold water . Dry the bowl . Return
the noodles to the bowl and season with the sesame oil . 
Remove the stems from the shiitakes . Slice the mushroom caps as thinly as
possible . Heat the canola oil in a skillet over medium heat . Add the mushrooms , 
garlic , and ginger and sauté for 3 minutes . Cut the block of tofu so it is half as
thick . Cut each piece into long , thin strips . Add the tofu to the shiitakes and cook
for 1 minute more . Do not worry if the tofu breaks up a little . Remove from the
heat . Add the green onions , carrots , basil , and sesame seeds to the mushroom
mixture . Reserve . 
Fill a large wide bowl with cold water . Dip 2 or 3 rice papers in the water for
an instant . Lay the rice papers on your work surface . When they are pliable , 
place a line of the noodles in the lower third of the paper within an inch of the
edge . Top the noodles with some of the mushroom mixture . Fold the bottom
third of the paper over the filling and roll just enough to enclose the filling . Fold
the two sides in over the bottom of the rice paper . Roll up the rice paper to form
a tight cylinder . Moisten the last flap of the rice paper with water to seal the
spring roll . Remove the finished rolls to a platter and cover with plastic wrap to
keep them moist while you finish making the other spring rolls . Should the rice
paper become brittle while working with it , brush it with some cold water and
wait a minute for it to become pliable again . Serve with dipping sauce . 
Makes 12 spring rolls . 
Fried Spring Rolls : For each spring roll , use 2 wrapping papers instead of 1 ( use
a total of 24 wrapping papers )  . Fry in oil at 375° until golden . 
BRUSCHETTA
Bruschetta with SunDried Tomato
Pesto and Portobello Mushrooms
1 loaf good Italian-style bread
1 or 2 cloves garlic , peeled
2 tablespoons olive oil , preferably a fruity extra virgin
1 5-inch portobello cap or 2 3-inch portobello caps
Olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons SunDried Tomato Pesto ( page 128 ) 
12 basil leaves for garnish ( optional ) 
Cut the bread at a 45° angle to make slices about ¾ inch thick . Cut 12 slices and
reserve the rest of the bread . Slice one garlic clove in half lengthwise . Rub the
garlic on the bread . Using your fingers or a pastry brush , rub a little olive oil on
the bread also . 
Heat a large flat-bottom sauté pan over medium-high heat . Lightly spray pan
with nonstick cooking spray or coat with olive oil . Drain any excess oil from the
pan . Place the bruschetta in the pan , putting in only as many as fit comfortably . 
Brown the bruschetta , first on the garlic side , then on the other . Repeat as
necessary .  ( You can also toast the bread under a broiler , watching carefully . But
preparing the bruschetta on the stovetop ensures a soft , creamy inside and thin
crisp crust .  ) Reserve . 
Brush the top of the portobellos lightly with olive oil . Very lightly brush the
gills ( or underside ) of the mushrooms . Salt and pepper the mushrooms . In a
sauté pan over medium-high heat , place the mushrooms , top down , in the pan . 
Occasionally shake the pan to ensure that the mushrooms aren ’ t burning . Allow
the mushrooms to cook until water begins to collect in the gills . Turn and cook
for 1 minute longer . Alternatively , broil or roast the seasoned mushrooms until
they are cooked through . Remove from pan and place on a plate . When the
mushrooms are cool enough to handle , cut into 12 very thin strips . 
Spread ½ teaspoon of the pesto over the garlic side of the bruschetta . Lay a
strip of portobello on each bruschetta . If possible , twist the strip . Not only will
this give you a convenient place to anchor a basil leaf garnish , but it will also
add visual interest to your presentation . Arrange attractively on a platter and
serve . 
Makes 12 bruschetta . 
soups
Stocks
Vegetable Stock
Roasted Vegetable Stock
Green Vegetable Stock
Mushroom Stock
Asian Broth
Japanese Seaweed Broth ( Kombu Dashi ) 
Hot Soups
Microwave Miso Soup for One
Miso Soup
Hot and Sour Soup with Glass Noodles
Thai Vegan Tom Yum Gong
Spicy Sweet Potato Soup
Onion Soup
Caldo Verde ( Portuguese Green Soup ) 
Harvest Vegetable Soup
Chunky Polish Borscht
Potato Soup : Four Variations
Grilled Eggplant and Roasted Red
Pepper Soup
Vegetable Soup with Lemon and Dill
Four Mushroom and Barley Soup
Corn Chowder
Jary ( Algerian Vegetable Soup ) 
Black Bean Soup
Tuscan White Bean Soup
Tomato , Fennel , and White Bean Soup
Curried Yellow Split Pea Soup
Lentil and Spinach Soup
Escarole and White Bean Soup
Chilled Soups
Two Melon Soup with Plum Wine
Blueberry and Red Wine Soup
Strawberry Soup with Almond Milk
Korean Seaweed Soup
Avocado Soup
Chilled Spring Pea Soup with Tarragon
Gazpacho : Two Variations
Chilled Beet and Cucumber Soup
Soup is the ultimate comfort food . It evokes childhood memories of steaming
bowls meant to soothe and heal . As adults , we continue to nourish our bodies
and spirits with soup . Thick , thin , simple , complex—soup is an emotionally and
gastronomically satisfying experience . 
Soup making is one of the more contemplative culinary tasks . It requires the
use of all the senses in making subtle judgments about balancing flavors and
textures . Since ingredients do vary—an April onion is not like a September
onion—we are called on to adjust the sweet , salty , sour , and bitter tastes until we
have a potion that satisfies the taste buds , nourishes the body , and comforts the
spirit . 
Think of the recipes in this chapter as guidelines , as jumping-off points for
your own resourcefulness and creativity . The following section explains some of
the techniques involved in soup making . 
Selecting a stock : Stocks provide a nuanced backdrop for the featured
ingredients in soup , so the stock you use for a soup must complement the soup ’ s
main components . For instance , a roasted vegetable stock would overpower the
delicacy of spring peas , and a light green stock would be lost in a spicy sweet
potato soup . Soups that don ’ t require stock usually require more vegetables in
the soup itself . 
Preparing mirepoix : The heart and soul of many soups and sauces , mirepoix 
( pronounced mere pwah ) is a combination of carrots , onions , and celery , all
finely diced and sautéed in oil , perhaps with a few herbs added . If you don ’ t
know what kind of soup you want to make , just begin by cutting some mirepoix
and generally an inspiration will hit before you are done . 
Puréeing soup : Process soup in a food processor in batches until it is smooth . 
In some cases it ’ s best to first strain the stock from the solids , purée the solids by
pulsing until they are coarsely chopped , and then add some of the stock back to
the mixture until the desired texture is reached . 
For chunky soups , strain the stock from the solids , use a potato masher to
reduce the solids to pulp , and then combine the stock and solids . 
Immersion blenders also work well for puréeing soup . However , take care
when blending soups with fibrous vegetables , such as Chilled Spring Pea Soup
with Tarragon ( page 91 )  , to make sure the blades are not bound by fibers
wrapped around the armature . 
Making creamy soups with no cream : There are many ways to thicken soup . 
Most of them not only improve the texture of a soup but also add some
nutritional kick . Mashed potatoes and puréed white beans both give you a
creamy consistency . Barley is an excellent thickener . Rice can also be
overcooked then mashed or puréed and added to soup , though the consistency
can be a bit grainy . Roux , that classic mixture of fat and flour , will work for
soups whose acidity isn ’ t too high , such as Corn Chowder ( page 81 )  . Browning
the flour in the fat gives a rich , deep flavor to the soup . The rule of thumb for
roux is 1 tablespoon of oil and 1 tablespoon of flour to 1 cup of stock , soymilk , 
or water . This quantity will be sufficient to thicken a soup , although it will take
some time . If you are in a hurry , use 2 tablespoons of flour and 2 tablespoons of
oil to 1 cup of stock , soymilk , or water . 
Puréed tofu can also be added to soups to give a creamy richness and a protein
and calcium boost . 
Cutting vegetables : If a soup is going to be puréed , cutting the vegetables
into small pieces will speed up the cooking and make puréeing easier . For
chunky soups , keep in mind the size of the bowls and spoons that you will be
using . It can be awkward to encounter something in your soup bowl that is larger
than your soup spoon . If you are using flat , wide soup bowls , small vegetables
sink to the bottom and their visual effect is lost . Larger chunks of vegetables rise
from the soup like an iceberg , promising more underneath . A variety of shapes
and textures improves the soup-eating experience through heightened visual
appeal . 
Flavoring with miso , bouillon powder , and Spike : If you are not able to
make stock , these provide a reasonable substitute . All of these are salty and most
of them contain some form of nutritional yeast . Try to find the “ no salt added ” 
kind .  ( Besides , you can always add salt , which is much cheaper than these
packaged powders .  ) Bouillon powder and Spike also contain dehydrated
vegetables . Some bouillon powders may contain animal fat or MSG , so as
always , read the labels carefully . 
Miso is your best bet for a fast soup stock . The darker the miso , the saltier it is
—and with as much as 630 milligrams of sodium in 1 tablespoon , it is salty .  
( Use a lighter miso if you are concerned with your salt intake .  ) Despite the salt , 
miso provides good amounts of protein , calcium , phosphorus , magnesium , and
potassium . Depending on the soup , use anywhere from 1 tablespoon to ¼ cup of
miso per quart of water . See pages 20–21 for more information on miso . 
If you don ’ t care to use any of the above , try using tomato juice or the water
from cooking vegetables or beans , or just doubling the amount of mirepoix in the
soup . 
STOCKS
Restaurants use the ends , scraps , and peelings of vegetables for stock . It
would be wasteful to throw them away . The various combinations of vegetable
trimmings that are used give the stocks different characters . Where will you get
these myriad vegetable scraps ? From your freezer ! Keep a large , airtight plastic
bag or container in your freezer and add vegetable scraps as they accumulate . 
Zucchini trimmings , the woody ends of asparagus or lemongrass , carrot ends , 
basil stems , fennel stalks , mushroom stems , celery hearts , and cucumber ends
can all find new life as soup stock . 
If you are buying organic produce , then the peelings of carrots , cucumbers , 
and potatoes may be used also . There are a few things you may not want to use : 
onion skins will turn the stock a dark brown color ; seeds and pith ( the white
part ) from peppers will turn bitter in stock , as will tomato seeds ; the waxy
coating of rutabagas and turnips is unpleasant ; cabbage and broccoli can
overpower the stock if allowed to boil for too long . 
Use your judgment . If you would never want to see that many carrots on your
plate , don ’ t put them in your stock . The combination of vegetables should be one
you like . 
Leaving the stock unsalted allows you to use it for many different recipes . It
can be used as a base for miso soup ; reduced , flavored , and thickened for a
sauce ; or used to cook lentils or split peas . 
If you are making the stock for a specific recipe , add a small amount of the
herbs in the soup recipe to the stock . Don ’ t overdo it , though . The long
simmering time of the stock will give the flavors plenty of time to develop . 
Patience is essential for successful stocks . Do not rush the process . Most of
the recipes here take at least an hour to simmer . If the broth tastes weak , let it
simmer longer . Your perseverance will be amply rewarded by richer , fuller
flavors . 
Vegetable Stock
3 medium onions , peeled and cut into quarters
8 whole cloves ( optional ; do not substitute ground cloves ) 
10 cloves garlic , smashed
4 celery stalks , cut into 2-inch pieces , 
or the heart of 1 bunch celery , cut into 2-inch pieces
4 carrots , cut into halves lengthwise , then into 2-inch pieces
2 to 4 cups reserved vegetable trimmings
2 bay leaves
4 sprigs fresh thyme ( optional ) 
4 black peppercorns
Stick the cloves into the onions . Place all ingredients in a large soup pot with 5
quarts of cold water . Put the pot on the stove on high heat . When the water is just
about to boil , turn the heat to medium . Partially cover the pot and simmer the
stock for about an hour or until all the vegetables are falling-apart soft . Taste the
broth . If it seems weak , simmer for another 30 minutes or so . 
To make a thin stock , strain the stock through a colander or large-holed
strainer . Press on the vegetables to extract all the liquid . 
To preserve some of the vegetable fibers and thicken the stock , before
straining it , purée with an immersion blender . Strain the stock through a colander
or strainer to catch the stringy , inedible fibers . 
If you want a more intense flavor , return the stock to the pot and reduce it to
half its original volume . Do this over low heat to preserve the delicate flavors . 
Makes about 1 gallon . 
Roasted Vegetable Stock
Vegetables that lend themselves to roasting are eggplant , fennel , onions , 
tomatoes , carrots , and potatoes . Asparagus ends , broccoli trimmings , and
mushrooms work well also . Try to cut the vegetables into pieces that will cook at
the same rate . Onions and carrots will need to be a bit smaller than zucchini . 
Potatoes and broccoli stems need to be cut so they roast in about the same time
as a clove of garlic . Generally , the harder a vegetable is , the smaller the chunk
for purposes of roasting . 
Roasting the vegetables at a low temperature ( 275° ) prevents charring and
develops the sweetness of the vegetables more intensely . For a thick stock , roast
white potatoes or sweet potatoes with the vegetables . 
This stock is particularly good for puréeing and using later to make sauces .  
( See Vegan Demi-glace , page 143 .  ) 
3 medium onions , peeled and cut into eighths
10 whole cloves garlic
4 celery stalks , cut into 2-inch pieces
4 carrots , cut into halves lengthwise , then into 2-inch pieces
4 cups reserved vegetable trimmings , or 1 zucchini , 1 eggplant , and 2 tomatoes , cut into 1-inch cubes
3 tablespoons oil
2 bay leaves
4 black peppercorns
Preheat the oven to 350° . In a large mixing bowl , toss the vegetables with the
oil . Arrange the vegetables in a single layer , if possible , on 2 baking sheets lined
with parchment paper or sprayed with nonstick cooking spray . Roast for 20
minutes . Stir the vegetables and rotate the pans . Roast for another 15 to 20
minutes or until they are tender to the touch . It is not necessary that they be
cooked all the way through . 
Discard any charred or blackened vegetables . Transfer the vegetables to a
soup pot and add 5 quarts of water , the bay leaves , and the peppercorns . Turn the
heat to high . When the water is just about to boil , turn the heat to medium . 
Partially cover the pot and simmer the stock for about 1 hour or until all the
vegetables are falling-apart soft . 
To make a thin stock , strain the stock through a colander or large-holed
strainer , discarding the bay leaves . Press on the vegetables to extract all the
liquid . 
To preserve some of the vegetable fibers and thicken the stock , before
straining it , purée the stock with an immersion blender . Strain the stock through
a colander or strainer to catch the stringy , inedible fibers . 
If you want a more intense flavor , return the stock to the pot and reduce it to
half its original volume . Do this over low heat to preserve the delicate flavors . 
Makes about 1 gallon . 
Green Vegetable Stock
This stock is ideal for soups featuring the first vegetables of spring , such as
asparagus and peas . It ’ s also good as a base for miso soup . Use the trimmings
from romaine lettuce ( don ’ t freeze these )  , the ends of asparagus , basil stems , 
green beans that are past their prime , broccoli stems , bok choy trimmings ( no
head cabbage , though , please )  , and the like to flavor this delicate broth . 
1 gallon reserved trimmings from green vegetables or
1 head romaine lettuce , cut into 2-inch squares
4 green onions , cut into 4-inch lengths
½ bunch parsley
2 cloves garlic
2 bay leaves
Cover the vegetables and bay leaves with cold water in a soup pot . Turn the heat
to high . When the water is just about to boil , turn the heat to medium . Simmer
the stock , uncovered , for 20 minutes . Turn off the heat and let the stock stand for
25 minutes . 
Strain the stock through a colander or large-holed strainer . Gently press on the
vegetables to extract all the broth .  ( Do not purée this stock .  ) Discard the solids . 
Makes about 1 gallon . 
Mushroom Stock
When saving mushroom stems , remove all the dirt from the stem before placing it
in the freezer . You may want to save mushroom stems separately so you can
accumulate enough for this hearty stock . The darker the mushrooms , the deeper
the flavor of the stock . 
2 teaspoons oil
2 medium onions , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
4 cups reserved mushroom stems or 3 cups sliced shiitake , portobello , cremini , or button mushrooms
4 celery stalks , cut into 2-inch pieces , or the heart of 1 bunch celery , cut into 2-inch pieces
2 cups reserved vegetable trimmings ( optional ) 
4 sprigs fresh thyme
½ ounce dried mushrooms ( optional ) 
2 bay leaves
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over high heat . When the oil is hot , add the onions , 
then the garlic and mushroom stems or mushrooms . Cook without stirring for 1
minute or until the onions develop a golden brown color . Reduce the heat to
medium . Cook the mixture , stirring occasionally , until the mushrooms have
given up their liquid and are dry , about 15 to 25 minutes . 
Put the mushroom mixture into a soup pot along with the remaining
ingredients and 8 cups of water . Place the soup pot over high heat . When the
water is just about to boil , turn the heat to medium . Partially cover the pot and
simmer the stock for about 1 hour . Taste the broth . If it seems weak , simmer for
another 30 minutes or so . 
Strain the stock through a colander or large-holed strainer . Press on the
vegetables to extract all the broth .  ( Do not purée this stock if using mushroom
stems .  ) Discard the solids . 
Makes about 1½ quarts . 
Asian Broth
There is nothing mysterious about Asian broth . Our lack of experience with
certain ingredients makes them seem intimidating , but with a little practice you
can achieve marvelous results . Add or subtract ingredients depending on the
cuisine . If you are planning to make a Thai-style soup , add the tough , woody
tops of lemongrass and the roots and stems of cilantro . For a Chinese soup , add
some star anise . For a spicy broth , add some extra chilies or Szechuan
peppercorns . 
4 dried shiitake mushrooms
6 cloves garlic
5 green onions
3¼-inch slices of fresh ginger
1 carrot , sliced lengthwise
1 small chili , fresh or dried
1 teaspoon whole peppercorns
Cover the dried mushrooms with 1½ cups of boiling water . Cover and let stand
for 20 minutes . Remove the mushrooms from the water and cut into ¼-inch
strips . Strain the soaking liquid into a medium pot . Add the remaining
ingredients and 3 cups of cold water . Place the pot over medium heat and
simmer for about 40 minutes or until the broth is fragrant . For a richer flavor , 
allow the broth to sit off-heat for an additional hour before straining . Strain the
broth . 
Makes 1 quart . 
Japanese Seaweed Broth 
( Kombu Dashi ) 
The simplest dashi ( broth ) involves kombu seaweed soaked overnight in water , 
but for our purposes , a slightly more elaborate recipe is given . Seaweed is a
good source of iodine , which may be a concern for some people on vegan diets . 
For an earthy-tasting broth , add 1 or 2 dried shiitake mushrooms per cup of
water . The kombu that is soaked for the broth can be saved , cut into strips , and
stir-fried with tofu or vegetables , or added back into a soup at the end of
cooking . 
1 4-inch piece kombu seaweed or dulse
2¼-inch slices fresh ginger
¼ cup soy sauce
2 tablespoons sake or dry sherry ( optional ) 
1 tablespoon mirin or 1 tablespoon sugar ( optional ) 
Gently wipe the kombu with a dry paper towel to remove dirt .  ( Do not rinse with
water or you will lose much of the flavor .  ) Soak the kombu in 4 cups of cold
water in a pot for 8 hours or more . Remove the kombu and reserve for another
use . The stock can be used at this point to make a light miso soup . 
Alternatively , soak the kombu in 4 cups of cold water for 1 to 2 hours . Heat on
medium-low . Just before the water boils , remove the kombu . Reserve the kombu
for another use . 
Add the ginger , soy sauce , sake or sherry , and sugar ( but not mirin ) to the pot . 
Bring the mixture to a boil . Lower the heat and simmer for 10 minutes . Add the
mirin . Taste the broth and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes about 4 cups . 
HOT SOUPS
Microwave Miso Soup for One
I am a lazy cook at home . Often I don ’ t even want to dirty a pot . This version of
miso soup allows me the comforts of hot soup with very little fuss . In the winter I
add extra garlic and ginger for their warming properties and to ward off colds
and sniffles . You can also add just about any leftover steamed vegetable , scraps
of leafy greens , or small bits of seaweed .  ( I often add leftover Edamame with
Hijiki and Brown Rice , page 249 .  ) 1 tablespoon light miso
1¼ cups water or Japanese Seaweed Broth ( page 68 ) 
¼ teaspoon minced garlic
¼ teaspoon grated fresh ginger
1 1-inch square dulse , wakame , or other seaweed ( optional ) 
1 green onion , thinly sliced
1 shiitake mushroom , thinly sliced
2 ounces tofu , diced ( optional ) 
Put the miso in the bottom of a large soup cup ( not a shallow soup bowl )  . Slowly
add the water or light stock and mix well so there are no lumps of miso . Add the
garlic , ginger , and seaweed . Heat on high in the microwave until fairly warm but
not hot , about 2 minutes . Add the rest of the soup ingredients . Heat for an
additional minute or until it is quite hot but not boiling . Remove the cup from the
microwave and cover with a small plate . Allow the flavors to blend for 3 or 4
minutes . 
Makes 1 serving . 
Miso Soup
This is a slightly more involved version , but all miso soups are very fast to make . 
They are traditionally eaten for breakfast in Japan and provide a good protein
and calcium boost to start the day . 
Dark miso is saltier than light miso , so adjust the flavoring with soy sauce as
necessary . Generally , I like light miso in spring and dark miso in winter . 
4 cups water or Japanese Seaweed Broth ( page 68 ) 
1 teaspoon minced garlic
½ medium onion , thinly sliced
1½ teaspoons grated fresh ginger
½ cup matchstick-cut carrots
1 cup thinly sliced shiitake or button mushrooms
1 3-inch piece of wakame , dulse , or other seaweed ( optional ) 
2 green onions , thinly sliced
1 cup thinly sliced seasonal vegetables ( asparagus , green beans , watercress , dandelion greens ) 
4 tablespoons miso
8 to 10 ounces tofu , cut into small cubes
Combine the water or light stock , garlic , onion , ginger , carrots , mushrooms , and
seaweed in a soup pot . Bring the mixture to a boil over high heat . Reduce the
heat to medium and simmer until the carrots are barely tender , about 5 to 10
minutes . Add the green onions and seasonal vegetables . Simmer for 5 more
minutes or until those vegetables are crisp-tender . In a small bowl , slowly add 1
cup of the soup broth to the miso and whisk until there are no lumps left . Add
the miso and tofu to the soup . Turn off the heat and cover the pot . Let the soup
steep for 3 to 4 minutes .  ( If you own covered soup bowls , you can ladle the soup
into the bowls and cover them .  ) Makes 4 entrée servings or 8 appetizer servings . 
Hot and Sour Soup with Glass Noodles
This is a decidedly easy version of a classic dish from northern China . The glass
noodles add the same textural element that eggs normally do , and tofu replaces
the usual pork . 
5 dried wood ear mushrooms
1 teaspoon peanut or canola oil
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
2 teaspoons minced garlic
10 shiitake mushrooms , cut into ¼-inch strips
4 cups Asian Broth ( page 68 ) 
¼ cup rice wine vinegar
2 tablespoons soy sauce , or 1 tablespoon soy sauce and 2 teaspoons mushroom soy sauce
1 ounce glass noodles ( mung bean threads ) 
2 tablespoons cornstarch ( optional ) 
8 ounces tofu , cubed
2 teaspoons sesame oil
1 teaspoon black pepper
4 green onions , trimmed and thinly sliced on the diagonal
Cover the dried mushrooms with 1½ cups boiling water . Cover and let stand for
20 minutes . Remove the mushrooms from the water and cut into ¼-inch strips . 
Strain the soaking liquid and reserve . 
Heat the oil in a 4-quart pot . Sauté the ginger , garlic , and shiitakes together for
1 to 2 minutes . Add the stock and the reserved soaking liquid . Bring the broth to
a boil . Add the vinegar , soy sauce , glass noodles , and reserved mushrooms . 
Bring the broth to a boil again . When the broth just begins to boil , reduce the
heat to low . Allow the soup to simmer over low heat for 3 minutes or just until
the glass noodles are done . 
Mix the cornstarch with 2 tablespoons cold water . Slowly pour this into the
soup , stirring constantly . Cook for 3 minutes longer or until the soup is slightly
thickened . Add the tofu , sesame oil , pepper and green onions . Taste and adjust
the seasonings . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Thai Vegan Tom Yum Gong
This is a refined and refreshing soup . Make sure your stock is redolent of ginger
and lemongrass . While lime leaves and tamarind soup base can be hard to find , 
they are worth the effort . No doubt , when you do discover a market that sells
them , you ’ ll find innumerable other treasures there also . Tofu substitutes for the
traditional shrimp . 
1 stalk lemongrass or 2 teaspoons sliced , dried lemongrass
6 cups Asian Broth ( page 68 ) 
½ package Knorr tamarind soup base
4 kaffir lime leaves , fresh or frozen , or 1 tablespoon grated lemon zest
½ cup quartered button mushrooms
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
1 teaspoon Thai chili paste
1 tablespoon light soy sauce
8 ounces tofu , cut into ½-inch cubes
2 green onions , cut on the diagonal into ¼-inch slices
2 green Thai chilies , very thinly sliced
3 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh cilantro
1 ounce fresh enoki or straw mushrooms
Whole cilantro leaves
If using fresh lemongrass , trim the end . Cut slices from the root end , ¼ inch
thick , on a sharp diagonal . Stop cutting when the stalk seems woody or when the
thin reddish band is no longer visible . Remove the woody center from the slices . 
If you can ’ t bear to throw away the rest of the lemongrass , cut the top of the
stalk into 3-inch lengths and crush them with the side of your knife . In a soup
pot , bring the broth and the tamarind soup base to a boil with the lemongrass
slices and stalk pieces and the lime leaves . Add the button mushrooms and
simmer for 20 minutes . Remove the lemongrass stalk pieces . Add the lime juice , 
chili paste , and soy sauce to the broth . Adjust the seasonings . 
Just before serving , add the tofu , green onions , chilies , and chopped cilantro . 
Let the flavors blend for 3 minutes . Ladle into bowls and garnish with enoki and
whole cilantro leaves . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Spicy Sweet Potato Soup
Hearty whole-grain bread is an especially good accompaniment to this soup . 
2 teaspoons cumin seed or 1 teaspoon ground cumin
1 tablespoon oil
3 medium onions , cut into a medium dice
4 cloves garlic , thinly sliced , or 2 teaspoons garlic purée
½ bunch celery , cut into a medium dice
2 medium carrots , cut into a medium dice
1½ teaspoons ancho chili powder
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger ( optional ) 
8 cups water or Roasted Vegetable Stock ( page 66 ) 
3 pounds sweet potatoes , peeled , cut into 1-to 2-inch cubes
1 small dried chipotle or ½ canned chipotle , drained
¼ cup fresh lemon or lime juice
Salt and pepper
¼ cup pumpkin seeds
Fresh cilantro leaves , whole or coarsely chopped
If you are using cumin seeds , toast them gently in a soup pot over medium heat
just until they begin to brown . Add the oil and raise the heat to medium-high . 
Add the onions , garlic , celery , and carrots . Cook without stirring until the
vegetables brown slightly .  ( This will take some patience and restraint .  ) When the
vegetables have begun to brown , add the chili powder , ginger , and ground
cumin , if not using seeds . Cook this mixture until a heady aroma rises from the
pot and vegetables are fairly soft . 
Add the stock and the sweet potatoes . Cook until the sweet potatoes are very
soft , just about falling apart , about 40 minutes . Taste the soup and add chipotles
accordingly . Remember that the heat of the chipotle will continue to develop
over the next day or so , so if you are heat-averse , be conservative at this point . 
Purée the soup and return it to the pot . Add the lemon juice and season with
salt and pepper . If the soup is too spicy , a bit of sugar will tone it down a little . If
the soup is too mild , a little more chipotle will add some kick . 
Toast the pumpkin seeds either in a sauté pan over low heat on top of the stove
or in a medium oven , until they begin to pop and plump up . 
Ladle the soup into bowls . Top with toasted pumpkin seeds and cilantro . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Onion Soup
This soup may satisfy those who are nostalgic for French onion soup . Feel free
to top the soup with a large crouton and some vegan cheese . 
1 tablespoon oil
3 yellow onions , cut into halves and sliced ¼ to ½ inch thick
3 cloves garlic , thinly sliced , or 2 teaspoons minced garlic
¼ teaspoon dried thyme or 2 teaspoons fresh thyme leaves
4 cups Mushroom Stock ( page 67 ) 
1½ teaspoons Spike or similar seasoning , or 1 tablespoon dark miso
Sea salt and pepper
In a large soup pot , heat the oil over medium heat . When the oil begins to
smoke , add the onions , garlic , and dried thyme . Cook without stirring until the
onions develop some color , 1 to 2 minutes , and then stir . Cook , stirring every 1
to 2 minutes , until onions are a deep brown color . The aroma should be pleasant .  
( If any of the onions blacken and smell burned , discard all the onions and oil and
start again , as the resulting soup will taste burned .  ) When most of the onions
have taken on a rich brown color , add the stock , fresh thyme , and Spike . Raise
the heat to high and bring to a boil . Reduce the heat to medium . Taste the soup
and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Caldo Verde ( Portuguese Green Soup ) 
This soup is ubiquitous in Portugal . Every café on every street corner sells its
own version of caldo verde , the national soup . Traditionally , chorizo , or spicy
sausage , is added in small quantities as a flavoring agent , but the soup does not
suffer from its omission . 
This potato soup is thinner than you might expect , giving the greens a chance
to costar with the potatoes . 
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium onion , finely diced
1 clove garlic , minced
6 Idaho potatoes , peeled and thinly sliced
1½ teaspoons salt
½ teaspoon white pepper
1 pound kale , chard , or collards , washed and trimmed
In a large soup pot over medium-high heat , heat the oil . Add the onions and
garlic and sauté for 3 minutes . Add the potatoes and sauté , stirring constantly , for
3 more minutes . Add 2 quarts of cold water and bring the soup to a boil . Reduce
the heat to medium and cover the pot . Simmer the soup for another 10 minutes
or until the potatoes are falling apart . Purée the soup . Season with salt and white
pepper . Return the soup to medium heat and warm . Stack the kale leaves , roll
them into a thick “ cigar ,  ” and cut the cigar into slices to yield neat shreds . Add
the shredded greens and simmer for 5 minutes or until the greens are bright
green and tender . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Harvest Vegetable Soup
This soup showcases the flavors of those fabulous root vegetables we wouldn ’ t
eat as children . Modify the mixture of vegetables based on what looks good in
the market . No oil or stock is used , giving this soup a clean , straightforward
flavor . For a more intense flavor , roast the vegetables in the oven until they are
about half cooked and then proceed as the recipe directs . 
Peeling root vegetables and winter squash can be difficult . Make sure your
peeler or knife is sharp so it won ’ t jump off the vegetables . This soup is puréed , 
so don ’ t waste a lot of energy cutting your vegetables really small . It does help to
cut the vegetables into roughly the same size so they cook at the same rate . 
Because this soup takes some time to cook , you can use its appealing aroma to
motivate you while you do household chores . 
1 very large rutabaga , peeled and diced
4 parsnips , peeled and diced
2 medium turnips , peeled and diced
1 medium butternut squash , peeled and diced
3 carrots , peeled and diced
2 Idaho potatoes , peeled and diced
2 large sweet potatoes , peeled and diced
1 bunch celery , diced
3 medium onions , diced , or 2 large leeks , cleaned and sliced
Sea salt
Place all ingredients in a large soup pot . Add enough cold water to cover the
vegetables by 4 inches . Turn the heat to medium-high . Allow the mixture to just
barely come to a boil , and then reduce the heat to a medium simmer . If you cook
this soup at too high a temperature , it will darken . Cook until the vegetables are
quite soft . This may take some time , so patience is required . Add water to the pot
as necessary . 
Purée the soup . Adjust the thickness with water . Season with sea salt .  ( Pepper
is not recommended for this soup as it may muddy the flavors of the vegetables .  ) 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Chunky Polish Borscht
Fermented beet juice , or kvas , adds a distinctive taste to most borscht . For those
desiring a really authentic flavor , the recipe follows . The rest of us can use a
mixture of white vinegar and lemon juice . 
1 tablespoon oil
1 large onion , diced
1 clove garlic , minced
4 stalks celery , diced
2 medium carrots , peeled and cut into ½-inch cubes
2 medium potatoes , peeled and cut into ½-inch cubes
4 medium beets , peeled and cut into ½-inch cubes
2½ cups shredded green cabbage
4 green onions , thinly sliced on the diagonal
3 tablespoons white vinegar
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice or ½ cup Kvas ( recipe follows ) 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon white pepper
1 cup cooked white beans ( Great Northern or cannellini ) 
Vegan sour cream ( optional ) 
In a large soup pot over medium heat , heat the oil and sauté the onions , garlic , 
celery , and carrots for 4 minutes or just until they begin to soften . Add the cubed
potatoes and beets and cook for 10 minutes longer , taking care that the
vegetables do not brown . 
Add 6 cups of water . Cover the pot and simmer over medium-low heat for 15
minutes . Add the cabbage and cook for 15 more minutes or until the vegetables
are tender . Add the green onions , vinegar , lemon juice , dill , salt , and pepper . 
Taste and adjust seasonings . 
To serve , place 1½ to 2 tablespoons of white beans in the bottom of each soup
bowl and ladle the borscht over them . Garnish with vegan sour cream , if desired . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Kvas ( Fermented Beet Juice ) 
3 medium beets , peeled and cut into 1-inch cubes
Place the beets in a sieve and wash them under cold water . Put the beets into a
crock or ceramic container . Add enough warm water to cover them by at least 2
inches . Cover the container with its lid , or seal it with aluminum foil , and set
aside at room temperature for 5 to 7 days , until the liquid ferments and tastes
sour . 
Strain the mixture through a sieve lined with a double thickness of cheesecloth
and set over a large bowl . Discard the beets and refrigerate the kvas , tightly
sealed , until you are ready to use it as a flavoring agent . 
Makes 1 cup . 
Potato Soup : Four Variations
Potatoes provide us with a ready palette for many different flavor variations . 
Chef ’ s potatoes , those irregular , round potatoes sold in netted bags , are an
inexpensive choice for soup . If you want to splurge , try Yukon Gold , with their
waxy yellow flesh , in the Potato and Roasted Garlic Soup variation . Idaho
russets , with their creamy white flesh , work well in the Potato and Leek Soup . 
Save your fingerling and red skin potatoes for salads and roasting . 
Basic Potato Soup
For this soup , I prefer to mash the potatoes before puréeing them . This prevents
the potatoes from becoming gummy and adds complexity to the soup ’ s texture . 
2 tablespoons oil , or vegan margarine
2 medium onions , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic ( optional ) 
3 to 4 pounds potatoes , peeled and cut into 1-to 1½-inch cubes
1½ teaspoons sea salt
1 quart full-bodied soymilk
In a large soup pot over medium heat , melt the margarine or heat the oil . Add the
onions and garlic and sauté until the onions are translucent . Do not brown the
onions . Add the potatoes , salt , and enough cold water to cover by 3 inches . Raise
the heat to high and bring the soup to a boil . Lower to a simmer and cook until
the potatoes are quite soft . Drain the vegetables , reserving the liquid , and mash
them , adding the soymilk and the reserved cooking water . Purée the vegetables . 
Add more water or soymilk as desired . Return the soup to the stove and warm
before serving . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Potato and Roasted Garlic Soup : Add 1 head of Roasted Garlic ( page 223 ) to
Basic Potato Soup . 
Potato and Watercress Soup : Prepare Basic Potato Soup without garlic . When it
is ready to be rewarmed , add 1 bunch of chopped watercress . Allow the soup to
warm with the watercress for 10 minutes to allow flavors to meld . Alternately , 
purée the watercress with the potatoes . 
Potato and Leek Soup : Replace 1 onion with 1 large or 2 medium leeks , white
parts only . Wash the leeks well , cut into halves lengthwise , and cut into ¼-inch
slices . Sauté the leeks with the garlic and onion and proceed as the recipe directs . 
Grilled Eggplant and
Roasted Red Pepper Soup
This soup has a hearty , surprisingly “ meaty ” texture , especially when the
eggplants are grilled over mesquite chips or charcoal . The eggplants , peppers , 
and onions may be grilled a day in advance—perhaps late on a summer evening
when you just don ’ t want to leave the grill and go back inside . 
2 large or 4 small eggplants
Salt
Seasoned oil
2 large red bell peppers
Oil
2 large onions , cut into ½-to ¾-inch slices
1 small onion , diced
6 cloves garlic , very thinly sliced
4 stalks celery , diced
1½ teaspoons dried basil , or ¼ cup shredded fresh basil
½ teaspoon dried thyme or 2 teaspoons fresh thyme
6 cups Roasted Vegetable Stock ( page 66 ) 
1 24-ounce can diced tomatoes or 1½ cups diced fresh tomatoes
Salt and freshly ground pepper
Cut the eggplants into 1-inch-thick slices . Liberally salt each side and lay the
slices in a colander . Allow the eggplants to drain for half an hour . When the
eggplants have released a fair amount of liquid , rinse each slice under cold water
and pat dry . 
Brush the eggplant slices sparingly with the seasoned oil . On an outdoor grill
over medium heat or on a grill pan on the stovetop , grill the eggplant until it is
about half cooked , about 3 to 6 minutes on each side , depending on your cooking
method . Reserve the grilled eggplant in a baking dish or bowl deep enough for
the juices to collect . 
Rub the red peppers with oil and grill them , turning occasionally , until the
skins begin to blister . When most of the skin has blistered , place the peppers in a
bowl and cover the bowl with plastic wrap or a plate to steam the peppers . 
Brush the onion slices with seasoned oil and grill until about half cooked , 3 to
5 minutes on each side , depending on your cooking method . 
When cool enough to handle , cut the eggplant and onion slices into 1-inch
chunks . Reserve them along with any juices that may have accumulated . 
Remove the black skin , seeds , and pith from the peppers . Chop the peppers
coarsely and reserve . 
Heat 1 tablespoon of oil in a soup pot over medium-high heat and sauté the
diced onion , garlic , celery , and any dried herbs . Sauté this mixture until the
onion begins to color and is soft . Add the stock . When the stock is hot , add the
tomatoes , grilled vegetables , and any liquid that may have accumulated . 
Cook until heated through . Add fresh herbs , salt , and freshly ground pepper . 
Taste the soup and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Vegetable Soup with Lemon and Dill
This is a versatile soup that can accommodate most green vegetable scraps you
may have hanging around in your refrigerator . Asparagus , escarole , and
artichokes would all do nicely , as would cauliflower , fennel , and even
mushrooms . 
Because warm lemon zest can become bitter on standing , the yield of this soup
is smaller so it can be consumed in one day . 
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium leek , white part only , washed , cut into halves lengthwise , and cut into ¼-inch semicircles
2 cloves garlic , minced
1 medium carrot , diced
3 stalks celery , plus the heart , diced
4 cups Green Vegetable Stock ( page 67 ) 
cup jasmine rice
1 teaspoon salt
teaspoon white pepper ( optional ) 
2 medium zucchini , cut into ½-inch semicircles
½ pound green beans , cut on the diagonal into ½-inch pieces
Zest and juice of 1 lemon
1 tablespoon chopped fresh dill
Heat the oil in a soup pot over medium-high heat . Add the leeks , garlic , carrot , 
and celery and sauté just until the vegetables begin to soften , about 3 minutes . 
Add the stock and bring the soup to a boil . Add the rice , stir , and reduce the heat
to low . Cook for 10 to 15 minutes , just until the rice is al dente .  ( To test for this , 
cut a rice grain into halves . It should have a little white dot in the middle .  ) Add
the salt and pepper . 
Raise the heat to medium . Add the zucchini , green beans , and any other
vegetable you are using . Cook for 4 or 5 minutes , just until the vegetables are
tender . Add the lemon zest , juice , and dill and mix well . Taste and adjust the
seasonings . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Four Mushroom and Barley Soup
It takes some time and patience to develop all the rich flavors of the mushrooms
in this soup , but the result is well worth the effort . Use half the barley if you are
not planning on eating the soup right away , because barley has a tendency to
swell . 
8 ounces button mushrooms
2 large portobello mushrooms
4 ounces shiitake mushrooms
4 ounces cremini , hedgehog , oyster , or other exotic mushrooms
1 tablespoon oil
3 medium onions , diced
1 tablespoon minced garlic
4 stalks celery , diced
1 teaspoon dried thyme or 1 tablespoon fresh thyme
2 teaspoons salt
8 cups warm Mushroom Stock ( page 67 ) 
1 cup pearl barley
¼ teaspoon black pepper ( optional ) 
If the stems on the button mushrooms are tough , remove them . Cut the
mushrooms into bite-size pieces . Remove the stems from the portobellos . Trim
any dirt from the stems and reserve the stems for stock . Cut the caps into halves
and cut into -inch pieces . Remove the woody stems from the shiitakes and
reserve for stock . Cut the caps into ¼-inch pieces . Prepare the exotic
mushrooms , removing any woody stems and dirt , then cutting the caps into bitesize pieces . Reserve . 
In a large soup pot , heat the oil over high heat . When the oil begins to smoke , 
add the onions , garlic , celery , and dried thyme . Cook without stirring until the
onions develop some color , 1 to 2 minutes . Cook , stirring every 1 or 2 minutes , 
until half of the onions are brown , about 6 minutes . Watch them carefully—if
they are blackening and smell like they are burning , remove them from the heat . 
Add the salt and mushrooms to the onions . Reduce the heat to medium-high . 
Cook the mixture , stirring , until the mushrooms release all their liquid , about 25
minutes . This part takes some patience and restraint . Cook the mixture until most
of the mushroom liquid has evaporated and the mixture is almost dry . This
ensures a deep mushroom flavor . 
Add the stock , raise the heat to medium-high , and bring the soup to a boil . 
Add the barley . Reduce the heat to medium and cook for 15 to 30 minutes , or
until the barley is tender . Add the pepper . Taste and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Corn Chowder
This colorful soup highlights the bounty of late summer , when corn is plentiful , 
peppers are fully ripe , the potato harvest is beginning , and the nights have begun
to have a little chill to them . 
Fresh corn is ideal in this recipe because you can use the cobs for stock . Try
using leftover grilled corn on the cob for an added flavor note . Cooking the
potatoes separately ensures even doneness . 
8 small red skin potatoes , peeled and cut into ½-inch cubes
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ cup vegan margarine or oil
2 medium onions , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
4 stalks celery , diced
2 medium carrots , diced
½ teaspoon ground cumin
teaspoon cayenne
teaspoon dark chili powder
3 tablespoons flour
8 cups warm Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
1 tablespoon oil
1 large red bell pepper , cut into ½-inch squares
1 large yellow bell pepper , cut into ½-inch squares
2 medium green bell peppers , cut into ½-inch squares
4 cups corn kernels
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon white pepper
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro
Diced tomatoes ( optional ) 
Whole cilantro leaves ( optional ) 
Cover the potatoes with water in a small pot . Add the salt . Bring the water to a
boil . Boil for three minutes or until the potatoes are tender . Remove the pot from
the heat , drain the hot water , and rinse the potatoes with cold water until they are
cool . Reserve . 
In a large soup pot over medium heat , melt the margarine or heat the oil . Add
the onions , garlic , celery , carrots , and spices . Sauté until the vegetables soften , 
about 8 minutes . Add the flour , stirring vigorously so no lumps develop . Cook
the flour for 2 minutes to eliminate the raw taste . Remove the pot from the heat . 
Slowly add 1 cup of the warm vegetable stock . Stir until the stock is fully
incorporated and the mixture is smooth . Add 1 more cup of the stock and mix
well . Add the remaining stock and mix well . When the mixture is smooth , return
the pot to medium heat . Stir occasionally as the soup comes to a boil , making
sure there is no scorching on the bottom of the pot . When the soup just begins to
boil , lower the heat and cook for another 15 minutes or until the soup thickens . 
While the soup is cooking , heat the oil in a skillet over medium-high heat . 
Add the peppers and sauté until they are tender . Add the corn , peppers , potatoes , 
salt , pepper , and chopped cilantro to the soup . Taste and adjust the seasonings . 
Garnish with diced fresh tomatoes and cilantro leaves , if desired . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Jary ( Algerian Vegetable Soup ) 
This soup gets its body from bulgur , the major ingredient in tabbouleh ( for more
on bulgur , see page 170 )  . The use of fresh green herbs is characteristic of soups
from several Middle Eastern cuisines . This soup is traditionally eaten at sunset
to break the day ’ s fast during Ramadan . You may omit the puréeing step for a
much chunkier soup . 
2 tablespoons oil
1 onion , diced
2 stalks celery , diced
1½ teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon paprika
Pinch cayenne
¼ cup tomato purée
4 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
¼ cup fine bulgur
½ cup chopped fresh parsley
½ cup chopped fresh cilantro
½ cup chopped fresh mint
½ cup cooked chickpeas
1 to 2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
Salt
In a large soup pot over medium-high heat , heat the oil and sauté the onion , 
celery , garlic , paprika , and cayenne until the onion is soft , about 6 minutes . Add
the tomato purée and stock . Bring to a simmer and then stir in the bulgur . 
Reduce the heat , cover , and simmer for 30 minutes , stirring occasionally , until
the bulgur is tender . 
Purée the soup . Add the herbs and purée again . Stir in the chickpeas and
reheat the soup . Add the lemon juice and salt to taste . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Black Bean Soup
Cooking the carrots and peppers separately from the beans retains their vibrant
colors and gives the soup a festive confetti look . Chili powder and cayenne may
be added to give this soup some heat , but leaving them out allows the robust
flavor of the black beans to shine through . Fresh cilantro leaves and diced
tomatoes make a lovely garnish . 
2 cups black beans
1½ tablespoons whole cumin seeds
2 tablespoons chopped garlic
1 medium red onion , diced
1 bay leaf
2 carrots , diced or cut into -inch-thick semicircles
2 tablespoons oil
1 large green bell pepper , cut into ½-inch squares
1 red bell pepper , cut into ½-inch squares
1 yellow bell pepper , cut into ½-inch squares
1½ tablespoons fresh lemon juice
2 teaspoons juice from pickled jalapeños ( optional ) 
½ teaspoon ground coriander
½ teaspoon ground cumin
1½ teaspoons salt
Diced fresh tomatoes ( optional ) 
Whole cilantro leaves ( optional ) 
Wash the beans in a large colander , checking thoroughly for small stones . Use
the quick-or long-soaking method ( page 163 ) to shorten the cooking time . In a
large soup pot over medium-high heat , toast the cumin seeds until they become
slightly brown and release their fragrance . Add the beans , garlic , onion , and bay
leaf to the pot along with 6 cups of water . Do not salt the water . Raise the heat to
high and bring the beans to a boil , stirring occasionally . Reduce the heat and
simmer the beans until soft . The time may vary , but it should take from 30 to 45
minutes . 
In a separate pan over medium-high heat , sauté the carrots in the oil for 2
minutes . Add the peppers and sauté until crisp-tender , about 3 minutes . 
Add the vegetables to the soup , along with the lemon juice , spices , and salt . 
Remove and discard bay leaf . Let the soup simmer over low heat for 30 minutes
before serving to allow the flavors to meld . Garnish with diced tomatoes and
cilantro leaves , if desired . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Tuscan White Bean Soup
Making this soup from scratch with dried beans gives it a clean flavor that
canned beans simply can ’ t match . 
1½ cups dried white beans ( Great Northern or cannellini ) 
2 tablespoons oil
2 medium onions , cut into ¼-inch slices
4 garlic cloves , thinly sliced
Salt and pepper
1 tablespoon finely sliced fresh sage
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil , plus extra for drizzling
Fresh sage leaves
Wash the beans in a large colander , checking very carefully for stones . Use the
quick-or long-soaking method ( page 163 ) to shorten the cooking time . Place the
beans in a 6-quart pot and cover with 6 cups of cold water . Bring the beans to a
boil over high heat . Reduce the heat to medium and simmer the beans until they
are soft , about 40 minutes . Skim any foam that develops . Add more water as
necessary . The cooked beans should be covered by 2 to 4 inches of cooking
liquid . Reserve the beans and the cooking liquid . 
In a large soup pot , heat the oil over high heat . When the oil begins to smoke , 
add the onions and garlic . Cook without stirring until the onions develop some
color , about 1 or 2 minutes , and then stir them . Cook , stirring every 1 or 2
minutes , until the onions turn a deep brown color . If the onions are blackening
and smell like they are burning , reduce the heat to medium-high and watch
closely . 
When the onions are nicely caramelized , add the beans and their cooking
liquid . If the beans are not quite soft , cook the soup over medium heat until they
are . Purée the soup . Adjust the thickness with water . Add salt and pepper to
taste . Stir in the sage and olive oil . Let the soup stand for 15 minutes to allow
flavors to blend . 
To serve , ladle the soup into bowls , drizzle with more extra virgin olive oil , 
and sprinkle with sage leaves . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Tomato , Fennel , 
and White Bean Soup
1 cup dried white beans or 1 16-ounce can white beans ( Great Northern or cannellini ) 
1 large fennel bulb
2 tablespoons oil
3 medium onions , diced
4 cloves garlic , thinly sliced , or 2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon fennel seeds
4 stalks celery , diced
1 teaspoon dried basil
½ teaspoon dried thyme
6 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 )  , or 3 cups tomato juice and 3 cups water
2 cups diced tomatoes , canned or fresh
Salt and pepper
If using dried beans , wash them in a colander , checking thoroughly for small
stones . Place the beans in a 2-quart saucepan along with 1 quart of cold water . 
Cook the beans on medium-high heat for about 1 hour or until they are tender . If
using canned beans , rinse them well in a colander and reserve . 
To prepare the fennel , cut off the bottom and the long stalks , reserving the
stalks for stock and the feathery leaves for garnish , if desired . Cut the bulb into
halves . Remove the core by cutting toward the middle of the bulb on either side
of the core . Pop out a triangular piece of core . Trim away any core you may have
missed . Cut the fennel into ¼-inch slices . Cut the flat slices from each end into
strips . 
In a large soup pot , heat the oil over medium-high heat . Add the onions , 
garlic , and fennel seeds and sauté for 3 minutes . Add the fennel , celery , basil , 
and thyme and sauté for 5 minutes longer . Raise the heat to high and add the
vegetable stock . Bring the soup to a boil and turn it off . Add the diced tomatoes
and reserved beans . Adjust the seasoning with salt and pepper . Reheat the soup if
necessary . Garnish with whole or chopped fennel leaves . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Curried Yellow Split Pea Soup
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
2 medium carrots , diced
2 stalks celery , diced
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
2 teaspoons medium curry powder or garam masala
½ teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground coriander
2½ cups yellow split peas
1 teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon white pepper
1 teaspoon oil
1 large red bell pepper , diced
2 Granny Smith or other tart apples , diced
Whole cilantro leaves ( optional ) 
Heat 1 tablespoon of oil in a soup pot over medium-high heat and sauté the
onion , garlic , carrots , celery , ginger , and spices until the vegetables begin to
soften and the spices give up their fragrance , about 10 minutes . Add the split
peas and 2 quarts of water to the pot . Raise the heat to high and bring the soup to
a boil . Lower the heat to a simmer and cook until split peas are falling apart , 15
to 25 minutes . Taste and add salt and pepper . 
In a small pan over medium heat , heat 1 teaspoon of oil and sauté the bell
pepper until crisp-tender . Add half the diced apples and cook for 1 minute . Add
the sautéed peppers and apples to the soup and stir gently . 
Ladle the soup into bowls and garnish with the remaining apples and , if
desired , cilantro leaves . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Lentil and Spinach Soup
I prefer to make this soup with water instead of stock so the flavor of the lentils
really comes through . 
1 tablespoon oil
2 medium onions , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
4 stalks celery , plus hearts , diced
2 medium carrots , diced
1½ teaspoons dried basil
½ teaspoon dried thyme
1 large bay leaf
2 cups brown lentils , washed
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
4 cups spinach leaves , washed and chopped coarsely
Heat the oil in a soup pot over medium-high heat and sauté the onions , garlic , 
celery , carrots , and dried herbs until the vegetables begin to soften . Add the
lentils and 2 quarts of water to the pot . Raise the heat to high and bring the soup
to a boil . Lower the heat to a simmer and cook for 15 to 25 minutes , until the
lentils are done . 
Add the salt , pepper , and spinach and mix well . Remove and discard bay leaf . 
Taste the soup and adjust the seasonings . Serve immediately . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Escarole and White Bean Soup
¾ cup dried white beans or 1½ cups canned white beans ( Great Northern or cannellini ) 
1 tablespoon oil
2 medium onions , diced
5 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
4 stalks celery , plus hearts , diced
1 teaspoon dried basil
½ teaspoon dried thyme
2 medium bay leaves
6 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
1 24-ounce can diced tomatoes with juice
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1 pound escarole , cleaned , trimmed , and chopped
½ cup chopped fresh basil ( optional ) 
Wash the dried beans in a large colander , checking very carefully for stones . Use
the quick-or long-soaking method ( page 163 ) to shorten the cooking time . Place
the beans in a 2-quart pot and cover with 4 cups cold water . Place over high heat
and bring to a boil . Reduce the heat to medium and simmer until the beans are
soft , about 40 minutes , skimming any foam that develops . The cooked beans
should be covered by a scant inch of cooking liquid when done . Add more water
as necessary . Reserve the beans and the cooking liquid . 
If using canned beans , rinse well in a colander and reserve . 
Heat the oil in a soup pot over medium-high heat and sauté the onions , garlic , 
celery , and dried herbs until the vegetables begin to soften . Add the stock to the
pot , raise the heat to high , and bring the soup to a boil . 
Add the beans and their cooking liquid , tomatoes and their juice , salt , and
pepper and mix well . Taste and adjust the seasonings . Warm the soup over
medium heat . Remove and discard bay leaves . 
Just before serving , add the escarole and cook for 4 minutes or until the
escarole is tender . Add the fresh basil . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
CHILLED SOUPS
Two Melon Soup with Plum Wine
This soup is extremely easy to make . If you ’ d like to simplify the recipe even
further , use just one type of melon . The sea salt brings out the sweetness of the
melons , and the pepper provides a nice piquant counterpoint along with the
dried ginger . Make this soup the night before you plan to serve it to allow the
flavors to develop completely . 
The soup shows to best advantage in shallow soup bowls with wide rims . 
Consider using a thin slice of sweet carambola ( star fruit ) or strawberry as a
garnish . For a dramatic presentation , reserve one slice of each melon , slice the
melon with a mandoline into long ribbons , and interweave the ribbons on top of
the soup bowls . 
1 ripe honeydew or 4 cups honeydew cubes
1 ripe cantaloupe or 4 cups cantaloupe cubes
½ teaspoon dried ginger ( preferably Jamaican ) 
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
1 cup Japanese plum wine
2 pinches sea salt
2 pinches white pepper
Peel , seed , and chop each melon into pieces small enough for a food processor
or blender . Purée each melon separately and reserve in medium bowls . Into each
bowl whisk ¼ teaspoon of dried ginger , 1 teaspoon of fresh ginger , and ½ cup of
plum wine . Season each with small pinches of sea salt and pepper . Taste and
adjust the seasonings . Cover each bowl and refrigerate for 8 hours or more . 
To serve , put a ladle in each container of soup . Hold a soup bowl at a 30-
degree angle to the table . Ladle a half portion of one soup ( about 4 to 6 ounces ) 
into the bowl . Carefully begin to ladle a half portion of the other soup into the
bowl . As the soup bowl fills with the second soup , begin to lower the bowl back
to the table . 
To present the soup , you can create designs by dragging a toothpick , spoon , or
knife from one side of the bowl to the other . If you are feeling really
adventurous , try gently spinning the bowl .  ( Practice with empty bowls before
attempting to do this with full bowls of soup .  ) Assuming there is some soup left
in the bowl after this , you will have created a yin-yang swirl . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Blueberry and Red Wine Soup
2 cups blueberries , preferably fresh
1 whole cinnamon stick
2 whole cloves
Pinch sea salt
1½ cups red wine , preferably a California Zinfandel
¼ cup sugar
1½ cups vegan sour cream or 12 ounces tofu , puréed with 2 tablespoons lemon juice
Heat the blueberries , cinnamon , cloves , salt , and red wine to a boil in a 6-quart
soup pot over medium-high heat . 
Reduce the heat to medium and simmer the soup until most of the blueberries
have burst . Remove from the heat . Remove the cinnamon and cloves . Add the
sugar and mix well . Let the mixture cool to room temperature . Purée about half
of the blueberry mixture . 
Stir in the sour cream or tofu . Refrigerate until chilled thoroughly . Adjust the
seasonings . If the soup seems too tart , add sugar . If the soup seems cloying , add
lemon juice . Garnish with fresh whole blueberries . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Strawberry Soup with Almond Milk
Packaged almond milk can be substituted , but the resulting soup won ’ t be as
thick and luxurious . You can also substitute a tablespoon or two of Grand
Marnier , Cointreau , or framboise for the rosewater . 
1 cup blanched almonds , coarsely ground
¼ cup sugar
1 pint ripe , full-flavored strawberries
4 ounces silken tofu
2 teaspoons rosewater Pinch sea salt
Soak the almonds for 8 to 12 hours in 3 cups of water . 
Strain and rinse the nuts . In a blender , whirl the almonds , 4 cups of hot water , 
and sugar together for 3 minutes . Strain the mixture through cheesecloth , 
squeezing the cloth to get all of the liquid . You should have 4 cups of almond
milk . 
Hull the strawberries and purée them with the tofu . Mix the strawberry purée
and the almond milk together . Add the rosewater and sea salt . Taste and adjust
the flavorings .  
( If the strawberries aren ’ t at their ripest , a little more sweetener may be needed .  ) 
Refrigerate until thoroughly chilled . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Korean Seaweed Soup
½ ounce wakame seaweed
4 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) or Asian Broth ( page 68 ) 
1 Japanese cucumber or small seedless cucumber
1 green onion , thinly sliced
1 teaspoon toasted white sesame seeds
1 small fresh red chili , thinly sliced , or teaspoon cayenne
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1 tablespoon rice wine vinegar
1 teaspoon sesame oil
In a small bowl , pour very hot water over the wakame until it is covered by 2
inches . Put a lid on the bowl and let the wakame stand for 20 minutes . Lift the
wakame out of the bowl , being careful to leave any grit in the bottom of the
bowl . Squeeze as much water as you can out of it and chop coarsely . 
In a small soup pot , bring the stock to a boil . Add the wakame and reduce the
heat to medium . Simmer the wakame until tender , 30 minutes to 1 hour . 
Toward the end of the wakame ‘ s cooking time , cut the cucumber into halves
lengthwise and cut the lengths into ¼-inch slices . Toss with the remaining
ingredients . Let the cucumbers marinate just until they begin to soften , about 15
minutes . 
Add the cucumbers and marinade to the seaweed soup . Adjust the seasonings . 
Refrigerate the soup to chill thoroughly . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Avocado Soup
I prefer Hass avocados , the ones with the alligator-like skins , for their consistent
flavor . Smooth-skinned Florida avocados are less dependable . Either variety
works well . 
8 ripe Hass avocados or 5 large Florida avocados
Zest and juice of 1 lemon
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 small onion , finely diced
1 jalapeño , seeded and minced
¼ cup chopped fresh cilantro
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
Salt and pepper
1 tomato , seeded and diced
Whole cilantro leaves ( optional ) 
Peel and seed the avocados . In a 3-quart bowl , mash the avocados . Stir in the
lemon juice , garlic , onion , jalapeño , chopped cilantro , and basil . Whisk in cold
water until the desired consistency is reached , about 3 cups . Season with salt and
pepper . 
Just before serving , toss the tomato with half the lemon zest . Season the
tomato mixture with salt and pepper . Add the remaining zest to the soup . Ladle
the soup into bowls and garnish with the diced tomato mixture and , if desired , 
whole cilantro leaves . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Chilled Spring Pea Soup
with Tarragon
6 cups Green Vegetable Stock ( page 67 ) 
2 fresh bay leaves ( optional ) 
4 cups sugar snap peas , coarsely chopped , or 4 cups English peas , fresh or frozen
2 green onions , chopped
2 stalks celery , diced
1 shallot , minced
4 ounces vegan cream cheese or 4 ounces silken tofu
1 cup coarsely chopped spinach leaves
1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
1 teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon white pepper
Fresh whole tarragon leaves
Heat the stock and bay leaves to just barely boiling in a 6-quart soup pot over
medium-high heat . Add the peas , green onions , celery , and shallot . Reduce the
heat to medium . Cook until the vegetables are soft , about 15 minutes for English
peas and 20 minutes for sugar snap peas . Crumble the cream cheese into the
soup . Add the spinach , fresh herbs , salt , and pepper . Purée the soup . Strain the
soup through a sieve to remove the tough fibers . Remove soup to a nonmetal
container . Cover and chill thoroughly , preferably for 8 hours or more . Adjust the
seasonings . Serve the soup garnished with fresh whole tarragon leaves . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Gazpacho : Two Variations
I offer two variations on this classic Spanish dish . The first is a quick food
processor version that will leave you plenty of time to enjoy it outdoors on a
summer day . 
Quick Gazpacho
3 medium cucumbers
2 stalks celery , finely diced
1 medium green bell pepper , cut into ½-inch cubes
1 small red bell pepper , cut into ½-inch cubes
1 small yellow bell pepper , cut into ½-inch cubes
¼ cup minced fresh parsley
¼ cup finely diced onion
1 teaspoon minced garlic
3 cups fresh tomatoes , seeded and diced , or 1 22-ounce can diced plum tomatoes
1 26-ounce can tomato juice
1 tablespoon Tabasco sauce
Salt and pepper
Peel the cucumbers and remove the seeds . Cut the cucumbers into ½-to 1-inch
cubes . If you are using canned tomatoes , drain them and reserve their juice . In a
large bowl , combine the cucumber cubes with the celery , peppers , parsley , onion , 
garlic , and tomatoes . Pulse this mixture in small batches in a food processor until
it is coarsely chopped . Put the chopped vegetables into a large bowl . Add the
tomato juice and Tabasco sauce and mix well . Adjust the thickness with
additional tomato juice or water . Season with salt and pepper . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Yellow Tomato Gazpacho
This recipe works well with any variety of yellow tomato , but I like it best with
Lemon Boy . The skin of Lemon Boys can be a bit tough so it is important to
remove them . Seeds left in the soup from either the tomatoes or the peppers can
give it a bitter edge . 
3 pounds yellow tomatoes ( about 3 to 4 Yellow Wonder or 6 to 8 Lemon Boy ) 
1 small red bell pepper
1 small green bell pepper
1½ seedless cucumbers or 3 regular cucumbers
3 green onions , thinly sliced on the diagonal
1 tablespoon minced fresh garlic
½ cup white balsamic vinegar
cup fresh lime juice
cup extra virgin olive oil
cup chopped fresh cilantro
1 teaspoon Tabasco
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup roasted red peppers ( fresh or canned ) 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
cup extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper
To skin the tomatoes , bring a large pot of water to boil on the stove , cut a small
X on the bottom of each tomato , and gently drop the tomatoes into the boiling
water . Leave the tomatoes in the water for about 45 seconds ( longer if they have
a tough skin )  , and then remove to a bowl of ice water . When the tomatoes are
cool enough to handle , the skin will peel off easily . 
Cut the tomatoes into halves and squeeze gently to remove all the seeds . 
Coarsely chop two-thirds of the tomatoes and purée them in a food processor
until very smooth . Cut the remaining tomatoes into ½-inch cubes . 
Remove the seeds from the peppers and cut them into very small pieces . Cut
the cucumbers into chunks and purée in a food processor until smooth .  ( Peel the
cucumbers if the skin seems tough .  ) Cut the remaining cucumbers into ½-inch
chunks . 
Combine the tomatoes , red peppers , green peppers , cucumbers , green onions , 
garlic , balsamic vinegar , lime juice , olive oil , cilantro , Tabasco , cumin , and salt
in a large bowl and mix well . Chill for at least 4 hours or overnight to allow
flavors to meld . Taste and adjust the seasonings , adding sugar if necessary . 
Combine the red peppers , basil , lime juice , olive oil , salt , and pepper in a bowl
and mix well . Blend in small batches in a blender ( not a food processor ) until
smooth . Reserve . 
To serve , ladle the soup into chilled bowls . Drizzle the roasted red pepper mix
over the top with the abandon of Jackson Pollack . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Chilled Beet and Cucumber Soup
2 pounds beets , trimmed
2 pounds cucumbers ( about 3 seedless or 4 medium salad cucumbers ) 
2 teaspoons grapeseed oil
3 green onions , chopped
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
1 tablespoon chopped fresh dill
1 teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon white pepper
Vegan sour cream ( optional ) 
Sprigs of fresh dill
Bring a large pot of water to a boil and add the beets . Reduce the heat to low and
cook until the beets are tender , about 30 minutes . Drain , reserving 2 cups of the
cooking liquid . Run cold water over the beets until they are cool enough to
handle . Peel the beets and cut into 1-inch chunks . 
Peel and seed the cucumbers . Cut them into 1-inch chunks . 
In a large pan over medium heat , heat oil and sauté the green onions and garlic
for 2 minutes . Add the cucumbers and cook until they are wilted , about 3
minutes . Add 2 cups of water ( not the beet water ) to the pan and simmer the
cucumbers until they are tender . 
Purée the beets with the beet water . Purée the cucumber mixture . In a large
bowl , combine the cucumber and beet mixtures . Add the lemon juice , chopped
dill , salt , and pepper . Taste and adjust the seasonings . Refrigerate the soup until
it is thoroughly chilled . Garnish with a dollop of vegan sour cream and sprigs of
fresh dill . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
salads & 
dressings
Salads
Arugula and Mushrooms with Pine Nuts
Caesar Salad
Baby Greens and Tofu with Sesame-Soy Vinaigrette
Mesclun with Almonds , Ginger , and Raspberries
Watercress and Spicy Glass Noodles
Roasted Vegetables with Balsamic Vinegar
Orange and Onion Salad
Italian Chopped Salad
Tempeh Niçoise
Apple-Fennel Salad
Poppy Seed Coleslaw
Asian Coleslaw
Almost-Traditional Potato Salad
French Potato Salad
Italian Potato Salad
Dressings
Basic Vinaigrette
Italian Vinaigrette
Balsamic Vinaigrette
Mustard-Sherry Vinaigrette
Raspberry Vinaigrette
Roasted Red Pepper and Basil Vinaigrette
Sesame-Soy Vinaigrette
Citrus Dressing
Tahini Dressing
Tofu-Dill Dressing
Tomato-Tarragon Dressing
Big Vegetable Dressing
The U . S . Food and Drug Administration ’ s directive to eat three to five servings
of vegetables a day can seem daunting . But salads can make it easy . One serving
of vegetables is one cup of raw vegetables—and once you have discovered
which salads excite and energize you , stopping at one cup may be difficult ! The
darker lettuces are a good source of calcium in the vegan diet . The lighter
lettuces may have a role in colon cleansing . 
Grocery stores now carry a wide array of greens—many of them pre-washed
and ready for dressing . The most laborious step has been eliminated . Try buying
greens at your local farmers ’ market for the freshest possible ingredients . 
Salad greens include : 
Crisp head lettuce : iceberg , romaine . These versatile lettuces provide a nice
background for the flavors of the other salad ingredients and can take a heavy
dressing without wilting or being overpowered . Red romaine tends to be more
delicate than its green counterpart . 
Bitter greens : arugula , dandelion , endive , chicory , escarole , radicchio , 
watercress . Every culture seems to have a special bitter green . These can be
served raw , lightly steamed or sautéed , or wilted with a hot dressing . The
bitterness of these greens pairs nicely with the sweetness of nuts , oranges , 
apples , pears , and full-flavored vinegars like raspberry , balsamic , and sherry . 
Tender heads and leaves : baby spinach , green or red oakleaf , Boston , Bibb , 
and butter lettuces . These sweet greens require tender loving care . They tend to
have a delicate flavor , particularly the head lettuces , so choose dressings and
accompaniments that are light in flavor , such as raspberry vinaigrette , toasted
almonds , cucumbers , teardrop tomatoes , julienned jicama , or carrots . 
Mesclun : typically a mix of baby greens from all the other categories—the
resulting taste is a mix of sweet and bitter . The leaves are small but fairly sturdy . 
The combination of lettuces changes with availability , though typically it will
include frisée ( curly endive )  , radicchio , arugula , red and green oakleaf , mâche 
( tat soi )  , mizuna ( Japanese dandelion greens )  , and red and green romaine . The
best thing about mesclun is that it comes washed and ready to use . Organic
varieties are readily available in traditional grocery stores . 
Here are some tips for washing salad greens : 
• To wash very dirty lettuce , fill a 2-gallon pot or a clean sink with cold water . 
Add salt to the water to help carry the dirt down to the bottom faster . Cut or
tear the lettuce into bite-size pieces . Submerge lettuce and gently swish , 
checking the rib portions for bugs and dirt . Let the lettuce sit for 2 minutes . 
Lift the lettuce out of the water , making sure not to stir up the dirt on the
bottom . Place the lettuce in a colander . If the lettuce is exceedingly dirty , 
repeat with clean water . 
• If the cold water coming from your faucet is not very cold , add some ice to it . 
Warm water will cause the lettuce to deteriorate quickly . 
• Add a little lemon juice or vinegar to your wash water to prevent your lettuce
from rusting—turning brown where it has been cut .  ( This is called acidulating
the water .  ) Using this technique allows you to prepare enough lettuce for two
or three days without much waste . 
• Make sure that you lift the lettuce out of the washing water ; don ’ t pour it out
into the colander because the dirt will come right with it . 
• Lettuces bruise easily , so be gentle with that salad spinner . The NASCAR
sounds it makes when revved up are amusing , but the vigorous movement can
damage the tender leaves . 
• To store your cleaned lettuce , put a dry paper towel in the bottom of an airtight
container . Put the washed lettuce on top and keep the container tightly closed . 
SALADS
Arugula and Mushrooms
with Pine Nuts
If you buy your arugula at the grocery store , chances are good that it will have
been cleaned once already . If you grow it yourself or purchase it at the farmers ’ 
market , it may be a little dirtier and require two or three washings to remove all
the sand and grit . 
2 tablespoons pine nuts
2 bunches arugula or 4 cups leaves
½ cup sliced white mushrooms
2 tablespoons roasted red peppers , cut into long strips
½ cup Balsamic Vinaigrette ( page 111 ) 
In a small heavy skillet over medium-low heat , toast the pine nuts until golden
brown . Remove the pine nuts from the pan and let cool . 
Remove the roots and any thick stems from the arugula . Separate the leaves
and check for any large stones or pieces of sand before washing . Spin or pat the
arugula dry . 
Put the arugula , mushrooms , peppers , and 1 tablespoon of pine nuts into a 2-
quart mixing bowl . Drizzle the dressing over the greens . Toss to combine . Divide
the salad among 4 plates . The heavier ingredients tend to fall to the bottom of the
bowl . If this happens , arrange them decoratively on top of the greens . Sprinkle
each plate with some of the remaining pine nuts and serve . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Caesar Salad
To produce a thicker dressing , use a food processor or a hand-held mixer
2 cloves garlic
½ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard or ½ pommery and ½ Dijon
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1 teaspoon vegetarian Worcestershire sauce or 1 small pinch sour tamarind paste ( optional ) 
1 tablespoon white wine or balsamic vinegar
½ cup olive oil or vegetable oil or a combination
2 tablespoons vegan Parmesan , if desired
1 teaspoon grated lemon zest
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1 head romaine lettuce
¼ cup croutons
¼ cup vegan Parmesan , prepared or homemade ( recipe follows ) 
Crush the garlic in the bottom of a 2-quart mixing bowl or mince in a food
processor . Add the salt and mix well . Allow the garlic and salt to sit together for
2 minutes . Add the mustard , lemon juice , Worcestershire or tamarind , and
vinegar . While whisking vigorously or with the food processor running , drizzle
in the oil very carefully—slowly at first , then a little faster as the oil is
incorporated . The dressing should not be separated . Whisk or process in the 2
tablespoons of vegan Parmesan ( if desired )  , lemon zest , and black pepper .  ( If
you miss the taste of anchovies , try adding a little seaweed , softened in warm
water .  ) Remove and discard the tough outer leaves of the romaine . Cut or tear
the dark green tops off the leaves and discard . Cut off the bottom 1 to 2 inches of
the head . Cut the head in quarters lengthwise—sixths if the head of lettuce is big . 
Cut these sections into 1-inch pieces . Wash the lettuce . Spin or pat dry . 
In a large bowl , mix the lettuce , croutons , and vegan Parmesan together . Add
the dressing and toss to combine . Serve immediately . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Vegan Parmesan Substitute
2 tablespoons ground almonds
2 tablespoons nutritional yeast
Pinch salt
Combine ingredients in a small bowl . 
Makes ¼ cup . 
Baby Greens and Tofu
with Sesame-Soy Vinaigrette
4 ounces silken tofu , cut into ½-inch cubes
3 tablespoons Sesame-Soy Vinaigrette ( page 113 ) 
2 cups mesclun
1 teaspoon white sesame seeds , toasted
Toss the tofu with 1 tablespoon of the dressing . Allow the tofu to marinate 15
minutes . 
In a small mixing bowl , toss the mesclun with the remaining 2 tablespoons of
dressing . Divide onto 2 plates . Scatter the tofu on the greens and sprinkle the
salads with the sesame seeds . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Mesclun with Almonds , 
Ginger , and Raspberries
Crystallized ginger is surprising to find on a salad . It is both sweet and spicy . 
Make sure to cut the ginger into pieces large enough for a guest to remove
should they dislike it . Crystallized ginger can be found in most supermarkets . 
¼ cup sliced almonds
2 tablespoons crystallized ginger or two large slices
4 cups mesclun greens
½ cup Raspberry Vinaigrette ( page 112 ) 
3 tablespoons fresh raspberries
Toast the almonds until golden in either a 300° oven for 5 to 8 minutes or in a
sauté pan set over medium-low heat . Remove from the pan and reserve . Cut the
crystallized ginger into long strips as thin as possible . If the knife becomes
sticky , dip it into hot water . 
In a 2-quart mixing bowl , toss the greens with the dressing . Divide the greens
among 4 plates . Sprinkle the almonds and ginger on top of each salad . Arrange
the fresh raspberries around the edge of the plates . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Watercress and Spicy Glass Noodles
The only oil in this salad comes from the 1½ teaspoons of sesame oil used to
flavor the dressing . The sweetness of the glass or mung bean noodles , added
sugar , and cucumber are sufficient to balance the vinegar and lime juice . 
Watercress is a much-neglected green that deserves a renaissance . 
3 ounces glass noodles ( cellophane noodles , mung bean noodles , or bean threads ) 
¼ cup soy sauce
1½ teaspoons sesame oil
½ teaspoon garlic chili paste
1 tablespoon sugar
½ cup rice wine vinegar
1 tablespoon lime juice ( optional ) 
1 green onion , green and white parts , trimmed and cut into thin slices diagonally
2 teaspoons sesame seeds , toasted
2 bunches watercress , washed and trimmed
Cover the noodles with cold water and let soak for 20 minutes . Drain the
noodles and put them in a pot of boiling water . Let the water return to a boil and
boil for 1 minute . Drain , rinse with cold water , and chill . 
Whisk the soy sauce , sesame oil , chili paste , sugar , vinegar , and lime juice . 
Toss the noodles with the dressing . Add the green onion and 1 teaspoon of the
sesame seeds . 
Divide the watercress among 6 plates . Divide the noodles among the plates . 
Sprinkle the salads with the remaining sesame seeds . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Roasted Vegetables with
Balsamic Vinegar
Roasting the vegetables brings out their natural sugars . The cremini , or brown
Italian mushrooms , add an earthy quality to the dish . Use whatever vegetables
are on hand . Make sure to cut them into consistent-size pieces so they will cook
in the same amount of time . 
1 small eggplant
Salt
2 cups cremini or white mushrooms
1 small bulb fennel
1 medium zucchini , cut into 1½-inch cubes
1 medium yellow squash , cut into 1½-inch cubes
2 medium firm tomatoes , cored and cut into eighths
1 tablespoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon salt
cup seasoned oil
½ cup balsamic vinegar
¼ cup fresh basil leaves , coarsely chopped
Freshly ground pepper
Preheat the oven to 300° . If the eggplant is older and the skin is tough , peel it . 
Cut the eggplant into 1½-to 2-inch cubes . Liberally salt the cubes and put them
in a colander . Allow the eggplant to drain for 15 minutes . Rinse the cubes under
cold water and pat dry . 
Remove the stems from the mushrooms if they seem woody .  ( Reserve them
for making stock , if you wish .  ) Cut the mushrooms into quarters . 
Cut the bottom and the long stalks off the fennel .  ( Reserve the stalks and the
feathery leaves for making stock , if you wish .  ) Cut the fennel bulb into halves . 
Remove the core by cutting toward the middle of the bulb on either side of the
core . Pop out a triangular piece of core . Trim away any core you may have
missed . Cut the fennel into ¾-inch slices or strips . 
In a 3-quart mixing bowl , combine all the vegetables . You should have about
7 cups . Toss the vegetables with the garlic and salt . Add the seasoned oil and
mix thoroughly . 
Arrange the vegetables in a single layer on a baking sheet . Roast in the oven
for 30 minutes . Stir the vegetables gently and roast for another 15 minutes or
until cooked through . 
Put the vegetables into a 3-quart mixing bowl . Toss with the vinegar and basil . 
Season with black pepper . Serve warm or at room temperature . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Orange and Onion Salad
This salad stands on its own or can be served with a pile of bitter greens in the
center of the plate . Arugula and watercress work particularly well . Soaking the
onions tames their flavor . This step can be omitted if you are using Vidalia , 
Maui , or Oso Sweet onions . The peeling technique for the oranges can also be
used with melons , pineapple , or tomatoes . Preparing the oranges this way gives
you the classic presentation for this Catalonian salad . 
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1 tablespoon sherry vinegar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon sugar
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh mint leaves
1 medium-large red onion
3 large navel oranges
Whole mint leaves for garnish
Whisk the lemon juice , vinegar , salt , and sugar until the sugar and salt are
dissolved . Whisk in the olive oil . Add the chopped mint leaves . Reserve . 
Cut the onion into rings as thin as possible with your knife , mandoline , food
processor , or the side of your box grater . Soak the onion slices in ice water for 15
minutes . Drain and pat dry . Toss with 2 tablespoons of the reserved dressing and
reserve . 
While the onions are soaking , peel the oranges with a knife in the following
fashion : Cut a slice from top and bottom of each orange so it is stable on the
cutting board . Place your knife on the top of the orange at the point where the
orange and white part meet . Carefully cut down the side of the orange , from top
to bottom , following the curve of the fruit , cutting away both the peel and the
pith to expose the orange pulp . Continue cutting around the orange until all the
peel and pith are removed . Cut the oranges crosswise into ¼-inch-thick slices . 
Toss the orange slices with the remaining dressing . 
Alternate the orange and onion slices in an overlapping pattern around the
serving platter .  ( This is called shingling .  ) Garnish with whole mint leaves . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Italian Chopped Salad
This salad can be a catch-all for those slim pickin ’ s from the early spring or late
summer garden or a creative way to present the remnants of the week ’ s vegetable
purchases . The dressing is minimal , allowing the flavors of the vegetables to
shine . Fresh basil , oregano , thyme , or marjoram are wonderful accents when
judiciously added to the salad . 
1 cup broccoli florets , blanched and coarsely chopped
2 ripe tomatoes , cut in ¾-inch cubes
1 medium or 2 small cucumbers , cut into ½-inch cubes
1 medium red pepper , cut into ½-inch cubes
1 small red onion , finely minced
4 or 5 radishes , trimmed and cut into very thin slices
½ head radicchio , cored and cut into 1-inch squares
2 cups romaine lettuce , washed and cut into 1½-inch squares
½ teaspoon sea salt
cup extra virgin olive oil
2 tablespoons lemon juice Freshly ground pepper
Place all the vegetables in a 2-quart mixing bowl . 
Season with sea salt . Drizzle the olive oil on the vegetables and toss to
combine . Add the lemon juice and toss again . 
Divide among salad plates and season with freshly ground pepper . 
Makes 6 salad-course servings or 4 main-dish servings . 
Tempeh Niçoise
This is a classic composed salad—one in which each type of vegetable is
arranged in a separate mound on the plate . Dressing each ingredient separately
gives the best result . If you don ’ t want to be so fussy , though , toss everything
except the aioli together in a bowl and serve the aioli on the side . 
1 pound fingerling or new potatoes , scrubbed and cut into quarters
1 cup Basic Vinaigrette ( page 110 ) 
8 ounces tempeh
1 teaspoon oil
8 red cherry tomatoes , cut into halves
8 yellow pear or cherry tomatoes , cut into halves
½ pound green beans , trimmed and cooked in boiling water for 1 minute
2 heads Boston or Bibb lettuce , washed , leaves separated
2 tablespoons Niçoise olives or other brine-cured or salt-cured olives
2 tablespoons Aioli ( page 120 ) 
1 cup Red Onion Pickles ( page 126 ) 
2 tablespoons capers
Rinse the potatoes well . Boil the potatoes in a pot of salted water until they are
tender . Drain the potatoes and rinse gently with cold water to remove starch and
avoid discoloration . Toss the warm potatoes with ¼ cup of the basic vinaigrette . 
Let the potatoes cool completely . 
Cut the tempeh into finger-size strips . In a medium sauté pan , heat the oil over
high heat . Add the tempeh strips . Shake the pan or stir the tempeh strips until
they begin to brown . When they are nicely browned , add 2 tablespoons of the
vinaigrette to the pan . The vinaigrette will separate when it hits the pan . Stir
briefly to glaze the tempeh and remove the pan from the heat . Lift the tempeh
out of the pan , leaving the oil behind . Reserve . 
Combine the tomatoes with 2 tablespoons vinaigrette and reserve . Combine
the green beans with 2 tablespoons vinaigrette and reserve . 
Line 4 large dinner plates with the lettuce leaves . Arrange one linear mound
each of the potatoes , green beans , olives , tomatoes , and tempeh in a spoke
pattern around the plate . Top each section of tempeh with some of the aioli . 
Mound some onion pickles in the center of each plate . Scatter the capers over the
salads . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Apple-Fennel Salad
This is a quick and easy salad that showcases two of autumn ’ s most delightful
riches . If you are fortunate enough to live in an apple-producing area , go to a
local orchard or farmers ’ market for the best selection of varieties . 
1 tablespoon lemon juice
1 teaspoon sugar
½ cup soy mayonnaise
1 bulb fennel
3 medium-size tart apples , preferably York , Winesap , or Stayman
Whisk the lemon juice , sugar , and mayonnaise . Reserve . 
Cut off the bottom and the long stalks of the fennel , reserving the stalks for
stock , if you wish , and the feathery leaves for garnish . Cut the fennel bulb into
halves . Remove the core by cutting toward the middle of the bulb on either side
of the core . Pop out a triangular piece of core . Trim away any core you may have
missed . Cut the fennel into ¼-inch slices or strips . 
Cut the apples into quarters . Remove the core and seeds . Cut the apples into
- to ½-inch half-moons . 
In a 2-quart mixing bowl , toss the apples and fennel with the dressing . Adjust
the seasonings with lemon juice , sugar , and salt . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Poppy Seed Coleslaw
If this salad sits for longer than 30 minutes , the green cabbage turns pink , which
could be unappealing to some . If you prefer , you may omit the green cabbage
entirely and use all red cabbage or vice versa . 
cup brown rice syrup
1 cup raspberry vinegar
1 medium shallot , minced
1 tablespoon poppy seeds
¼ teaspoon salt
Pinch of white pepper ( optional ) 
¼ medium head red cabbage
¼ medium head green cabbage
Place the syrup in a mixing bowl . Whisk in the vinegar . Add the shallot and the
poppy seeds . Season with salt . Add the white pepper . The flavors of the dressing
should be fairly intense . 
Slice the cabbage as thinly as possible with a chef ’ s knife , a food processor , or
the slicing side of a box grater . 
Mix the cabbage with the dressing . Let stand for 30 minutes and then serve
immediately . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Asian Coleslaw
I use regular green cabbage , which remains crisp for several hours in the
dressing . If left overnight , the cabbage will become a little limp and the chilies
will add some significant heat . Neither of these consequences is unpleasant , 
depending on your preference . If you substitute a more tender cabbage , like
savoy or napa , the cabbage can be cut into ¼-inch slices , but the salad should be
served on the same day it is made . For green cabbage , use your food processor , 
mandoline , or the side of your box grater to slice the cabbage as thinly as
possible . 
If you dislike cilantro , substitute Thai basil . 
3 tablespoons lime juice
2 tablespoons rice wine vinegar
1 tablespoon sugar
½ teaspoon salt
2 dried red chilies , crumbled
4 cups thinly sliced green cabbage
1 small carrot , cut into small matchsticks or grated
2 shallots , thinly sliced
1 tablespoon fresh ginger , cut into matchsticks , or 2 teaspoons minced fresh ginger
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh cilantro leaves
¼ cup unsalted peanuts , roasted and chopped
Whole cilantro leaves for garnish
Whisk the lime juice , vinegar , sugar , salt , and chilies in a 2-quart mixing bowl . 
Add the cabbage , carrot , shallots , ginger , and chopped cilantro . Mix all
ingredients thoroughly . Let the coleslaw stand for 15 minutes to allow the flavors
to develop . 
Divide the salad among 4 plates . Sprinkle generously with chopped peanuts
and garnish with whole cilantro leaves . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Almost-Traditional Potato Salad
There ’ s no reason that vegans can ’ t participate in the traditional backyard
cookout , so bring this version of potato salad to your next neighborhood
gathering—but don ’ t give your secret away ! 
2 pounds new potatoes , scrubbed and cut into 1½-inch cubes
1 cup soy mayonnaise
1 tablespoon mustard
1 tablespoon red wine vinegar
2 teaspoons lemon juice
1 teaspoon sugar or 1 tablespoon sweet pickle relish
¼ teaspoon salt
2 stalks celery , thinly sliced
½ medium red onion , finely diced
Rinse the potatoes well . Boil the potatoes in a large pot of salted water to cover
by 3 to 4 inches until they are tender . Drain the potatoes and rinse gently with
cold water to remove starch and avoid discoloration . Let the potatoes cool
completely . 
In a 2-quart mixing bowl , whisk the mayonnaise , mustard , vinegar , lemon
juice , sugar ( or relish )  , and salt . Add the celery and onion and mix well . Add the
potatoes and toss until they are well coated . Refrigerate if desired . Allow the
flavors to blend for 30 minutes before serving . 
Makes 6 servings . 
French Potato Salad
2 pounds fingerling or new potatoes , scrubbed and cut into 1½-inch cubes
1 tablespoon capers
½ cup red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon grainy mustard
2 teaspoons lemon juice
1 shallot , minced
1 small clove garlic , minced
1 tablespoon minced fresh parsley
2 teaspoons minced fresh tarragon or basil
1 cup extra virgin olive oil
Freshly ground pepper
2 green onions , green and white parts , trimmed and cut into ½-inch pieces
Rinse the potatoes well . Boil the potatoes in a large pot of salted water to cover
by 3 to 4 inches until they are tender . Drain the potatoes and rinse gently with
cold water to remove starch and avoid discoloration . Let the potatoes cool
completely . 
Chop half of the capers coarsely and put in a 2-quart mixing bowl . Reserve
the rest of the capers . Add the vinegar , mustard , lemon juice , shallot , garlic , and
herbs and whisk to blend . Whisking vigorously , drizzle the oil into the vinegar
mixture , slowly at first , then a little faster as the oil is incorporated . The dressing
should be fairly thick .  ( The consistency should be thicker than Italian dressing
but thinner than mayonnaise .  ) Add the potatoes and the reserved capers and toss
until all of the potatoes are well coated . Season with freshly ground pepper . 
Refrigerate , if desired . Allow the flavors to blend for 30 minutes before serving . 
Garnish with green onions just before serving . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Italian Potato Salad
Perhaps this is not an entirely authentic Italian dish . It was born of necessity one
day when I had made too much roasted red pepper vinaigrette . It is , however , in
the Italian spirit—and delicious . Oil-cured or kalamata olives work well . 
2 pounds fingerling or new potatoes , scrubbed and cut into 1½-inch cubes
1 cup Roasted Red Pepper and Basil Vinaigrette ( page 113 ) 
1 medium red onion , finely diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
½ cup roasted red peppers , cut into -inch strips
¼ cup fresh parsley , minced
¼ cup fresh basil leaves , cut into strips
2 cups whole arugula leaves , well washed
¼ cup pitted black olives , cut into quarters
Rinse the potatoes well . Boil them in a large pot of salted water to cover by 3 or
4 inches until tender . Drain the potatoes and rinse gently with cold water to
remove starch and avoid discoloration . 
In a large mixing bowl , toss the warm potatoes with the vinaigrette , onion , and
garlic . Allow the salad to cool to room temperature . The warm potatoes will
absorb the dressing . Before continuing , add more vinaigrette , if desired . 
Add the peppers , parsley , and basil to the cooled salad . To serve , arrange the
arugula around the edge of the serving platter . Pile the potato salad in the middle
and scatter the olives around the salad . 
Makes 8 servings . 
DRESSINGS
Once you get the hang of making your own dressings , you ’ ll wonder why you
ever bought the expensive bottled ones—especially the ones with chemical
additives you ’ d rather avoid . Homemade dressings with lots of vegetables , such
as Big Vegetable Dressing and Tomato-Tarragon Dressing , will keep in the
refrigerator for 3 to 4 days . Other dressings will stay fresh in the refrigerator for
7 to 14 days . See pages 26–29 for information on oils . 
Basic Vinaigrette
Mustard is the magic ingredient that holds vinaigrettes together . This dressing
will separate but will come back together with a quick whisking . Or you can
make the vinaigrette in a jar with a tight-fitting lid and shake it whenever you
are ready to use it . 
Match the flavors of the vinegar and oil to the other ingredients you plan to
use . 
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
½ teaspoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon minced shallot
½ teaspoon sugar
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
½ cup red wine , white wine , or other vinegar
1 cup canola , grape seed , or olive oil , or a combination
In a 1-quart mixing bowl or a food processor , whisk the mustard , garlic , shallot , 
sugar , salt , pepper , and vinegar . Whisking vigorously , or with the food processor
running , drizzle the oil into the vinegar base , slowly at first , then a little faster as
the oil is incorporated . Taste and adjust seasonings . 
Makes 1½ cups . 
Italian Vinaigrette
A good basic dressing to have on hand , this also works nicely as a marinade for
raw or lightly blanched vegetables . If you ’ d like to make a Greek dressing , add
¼ teaspoon oregano . If you ’ d like to make it creamy , reduce the oil to ½ cup , add
4 ounces of tofu , and purée . 
½ cup red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1½ teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon finely minced shallot or red onion
¼ teaspoon dried basil
teaspoon dried thyme
½ teaspoon sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 generous pinch black pepper
1 tablespoon lemon juice
1 cup oil
In a 1-quart mixing bowl or a food processor , whisk the vinegar , mustard , garlic , 
onion , herbs , sugar , salt , pepper , and lemon juice . While whisking vigorously , or
with the food processor running , drizzle the oil into the vinegar mixture very
carefully—slowly at first , then a little faster as the oil is incorporated . This
dressing may separate but can be brought back together by whisking . 
Makes 1¾ cups . 
Balsamic Vinaigrette
This is my favorite dressing for everyday eating . Make sure to use a good mellow
balsamic vinegar from Modena , Italy , where all true balsamics originate . This
dressing is particularly well suited to mesclun greens . 
½ cup balsamic vinegar
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
½ teaspoon minced garlic
teaspoon sugar
½ teaspoon sea salt
teaspoon ground black pepper
2 teaspoons lemon juice
1 cup olive oil , or ½ cup extra virgin olive oil and ½ cup canola or grapeseed oil
In a 1-quart mixing bowl or a food processor , whisk the vinegar , mustard , garlic , 
sugar , salt , pepper , and lemon juice . While whisking vigorously , or with the food
processor running , drizzle the oil into the balsamic mixture very carefully—
slowly at first , then a little faster as the oil is incorporated . This dressing should
be fairly thick and will remain emulsified for several days . 
Makes 1 cups . 
Mustard-Sherry Vinaigrette
The sweetness of the sherry in this simple dressing pairs well with mesclun or
bitter greens . For added richness , purée a roasted shallot into the dressing . 
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
2 teaspoons minced shallot
teaspoon sugar
Generous pinch of sea salt
½ cup sherry vinegar
1 cup oil
In a 1-quart mixing bowl or a food processor , whisk the mustard , shallot , sugar , 
salt , and vinegar . While whisking vigorously , or with the food processor running , 
drizzle the oil into the vinegar mixture very carefully—slowly at first , then a
little faster as the oil is incorporated . This dressing may separate but can be
brought back together by whisking . 
Makes 1½ cups . 
Raspberry Vinaigrette
This is a classic sweet-and-sour combination , which makes it suitable for most
bitter greens . If raspberries are too expensive or unavailable , simply omit them
from the recipe . 
1 heaping teaspoon Dijon mustard
1 teaspoon minced shallot
2 teaspoons brown rice syrup or 2 teaspoons sugar
½ cup raspberry vinegar
1 tablespoon lemon juice
¼ cup fresh or frozen raspberries
1 cup canola , grapeseed , or olive oil , or a blend
In the container of a blender or food processor , combine the mustard , shallot , 
syrup or sugar , vinegar , lemon juice , and raspberries . Purée the mixture . With the
food processor or blender running , carefully drizzle the oil into the vinegar
mixture—slowly at first , then a little faster as the oil is incorporated . Taste and
adjust seasonings . 
Makes 2 cups . 
Roasted Red Pepper
and Basil Vinaigrette
While this recipe is similar to the one for Balsamic Vinaigrette , the addition of
sweet roasted red peppers and basil change its flavors dramatically . While the
Balsamic Vinaigrette is best for greens , this dressing is best used with potatoes , 
pasta , rice , or blanched green vegetables like broccoli rabe or green beans . 
You will get the best results using a food processor or immersion blender . If
you are preparing this recipe by hand , finely mince the red peppers and basil
called for in the first part of the recipe . 
½ cup balsamic vinegar
½ cup roasted red peppers , fresh or canned
½ cup fresh basil , loosely packed and coarsely chopped
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1½ teaspoons minced garlic
teaspoon sugar
½ teaspoon sea salt
teaspoon ground black pepper
2 teaspoons lemon juice
1 cup oil
In your food processor or a 1-quart mixing bowl , purée or whisk the vinegar , 
half of the peppers , half of the basil , mustard , garlic , sugar , salt , pepper , and
lemon juice . With the food processor or blender running or while whisking
vigorously , drizzle the oil into the balsamic mixture very carefully—slowly at
first , then a little faster as the oil is incorporated . This dressing should be fairly
thick . Cut the remaining peppers into ¼-inch strips . Add to the dressing along
with the remaining basil . Taste and adjust seasonings . 
Makes 2½ cups . 
Sesame-Soy Vinaigrette
This is a simple , elegant dressing . It is not emulsified so you will need to whisk
or shake it before you use it . If you can ’ t get rice wine vinegar , distilled white
vinegar will do . 
1 clove garlic
1 tablespoon soy sauce
¼ cup rice wine vinegar
1 teaspoon sesame oil
½ cup canola or grapeseed oil
1 teaspoon sesame seeds , toasted
Crush the garlic clove with the side of your knife . In a 1-quart mixing bowl , 
place the garlic , soy sauce , and vinegar . Whisk in the oils . Add the sesame seeds . 
Let the dressing stand for 15 minutes to allow the flavors to blend . 
Makes ¾ cup . 
Citrus Dressing
This dressing stays emulsified longer when made in a food processor or with an
immersion blender . Should the dressing separate , however , a little vigorous
whisking will combine it again . Try either blood orange juice or orange juice
concentrate for a fuller flavor . 
1 minced shallot
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
¼ cup orange juice
2 tablespoons Key lime juice
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1 teaspoon sugar
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup oil
In a 1quart mixing bowl or a food processor , whisk the shallot , mustard , juices , 
sugar , and salt . While whisking vigorously , or with the food processor running , 
drizzle the oil into the juice mixture very carefully—slowly at first , then a little
faster as the oil is incorporated . This dressing should be thick and will stay
emulsified for 2 or 3 days . 
Makes 1½ cups . 
Tahini Dressing
This is a delightfully simple dressing with a clean taste . Use on blanched
vegetables like broccoli or some of the sturdier bitter greens or head lettuces . 
This recipe does not work well in the food processor , which tends to heat the
tahini and cause the dressing to become stiff . 
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
½ cup tahini
1 teaspoon minced garlic
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon ground coriander
teaspoon fine sea salt
6 tablespoons lemon juice
In a 1-quart mixing bowl , whisk cup of cold water and the olive oil into the
tahini . Add the garlic , cumin , coriander , and salt . Drizzle the lemon juice into the
tahini mixture while whisking continuously . The dressing may become stiff , but
this is a temporary condition . Once the lemon juice begins to be incorporated , 
the dressing will become smooth again . Taste and adjust seasonings . 
Makes 1½ cups . 
Tofu-Dill Dressing
This is a creamy low-fat dressing perfect for cucumbers , romaine , carrots , and
most any salad combination . 
8 ounces firm silken tofu
2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh dill weed
½ cup lemon juice
2 tablespoons rice wine vinegar
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 tablespoons finely minced red onion
1 tablespoon light miso
1 cup water
Place the tofu , 1 tablespoon of dill leaves , lemon juice , vinegar , garlic , onion , 
and miso into the bowl of a food processor and purée . With the food processor
running , add the water in a constant stream . Taste and adjust the seasonings . 
Adjust the consistency with water . Remove to a storage container and add the
remaining dill leaves . Allow the flavors to develop for 15 minutes before using . 
If using a blender , place the water , lemon juice , and vinegar in the cup of the
blender first . Cut the tofu into small pieces and put them into the water . Add 1
tablespoon of dill leaves , garlic , onion , and miso . Pulse the mixture and then
purée . Taste and adjust seasonings . Adjust the consistency with water . Remove
to a storage container and add the remaining dill leaves . Allow the flavors to
develop for 15 minutes before using . 
Makes 2½ cups . 
Tomato-Tarragon Dressing
For leafy green salads , I prefer to toss the fresh herbs with the greens . For head
lettuces , putting the herbs in the dressing works better . This dressing is also
delicious on green beans , asparagus , or pasta . 
1 cup seeded , diced fresh tomato or 1 cup canned diced tomato , drained
2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh tarragon
1 minced shallot
½ teaspoon chopped garlic
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1 cup oil
Place the tomato , 1 tablespoon of tarragon , shallot , garlic , vinegar , and lemon
juice into the container of a blender or food processor and purée . With the motor
running , drizzle the oil into the vinegar mixture very carefully—slowly at first , 
then a little faster . Remove to a storage container and add the remaining
tarragon . Allow the flavors to develop for 15 minutes before using . 
Makes 2½ cups . 
Big Vegetable Dressing
This dressing is so similar to a popular buttermilk dressing that it may fool the
kids ! If you don ’ t have a food processor , put the vegetables through a food
grinder . This dressing will keep for 3 to 4 days in the refrigerator . 
1 small carrot , peeled and cut into ½-inch coins
1 small green pepper , cut into 1-inch cubes
1 small red pepper , cut into 1-inch cubes
1 stalk celery , cut into ¼-inch pieces
2 cloves garlic
8 ounces firm silken tofu
¼ cup soymilk
2 tablespoons lemon juice
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
1 teaspoon dried dill weed
1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley
2 teaspoons Mrs . Dash , Spike , or similar seasoning
teaspoon black pepper
Place the carrot , peppers , celery , and garlic into the bowl of a food processor . 
Pulse until the vegetables are coarsely chopped . Add the remaining ingredients
and purée . Taste the dressing and adjust seasonings . 
Makes 2½ cups . 
condiments & sauces
Condiments
Tofu Mayonnaise
Basic Aioli
Stovetop Ketchup
Cranberry Ketchup
Hot Mustard
Apricot Mustard
Olive Relish
Red Onion and Rosemary Relish
Green Tomato Relish
Summer Tarragon Pickles
Sauces
Roasted Red Pepper Coulis
Tomato Barbecue Sauce
Orange-Chipotle Barbecue Sauce
Chinese-Style Barbecue Sauce
Simple Asian Barbecue Sauce
Tahini Sauce
Rich Tahini Sauce
Peanut Sauce
Pico de Gallo
Salsa sCruda
Okra Pickles
Red Onion Pickles
Basil Pesto
SunDried Tomato Pesto
Mushroom Pesto
Cilantro Pesto
Romesco Sauce
Black Olive Tapenade
Green Olive Tapenade
Simple Soy Dipping Sauce
Sweet and Sour Dipping Sauce
Vietnamese Lime Dipping Sauce
Harissa Dipping Sauce
Meshwiya
Vegan Béchamel
Vegan Mornay Sauce
Velvety Vegetable Sauce
Vegan Demi-glace
Vegan Gravy
Sometimes the most memorable part of a meal is that perfect accompaniment , 
the little item on the plate that adds just the right note of sweet , sour , salty , or
bitter to bring the whole meal into focus . This is the power of a condiment . 
Similarly , in a traditional restaurant meal , there is usually a piece of meat ( or
poultry or fish ) that is cooked rather simply but served with some sauce that
gives the meal definition . In vegan meals , where vegetables , grains , and beans
take center stage , it is the sauce that coaxes the subtle essences from food and
elevates eating to dining . 
CONDIMENTS
Mayonnaise
I never understood the appeal of mayonnaise until I had some freshly made
with fresh lemon juice and flavorful oil . This rich emulsion adds body and flavor
to lean ingredients , which accounts for its use in potato salad , coleslaw , and
salad dressings . Regular mayonnaise contains egg yolks and lots of oil . The good
news is that in vegan mayonnaise , the egg yolks and most of the oil are replaced
by tofu . Not only is the resulting sauce void of cholesterol , but it ’ s also creamy , 
lower in fat , and tasty ! Recipes using fresh herbs retain their vibrant flavors in
the refrigerator for 4 to 5 days . Other recipes stay fresh for 2 weeks . 
Tofu Mayonnaise
There are many commercially available soy mayonnaises , but it is easy to make
your own at home , not to mention cheaper . This would be a good place to slip in
some garlic flaxseed oil , if you are so inclined . 
1 pound tofu
1 tablespoon rice wine or white vinegar
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
2 tablespoons to ¼ cup extra virgin olive oil or other oil
1 teaspoon white miso or ½ teaspoon salt
Crumble the tofu into a blender container or the bowl of a food processor . Add
the remaining ingredients . Process until smooth . Refrigerate for 8 to 12 hours
before using . 
Makes 2 cups . 
Aïoli
Aioli is a traditional Italian condiment that is , in essence , a garlic mayonnaise . 
Below are several versions , all based on the Tofu Mayonnaise ( page 119 )  , that
can add new dimensions to simple foods . This recipe will produce a mild , allpurpose aioli . I like aïoli with a sharp garlic bite , however , so feel free to double
the garlic for a zestier sauce . But remember that a little garlic can go a long
way ! 
Basic Aïoli
2 cups Tofu Mayonnaise or prepared soy mayonnaise
1 teaspoon minced fresh garlic
1 teaspoon lemon juice ( optional ) 
Mix all ingredients well . 
Makes 2 cups . 
Roasted Red Pepper Aïoli : To 1 cup of Basic Aioli add ¼ cup of chopped , 
roasted red peppers and purée or blend well . 
Pesto Aïoli : To 1 cup of Basic Aioli , add 2 tablespoons of Basil Pesto ( page 127 ) 
and mix well . 
Chipotle Aïoli : To 2 cups of Basic Aioli , add one-half of a single chipotle chili , 
¼ teaspoon of ground cumin , ¼ teaspoon of chili powder , and teaspoon of
ground coriander and purée or blend well . 
Mustard-Dill Aïoli : Combine 2 cups of Basic Aioli , 1 tablespoon of grainy
mustard , and 1 tablespoon of chopped fresh dill and mix well . Mustard-Dill
Aioli is good on green beans . 
Ketchup
A member of a family of sweet and sour sauces common to American cuisine , 
ketchup is most commonly made with tomatoes , though mushroom ketchup was
once widely marketed and banana ketchup can be found in the Asian section of
many grocery stores . Most ketchups are smooth , puréed sauces . The base for
ketchup is usually a fruit ( a tomato is a fruit )  , nut , or vegetable , with vinegar or
citrus juice added , along with some spices . Ketchup can be blistering hot or quite
mild . Many hot sauces employ carrots as a base and have a ketchup-like
consistency . The ketchup recipes given here will stay fresh in the refrigerator for
2 to 3 weeks . 
These condiments are great accompaniments to Tostones ( page 51 )  , GingerFried Tempeh ( page 251 )  , or your favorite veggie burger . Ketchup is also used in
many Asian dishes such as Nasi Goreng ( page 180 ) or Pad Thai ( page 198 )  . 
Stovetop Ketchup
A distinctly American condiment , ketchup doesn ’ t have to come from the grocery
store . Stovetop ketchup requires refrigeration and is best used within a week or
two . 
This recipe specifies canned tomatoes because they are already skinned and
seeded . 
1 teaspoon oil
1 medium onion , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 teaspoons salt
teaspoon ground cinnamon
teaspoon ground allspice
Pinch cloves
1 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
½ cup apple cider vinegar
½ cup sugar
Heat the oil in a small saucepan over medium heat . Sauté the onion , garlic , salt , 
and spices for 8 minutes or until the onion is very soft . Add the remaining
ingredients . Turn the heat to medium-high and bring the mixture to a boil . Lower
the heat to medium-low and simmer for 15 minutes . Let the mixture cool , and
then purée it . 
Adjust the seasoning with salt , sugar , or vinegar and the consistency with
water . 
Makes 3 cups . 
Chipotle Ketchup : Add one-quarter to one-half of a single canned chipotle chili
just before puréeing . 
Curry Ketchup : Add 2 teaspoons of curry powder to the spice mixture . 
Mango Ketchup : Replace all or some of the tomatoes with fresh mangoes or
mango purée . 
Cranberry Ketchup
Most dried fruits , including blueberries , papaya , and apricots , will work in this
recipe , although I wouldn ’ t try it with dates or figs . Different fruits may require
some seasoning adjustments . 
1½ cups dried cranberries or cherries
½ cup cranberry juice
½ cup orange juice
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
2 tablespoons Succanat or brown sugar
teaspoon ground allspice
¼ teaspoon ground ginger
1 shallot , minced
Combine all the ingredients in a small saucepan and bring to a boil over
medium-high heat . Lower the heat to medium and simmer for 20 minutes or
until the cranberries are very soft . Let the mixture cool , and then purée it . Adjust
the seasoning with salt and sugar and the consistency with water or orange juice . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Mustard
Whole mustard seeds come in white , brown and black . Black mustard seeds
have a hot but mellow flavor , while brown are blistering hot and white a bit
milder . Dry mustard loses its potency after opening so either keep it in the
freezer or plan to use it within six months . White mustard seeds are found in
most American prepared mustards , while English mustards contain both brown
and white mustard seeds along with wheat flour . Chinese mustards normally
contain brown seeds . 
Mustard is often a humble ingredient in other sauces , like barbecue sauce or
mayonnaise . In vegan recipes , it is often paired with nutritional yeast to produce
a cheesy flavor . Hearty mustards , like the Apricot Mustard below , can stand on
their own as accompaniments to veggie burgers , Panelle ( page 54 )  , or GingerFried Tempeh ( page 251 )  . These mustards will keep indefinitely in the
refrigerator . 
Hot Mustard
For a different taste , try using beer for all or part of the liquid in this recipe . If
you prefer a yellow color , add ¼ teaspoon of turmeric to the mustard powder . 
¼ cup white wine ( optional ) 
½ cup dry mustard
Reduce the wine by half . Add ½ cup of water and bring the mixture to a boil . 
Whisk the boiling water slowly into the dry mustard . Let the flavors develop for
15 minutes . 
Makes ¾ cup . 
Apricot Mustard
5 dried apricots , cut into thin strips
2 tablespoons whole mustard seeds
¼ cup orange or apple juice
¼ cup dry mustard
½ teaspoon salt
In a small bowl cover the apricots with ¼ cup of boiling water . Cover the bowl
and let stand for 10 minutes . In a food processor , blender , or spice mill , coarsely
grind the mustard seeds . In a small saucepan , boil the juice . Whisk the juice into
the dry mustard . Combine all of the ingredients in the saucepan , including the
soaking liquid from the apricots . Cook the mixture over low heat for 5 to 10
minutes , until it is quite thick . Purée the mustard , adjusting the consistency with
juice or water . Refrigerate the mustard for 8 to 12 hours before using to allow the
flavors to develop . 
Makes 1 cup . 
Relish
Relish typically refers to pickle relish , a condiment combining sweet , salty , 
and sour tastes , perhaps with a little hot pepper . Relishes are based on the same
flavor principles as ketchups but have a chunky texture . 
In addition to trying the recipes here , you can find all sorts of prepared
relishes in the store . Chowchow , piccalilli , and kimchi are familiar but wildly
different relishes . Chutneys are a subset of relishes but with some unique
characteristics . East Indian chutneys tend to be more like salsa—raw or lightly
cooked vegetables and fruits—but with the sweet note of relish . English
chutneys are long-cooked and contain chunky fruits , vegetables , and spices . 
Another relish to look for is sambal , a spicy Indonesian condiment , served with
rice or as a side dish . Sambals can be as simple as ground chilies with sugar and
salt , or as elaborate as a combination of fruits , coconut , chilies , and lemongrass . 
Specialty stores often carry some very good packaged sambals . 
Olive Relish
Olive Relish , a component of Muffuletta ( page 150 )  , is equally good topping
Bruschetta ( page 60 ) or tossed with tomatoes for an impromptu salad . This
relish should be used within 1 week . 
cup pitted green olives
cup pitted black olives ( not canned ripe olives ) 
1 tablespoon capers
cup chopped roasted red peppers
¼ cup diced celery
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
2 teaspoons chopped fresh parsley
1 teaspoon chopped fresh oregano
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
1 teaspoon minced fresh garlic
¼ cup minced red onion
¼ teaspoon black pepper
¼ cup red wine vinegar
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
Chop the olives , capers , and red peppers coarsely with a knife or by pulsing in a
food processor . Combine the olive mixture with the remaining ingredients . Let
the mixture stand for at least two hours before using . 
Makes about 1½ cups . 
Red Onion and Rosemary Relish
Balsamic vinegar gives this relish a deep , rounded flavor . For a more piquant
relish , use red wine vinegar . This condiment goes well with sturdy , earthy flavors
such as lentils , kasha , tempeh , grilled vegetables ( especially portobellos )  , or
veggie burgers . This recipe is best used within 3 to 4 days . 
1 tablespoon blended oil
3 large red onions , peeled , cut in -inch slices , and separated into rings
4 cloves garlic , sliced thinly
¼ cup balsamic vinegar
2 teaspoons sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
teaspoon black pepper
½ teaspoon minced fresh rosemary
In a wide skillet , heat the oil over high heat . When the oil is quite hot ( just below
smoking )  , carefully add the onions to the pan . When the onions develop some
color , after about 1 to 2 minutes , stir them . Add the garlic and reduce the heat to
medium-high . Cook , stirring every 1 to 2 minutes , until the onions are wilted and
are a deep brown color . 
Add the balsamic vinegar and cook , stirring , until all the liquid has
evaporated . Sprinkle the sugar over the onions and cook for 1 minute longer . 
Remove the pan from the heat . Add the salt , pepper , and rosemary and mix well . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Green Tomato Relish
This is a quick relish , not meant for canning , that takes full advantage of the
astringent quality of green tomatoes . It gives an added dimension to tofu pups . 
This relish will keep indefinitely in the refrigerator . 
2 tablespoons salt
1 cup chopped green tomatoes
2 medium green bell peppers , finely diced
2 small jalapeños , seeded and finely diced
1 medium red bell pepper , finely diced
1 medium yellow bell pepper , finely diced
1 medium yellow onion , finely diced
3 tablespoons Succanat or brown sugar
2 teaspoons mustard seeds
½ teaspoon celery seeds
1 cups vinegar
In a large mixing bowl , sprinkle the salt over the vegetables and mix thoroughly . 
Let stand for 3 to 4 hours . Drain the vegetables in a colander and rinse under
running water . Pat the vegetables dry and reserve . 
In a large stainless steel saucepan , combine the sugar , mustard seeds , celery
seeds , and vinegar . Simmer the mixture for 15 minutes . Add the vegetables and
bring the mixture to a boil . Pack the hot mixture into a 1-quart jar . When the
relish has cooled from hot to very warm , put the lid loosely on the jar . When the
relish has cooled to room temperature , tighten the lid and refrigerate for 8 to 12
hours before using . 
Makes 1 quart . 
Pickles
Pickles can be sweet or sour , hot or mild . Sturdy vegetables , such as carrots , 
cauliflower , okra , zucchini , onions , corn , hot peppers , cactus paddles , or , of
course , cucumbers , make wonderful pickles . Pickles can be a good vehicle for
sneaking vegetables into the diet of a picky child . 
Summer Tarragon Pickles
2 medium cucumbers , bias cut into 1-inch slices
1 medium carrot , bias cut into ½-inch slices
4 stalks celery , bias cut into 1-inch slices
1 medium onion , cut into 1-inch cubes
1 cup 1-inch chunks of red bell pepper
1 cup 1-inch chunks of green bell pepper
1 small cauliflower , broken into florets
½ cup salt
½ cup sugar
2 teaspoons mustard seeds
1 teaspoon celery seeds
2 tablespoons whole black peppercorns
1 cup tarragon white wine vinegar
4 sprigs tarragon
Combine the vegetables in a large bowl . Dissolve the salt in 6 cups of cold water
and pour over the vegetables . Let stand for 8 to 12 hours in a cool place . Drain
and rinse under running water . Drain thoroughly and reserve . 
In a stainless steel saucepan , combine the sugar , mustard seeds , celery seeds , 
peppercorns , and vinegar . Simmer the mixture for 15 minutes . Add the
vegetables and simmer for 5 minutes longer . Pack the vegetables into a 1-quart
jar . Slide the tarragon sprigs into the jar . Pour the hot vinegar mixture over the
vegetables , making sure to transfer all the spices to the jar . 
When the pickles have cooled from hot to very warm , put the lid loosely on
the jar . When the pickles have cooled to room temperature , tighten the lid and
refrigerate for 8 to 18 hours before use . 
Makes 1 quart . 
Okra Pickles
Even people who hate cooked okra like okra pickles . For this recipe to work , the
okra must be tender , so choose okra the size of your thumb or smaller . If it is
more mature , simmer the okra with the vinegar and sugar for 5 minutes or until
it ’ s tender . 
1 medium onion , cut into long , thin strips
1 pound young okra , trimmed
1¾cups apple cider vinegar
1 tablespoon salt
¾ cup sugar
4 whole cloves
6 black peppercorns
2 teaspoons mustard seeds
Pack the onion and okra into a quart jar with a tight-fitting lid . In a stainless steel
saucepan , bring the remaining ingredients to a boil . Pour over the okra and
onions . When the mixture has cooled from hot to very warm , put the lid loosely
on the jar . When the pickles have cooled to room temperature , tighten the lid and
refrigerate for 8 to 12 hours before using . 
Makes about 1 quart . 
Red Onion Pickles
3 large red onions , peeled , cut into -inch slices , and separated into rings
½ cup plus 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
¼ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 whole clove
3 black peppercorns
Place the onions in a medium bowl . In a small saucepan , combine the vinegar , 
sugar , salt , clove , peppercorns , and ¼ cup of water . Bring the mixture to a boil . 
Pour the hot liquid over the onions and toss to blend . Let the onions marinate for
1 hour before using . Store the onions in the vinegar mixture in the refrigerator . 
Makes 2 cups . 
Pesto
Pesto is an uncooked , finely ground sauce usually made with fresh herbs , nuts , 
and oil . It can be the featured sauce for pasta , a marinade for roasted vegetables , 
or a flavoring agent for mayonnaise . Pesto showcases the brilliant , sharp flavors
of fresh herbs and modulates them with the sweetness of nuts and oil . 
Ready-made pestos available at the grocery store generally contain cheese . 
Vegan pestos tend to have more intense herb flavors and an oilier consistency . To
thicken the pesto for use as a spread , add some breadcrumbs or matzoh meal . 
Basil Pesto
Genoa is the home of pesto . Genovese basil has a bit of a spicy kick and makes
the most authentic pesto . Look for basil with notched or serrated leaves and a
deep green color . Sweet basil , whose leaves are smooth along the edges , has a
mild , pleasing flavor but won ’ t give you the bite of Genovese basil . For a
different taste , use half sweet basil and half flavored basil , such as lemon basil
or cinnamon basil . 
Traditionally , pesto is made by crushing the ingredients together in a mortar
with a pestle . Thank goodness for the food processor and the blender ! If the
blade on your food processor is not exceptionally sharp , you will want to
coarsely chop the basil with a knife before putting it into the food processor . 
1½ teaspoons minced garlic
½ teaspoon sea salt
1½ cups fresh basil leaves
3 tablespoons pine nuts
cup extra virgin olive oil
In the bowl of a food processor , mix the garlic and salt . Let stand for 2 minutes . 
Add the basil and pine nuts and process until a thick paste forms . With the motor
running , drizzle the olive oil through the feed tube . Work quickly , as the heat of
the food processor warms the mixture , possibly altering its flavor . Taste and
adjust seasonings . 
Makes about cup . 
SunDried Tomato Pesto
If your food processor can effectively handle smaller volumes , this recipe may be
halved . 
½ cup hazelnuts , toasted
1 cup sun-dried tomatoes in oil , well-drained , oil reserved
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 tablespoons minced fresh basil
Extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper
Coarsely chop the hazelnuts in a food processor . Add the sun-dried tomatoes and
garlic and process until fairly smooth . Taste the oil from the sun-dried tomatoes . 
If you find the taste pleasing , you may use it in the next step . Add the basil and
turn the machine on . Slowly drizzle either the reserved oil or extra virgin olive
oil through the feed tube until a thick but spreadable paste is formed . Taste and
add salt and pepper as desired . The amount of oil you need will vary depending
on the sun-dried tomatoes you use . 
Makes 1¾ cups . 
Mushroom Pesto
5 medium portobello mushrooms , grilled or roasted , or 2 cups cremini mushrooms , roasted
2 teaspoons minced garlic
¼ teaspoon salt
teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
½ cup walnut halves and pieces
1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh rosemary
½ cup coarsely chopped flat-leaf parsley
½ cup extra virgin olive oil
Slice the mushrooms thinly and chop coarsely . In the bowl of a food processor , 
mix the garlic , salt , and pepper together . Let stand for 2 minutes . Add the
mushrooms , walnuts , and herbs and process until a thick paste forms . With the
motor running , drizzle the olive oil through the feed tube . Taste and adjust the
seasonings . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Cilantro Pesto
1½ teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon chili powder , preferably ancho
¼ teaspoon chipotle powder , or one-half of a dried chipotle , or one-fourth of a canned chipotle
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon cayenne
1½ cups fresh cilantro leaves
½ cup toasted pumpkin seeds
cup extra virgin olive oil
In the bowl of a food processor , combine the garlic , salt , chili powder , chipotle
powder , cumin , and cayenne . Let stand for 2 minutes . Add the cilantro and
pumpkin seeds and process until a thick paste forms . With the motor running , 
drizzle the olive oil through the feed tube . Work quickly , as the heat of the food
processor warms the pesto , possibly altering its flavor . 
Makes about 1 cup . 
Romesco Sauce
Romesco sauce is very similar to pesto but comes from Catalonia in Spain . 
Traditionally , this sauce is served over grilled baby leeks . Adjust the heat to your
liking by adding or omitting the red pepper flakes . Try using this sauce used as a
sandwich filling , as in Mixed Vegetable Romesco Focaccia ( page 153 )  . Good
Spanish paprika adds some lovely flavor undertones . Many gourmet shops carry
a smoked Spanish paprika in both mild and hot varieties , which is especially
nice . If your paprika is old , just omit it . 
½ cup sliced or slivered almonds
¼ cup breadcrumbs or matzoh meal
2 teaspoons minced garlic
teaspoon red pepper flakes
teaspoon paprika
¼ teaspoon sea salt
teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 cup roasted red peppers
1 medium tomato , peeled and seeded ( optional ) 
½ cup red wine vinegar
½ cup extra virgin olive oil
Process the almonds , breadcrumbs , garlic , pepper flakes , paprika , salt , and
pepper in a food processor until the almonds are finely chopped . Do not allow a
paste to form . Add the red peppers , tomato , and vinegar . Process until the
mixture is smooth . With the machine running , drizzle the oil through the feed
tube . Taste and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Tapenade
The people of Provence in the South of France created tapenade . There are
thousands of variations on this olive paste . Many versions contain anchovies or
even tuna . Some are thick and emulsified and some are thin and separated . 
However you prefer your tapenade , it makes a delightful dip for French bread , a
delicious spread on sandwiches , or a lovely condiment with the grilled
vegetables of late summer . 
Double check for pits before placing the olives in the food processor ! 
Unfortunately , tapenade does not fit into a low-salt diet . 
Black Olive Tapenade
While it is not traditional , I like to use tomato juice in black olive tapenade . It
helps to keep the mixture emulsified and allows me to use much less oil . 
1 cup black olive paste or 1½ cups pitted black olives
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 tablespoon capers
2 tablespoons diced red onion
2 teaspoons minced garlic
2 tablespoons tomato juice
1 tablespoon lemon juice
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh basil
In a food processor , process the olives , red pepper flakes , capers , onion , and
garlic in brief pulses until they are coarsely chopped . Add the tomato and lemon
juices and pulse 2 or 3 times to mix . With the motor running ( or while
whisking )  , drizzle in the olive oil and add the basil . Do not overprocess . 
If working by hand , finely chop or dice the olives , red pepper flakes , capers , 
onion , garlic , and basil . Add the tomato and lemon juices and mix well . Drizzle
in the olive oil while whisking . Stir in the basil . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Green Olive Tapenade
1 ½ cups green olives , pitted and finely chopped
¼ cup capers
2 tablespoons diced yellow onion
1 teaspoon minced garlic
Juice and zest of 1 lemon
3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
2 tablespoons coarsely chopped flat-leaf parsley
In a food processor , process the olives , capers , onion , and garlic in brief pulses
until coarsely chopped . Add the lemon juice and zest and pulse 2 or 3 times to
mix . With the motor running , drizzle in the olive oil and add the parsley . Do not
overprocess . 
If working by hand , finely chop or dice the olives , capers , onions , garlic , and
parsley . Add the lemon zest and juice and mix well . Drizzle in the olive oil while
whisking . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
SAUCES
Coulis
The word “ coulis ” may be unfamiliar to you , but it is merely a puréed sauce
that highlights one prominent flavor with perhaps some subtle undertones or
herbal accents . 
Roasted Red Pepper Coulis
Here are basic and elaborate versions of a versatile , classic sauce . 
Easy Roasted Red Pepper Coulis
This is a quick and easy sauce , assuming you have plenty of roasted red peppers
on hand . Add a little spice with crushed red pepper or hot sauce . 
1 cup roasted red peppers , prepared or homemade ( page 232 ) 
¼ teaspoon minced fresh garlic
1 tablespoon minced fresh basil ( optional ) 
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper
Purée the roasted red peppers , garlic , and basil together . Add the olive oil . Taste
and adjust the seasonings with salt and pepper . Adjust the thickness with water . 
Makes 1¼ cups . 
Elaborate Roasted Red Pepper Coulis
It may seem odd to include both oven-roasted peppers and roasted red peppers , 
but each contributes a different note to the sauce— much as the roasted onion
and sautéed onion do . A good , fresh-tasting canned tomato is essential to this
sauce . 
This sauce , one of my favorites , is spectacular with Basic Polenta ( page 172 ) 
and sautéed spinach , grilled portobellos , Roasted Vegetable Terrine ( page 48 )  , 
or plain pasta . This recipe makes a lot , but the sauce will keep for 2 weeks if well
refrigerated . If you don ’ t care to store that much , add some soymilk and
additional fresh basil to make an easy , delicious soup . 
1 or 2 fresh red peppers , cut in 1-inch wide strips
1 large onion , cut in ½-inch rings
2 tablespoons oil
1 small onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced fresh garlic
¼ teaspoon dried basil
teaspoon dried thyme
2 28-ounce cans diced tomatoes
1 15-ounce can tomato sauce
2 cups roasted red peppers , prepared or homemade ( page 231–232 ) 
1 teaspoon sugar
½ teaspoon salt
¼ cup thinly sliced fresh basil , packed
Preheat oven to 400° . Toss the sliced peppers and onion with 1 tablespoon of oil . 
Place the vegetables in a pan or on a baking sheet fitted with parchment . Roast
the vegetables in the oven , turning every 10 minutes to ensure even cooking . 
Cook the vegetables until they are cooked through . The onions should be brown
and the skins of the peppers will be slightly blackened . 
In a heavy saucepan , sauté the diced onion , minced garlic , dried basil , and
thyme in the remaining oil until the onion has softened . Add the roasted
vegetables , diced tomatoes , tomato sauce , and prepared or homemade roasted
red peppers . Cook the sauce for 15 to 20 minutes to allow the flavors to blend . 
Add the sugar , salt , and basil . Purée the sauce . 
Makes 8 cups . 
Barbecue Sauce
The perfect complement to grilled or roasted foods is barbecue sauce , with its
sweet and sour flavors . Although ketchup is often used as a base , the spicing is
more elaborate than that of ketchup , with onions , garlic , mustard , and chili
powder added to the mix . Barbecue sauce with a high sugar content ensures a
nice glaze . Soy sauce , especially mushroom soy sauce , imparts a rich brown
color . Some very simple twists in flavoring can transport your barbecue sauce
around the world—star anise and ginger bring you to China , chipotles and
cilantro to Mexico , sesame and chili to Korea , cinnamon and cumin to the
Middle East , red curry paste to Thailand , lemon and oregano to Greece . 
Barbecue sauces can be either completely smooth or have some chunky
components in a smooth base . 
Tempeh , tofu , and hearty vegetables such as eggplant , zucchini , corn , and
mushrooms are all good candidates for grilling with barbecue sauce . If you can ’ t
grill outside , bake , braise , or broil your vegetables with the sauce . 
To bake : prepare the vegetables as for roasting ( page 206 ) and toss with
barbecue sauce . Place the vegetables in a casserole with a little water to prevent
burning . Bake until the vegetables are soft . If a crispy exterior is desired , broil
the vegetables briefly . 
To braise : prepare as for roasting ( page 206 )  , but place the vegetables and
sauce in a heavy skillet or wide pan over medium-low heat . Cook until the
vegetables are tender . 
To broil : prepare the vegetables as for roasting ( page 206 )  , and blanch ( cook
briefly in boiling water , as described on page 205 ) until crisp-tender . Toss them
with sauce and place in a single layer in a baking dish or on a parchment-lined
baking sheet . Broil on one side about 2 minutes ; turn the vegetables and broil on
the other side for an additional 3 to 4 minutes or until nicely glazed . 
Tomato Barbecue Sauce
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 tablespoon chili powder
1 teaspoon dry mustard ( optional ) 
1½ cups tomato ketchup
½ cup vinegar
1 tablespoon lemon juice
¼ cup soy sauce
2 tablespoons mushroom soy sauce
2 teaspoons molasses ( optional ) 
cup sugar
Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat and sauté the onion , garlic , chili
powder , and mustard for 5 minutes or until the onion is soft . Add the remaining
ingredients , mix well , and simmer the sauce for 15 minutes . 
Makes 2 cups . 
Orange-Chipotle Barbecue Sauce
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 cup orange juice
¼ cup lime juice
¼ cup rice wine vinegar
¼ cup sugar
1 teaspoon salt
Half of a chipotle chili , seeded and chopped
1 teaspoon garlic chili paste
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon water
1 tablespoon chopped fresh cilantro
Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat and sauté the onion and garlic for 5
minutes or until the onion is soft . Add the juices , vinegar , sugar , and salt and
bring the mixture to a boil . Reduce the heat to low and add the chipotle , chili
paste , and cornstarch mixture . Cook , stirring , until the sauce is slightly
thickened . Add the cilantro . 
Makes 2 cups . 
Chinese-Style Barbecue Sauce
1 tablespoon fermented black beans
¼ cup dry sherry
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
¼ cup soy sauce
¼ cup hoisin sauce
¼ cup ketchup
2 tablespoons rice wine vinegar
2 tablespoons sugar
1 teaspoon garlic chili paste
½ teaspoon five-spice powder or 2 star anise , ground
In a small bowl , cover the fermented beans with boiling water . Let stand 10
minutes . Drain and coarsely chop the beans . Whisk all the ingredients together in
a bowl . Let stand for 1 hour before using to allow the flavors to develop . 
Makes about 1½ cups . 
Simple Asian Barbecue Sauce
2 tablespoons sesame oil
½ cup soy sauce
2 teaspoons mushroom soy sauce
1½ teaspoons chili garlic paste
1 tablespoon lime juice
1 tablespoon sugar
Whisk all ingredients together in a small bowl . 
Makes ¾ cup . 
Tahini and Peanut Sauces
While you may associate tahini sauce only with falafel and peanut sauce only
with soba noodles , these protein-rich sauces have many uses in vegan meals . 
Like mayonnaise , their rich oils give body to otherwise lean dishes . Try them
with simple steamed vegetables , plain couscous , or seared tofu . Use them on
grilled vegetables , crudité platters , or salads . For a quick meal , toss seitan or
tempeh with one of these sauces and serve with blanched broccoli and brown
rice . 
Both peanut and tahini sauce can become very thick , especially when citrus
juice or vinegar is added to them . Don ’ t despair . The sauces will thin out again
as oil or water is added . 
Tahini Sauce
This sauce is simple and nutritious . Don ’ t save it just for falafel ! 
½ cup tahini
¼ cup fresh lemon juice
¼ teaspoon ground cumin
2 teaspoons minced garlic
¼ teaspoon salt
In a medium bowl , whisk cup of cold water into the tahini until smooth . Add
the remaining ingredients and whisk to blend . 
Makes about 1¼ cups . 
Rich Tahini Sauce
The sweetness of the caramelized onions makes this a particularly good sauce
for couscous served with some sautéed spinach or greens . For best results , have
the patience to caramelize the onions thoroughly . 
2 teaspoons oil
2 medium onions , cut into ½-inch rings
4 cloves garlic , sliced thinly
1 cup tahini
2 tablespoons lemon juice
½ teaspoon minced fresh garlic
½ cup extra virgin olive oil
½ teaspoon salt
Place the oil in a wide saucepan over high heat . Add the onions and sliced garlic . 
Lower the heat to medium-high and stir constantly until the onions develop a
light , golden brown color . Place the onions in a food processor , blender , or food
mill and purée . Add ½ cup of water to the onions . Add the tahini , lemon juice , 
and minced garlic and blend or mix well . The sauce may become thick at this
point . Add the olive oil and salt and mix well . Adjust the thickness with water . 
Makes 2½ cups . 
Peanut Sauce
It seems that the people in love with the peanut butter and jelly sandwich have
now fallen in love with Asian peanut sauces . This is a basic recipe that can be
made spicier or milder , according to personal preference . Removing the seeds
from the chilies will reduce their heat considerably . 
Chopped peanuts , fresh cilantro leaves , and green onions are a natural
garnish for any dish using this sauce . 
1 cup smooth peanut butter
3 tablespoons rice wine vinegar
1 tablespoon lemon or lime juice
2 tablespoons soy sauce
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
1 tablespoon sesame oil
1 small dried chili , crushed , or ½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
Place the peanut butter in a 1-quart mixing bowl . Whisk ½ cup of warm water
into the peanut butter , slowly at first , then faster as the peanut butter begins to
liquefy . Add the rest of the ingredients and mix well . 
Makes 2 cups . 
Salsas
Salsa simply means “ sauce ” in Italian or Spanish , but it has come to mean
something so much more to many people . In the 1990s , sales of salsa began to
outpace those of ketchup , a sign that our cuisine truly is an amalgam of many
influences . Salsa , as the term is now used , refers to a chunky raw or lightly
cooked tomato sauce , more sour and spicy than a relish . 
These mainstay salsas are light and fresh and subject to change at the slightest
whim of the cook . Try some of the suggestions or go wild with your own
inventions . 
Pico de Gallo
1 small red onion , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 cups seeded , diced fresh tomatoes
2 tablespoons lime juice or white vinegar
¼ teaspoon salt
Freshly ground black pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 tablespoon chopped fresh cilantro
Combine all ingredients in a bowl and toss to blend . Let stand for 15 minutes for
the flavors to develop . 
Makes about 2½ cups . 
Corn and Black Bean Salsa : To the Pico de Gallo recipe , add 1 cup of corn
kernels , ½ cup of cooked black beans , and 2 additional tablespoons of cilantro . 
Mango Salsa : Prepare the Pico de Gallo recipe , but use only ½ of the onion . Add
1 large mango , peeled , pitted , and diced ; 1 teaspoon of chili garlic paste ; and 2
additional tablespoons of cilantro . 
Chipotle Salsa : Sauté the onions and garlic briefly in some of the oil . Use
canned tomatoes and add teaspoon of ground cumin and half of a canned
chipotle . Coarsely process all ingredients in a food processor . 
Salsa Cruda
2 cups diced fresh tomatoes
1 teaspoon minced garlic
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon shredded fresh basil
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
Combine all ingredients together in a bowl and toss to blend . Let stand for 30
minutes for the flavors to develop . 
Makes about 2¼ cups . 
Dipping Sauces
Dipping sauces are thin sauces with powerful flavors . The small amount that
coats the dipped item is just enough of an accent . 
Each of these sauces has a balance of sweet , sour , salty , and bitter
components . They can accompany most anything—Fresh Spring Rolls ( page
59 )  , raw cabbage , fresh tofu , chilled noodles , or veggie wraps . 
Simple Soy Dipping Sauce
2 tablespoons rice wine vinegar
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1 teaspoon sesame oil
1 teaspoon hot chili oil
Combine all ingredients in a cup or bowl and mix well . 
Makes about cup . 
Sweet and Sour Dipping Sauce
3 tablespoons orange juice
2 tablespoons rice wine vinegar
1 tablespoon lemon juice
2 teaspoons sugar
½ teaspoon salt
Combine all ingredients in a cup or bowl and mix well . 
Makes about cup . 
Vietnamese Lime Dipping Sauce
¼ cup rice wine vinegar
2 teaspoons lime juice
2 tablespoons water
2 teaspoons sugar
1 clove garlic , crushed
1 small chili , slivered
2 tablespoons long , fine carrot shreds
1 tablespoon whole fresh cilantro leaves
1 teaspoon crushed toasted peanuts
Combine all ingredients in a cup or bowl and mix well . 
Makes about cup . 
Harissa Dipping Sauce
Harissa , a fiery hot Tunisian paste , is a mix of chilies , spices , and olive oil . Often
mixed with couscous , harissa can add a full-flavored heat to many dishes . Use
this spicy sauce sparingly on Tostones ( page 51 )  , Sweet Potato Falafel ( page
52 )  , or Panelle ( page 54 )  . 
2 tablespoons harissa
2 teaspoons lemon juice
¼ cup water
¼ teaspoon salt
Mix all ingredients together . 
Makes cup . 
Meshwiya
This Tunisian-style salsa is another spicy sauce , but with more body and less
heat . It ’ s best to wear gloves when working with the jalapeños . Use this as you
would salsa , with tortilla chips , Panelle ( page 54 )  , or Chickpea Kibbeh ( page
171 )  . 
4 medium tomatoes
1 large green bell pepper
1 or 2 jalapeño peppers or other hot peppers
2 teaspoons ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground coriander
1 tablespoon lemon or lime juice
1 teaspoon minced fresh garlic
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
On the grill , with tongs over an open flame , or in a cast iron skillet , sear the
tomatoes and green pepper until the skins are blistered and easy to peel . Seed the
tomatoes and peppers and remove any white membrane . Chop the vegetables
coarsely . Add the cumin , coriander , lemon or lime juice , garlic , and olive oil . 
Taste and adjust the seasonings . 
Makes about 2¼ cups . 
Classic Sauces
Adapting classic sauce recipes to a plant-only diet is challenging . While the
texture of béchamel and beurre blanc is appealing , it is the richness of the butter
and cream that makes people swoon . While these adaptations don ’ t have the
buttery richness of the originals , their smooth , creamy textures and rich clean
flavors will win you over . 
Vegan Béchamel
Also known as white or cream sauce , béchamel starts out with a roux—a mix of
butter and flour—to which milk is added . This adaptation is easy if a rich , 
creamy soymilk is used . Cooking the flour is very important , as it eliminates the
raw taste . Browning the flour adds a nutty flavor that is appealing in some
recipes but not in others . 
Serve cauliflower , brussel sprouts , or onions in this sauce to bring comfort to
chilly winter evenings . Add sautéed mushrooms and tempeh to the sauce to make
a hearty topping for rice . 
2 tablespoons olive or canola oil
2 tablespoons flour
1 cup creamy soymilk , warm or at room temperature
Heat the oil in a small saucepan over medium heat . Whisk in the flour and cook
for 3 minutes or until the flour comes together . Slowly whisk in the soymilk , 
taking care that no lumps form . Cook the sauce , whisking continuously , until it
begins to thicken . Lower the heat and cook for 1 minute longer . 
Makes about 1 cup . 
Vegan Mornay Sauce
Mornay sauce is traditionally made by adding cheese to béchamel . You may wish
to try adding chickpea purée , ground almonds , or ground cashews to the basic
recipe below to give the sauce some additional body . Kitchen experimenters may
also try adding ¼ teaspoon of guar or xanthan gum to the recipe to approximate
the texture of cheese . 
Use this sauce with blanched broccoli , pasta , or whole wheat toast topped
with roasted vegetables . 
¼ cup nutritional yeast
½ cup unbleached flour
2 cups soymilk , warm
1 tablespoon light miso
½ teaspoon garlic powder
¼ teaspoon paprika
¼ cup vegan margarine or ¼ cup grapeseed oil
2 teaspoons grainy mustard ( optional ) 
In a medium saucepan over low heat , toast the yeast and flour just until the flour
begins to take on some color and the yeast is lightly toasted . Carefully whisk the
milk into the flour mixture , making sure no lumps form . Add the miso , garlic
powder , and paprika . Whisk to blend thoroughly . Add the margarine and
mustard . Taste and adjust seasonings . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Velvety Vegetable Sauce
Reducing wine with minced shallot and then adding cold butter is the basic
technique for beurre blanc , one of the classic French sauces . The result is
velvety and rich—a definite crowd pleaser . While it ’ s possible to substitute olive
oil for butter and then thicken the sauce with cornstarch , the results are pale in
comparison . And vegan margarine—with no whey protein—does not hold up like
butter does in the sauce . 
A better tasting and more healthful approach is to combine vegetable juice or
purée with the reduced wine and then enrich with olive oil . To make vegetable
purée , roast , blanch , or steam the vegetables until they are tender , but not
discolored . Purée the vegetables and strain through a fine sieve . Straining is
important with fibrous vegetables like asparagus , broccoli , or fennel . 
Some vegetables that work well include leeks , carrots , fennel , onions , 
asparagus , edamame , peas , winter squash , or tomatoes . Cornstarch is used to
thicken these sauces because of the acidity of the wine .  ( Flour cannot thicken
sauces that have acidic components .  ) White bean purée and mashed potatoes
may also be used to thicken the sauce . Keep the heat at medium or medium-low , 
as excess heat will cause the sauce to thin . 
Herbs make a natural addition to this sauce . Refer to sections on individual
vegetables in the “ Vegetables ” chapter ( page 203 ) for pairings . Use this sauce
to dress plain Jane rice or pasta and then top with roasted , steamed , or blanched
vegetables ; seared tempeh ; or tofu . 
½ cup dry white wine
1 tablespoon minced shallot
1 cup vegetable purée
teaspoon salt
Ground white or black pepper
2 tablespoons canola oil , grapeseed oil , or extra virgin olive oil ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon water , or 2 tablespoons puréed white beans or mashed
potatoes
1 teaspoon chopped fresh herbs ( optional ) 
H eat the wine and shallot in a small saucepan . Reduce until only 1 tablespoon
remains .  ( This step is very important to eliminate any raw wine flavor .  ) Whisk in
the vegetable purée , salt , and pepper . Taste and add oil if desired . Cook the sauce
until heated through . If the sauce is very thin , thicken it with the cornstarch
mixture ; otherwise , gently cook the sauce to the desired consistency . Add the
herbs a few minutes before serving . 
Makes 1¼ cups . 
Vegan Demi-glace
Demi-glace is an intensely flavored , thick , brown sauce made from veal stock . In
vegan cuisine , it may contain the water from soaking dried mushrooms or
reduced balsamic vinegar to give it depth of flavor , and olive oil to give some
richness . Cornstarch thickens the sauce and makes it glossy . 
This is an all-purpose brown sauce for veggie cutlets , tempeh , portobellos , or
Roasted Garlic Mashed Potatoes ( page 233 )  . For a lighter sauce , use white wine
instead of balsamic vinegar and omit the black pepper . For a nutty flavor , add
some nutritional yeast . 
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 medium onion , diced
½ teaspoon minced garlic
4 stalks celery , diced
2 medium carrots , diced
2 bay leaves
½ cup aged balsamic vinegar
3 cups Roasted Vegetable Stock ( page 66 )  , or Mushroom Stock ( page 67 )  , or 2 bouillon cubes and 3 cups
water
1 tablespoon cornstarch dissolved in 2 tablespoons water
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon black pepper ( optional ) 
Heat the oil in a deep skillet over medium-high heat and sauté the onion until it
begins to brown , about 8 to 10 minutes . Lower the heat to medium and add the
garlic , celery , carrots , and bay leaves . Cook for 5 minutes longer , or until the
carrots have begun to soften . Add the balsamic vinegar and reduce to 1
tablespoon , taking care not to let it burn . Add the stock and bring the mixture to
a boil . Lower the heat and simmer the sauce for 10 minutes . Purée the
vegetables . For a perfectly smooth sauce , strain through a fine sieve , pressing to
release all the liquid . 
Return the sauce to the pan and heat through . Whisk the cornstarch mixture
into the sauce , then cook , whisking , until the sauce begins to thicken . When the
sauce is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon , remove the pan from the heat . 
Taste and adjust the seasonings , adding the oil and pepper , if desired . 
Makes about 3 cups . 
Vegan Gravy
The Rice Milk recipe ( page 317 ) can be decreased to ¼ cup of rice and 2 cups of
water to give you just enough for this recipe . But I would suggest making lots of
extra gravy because you may become hooked . 
If you use prepared rice milk and it isn ’ t thick , you may need to add 2
teaspoons of cornstarch dissolved in 2 tablespoons of water to thicken the gravy . 
No thickening is need for the Rice Milk recipe in this book . 
This is a basic recipe to which you may add sautéed mushrooms , onions , 
celery , or carrots . It also works quite well as the basis for a quick stew , with the
addition of some boiled potatoes and cooked veggies . 
2 cups unsweetened rice milk , preferably homemade ( page 317 ) 
2 tablespoons nutritional yeast
½ tablespoon Marmite , Vegex , or yeast extract , or 1 tablespoon miso
1 teaspoon grainy Dijon mustard
teaspoon black pepper
Heat the rice milk . Whisk in the nutritional yeast , Marmite , mustard , and pepper . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
sandwiches
Cold Sandwiches
Tofu No-Egg Salad Pita
Hummus Sandwich
TLT : Tempeh or Tofu , Lettuce , and Tomato
Muffuletta
Greek Salad Pita
Italian Chopped Vegetable Pita
Mixed Vegetable Romesco Focaccia
Peanut Butter Variations
Tofu Boursin Lavosh
Burgers
SunDried Tomato and Lentil Burgers
Black Bean Burgers
Portobello Mushroom Burgers
Broccoli-Almond Patties
Dress Up Your Veggie Burger
Hot Sandwiches
Vegetable Barbecue
Tempeh Reuben
What is a sandwich but a meal you can hold in your hand ? It has a starch , a
protein , and vegetables or fruit . The best sandwiches have varied textures that
complement each other to provide a well-rounded , pleasant eating experience . 
But , of course , we don ’ t think of it that way when we are scrambling to pack a
lunch for the office or scraping the last bit of peanut butter from the jar . 
The rise of fast food has conditioned us to eat on the run . Commercials and
billboards entice us to visit the drive-through window and gobble something
down to satisfy our immediate craving . The convenience and familiarity of fast
food are tempting , so we need alternatives that are easy and appealing . That is
why most of the sandwiches in this section are designed to parallel familiar
sandwich selections . And while they may require some forethought and a shift in
how you stock your refrigerator , they are designed to fit into a busy daily
routine . 
Here are a few pointers for creating a great-tasting sandwich that ’ s also good
for you : 
• Experiment with breads . Good bread can turn an ordinary sandwich into a
rapturous feast . Look for a combination of nutrition and flavor . Choose whole
grains over refined grains . Select multigrain breads , which provide a variety of
nutrients and fibers—and taste pretty darn good . Even traditional grocery
stores often carry sprouted grain breads in the freezer section . 
• Treat yourself to freshly baked bread , whether you make it yourself or buy it
from a good bakery . A good bakery will make bread from scratch each day , 
and its bread will have very few preservatives or none at all . Ask at the
counter . Be aware that many grocery-store bake shops use products that are
either “ par-baked ,  ” which means bread goes into the oven just to heat and
develop some color , or “ proof and bake ,  ” which means unrisen dough is
allowed to rise and then baked . Some of these products contain stabilizers or
preservatives that you may want to avoid . If you don ’ t see any flour on the
tables in the back , chances are good that the shop is using pre-made products . 
• Match the bread to the style of sandwich you are making . It will be hard to
make a delicate tea sandwich with a rustic peasant rye or to make muffuletta
with a flimsy white sandwich loaf . 
• Turn leftovers into lunch by spreading them on or rolling them into flexible
flatbreads like pitas or flavored tortillas . 
• Keep wet sandwich fillings , such as those for Greek Salad Pita ( page 151 ) or
Mixed Vegetable Romesco Focaccia ( page 153 )  , separate from the bread until
you are ready to eat . 
• Try the bean spreads found in “ Appetizers and Snacks ” as the spread for your
sandwich ( Tuscan White Bean Spread , page 43 ; Black Bean Dip , page 44 ; 
Refried Bean Dip , page 44 ; Curried Lentil Dip , page 45 )  . 
• Be adventurous with your sprout selection . Alfalfa sprouts are great , but try
sunflower sprouts for a big crunch , radish sprouts for a peppery bite , or
sprouted lentils for a nutty accent . 
COLD SANDWICHES
Tofu No-Egg Salad Pita
If the firm tofu that you generally buy tends to be wet , weight it for several hours
or wring it out to remove the excess water ( for directions , see page 244 )  . A pinch
of cayenne helps liven up this dish , especially if your mustard is lackluster . Using
a fork gives a better texture than a food processor in this dish . 
1 pound firm tofu
¼ teaspoon turmeric
2 teaspoons Dijon or grainy mustard
¼ cup soy mayonnaise
¼ cup chopped celery
2 green onions , chopped
2 tablespoons chopped red onion
1 small green bell pepper , finely diced
2 tablespoons minced fresh parsley ( optional ) 
2 6-to 8-inch whole wheat pitas ( prepared or see page 271 ) 
Shredded lettuce
1 tomato , sliced
1 cucumber , sliced
In a small mixing bowl , break the tofu into small chunks . Add the turmeric , 
mustard , and mayonnaise and mash the ingredients with a fork . Add the
vegetables and parsley and stir gently until well mixed . Cut the pitas into halves . 
Carefully open the pockets . Divide the salad mixture evenly among the pita
halves , stuffing it gently into the bread . Add lettuce , tomatoes , and cucumbers . 
Makes 4 sandwiches . 
Vegan Chilies Rellenos ( page 58 )  , Spinach and Mushroom Quesadillas 
( page 53 )  , Tostones ( page 51 )  . 
Orrechiette with Butternut Squash and Thyme ( page 187 )  . 
Chilled Soba Noodles on Painted Plates ( page 200 )  . 
Top plate : Sweet Potato Falafel ( page 52 )  , Harissa Dipping Sauce ( page
139 )  . 
Bottom plate : Chickpea Kibbeh ( page 171 )  , Curried Couscous ( page
196 )  . 
Hummus Sandwich
Hummus , once relegated to bohemian potlucks and Middle Eastern restaurants , 
has come into the mainstream in grocery stores . You can find hummus with
roasted red peppers , sun-dried tomatoes , caramelized onions , black olives and
basil , pesto , and so on . My preference is for straightforward hummus topped
with other ingredients , which give the sandwich additional flavors and a variety
of textures . 
If you have the time , you can make your own fresh hummus , which may have
more protein and nutrients than the store-bought kind . Chickpeas , often labeled
garbanzo beans , are a nutritional powerhouse—high in protein , calcium , and
iron . Hummus will thicken considerably when it stands for several hours . The
flavors will also develop and meld nicely . 
2 slices sourdough bread
¼ cup hummus , prepared or homemade ( recipe follows ) 
4 to 6 ¼-inch cucumber slices
2 or 3 ½-inch tomato slices
¼ cup alfalfa sprouts
1 large lettuce leaf
Toast the bread , if desired . Spread the hummus evenly on both slices of bread . 
Layer the cucumbers , tomatoes , sprouts , and lettuce on one piece of hummusladen bread . Top with the other piece of bread . 
Makes 1 sandwich . 
Hummus
To serve the hummus as a dip for an appetizer , dress it with a good fruity olive
oil and some chopped fresh herbs and pair it with pita toasts or raw vegetables .  
( For Whole Wheat Pita Bread , see page 271 .  ) 
1 14-ounce can chickpeas , drained and rinsed
2 to 4 cloves garlic , minced
¼ teaspoon ground coriander
2 tablespoons lemon juice
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
¼ cup tahini
Sea salt
Purée the chickpeas in a food processor . Remove any tough skins that do not
break down . Add the garlic , coriander , lemon juice , and oil and blend
thoroughly . Add the tahini and pulse to blend . Adjust the texture with water . 
Taste and season with sea salt . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Other Ideas for Hummus Sandwich Fillings
• Grilled or roasted portobello mushroom , caramelized onions , tomato , and
arugula
• Sprinkle of ground cumin , toasted pumpkin seeds , cilantro , red bell pepper , 
tomato , and lettuce
• Marinated green beans , red bell pepper , thinly sliced red onion , and pine nuts
• Roasted red peppers , kalamata olives , radicchio , and fresh basil
• Avocado , thinly sliced red onion , radish sprouts , and tomato
• Capers , thinly sliced onion , black olives , tomato , and fresh oregano
TLT : Tempeh or Tofu , Lettuce , 
and Tomato
It seems that when people make the transition to a plant-based diet , the meats
they crave most are the fatty , highly seasoned , and salty ones—bacon , sausage , 
fast food hamburgers , and lunchmeats . Highly processed soy products exist that
try to replicate these flavors , but I recommend using a smoked and spiced tofu or
tempeh . These tend to have few , if any , preservatives and plenty of flavor . Some
grocery stores are now keeping these tofu products in the produce department . 
Toasting the bread for this sandwich gives you the crunchy texture associated
with a BLT . Garnish with a good dill pickle and some Almost-Traditional Potato
Salad ( page 108 ) and you ’ ll feel like you are eating in your favorite greasy
spoon without the grease . 
2 slices mild-flavored whole wheat bread
Soy mayonnaise ( optional ) 1 . 
3 ounces ( ½ package ) smoked tofu or tempeh
2 thick slices ripe tomato
1 large leaf iceberg , green leaf , or other lettuce
Toast the bread . Spread each slice generously with soy mayonnaise . Cut the tofu
or tempeh into halves to give you two flat pieces . Cut these pieces into 1½-inch
strips , if desired . Arrange the tofu on the mayonnaise , and top with the tomatoes , 
then the lettuce . Cover with the second piece of toast . Cut the sandwich into
halves . 
Makes 1 sandwich . 
Muffuletta
The flavor of this native of New Orleans improves if it is prepared several
hours in advance and allowed to stand in the refrigerator . It is imperative that
the bread be spongy enough to absorb the juices from the olive relish and
vegetables but sturdy enough not to fall apart . A rustic Tuscan loaf or focaccia
works well if you can ’ t find a round country loaf . If you feel like baking , try the
Big Fat Sandwich Loaf ( page 262 ) or Focaccia ( page 264 )  . 
Eggplants and portobello mushrooms are particularly good vegetables for this
sandwich because they stand up to the assertive Olive Relish . 
1 large round sandwich loaf ( about 10 inches in diameter ) 
1 cup Olive Relish ( page 123 ) 
4 cups roasted or grilled vegetables
1 cup arugula leaves or other lettuce
Split the sandwich loaf in half horizontally . Spread each half with Olive Relish . 
Layer the vegetables on the bottom of the loaf . Top the vegetables with the
arugula . Carefully place the top half of the bread on the sandwich . Replace any
Olive Relish that falls out . Cover the sandwich for at least 15 minutes . Secure
the top with toothpicks and cut the loaf into 6 wedges . 
Makes 6 sandwiches . 
Greek Salad Pita
I don ’ t know if Greeks are familiar with this salad , but I do know that it has
become a standard in diners . Make or buy vegan feta if you like , but be
forewarned that the texture of vegan feta just barely approximates that of milkbased feta . A couple of dolmades , or stuffed grape leaves , makes this a heartier
meal . When buying dolmades , read the ingredients carefully to make sure the
grape leaves are filled with just rice and spices . 
1 8-inch whole wheat pita ( prepared or see page 271 ) 
1½ cups chopped romaine lettuce
6 thin slices red onion
6 or 8 slices cucumber , ¼ inch thick
4 cherry tomatoes , cut into halves
4 pepperoncini or several rings pickled banana peppers
1 red radish , thinly sliced
4 pitted kalamata olives , cut into quarters
4 marinated artichoke hearts
3 ounces vegan feta ( optional ) 
2 or 3 tablespoons Italian Vinaigrette ( page 111 ) 
Cut the pita into halves . Carefully open the pocket . In a medium mixing bowl , 
toss the vegetables , cheese , and dressing together . Divide the salad mixture
between the pita halves , stuffing it gently into the bread . 
Makes 2 sandwiches . 
Italian Chopped Vegetable Pita
½ cup cooked kidney beans or chickpeas
½ cup quartered fresh button mushrooms
¼ cup Italian Vinaigrette ( page 111 ) or Balsamic Vinaigrette ( page 111 ) 
1 cup shredded romaine lettuce
1 small red bell pepper , finely diced
1 small green bell pepper , finely diced
½ cucumber , seeded and finely diced
1 medium tomato , seeded and finely diced
2 green onions , thinly sliced
1 stalk celery , very thinly sliced
3 ounces tofu mozzarella or smoked tofu
1 6-to 8-inch whole wheat pita ( prepared or see page 271 ) 
In a small bowl or container , toss the beans and mushrooms with the dressing . 
Cover and refrigerate for 8 or more hours . In a medium mixing bowl , toss the
vegetables and tofu with the bean mixture . Cut the pita into halves . Carefully
open the pocket . Divide the salad mixture evenly among the pita halves , stuffing
it gently into the bread . 
Makes 2 sandwiches . 
Mixed Vegetable Romesco Focaccia
This is a fantastic way to handle an overabundance of one vegetable or use up
odds and ends of vegetables from the fridge . Romesco , the rich Catalan roasted
red pepper pesto , is traditionally used on grilled vegetables . Green beans , 
fennel , zucchini , caramelized onions , and eggplant work particularly well with
the Romesco Sauce and make an especially toothsome sandwich . You can buy
focaccia or use the recipe on page 264 . If you don ’ t have focaccia , make sure to
use a sturdy bread that will soak up some of the tasty sauce . 
2 cups chopped grilled , roasted , or cooked vegetables
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
¾ cup Romesco Sauce ( page 129 ) 
1 6-inch round focaccia or an 8x4-inch piece focaccia ( prepared or see page 264 ) 
½ cup arugula , mesclun , or similar bitter lettuce
Drain any liquid from the vegetables . In a medium bowl , combine the
vegetables , basil , and Romesco Sauce . Let the mixture stand for at least 15
minutes or overnight . 
Cut the focaccia into halves , then split each half horizontally . Divide the
vegetable mixture evenly among the two bottom pieces of focaccia . Top each
with half of the arugula , then the remaining focaccia . The sandwiches can stand
at room temperature until the chill is off the vegetables . 
Makes 2 sandwiches . 
Peanut Butter Variations
Growing up a few miles away from the spot where George Washington Carver
first cultivated peanuts sealed my fate as a peanut butter lover . Peanut butter
seems to inspire odd combinations . While I ’ ve never heard of anyone else who
loves peanut butter and ketchup the way that I do , these sandwich fillings , 
standard and exotic , are commonly paired with peanut butter . 
• Sliced bananas
• Sliced apples
• Grated carrots
• Wheat germ
• Pineapple
• Dates
• Raisins • Sunflower
• Sunflower seeds
• Celery
• Radish slices
• Bread-and-butter or dill pickles
If the fat content of peanut butter concerns you , try puréeing 6 ounces of
silken tofu and adding 2 tablespoons of peanut butter . Use this spread as-is or
mix in your favorite peanut butter toppings to make a one-step spread . 
Tofu Boursin Lavosh
Lavosh is a large , flexible , flat Armenian bread . Soaking the vegetables in salt
water makes them flexible so the lavosh is easier to roll . If you can ’ t find lavosh , 
use the large flour tortillas made for wraps . 
1½ cups Tofu Boursin ( recipe follows ) 
1 12-inch lavosh
½ English cucumber or 1 salad cucumber
2 medium carrots , peeled
1 medium zucchini
3 green onions , thinly sliced
4 small radishes , cut into paper-thin slices
Spread the tofu boursin evenly over the lavosh . If you are using a salad
cucumber , peel it if the skin is tough and scoop out the seeds . Cut long , thin
ribbons of cucumber , carrots , and zucchini . Soak the vegetables in salted water
for 10 minutes . Drain and pat dry . 
Layer the vegetables on the lavosh , alternating colors . It is not necessary that
each vegetable cover the entire lavosh . 
Roll the lavosh into a tight cylinder and wrap securely with plastic wrap . Cut
into 3 pieces and serve immediately or refrigerate up to 4 hours . 
Makes 3 sandwiches . 
Tofu Boursin
If you add the fresh herbs to the food processor along with the cashews , the
mixture will be an impressive , though perhaps not appetizing , green color . 
Fresh herbs produce the best results , but if you need to use dried herbs in this
recipe , place them in a small bowl , teacup , or custard cup and cover with a
small amount of boiling water . Cover the bowl and let the herbs rehydrate . Drain
the mixture before adding to the food processor . 
1 cup cashews
4 cloves garlic , minced
½ teaspoon salt or 1 teaspoon white miso
teaspoon ground black pepper
1 pound medium tofu
2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 teaspoons each chopped fresh tarragon , basil , and parsley
1 teaspoon chopped fresh dill
Put the cashews in a 2-cup measure . Cover with hot water and let the nuts soak
for 1 hour . Drain and rinse the cashews . Cover with hot water and let the nuts
soak for 6 or more hours . Drain and rinse the cashews . Combine the cashews , 
garlic , salt , and pepper in the bowl of a food processor and pulse until the
cashews are pasty . Crumble the tofu into the processor and add the lemon juice . 
Pulse until the mixture is blended well . Add the herbs and pulse until mixed
well . Taste and adjust the seasonings with salt , pepper , and lemon juice . 
Makes 3 cups . 
BURGERS
Any of these burgers can be formed into small patties and served as appetizers
or as part of a mezze-style dinner . These from-scratch burgers are designed to
stand on their own in a hearty bun with a simple garnish of fresh tomato and
lettuce , though you may want to get adventurous with the condiments . 
SunDried Tomato and Lentil Burgers
No need to drag the food processor out for this one . Mashing the lentils by hand
retains their texture better . Substitute some leftover brown rice or bulgur for half
of the lentils , if you like . If the mixture is too wet to hold together , add some
breadcrumbs . 
2 cups cooked brown , red , or yellow lentils
1 tablespoon oil
1 small onion , finely diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
¼ cup finely chopped walnuts
¼ cup oil-pack sun-dried tomatoes , coarsely chopped
1 teaspoon chopped fresh sage or teaspoon ground sage
½ teaspoon fresh thyme leaves or teaspoon dried thyme
teaspoon black pepper
In a medium mixing bowl , mash the lentils with a potato masher or a fork . Heat
1 teaspoon of the oil in a skillet over medium-high heat . When the oil is hot , add
the onion , garlic , and walnuts . Cook without stirring until the onion is browned . 
When the onion begins to color , reduce the heat to medium and cook until the
onion is caramelized and the walnuts have begun to toast , about 4 minutes . Add
the onion mixture to the lentils . Add the sun-dried tomatoes , herbs , and pepper to
the lentils . 
Form the lentil mixture into 4 patties . Heat 2 teaspoons of the oil in a skillet
over medium-high heat . Fry the patties until they are nicely browned , about 5
minutes . Turn and fry the other side , about 4 minutes . 
Makes 4 patties . 
Black Bean Burgers
Serve these with fresh mango slices and salsa . 
2 cups cooked black beans
1 tablespoon oil
1 small onion , finely diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 red bell pepper , finely diced
1 jalapeño pepper , finely diced
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon ground coriander
½ chipotle pepper , dried or canned
½ cup fresh or thawed corn kernels
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro
In a medium mixing bowl , mash the black beans with a potato masher or a fork . 
Heat 1 teaspoon of the oil in a skillet over medium-high heat . When the oil is
hot , add the onion , garlic , bell and jalapeño peppers , cumin , and coriander . Cook
the vegetable mixture until the onion is soft . Add the vegetables to the black
beans . Crumble the dried chipotle or mince the canned chipotle , add it to the
bean mixture , and mix well . Stir in the corn and cilantro and mix well . 
Form the bean mixture into 4 patties . Heat 2 teaspoons of the oil in a skillet
over medium-high heat . Fry the patties until they are nicely browned , about 5
minutes . Turn and fry the other side for about 4 minutes . 
Makes 4 patties . 
Portobello Mushroom Burgers
The easiest mushroom burger involves a grilled or roasted portobello cap on a
bun . I like to top it with roasted red peppers and some pesto . This recipe yields a
more substantial burger . A combination of mushrooms works here as well—
creminis , shiitakes , portobellos , and buttons . 
4 teaspoons oil
1 pound portobello mushrooms , coarsely chopped
1 medium red onion , finely diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
½ teaspoon dried thyme
¼ teaspoon dried basil
teaspoon dried rubbed sage
1 tablespoon soy sauce , or 2 teaspoons soy sauce and 1 teaspoon mushroom soy sauce
¼ cup red wine ( optional ) 
1½ cups cooked brown rice ( preferably basmati ) or 1½ cups cooked bulgur
¼ cup whole wheat or soy flour
In a wide skillet , heat 2 teaspoons of the oil over medium-high heat . Add the
mushrooms , onion , garlic , and herbs . Cook until the mushrooms release their
liquid , then until all of the liquid is evaporated . Add the soy sauce and wine and
cook the mixture until it is dry . Cool the mixture in a medium mixing bowl . The
mushrooms will release more liquid as they cool . Do not drain . 
When the mushrooms are cool enough to handle , add the rice and flour . Stir to
mix the ingredients . If the mixture does not come together , use a potato masher
or pulse briefly in a food processor . 
Form the mixture into 8 patties . Heat 2 teaspoons of the oil in a skillet over
medium-high heat . Fry the patties until they are nicely browned , about 5
minutes . Turn and fry the other side for about 4 minutes . 
Makes 8 patties . 
Broccoli-Almond Patties
It seems impossible that these are so good ! These can be enjoyed as a burger in
a bun or an entrée with Roasted Red Pepper Coulis ( page 131 ) or Mild Tomato
Sauce ( page 185 )  . These are even good uncooked—just omit the wheat germ and
the frying . Tahini , peanut butter , or cashew butter may be substituted for the
almond butter . 
2 cups chopped fresh broccoli florets and stems
½ cup sunflower sprouts , chopped fine
2 green onions , thinly sliced
¼ teaspoon minced garlic
½ cup almond butter
2 teaspoons kelp or salt-free Spike or Mrs . Dash
2 teaspoons chopped fresh sage or ½ teaspoon dried rubbed sage
1 teaspoon oil
½ cup wheat germ
In the bowl of a food processor , pulse the chopped broccoli , sprouts , green
onions , and garlic until they are very finely chopped but have not begun to
purée .  ( Alternatively , mix the broccoli , sprouts , onion , and garlic and put
through a food grinder .  ) In a medium mixing bowl , combine the vegetable
mixture with the almond butter , kelp , and sage . The mixture should hold together
fairly well but not be too sticky or wet . Form into 4 patties . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium-high heat . Dredge the patties in the
wheat germ , patting the wheat germ so it will adhere . Fry the patties briefly until
they are crisp on each side . Do not cook too long or they will become soggy . 
Makes 4 patties . 
Dress Up Your Veggie Burger
Commercially available veggie burgers are a quick and easy way to break the
meat habit without feeling deprived . But a steady diet of them may get tiresome . 
Here are some ideas to give a little oomph to your new convenience food . 
• Caramelized onions dressed with Orange-Chipotle Barbecue Sauce ( page 134 ) 
• Avocado slices , grapefruit sections , and mango salsa
• Pineapple rings glazed with brown sugar and lemon , and Asian Coleslaw ( page
107 ) 
• Caponata ( page 46 ) 
• Wasabi , pickled ginger , and Bibb lettuce
• Roasted red peppers , arugula , and pesto
HOT SANDWICHES
Vegetable Barbecue
You can use a prepared barbecue sauce or the recipes on pages 133–135 . If you
omit the peanuts , the Asian Coleslaw recipe on page 107 will work here . 
1 medium red onion , peeled
2 cloves garlic , peeled
1 large red or green bell pepper , ribs and seeds removed
2 large portobello caps
1 medium zucchini , trimmed
2 teaspoons oil
1 cup barbecue sauce
4 whole wheat sandwich rolls
1 cup coleslaw ( optional ) 
Cut the onion into halves vertically , from root to stem . Cut ¼-inch slices from
each half . Slice the garlic as thinly as possible . Cut the pepper into ½-inch strips . 
Slice the portobello caps into long strips , ¼ inch wide . Using a box grater , 
vegetable peeler , or knife , make long , ¼-inch-thick ribbons of the zucchini . 
In a wide skillet , heat the oil over medium heat . When the oil is hot , add the
onion and garlic . Allow the onion to brown without stirring . When the onion has
begun to brown , about 3 or 4 minutes , add the peppers and the portobellos . Sauté
for 2 minutes . Add the zucchini ribbons to the pan . When the zucchini just
begins to wilt , add the barbecue sauce to the pan . Heat the mixture thoroughly . 
The zucchini should be just beyond the crisp-tender stage . 
Divide the barbecue between the 4 buns . Top with coleslaw . 
Makes 4 sandwiches . 
Tempeh Reuben
4 ounces tempeh
½ cup sauerkraut
2 slices rye bread
1 tablespoon vegan Russian dressing ( recipe below ) 
2 slices vegan Swiss cheese
1 tablespoon oil
Cut the tempeh into halves horizontally so you have two thin , flat pieces . In a
wide skillet , heat 1 teaspoon of the oil over medium heat . When the pan is hot , 
add the sauerkraut . Stir until the sauerkraut is warmed through . Remove from the
pan and reserve . 
Wipe the pan clean and add another teaspoon of the oil . When the pan is hot , 
sauté the tempeh until it is a little crispy on each side , about 5 minutes . Remove
from the pan . Spread half of the dressing on each slice of bread . Put the tempeh
on the bread . Top the tempeh with the sauerkraut and then the cheese . Heat the
last teaspoon of the oil in the pan and grill the sandwich until nicely browned on
each side . 
Makes 1 sandwich . 
Russian Dressing
2 teaspoons soy mayonnaise
1 teaspoon ketchup
¼ teaspoon pickle relish
2 or 3 drops lemon juice
Combine all ingredients in a very small bowl and mix well . 
beans & 
grains
Beans
Savory Black-eyed Peas
Spaghetti with Lentil Tomato Sauce
Sweet and Sour Eggplant and Chickpea Stew
Seven-Bean Chili
Grains
Sesame Barley Pilaf
Bulgur Pilaf with Cashews and Oven-Roasted Tomatoes
Chickpea Kibbeh
Basic Polenta
Posole
Millet Paella
Stovetop Rice
Baked Rice
Dirty Rice
Lemon Zucchini Risotto
Nasi Goreng ( Indonesian Fried Rice ) 
Beans and grains have been cultivated for ten thousand years . They have been
deified , sacrificed , and used as the cornerstone of both civilizations and cuisines . 
Rice or corn , chickpeas or pasta , soybeans or black beans are some of the
fundamental distinctions among the world ’ s cuisines . 
The recipes that follow will help you in using some provisions that may not be
familiar to you , such as millet and bulgur , and give you some ideas on using old
favorites such as lentils and hominy in new ways . And of course , many other
recipes featuring beans and grains appear in other chapters throughout the book . 
BEANS
Preparing Beans
A few simple steps can ensure safe , healthful , and tasty results . 
Selecting : When buying beans , choose plump , smooth beans with bright
colors . Avoid shriveled beans , which are old and have tough hulls . These give
inconsistent results when cooked . 
Rinsing : Prior to soaking or cooking , beans should always be rinsed under
running water to remove dust and sorted to remove pebbles and damaged beans . 
Soaking : Beans are full of complex sugars ( oligosaccharides ) that can cause
flatulence . Fortunately , these hard-to-digest sugars are water soluble , meaning
that soaking in water , especially boiling water , and discarding the water
eliminate some or most of these sugars .  ( It is helpful to pair beans with onions
and garlic , which are powerful carminatives , a polite way of saying that they
help relieve gas . Particularly useful herbs with this property are sage , thyme , 
oregano , basil , fennel , parsley , cumin , cayenne , and cinnamon .  ) Note that lentils
do not need to be soaked . 
Quick soaking removes up to 90 percent of indigestible sugars , according to
one study . Bring 2 cups of beans and 2 quarts of water to a boil in a large pot . 
Turn off the heat , cover the pot , and let the beans soak for at least 1 hour and up
to 4 hours . Drain the beans and rinse thoroughly . 
Long soaking is the more familiar technique , though it only removes about 20
percent of indigestible sugars . Soak the beans in a large amount of water for 8 to
12 hours . Drain the beans and rinse thoroughly . 
Cooking : For plain beans , the ratio is 1 cup of beans to 4 cups of water . 
Combine them in a heavy pot and add a few bay leaves , sprigs of thyme , or
oregano if you like . It is very important that you do not salt the water . Salt causes
the hulls to toughen and can prevent the beans from cooking . Bring to a boil , 
lower the heat to medium , and simmer until the beans are soft . Check the pot
several times during cooking and add water as needed . Cooking times vary with
the variety and age of the beans . Black turtle , Great Northern , red , and pink
beans all take about 1 to 1½ hours . Kidney , dried lima , navy , and pinto beans
take 2 to 2½ hours . Soybeans , chickpeas , and adzuki beans need about 3 to 3½
hours of cooking time . 
Sprouting Beans and Grains
The popularity of bean sprouts waxes and wanes . Since reports of food-borne
illnesses caused by bacteria in packaged sprouts , home sprouting once again has
taken on a certain cachet . Years ago our sprouting equipment consisted of Mason
jars topped with scraps left over from repairing the screen door . Now health food
stores sell jars with color-coded tops and special seeds with guaranteed
germination profiles . 
Low tech or high tech , sprouting gives you another way of enjoying this
nutrient-packed fare . Beans and grains are , after all , seeds . As the seeds sprout , 
they become more digestible . Sprouts can be enjoyed raw or quickly sautéed . 
The basic procedure is the same for all : 
• Rinse ½ cup of seeds in a colander , discarding any broken or blemished seeds . 
Put the seeds in a sterilized glass jar and cover with 4 inches of water . 
• Soak the seeds for 12 to 24 hours , changing the water once . 
• Drain the soak water from the seeds and discard the hulls , which will have
risen to the top . Rinse the seeds 3 or 4 more times until the water runs clear . 
• Set the jar at an angle in the dish drainer with the mouth down to allow the
water to drain for 12 to 24 hours . Repeat the rinsing procedure once or twice a
day until sprouts begin to appear . The seeds and sprouts should be kept out of
direct sunlight and in an area that is not too cold . 
• Set the jar in a sunny spot for several hours so the sprouts will turn green . 
Lentils , chickpeas , black beans , mung beans , and wheat berries all produce
sprouts in 3 to 4 days . Sunflowers and sesame seeds take only about 1 day . 
Alfalfa seeds take 3 to 6 days . 
Black-eyed Peas
After migrating from China to Africa , black-eyed peas came to America with
the slave trade . They made their home in soup pots all across the South and are
essential eating on New Year ’ s Day—they bring luck , and the small carrot 
 “ coins ” or collard greens served with them bring money . 
Savory Black-eyed Peas
Carl Lewis
10 ounces dried black-eyed peas
1 small onion , finely chopped
1 celery stalk , finely chopped
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 tablespoon dried summer savory or marjoram
1½ tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
Place 4 cups of water and all ingredients except salt and pepper in an electric
slow cooker . Turn the heat to medium . Check the beans after 30 minutes to see if
they need more water . Cook the beans for another 40 minutes or until they are
soft . Season with salt and pepper . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Lentils
Yellow , red , black , green , brown—lentils come in an amazing array of colors
and textures . Sprouted , puréed , stewed , sautéed , or made into salads , lentils
provide plenty of protein , potassium , magnesium , and folate . 
Brown lentils , the type you are most likely to find in your grocery store , have
a soft , creamy texture when cooked . These small lens-shaped pulses take about
15 to 20 minutes to cook , making them ideal for a fast supper . 
Green lentils and black lentils , called French or le Puy and Beluga , 
respectively , are round and have a firmer texture when cooked . They are used in
salads and sauces , where they hold their shape . They make excellent sprouts that
can then be eaten raw or quickly sautéed for a peppery crunch . 
Red and yellow lentils tend to fall apart on cooking , yielding a purée with a
pleasant grainy texture . Current culinary trends use these purées as a low-fat
alternative to traditional cream or butter sauces . 
Spaghetti with Lentil Tomato Sauce
Carl Lewis
1 cup brown lentils
½ teaspoon dried thyme
½ teaspoon dried basil
2 cups tomato sauce
1 small onion , finely chopped
1½ teaspoons black pepper
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1 teaspoon salt
8 ounces thin spaghetti
1½ teaspoons olive oil
3 or 4 sprigs parsley ( optional ) 
Bring the lentils , thyme , basil , and 2 cups of water to boil in a medium saucepan
over high heat . Reduce the heat to medium and cook until the lentils are al dente , 
about 12 to 15 minutes . Drain the lentils . 
Combine the lentils , tomato sauce , onion , pepper , pepper flakes , oregano , and
salt in a saucepan . Simmer over low heat for 30 minutes , stirring occasionally to
prevent sticking . 
Cook the spaghetti according to the package directions . Drain and rinse . In a
large serving bowl , toss the spaghetti with the olive oil . Pour the sauce over the
spaghetti . Garnish with parsley , if desired . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Chickpeas
A staple of the Mediterranean , chickpeas can be mashed , puréed , stewed , 
boiled , fried , dried , and ground . I love the convenience and consistency of
canned chickpeas . People who hate beans often make an exception for
chickpeas . With their slightly nutty flavor and crunchy-creamy texture , 
chickpeas are one of the most multitalented beans around . 
Sweet and Sour Eggplant
and Chickpea Stew
Serve this dish with some black Italian kale ( bitter ) and basmati rice ( sweet ) for
an acrobatic flavor balance . 
1½ pounds eggplant , cut into 1-inch cubes , salted , and drained ( page 221 ) 
1 tablespoon oil
1 large red onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes ( optional ) 
2 tablespoons tomato paste
1 20-ounce can diced tomatoes with juice
2 cups cooked chickpeas
2 tablespoons red , white , or tarragon wine vinegar
1 tablespoon Succanat or brown sugar
¼ cup coarsely chopped flat-leaf parsley
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
Salt and pepper
Rinse the eggplant and pat dry . 
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat . Sauté the onion , garlic , and
pepper flakes for 4 minutes . Add the eggplant and cook , stirring , for about 5
minutes . Add the tomato paste and cook for 2 minutes longer , or until the paste
is heated through . Stir in the tomatoes , chickpeas , vinegar , and sugar . Let the
mixture stew for 10 minutes or until the eggplant is soft . Add the parsley and
basil . Season with salt and pepper to taste . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Mixed Beans
Seven-Bean Chili
Carl Lewis
¼ cup dried pinto beans
¼ cup dried black turtle beans
¼ cup dried chickpeas
¼ cup dried soybeans
¼ cup dried kidney beans
¼ cup dried pinto or cranberry beans
¼ cup dried Great Northern beans
1 tablespoon cumin seeds , toasted
1 teaspoon dried oregano
2 bay leaves
2 teaspoons oil
1 medium onion , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 stalk celery , diced
1 medium red bell pepper , diced
1 medium green bell pepper , diced
1 teaspoon chili powder
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground coriander
1 cup diced tomatoes , fresh or canned
¼ cup red wine vinegar Salt and pepper
Rinse and soak the beans as described on page 163 . Put the beans in a heavy
soup pot with 8 cups of fresh water and the cumin seeds , oregano , and bay
leaves . Bring the beans to a boil , reduce the heat to medium , and simmer for 2
hours . Check the pot periodically and add more water as needed . 
While the beans are cooking , heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat and
sauté the onion , garlic , celery , peppers , chili powder , pepper flakes , cumin , and
coriander for 5 to 7 minutes . Add the tomatoes and red wine vinegar and mix
well . Cook the mixture until heated through . 
Add the onion mixture to the soup pot when most of the beans seem tender 
( the soybeans will take the longest )  . Cook for 30 minutes . Remove and discard
bay leaves . Season the chili with salt and pepper . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
GRAINS
Barley
There are several types of barley available . 
Pearled barley , the most widely available type , has been stripped of its bran , 
steamed , and polished . Although it is considerably lower in protein and mineral
content than the other varieties , it is easily digestible and cooks quickly ( 15 to 20
minutes )  . 
Hulled barley has had only the indigestible hull removed . 
Scotch barley is hulled barley that has been lightly polished , removing most
of the bran , and then coarsely ground . 
Whole barley , while significantly more nutritious than the other types , takes
much longer to cook ( 40 to 60 minutes ) and has a stronger flavor that some may
find less agreeable . 
A little barley goes a long way . Who hasn ’ t found their leftover mushroom
barley soup turned into a mushroom barley brick after a day in the refrigerator ? 
Toasting barley before cooking helps it retain its shape . When this is done , 
barley can be cooked much like risotto . Mushrooms are universally agreed to be
barley ’ s best partner . Other foods that harmonize well with barley include green
beans , roasted red peppers , onions , tomatoes , arugula , almonds , and hazelnuts . 
Sesame Barley Pilaf
1 cup barley
2 tablespoons canola oil
1 medium onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
2 medium carrots , cut into large matchsticks
4 stalks celery , cut diagonally into ½-inch pieces
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
1 cup blanched English or sugar snap peas
1 teaspoon mushroom soy sauce
2 teaspoons soy sauce
2 teaspoons sesame oil
¼ cup toasted pine nuts
Heat a heavy skillet over medium heat . Add the barley and toast just until it
begins to brown . Remove from the skillet and reserve the barley . Heat the oil in
the skillet and sauté the onion , garlic , carrots , celery , and ginger until the onion
begins to soften . Add the barley and cook 4 minutes longer . Add 3 cups of water , 
stir , cover , and simmer for 20 minutes . Add the peas , soy sauces , sesame oil , and
pine nuts and cook for 5 to 10 minutes longer . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Bulgur
Sometimes confused with cracked wheat , bulgur consists of whole grains of
wheat that have been steamed , dried , and milled . 
Coarse-ground bulgur is similar to rice in texture and is used in pilafs , stews , 
stuffing , and as a side dish . 
Medium bulgur is used in salads , the best known of which is probably
tabbouleh . 
Fine bulgur is used in patties , especially kibbeh , and some desserts . 
All bulgur should be washed before cooking to remove any dust . Coarse
bulgur is added to a pan of sautéed vegetables with twice its volume of water , 
then cooked for 20 minutes and allowed to steam , off the heat , for 20 minutes
longer . Medium or fine bulgur should be soaked in at least twice its volume of
water , then drained in a sieve and pressed to remove the excess water . One cup
of raw bulgur yields 1½ cups cooked . 
Bulgur Pilaf with Cashews and Oven-Roasted Tomatoes
2 tablespoons oil
2 medium onions , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
½ cup chopped toasted cashews
1 cup coarse bulgur , rinsed
½ teaspoon ground coriander
1 teaspoon salt
teaspoon black pepper
5 Oven-Roasted Tomatoes , chopped ( page 239 ) 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh basil , preferably lemon or cinnamon basil
Heat the oil in a wide , heavy skillet over medium-high heat . Sauté the onions , 
garlic , and half the cashews until the onions are soft . Add the bulgur , 2 cups of
hot water , coriander , salt , pepper , and tomatoes and mix well . Cook , covered , 
over medium heat for 20 minutes . Remove the lid , quickly stir in the basil , cover
the skillet , and remove from the heat . Let stand for 20 minutes so the bulgur can
steam . 
Alternatively , preheat the oven to 375° . Transfer the onion mixture to an
ovenproof casserole . Add the bulgur , 2 cups of hot water , coriander , salt , pepper , 
and tomatoes . Cover the casserole tightly and bake for 30 minutes . Remove the
casserole from the oven , stir in the basil , replace the cover , and let stand to allow
the bulgur to steam for an additional 15 to 20 minutes . 
Before serving , sprinkle the bulgur with the remaining cashews . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Chickpea Kibbeh
Kibbeh is a general term for a seasoned , shallow-fried patty . While fine bulgur is
the base , most any combination of legumes , vegetables , and flour can be used . 
The mixture is usually flavored with a North African spice mix called raz al
hanout , made with cumin , allspice , ginger , anise , cinnamon , and whatever else
its creator decides to use . The sweet spices and the sharp edge of onion and
garlic make for an interesting play of flavors . If you can find raz al hanout , 
substitute 1 teaspoon of it for the sweet spices in this recipe . 
You can vary this recipe by substituting 12 ounces of tofu for the chickpeas , 
and thyme , basil , and oregano for the sweet spices . The result can be patted into
patties or made into meatballs and fried . To reduce the fat , fit a baking sheet
with parchment or spray it lightly with nonstick cooking spray , bake the patties
or meatballs at 350° for 10 minutes , turn or rotate , and bake 7 minutes longer . 
½ cup fine bulgur
1 cup cooked chickpeas
½ teaspoon pepper
1 small onion , chopped
1 teaspoon minced garlic
½ teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground coriander
½ teaspoon ground allspice
Pinch ground cinnamon
teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
teaspoon cayenne
2 tablespoons finely chopped cilantro leaves
½ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon baking powder
2 tablespoons nutritional yeast
¾ cup whole wheat flour Oil for frying
Put the bulgur in a medium mixing bowl . Rinse twice with cold water . Pour 2
cups boiling water over the bulgur . Stir once or twice to mix . Cover the bowl and
let stand for 10 minutes to allow the bulgur to absorb the water . Pour the bulgur
into a sieve and press to remove any excess liquid . 
Purée the chickpeas with the pepper , onion , and garlic . Add the bulgur , spices , 
cilantro , salt , baking powder , and yeast to the food processor and pulse until well
blended . Transfer this mixture to a mixing bowl . Add the flour and mix until a
workable dough is formed . If the dough is quite sticky , add more flour , 1
tablespoon at a time . The dough will be a little wetter than biscuit dough . 
Heat up to ½ inch of oil in a wide , heavy skillet over medium-high heat . Form
2 tablespoons of the dough into patties ½ inch thick . Slide the patties into the oil
and fry until lightly browned , about 2 minutes . Turn and brown the other side . 
Drain the kibbeh on paper towels . 
Serve hot or cold . The kibbeh may be reheated or held in a warm oven . 
Makes 16 patties , 8 appetizer servings or 4 main-course servings . 
Corn
Corn is one of the few grains eaten both fresh and dried . Modern processing
removes the hull and the germ , but stone-ground corn retains these and their
nutrients . As with many whole products , the shelf life of stone-ground cornmeal
and grits tends to be shorter than that of the more processed versions due to the
rich , polyunsaturated oils in the germ . Keep cornmeal and grits refrigerated or
buy only enough for a month or two at a time . 
Basic Polenta
Polenta is a rustic Italian cornmeal porridge—basically mush . It can be served
soft or firm . Firm polenta can be grilled , seared , or baked . Soft polenta will
become firm polenta on cooling . Although polenta can be flavored with any
number of additions , I prefer to flavor it simply with olive oil and garlic , saving
the fancy accoutrements for use as toppings . 
Long cooking is necessary to develop the rich flavors and texture of the corn . 
A fine-ground polenta will cook much faster than corn grits , but you won ’ t get
the same velvety texture . Some recipes call for cormmeal , but its quality is
variable , with highly refined varieties resulting in a thin flavor . My favorite
polenta is made from a particular whole-grain , stone-ground grit that takes four
hours to fully cook . This is the love that polenta inspires . 
When polenta is cooking , it is thick and hot , and when it bubbles , it splatters , 
which can cause very bad burns . Should the polenta “ erupt ,  ” lower the heat and
add more water . 
Serve polenta with grilled or roasted vegetables , Lentil Tomato Sauce ( page
166 )  , Roasted Red Pepper Coulis ( page 131 )  , sautéed escarole or broccoli rabe , 
or nothing at all . 
2 teaspoons salt
1½ cups polenta or yellow corn grits
cup extra virgin olive oil
¼ teaspoon black pepper
½ teaspoon minced garlic
1 tablespoon mashed Roasted Garlic ( page 223 ) 
In a medium saucepan over medium-high heat , bring 6 cups of water and the salt
to a boil . Carefully whisk in the polenta , taking care that no lumps form . Cook , 
whisking , until the mixture becomes as thick as cream of wheat , about 5 to 8
minutes . Turn the heat to medium-low . Cook the polenta , stirring frequently with
a spoon and adding water as needed , for at least 30 minutes , and up to 1½ hours
for corn grits . The polenta should be thick but not too difficult to stir . 
When the polenta is fully cooked , add the olive oil , pepper , and garlic . Adjust
the seasonings with salt and pepper . Either serve the polenta immediately or
spread in a lightly oiled jelly roll pan . Smooth the surface of the polenta and
spread a small amount of oil over the top . Alternatively , pour the polenta into a
lightly oiled loaf pan . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Posole
This Mexican dish features hominy , which is made from hard kernel corn that is
left on the cob to dry , then treated with lye . Lye is a strong alkali made from
wood ash and is also used in soap production . Why would someone put this on
food ? Processing corn this way makes the niacin available for absorption . 
Calcium , lysine , and tryptophan content are also increased . Hominy is also
ground into grits and masa harina , the flour used to make tortillas . But mostly , 
those big white kernels are a wonderful comfort food . With this in mind , posole
is not intended to be fiery hot , so choose your chilies based on your own
tolerance . Because posole is a stew , it invites other ingredients you may have on
hand . Try adding some chopped collard or mustard greens . 
1 hot green chili , preferably jalapeño
2 poblano chilies
6 tomatillos or ½ cup prepared salsa verde
1 tablespoon oil
1 large onion , diced
3 cloves garlic
2 stalks celery , diced
2 pattypan squash , cut into ¾-inch chunks ( optional ) 
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon fresh lemon thyme leaves or ¼ teaspoon dried thyme
1 tablespoon fresh oregano , preferably Mexican , or 1 teaspoon dried oregano
2 15-ounce cans hominy , drained
1 15-ounce can Italian white beans ( cannellini )  , drained
4 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 )  , or 1 vegan bouillon cube and 4 cups water
¼ cup chopped fresh cilantro
Avocado , green onions , lime wedges , shredded lettuce , corn bread , radishes , diced tomato , or chopped red
or yellow bell peppers as accompaniments
Roast , seed , and coarsely chop the jalapeño and poblanos ( page 231 )  . Reserve . 
Heat a heavy skillet over medium to medium-high heat . Remove the husks
from the tomatillos . Sear the tomatillos in the hot skillet , moving them
constantly . The skins should turn brown but not burn . The cooking time will
vary . Remove the tomatillos from the pan . When they are cool enough to handle , 
coarsely chop them , reserving any liquid they release . 
Heat the oil in a soup pot . Cook the onion , garlic , celery , squash , cumin , 
pepper , thyme , and oregano until the onion is soft . Add the chilies , tomatillos , 
hominy , and beans and mix well . Add the vegetable stock . Bring the stew to a
boil , lower the heat , and simmer for 30 minutes to 1 hour , until the squash are
soft and the flavors are blended . Stir the cilantro into the stew just before
serving . 
To serve , ladle the posole into deep soup bowls and garnish with any of the
suggested accompaniments . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Millet
Millet ’ s small size makes it easy to overlook . It ’ s often the last grain left in the
bird feeder , with even seed-eaters preferring to avoid it . Millet was first
cultivated ten thousand years ago and may have been the first grain to be bred
for improved size and yield . Perhaps its humble status is due to its tendency to
become a gluey mass if not toasted before cooking . This may be why it is known
as the “ gruel of endurance ” in the Old Testament . Millet is , however , one of
China ’ s five sacred crops , and was more important at one time than rice . The
best millet recipes take advantage of its nutty flavor and pleasing texture . 
Millet Paella
2 cups millet
2 tablespoons olive oil
A few saffron threads
1 medium onion , cut into halves and sliced inch thick
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 red bell pepper , diced
1 yellow bell pepper , diced
1 green bell pepper , diced
1 bulb fennel , trimmed ( page 222 ) and sliced inch thick
3 cups warm Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) or water
1 15-ounce can kidney beans , rinsed and drained , or 1 cup Seitan Chorizo ( page 277 )  , optional
1 cup diced tomatoes , fresh or canned
3 cups chopped escarole
½ cup peas , fresh or frozen , or 1 cup sugar snap peas or ½ cup edamame
Put a wide soup pot over medium heat . Add the millet to the pan and toast until
it begins to brown , about 4 or 5 minutes . When the millet begins to pop , remove
from the pan and reserve . 
Heat the olive oil in the pot and add the saffron . When the saffron turns from
bright red to slightly brown , add the onion , garlic , peppers , and fennel to the pot . 
Add the millet and mix well . Add the stock or water and reduce the heat to
medium-low . Cook , covered , for 10 to 15 minutes . Add the beans or Seitan
Chorizo , tomatoes , escarole , and peas to the stew . Cover and cook 5 minutes
longer , or until the millet is soft but not mushy . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Rice
Half of the world ’ s population is dependent on rice for sustenance . India saw
the advent of rice cultivation about five thousand years ago . The spread of rice
was slow but steady , and today rice is grown on every continent except
Antarctica . 
The nutrient content of rice has been enhanced through selective breeding . 
Most recently , a genetically modified rice containing beta-carotene has been
developed to help combat vitamin A deficiency in countries where rice is a
staple . 
Your local grocer or health food store should be able to supply you with a
rainbow of rice : purple , black , white , brown , red . The less polished varieties
should be bought in small quantities that will be used up quickly , as the oils in
the bran and germ will become rancid . Here is a quick overview of the types of
rice generally found at the grocery : Brown rice is the entire grain with only the
indigestible husk removed . Brown rice takes longer to cook than white , but is
much more nutritious , with more fiber , potassium , protein , phosphorus , 
riboflavin , and niacin than enriched white rice . Brown rice is available in many
lengths and varieties . Try brown basmati rice ; it has a distinctly nutty flavor and
chewy texture . Quick and instant brown rice products are now available . These
products have been “ converted ,  ” which shortens the cooking time but adversely
affects the texture . 
Rice bran contains oil that is rich in polyunsaturated fats and vitamin E and
has been shown to help reduce cholesterol . Since brown rice still has the bran
attached , its shelf life is only 6 months . If you plan on keeping it longer than
that , store the rice in the freezer or refrigerator . 
White rice has had the husk , bran , and germ removed . When white rice , also
known as polished rice , became common in Asia , the people there developed
beriberi , a disease caused by a deficiency of thiamin , or vitamin B1 , which is
found in the bran of rice . Most white rice produced in the United States is now
fortified with B vitamins and iron . These vitamins and minerals are sprayed on
the surface of the rice . Rinsing the rice , as called for in some of the recipes that
follow , removes many of these supplements . 
Long-grain rice is four to five times longer than it is wide . With a relatively
low starch content , cooked long-grain rice is light and dry , with separate grains . 
Basmati , jasmine , and California Rose are all long-grain rice varieties . 
Short-grain rice has round , plump grains . It has a high starch content and
when cooked it is sticky even when it is rinsed beforehand . Arborio is a shortgrain rice variety , and sushi and mochi ( Japanese rice cakes ) are short-grain rice
products . 
Medium-grain rice has an appearance somewhere between that of the longand short-grain varieties . When cooked , medium-grain rice is light and fluffy at
first but gets sticky as it cools . 
Converted or parboiled rice is soaked , then steamed under pressure , then
dried . The white varieties are then milled . Steaming the whole grain helps infuse
some of the bran and germ nutrients into the rice . The starch in the rice begins to
bind together so that on final cooking , the grains are fluffy and separate . 
Many varieties of rice are readily available . Should you happen to pick up a
bag of imported rice with a decidedly shiny look , rinse thoroughly before
cooking . This rice has been coated with a mixture of talc and glucose that acts as
a preservative . 
Jasmine rice is an aromatic long-grain variety from Thailand . 
Basmati translates as “ queen of fragrance .  ” This long-grain rice is aged to
reduce its moisture content , which enhances its nutty aroma . 
Wehani rice is a basmati hybrid developed by Lundberg Farms in California . 
This brick red rice has the texture of wild rice and the fragrance of popcorn . 
Arborio rice has short , plump grains ; it is the most common rice used for
risotto . Upon cooking , arborio releases its starch , which gives risotto its
characteristic creamy texture . 
Wild rice is not a rice at all , but a marsh grass native to the Great Lakes
region . Its nutty flavor and chewy texture make it a perfect partner for classic
autumn flavors such as hazelnuts , sage , mushrooms , and winter squash . 
Stovetop Rice
There are several ways to prepare rice on the stovetop . 
Absorption Method
This method works for a wide variety of rice . No nutrients are lost through
rinsing or using excess water , making this the method of choice for enriched
rice . 
1 cup long-grain white rice
¾ teaspoon salt
Combine 2 cups of water , rice , and salt in a heavybottomed , 2-quart saucepan . 
Bring to a boil over high heat . Boil the rice , uncovered , until holes appear in the
surface of the rice , about 7 minutes . Turn the heat to very low ( or , if you have an
electric burner , turn the heat off )  , cover the pot , and let the rice steam for 8 to 15
minutes . Separate the grains with a fork before serving . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Steaming Method
This is the same method that rice cookers employ . The measurements are inexact
because the amount of water that the rice retains on rinsing varies . Once you ’ ve
tried this method a few times , you ’ ll know how to make the judgments . Jasmine
and basmati rice are typically cooked without salt so their fragrant , nutty flavors
can shine through . 
2 cups jasmine or basmati rice
Put the rice in a heavybottomed 2-quart pot . Fill the pot with cold water . Agitate
the rice in the water . When the rinse water is milky , pour it off and repeat the
rinsing process . Continue rinsing the rice until the water is fairly clear , about 4 to
8 times . 
Add enough clean water to the pot to cover the rice by about ¾ inch . Cover
the pot and bring to a boil over high heat . Reduce the heat to very low and cook
for 8 minutes . Turn the heat off and let the rice steam for 5 minutes . Separate the
grains with a fork before serving . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Excess Water Method
The Absorption and Steaming Methods rely on steaming the rice in a specific
quantity of water . This method just boils the rice in an excess of water until it is
done . This is the preferred method of cooking starchy rice varieties to obtain a
fluffy result , as the extra starch is drained with the cooking water . This method
works well for short-grain brown rice and wild rice . 
2 cups short-grain brown rice or wild rice
Bring a 2-quart pot of water to boil . Add the rice while stirring vigorously . Boil
until the rice is tender , about 20 minutes for short-grain brown rice or 30 to 40
minutes for wild rice . Drain the rice into a strainer or colander . Rinse with
running water if preparing the rice for salads or cold dishes . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Baked Rice
This method gives the rice several dimensions of flavor , especially if you choose
to sauté some onions , garlic , celery , and seasonings with the rice . 
2 cups long-grain white rice
2 tablespoons oil
2½ cups tepid water or Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
1 teaspoon salt
Preheat the oven to 350° . Rinse the rice in several changes of water until the
rinse water is clear , about 5 to 8 times . Heat the oil in an ovenproof pot . Sauté
the rice in the oil until it just begins to brown , about 5 minutes . Add the tepid
water or Vegetable Stock and salt to the rice . Cover the pot and place in the
oven . Cook the rice for 30 minutes , or until the water is absorbed and the rice is
tender . 
If you prefer , you can sauté the rice in a skillet and then transfer it to a baking
dish . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Dirty Rice
2 cups long-grain white rice
3 tablespoons oil
2 medium onions , diced
1 small green bell pepper , diced
1 small red bell pepper , diced
2 stalks celery , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon dried oregano
1 teaspoon dry mustard
½ teaspoon dried thyme
½ teaspoon cayenne
1 teaspoon paprika
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
Preheat the oven to 350° . Rinse the rice in several changes of water until the
rinse water is clear , about 5 to 8 times . Lightly oil or spray a 9x13-inch baking
dish . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium-high heat , and sauté the rice and
onions until the rice begins to brown , about 5 minutes . Add the remaining
ingredients and mix well . Cook the mixture until the vegetables start to wilt , 
about 4 minutes . Transfer the mixture to the baking dish . Add 2½ cups of tepid
water . Cover the dish tightly with foil and bake until the liquid is absorbed and
the rice is tender , about 30 to 40 minutes . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Lemon Zucchini Risotto
Here ’ s a dish that exploits the starchiness of the rice instead of rinsing it away . 
Risotto always uses a short-grain rice with a high starch content . Arborio is the
easiest to find in the grocery store , though carnaroli or vialone nano are more
forgiving , remaining al dente longer , should there be a delay in getting dinner on
the table . 
Risotto is not difficult , but it does require the cook ’ s full attention . If you are
an experienced risotto cook , you probably know that a little inattention can turn
risotto into a burnt , gluey mass . Cooking time is generally 20 to 30 minutes . 
Most of the time is spent stirring and watching for the rice to absorb liquid . 
The result should be creamy , with a consistency between that of soup and
porridge . Most main course risotto is served in bowls . For risotto served as a
side dish , allow the risotto to get just a bit thicker so it will sit nicely on a plate . 
Fresh basil is preferable for this recipe , but dried also works well . Dried basil
is added at the beginning of the cooking process to extract its full flavor . Fresh
basil is added at the end . 
6 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
2 tablespoons oil
1 small onion , diced
2 to 4 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
1½ cups arborio rice
3 tablespoons shredded fresh basil or 1 teaspoon dried basil
½ cup dry white wine
2 medium zucchini , cut into halves lengthwise , then into ½-inch slices
Zest and juice of 1 lemon
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
¼ cup diced fresh tomatoes
Salt and white pepper
Heat the stock over low heat on a burner near the risotto pan . Have a ladle
handy . 
Heat the oil in a large , wide skillet over medium-high heat and sauté the
onion , garlic , rice , and dried basil ( but not fresh basil )  . Cook , stirring constantly , 
until the rice begins to brown . Do not let more than one-tenth of the rice brown . 
Add the wine and cook , stirring , until the rice absorbs the wine . Add 1 cup of the
stock . Reduce the heat to medium . Cook , stirring , until most of the stock is
absorbed . Do not allow the rice to brown or stick to the pan . Continue adding the
stock , 1 cup at a time , and cook until it is nearly all absorbed . When adding the
last cup of stock , add the zucchini . 
When the stock is absorbed and the zucchini is just tender , remove the pan
from the heat . Stir in the lemon juice , half the zest , 3 tablespoons of the olive oil , 
tomatoes , and 2 tablespoons of the fresh basil . Mix gently so the zucchini
doesn ’ t fall apart . Taste for seasoning and add salt and white pepper as needed . 
Divide the risotto among four large , shallow bowls . Garnish with the reserved
basil and top with some lemon zest . Drizzle a teaspoon or so of the extra virgin
olive oil around the herbs . Serve immediately . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Nasi Goreng ( Indonesian Fried Rice ) 
It is best to completely cool the rice before frying so that the grains remain
separate when fried and take on all the different flavors . Serve with GingerFried Tempeh ( page 251 ) for a complete meal . 
2 cups long-grain rice , brown or white
3 tablespoons peanut oil
1 small onion , very finely chopped
1 to 3 large fresh red chilies , seeded and thinly sliced
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
2 medium carrots , diced
4 ounces button mushrooms , quartered
2 teaspoons ketchup
1 tablespoon soy sauce
½ teaspoon salt
2 cups shredded cabbage ( napa or green ) 
½ cucumber , sliced
1 bunch watercress
Cook the rice according to any of the stovetop directions above . Fluff it with a
fork . Let it cool completely . 
Heat the oil in a wok or wide , deep skillet over high heat . Add the onion , 
chilies , and ginger and stir-fry for 1 minute . Add the carrots and mushrooms and
stir-fry for 2 minutes longer . Add the ketchup , soy sauce , and salt and mix well . 
Add the cabbage and stir-fry until it wilts , 1 to 2 minutes for napa , 4 to 6 minutes
for green cabbage . Reduce the heat to medium-low . 
Add the cold rice and mix thoroughly . Cook until the rice is heated through . 
Add a little water if the rice begins to stick or burn . Transfer the rice to a serving
platter and garnish with cucumber slices and watercress . 
Makes 4 servings . 
pasta
European Pasta
Basic Tomato Sauce
Mild Tomato Sauce
Arrabiata Sauce
Puttanesca Sauce
Orecchiette with Butternut Squash and Thyme
Roasted Vegetable Lasagna
Pasta Ribbons with Cabbage and Apples
White Bean Ravioli with Caramelized Onion Sauce
Farfalle with SunDried Tomatoes and Portobellos
Swiss Chard Cannelloni with Walnut Sauce
Macaroni and Cheeze
Middle Eastern Pasta
Basic Couscous
Couscous with Peas and Mint
Couscous with Raisins and Pine Nuts
Curried Couscous
Asian Pasta
Noodles and Broccoli with Spicy Peanut Sauce
Pad Thai
Chow Fun with Hot and Smoky Tofu
Chilled Soba Noodles on Painted Plates
People all over the world love pasta . While the origin of pasta is obscure , it
seems to have arisen in several regions centuries ago , judging by its central role
in widely disparate cuisines . Although many people think Marco Polo
introduced pasta to Europe after his travels in China , this theory is suspect as he
used an Italian name for pasta when writing about Chinese noodles . The ancient
Romans thought pasta was a gift from Vulcan , the god of fire . Sicilian artifacts
show that not only were flat noodles common three thousand years ago , but so
were extruded pasta shapes like macaroni . Asian pastas have an equally
impressive history . 
While the debate on pasta ’ s origin may rage , I am content to enjoy it in its
varied shapes , flavors , and textures . Even if you are not a vegetarian , chances are
you ’ ve had some meatless meals with pasta as the entrée . Pasta , with its
nonassertive flavor and complex carbohydrates , is a natural for pairing with a
wide variety of ingredients throughout the year . 
EUROPEAN PASTA
While we are most familiar with the heavy , long-simmered tomato sauces , 
many Italian pasta sauces and dishes are quick and light , a veneration of the
locally available products . Some of these dishes may seem dry if you are not
used to them—particularly since they are not smothered with cheese . One secret
is to include a little of the pasta water in the sauce , so don ’ t be too thorough
when draining the noodles . 
Cooking pasta : Pasta , fresh or dried , should be cooked in an abundance of
water at a full boil . When water is heating , bubbles appear at the bottom of the
pan and then come to the surface . This is the water releasing dissolved air . If you
can stir the water and stop the bubbling , then the water is not yet boiling . Adding
pasta to water that is not rapidly boiling may make it mushy . Use at least 1 quart
of water for every 4 ounces of pasta . Add the pasta to the water in batches so the
water temperature doesn ’ t drop too dramatically . Stir the pasta immediately with
a long-handled spoon , being careful not to be burned by the steam . Stir
frequently . If you use plenty of water , you will not need to add any oil , as oil is
used primarily to keep the starchy foam from boiling over onto the stovetop . The
oil will also coat the pasta and cause the sauce to slide off the noodles . 
Most fresh pastas take 2 to 3 minutes to cook . Boxes of dried pasta usually
give cooking times , but these should be thought of as guidelines only . A good
rule of thumb is to cook the pasta 3 minutes less than indicated in the directions . 
Before draining , break one piece of pasta in half . There should be a small line or
dot of white in the middle . The pasta will be al dente , or “ to the tooth ,  ” at this
point and perfect . If the pasta is to be baked in a casserole , consider cooking it a
few minutes less . 
Pasta being used for cold salads should be rinsed with cold water . 
Pasta Sauces
Basic Tomato Sauce is a good standard sauce . I like to leave the seasonings
fairly plain to increase the sauce ’ s versatility . When you want a lighter sauce , try
Mild Tomato Sauce . Arrabiata and Puttanesca are hearty , chunky sauces suitable
for penne , spaghetti , radiatore , orrechiette—just about any type of pasta . They
are easy to make for a large crowd and will generate quite a fan club for their
cook . 
Basic Tomato Sauce
Sometimes diced tomatoes give a better flavor to red sauce than crushed
tomatoes or tomato sauce . You may want to try them—if you don ’ t want a chunky
sauce , you can purée it . Cooking the tomato paste gets rid of the tinned flavor . 
For a smoky flavor , let the tomato paste just begin to brown before adding the
tomatoes and water . 
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium yellow onion , diced
1 tablespoon minced garlic
2 tablespoons tomato paste
2 cups diced tomatoes , fresh or canned
1 teaspoon sugar
½ teaspoon salt
teaspoon ground black pepper
2 tablespoons chopped fresh basil
Heat the oil in a heavy saucepan over medium heat and cook the onion and
garlic until the onion is soft , about 8 minutes . Add the tomato paste and cook , 
stirring , for 2 to 3 minutes or until the paste is heated through . Add the diced
tomatoes , sugar , salt , and pepper . If using fresh tomatoes , add 1 cup of water . 
Loosely cover the pot and cook the sauce for about 20 minutes . Taste and adjust
the seasonings . Add the basil . Purée if you prefer a smooth sauce . 
Makes enough sauce for 8 ounces of pasta , or 4 servings . 
Mild Tomato Sauce
This mild tomato sauce may be used in dishes where a light touch is desired , 
such as pasta tossed with spring vegetables , green beans with couscous , or
baked fennel or artichokes stuffed with brown rice . 
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 small yellow onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 28-ounce can diced tomatoes or 2 cups diced fresh tomatoes , seeded
½ teaspoon sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
Freshly ground black pepper
Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat and sauté the onion and garlic until
the onion is soft but not browned , about 7 minutes . Add the remaining
ingredients and simmer for 15 minutes . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Arrabiata Sauce
If you are not using fresh tomatoes , make sure that the canned tomatoes are of a
very good quality . 
1 tablespoon olive oil or other oil
1 teaspoon coarsely minced garlic
1 dried chili or ½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
3 cups diced tomatoes , fresh or canned
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
Salt and pepper
Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat and sauté the garlic and peppers
just until the peppers begin to brown . Add the tomatoes and their juice . If using
fresh tomatoes , add ½ cup of water . Add the parsley , mix well , and heat through . 
Adjust the seasoning with salt and pepper . 
Makes enough sauce for 8 ounces of pasta , or 4 servings . 
Puttanesca Sauce
2 tablespoons canola oil and olive oil blend
1 tablespoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon fresh thyme or ½ teaspoon dried thyme
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil or 1 teaspoon dried basil
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 cup Basic Tomato Sauce ( page 184 ) or prepared tomato sauce
6 cups diced tomatoes , fresh or canned
¾ cup pitted kalamata olives , quartered
2 tablespoons very small capers ( often labeled “ nonpareil ”  ) 
½ cup chopped fresh parsley
Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat and add the garlic , dried herbs , and
crushed red peppers .  ( Fresh herbs will be added later .  ) Do not brown the garlic . 
When the garlic mixture is hot , add the tomato sauce and tomatoes . If using fresh
tomatoes , add 1 cup of water . Cook the sauce , stirring often , just until it bubbles . 
Add the olives , capers , parsley , and fresh herbs and reduce the heat to low . 
Allow the sauce to cook for 10 to 15 minutes longer for the flavors to develop . 
Makes enough sauce for 1 pound of pasta , or 8 servings . 
Pasta Dishes
Orecchiette with Butternut Squash
and Thyme
Butternut squash are a challenge to peel , but here ’ s a trick to greatly simplify the
task . Microwave them , whole , for about 3 minutes . Let them cool . The cooking
softens the skin slightly so the knife can get some traction . 
The orecchiette , or little ears , hold plenty of sauce . 
1 small butternut squash , peeled , seeded , and cut into ¾-inch cubes
8 ounces orecchiette
2 teaspoons oil
1 large leek , white part only , cut into halves lengthwise , then sliced
4 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
1 cup moderately dry white wine
½ cup Vegetable Stock ( page 65 )  , Roasted Vegetable Stock ( page 66 )  , or 1 cup water from cooking the
squash
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried thyme
Bring 3 quarts of salted water to boil in a large pot . Add the squash cubes to the
pot and cook just until they are tender , about 4 to 6 minutes . Drain the squash in
a colander ( reserving 1 cup of cooking water if you are using it in the sauce ) and
rinse lightly with cold water . Put the squash in a bowl and reserve . 
Bring 3 quarts of water to a boil in a large pot . With the water rapidly boiling , 
add the pasta and stir . Let the pasta cook for 8 minutes or until the orecchiette
are just al dente . Drain the pasta in a colander . Rinse lightly with cool water . Put
the pasta into a large serving bowl and reserve . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium-high heat and sauté the leek and
garlic until the leek is soft . If you are using dried thyme , add it to the pan with
the leeks . Turn the heat to high and add the white wine . Cook until the wine is
reduced by two-thirds . Add the vegetable stock or cooking water from squash . 
Cook until the liquid is reduced by one-fourth . Add the squash to the pot . 
Reduce the heat to medium . Taste the sauce and adjust the seasoning with salt
and pepper . Add the olive oil , fresh thyme , and orecchiette and mix well . Serve
immediately or reserve in a warm oven . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Roasted Vegetable Lasagna
For baked pasta dishes , fresh uncooked pasta sheets work well as long as you
thin the tomato sauce with a little extra water . If you can ’ t get fresh pasta , cook 1
pound of the dry noodles and add only ½ cup of water to the tomato sauce . 
To test that the lasagna is heated through , insert a dinner knife into the middle
of the lasagna and hold it there for 5 to 10 seconds . If the tip of the knife isn ’ t
hot , then your lasagna isn ’ t either . To avoid a false reading , make sure the knife
isn ’ t touching the bottom of the pan . 
Salt
1 large eggplant , cut into ¾-inch slices
2 medium red onions , cut into ½-inch slices
1 medium red bell pepper , cut into halves and seeded
1 medium yellow bell pepper , cut into halves and seeded
1 medium green bell pepper , cut into halves and seeded
Seasoned oil or plain olive oil
2 medium zucchini , cut lengthwise into ¾-inch slices
2 medium yellow squash , cut lengthwise into ¾-inch slices
8 roma tomatoes , cut into halves
1 head broccoli , trimmed , separated into large florets , and blanched
3 cups Basic Tomato Sauce ( page 184 ) 
½ cup chopped fresh basil
2 teaspoons fresh thyme ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon chopped fresh oregano ( optional ) 
3 large pasta sheets , fresh or frozen
Liberally salt both sides of the eggplant slices and place them in a colander to
drain . Let stand 30 minutes . When they have released a fair amount of liquid , 
rinse each slice briefly under cold water and pat dry . 
Preheat the broiler to high or heat a grill plate or George Foreman grill . Do not
separate the onion slices into rings or they may burn . Arrange the eggplant , 
onions , and peppers in a single layer on baking trays lined with parchment . 
Brush each vegetable slice lightly with oil . Broil them for 3 minutes on each
side . Remove to a platter . Broil the zucchini , squash , and tomatoes until they are
crisp-tender . If the skins have started to pull away from the peppers or tomatoes , 
discard them . Broil the broccoli until it is crisp-tender . Alternatively , grill the
vegetables in batches until they are crisp-tender . 
Turn the oven temperature down to 350° if you are using a glass baking dish
and 375° if you are using a metal one . 
If any liquid has accumulated from the cooked vegetables , put it in a 1-cup
measure . Add enough water to make 1 cup and mix this liquid with the tomato
sauce to thin it . Mix the herbs together in a small bowl . 
Generously oil a large rectangular baking dish . Spread 1½ cups of the thinned
tomato sauce over the bottom of the pan . Top the sauce with one sheet of pasta . 
Sprinkle with one-fourth the herb mixture and then spread with ½ cup of the
tomato sauce . Layer half the vegetables on the pasta sheet . Sprinkle the
vegetables with another fourth of the herb mixture and top with another pasta
sheet . Sprinkle another fourth of the herb mixture on top of the second pasta
sheet . Layer the rest of the vegetables on the pasta sheet and top with the
remaining herbs . Place the last pasta sheet on top of the vegetables . Spread the
last cup of tomato sauce on top of the third pasta sheet . Cover the lasagna with
waxed paper and then with aluminum foil . Bake for 35 minutes or until it is quite
bubbly and heated all the way through . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Pasta Ribbons with Cabbage
and Apples
When is a noodle not a noodle ? When it is vegan ! All pastas labeled “ noodles ” 
are required to contain 5 . 5 percent egg solids . Savvy pasta companies have
taken to labeling vegan noodles as pasta ribbons ( see section on Asian pastas , 
page 196 )  . If you can ’ t find eggless noodles , use fettucini . 
6 ounces wide eggless noodles
3 tablespoons oil
1 medium onion , cut into halves lengthwise , then into ½-inch half moons
2 cups shredded green cabbage or 4 cups shredded savoy or napa cabbage
½ teaspoon caraway seeds ( optional ) 
½ cup sauerkraut
1 Granny Smith apple , cored and shredded
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
3 tablespoons whole wheat breadcrumbs
Bring 3 quarts of water to a boil in a large pot and add the noodles . Cook
according to package directions . Drain in a colander and rinse . Put the noodles in
a large serving bowl and reserve . 
In a wide skillet , heat 2 tablespoons of the oil over medium-high heat . Add the
onion and cook for 3 minutes or until they begin to brown . Lower the heat to
medium . Add the cabbage and caraway seeds and cook until the cabbage is
wilted , about 4 to 8 minutes . Add the sauerkraut , apples , and pepper and mix
well . 
Add the cabbage mixture to the noodles in the bowl and mix well . Wipe out
the skillet . Over medium heat , heat the remaining oil . Add the breadcrumbs and
toast until they are browned . Top the noodles with the breadcrumbs . Serve
immediately or reserve in a warm oven . If you are holding the noodles for more
than 15 minutes , cover them loosely with aluminum foil and remove 10 minutes
before serving . 
Makes 4 servings . 
White Bean Ravioli
with Caramelized Onion Sauce
Use Tuscan White Bean Spread made from dried beans , as it is significantly
thicker than that made with canned beans . A soft filling will make the pasta
soggy , causing the ravioli to fall apart . Adding some breadcrumbs to the filling
may be necessary to ensure success . 
¾ cup Tuscan White Bean Spread ( page 43 ) 
50 round wonton or gyoza skins
2 teaspoons oil
4 red onions , cut into halves lengthwise and sliced
4 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
½ cup dry white wine
1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar
1 teaspoon mushroom soy sauce
1 cup Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
1 teaspoon fresh thyme
½ teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary
teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil ( optional ) 
½ cup toasted , chopped walnuts
4 sprigs fresh thyme or rosemary
Have a small bowl with water ready and a clean kitchen towel to dry your
fingers . Place 1 teaspoon of the bean spread in the middle of the wonton skin . 
Brush the edges of the wonton skin lightly with water . Place a second skin
directly over the first one . Working from the edge of the filling , press the pasta
sheets together as you rotate the ravioli in your hand . Continue until the skins are
pressed together with no air bubbles between the sheets . This may take some
practice . On a baking sheet dusted lightly with semolina flour or cornstarch , 
arrange the finished ravioli in a single layer . Cover lightly with a clean , dry
kitchen towel . Repeat until all the ravioli are made . Make a second layer of
ravioli on the towel , if necessary . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium-high heat . When the oil is quite hot , 
add the onions and garlic . Cook without stirring until the onions develop some
color , about 1 to 2 minutes , and then stir . Cook , stirring every minute or two , 
until the onions turn a deep brown color and the aroma is pleasant . If the onions
are blackening or smell like they are burning , reduce the heat to medium and
watch closely .  ( If you are cooking on an electric stove , remove the skillet from
the heat to allow both the burner and the skillet to cool down .  ) When most of the
onions are a rich brown color , add the white wine and balsamic vinegar and
reduce until the mixture is almost dry . Add the soy sauce and vegetable stock to
the pan and cook until heated through . Add the thyme , rosemary , pepper , and
olive oil and mix well . This sauce will be the consistency of broth . 
In a Dutch oven or wide , deep pot , bring 4 quarts of salted water to a boil . 
Reduce the heat so the water is just simmering . Gently slide 12 ravioli into the
water . Stir gently to prevent sticking to the bottom of the pot . Do not overcrowd
the ravioli or they will break . Cook for 3 to 4 minutes , until the ravioli begin to
rise to the surface . Remove them to a bowl as they rise . If there are a couple of
stragglers , remove them from the pot anyway . Cook all the ravioli in this
fashion . 
Divide the ravioli among 4 pasta bowls . Place the onions from the sauce on
top of the ravioli . Divide the broth among the four bowls . Sprinkle each serving
with walnuts and garnish with fresh herbs . 
Makes 6 side-dish servings or 4 main-course servings . 
Farfalle with SunDried Tomatoes
and Portobellos
Lemon basil has a sharper , more assertive flavor than sweet basil , so it doesn ’ t
get lost in the other strong flavors in this dish . The little bow ties may even entice
your younger diners to give it a taste test . Steamed broccoli or Broccoli Rabe
with SunDried Tomatoes and Pine Nuts ( page 212 ) makes a nice accompaniment
to this dish . 
8 ounces farfalle ( bow tie pasta ) 
2 teaspoons oil
1 medium red onion , cut into halves lengthwise , then into ½-inch half-moons
3 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
2 portobello mushrooms , stems removed , thinly sliced
1 cup SunDried Tomato Pesto ( page 128 ) 
¼ cup thinly sliced lemon basil
1 teaspoon fresh thyme or lemon thyme
Bring 3 quarts of water to a rapid boil in a large pot and cook the farfalle
according to the package directions . Drain in a colander and rinse . Put the pasta
in a large serving bowl and reserve . 
In a wide skillet , heat the oil over medium heat . Add the onion and garlic to
the pan and sauté for 2 minutes or just until the onion begins to soften . Add the
portobello strips to the pan and cook until they are soft , about 4 minutes . Stir
gently to avoid breaking up the mushrooms . Add the pesto to the pan along with
½ cup of water . Add the farfalle , mix well , and heat through . Add the basil and
thyme . Serve immediately or reserve in a warm oven . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Swiss Chard Cannelloni with
Walnut Sauce
This is a lot of Swiss chard , but it cooks down to a reasonable volume . If you
haven ’ t developed a taste for chard , substitute spinach . 
½ cup bulgur
½ cup golden raisins
2 pounds Swiss chard
2 teaspoons plus 1 tablespoon oil
2 leeks , white part only , washed , cut into halves lengthwise , and sliced
3 teaspoons minced garlic
Pinch ground nutmeg
Salt and pepper
¾ cup finely toasted , chopped walnuts ( about 3 ounces ) 
1 cup fresh , soft breadcrumbs ( no crusts , just the middle of the bread ) 
1 teaspoon chopped fresh marjoram
2 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
1 teaspoon grainy mustard
3 large pasta sheets , fresh or frozen
¼ cup coarsely chopped walnuts
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
Put the bulgur in a 1-quart nonmetal bowl . Cover with 1 cup of boiling water . 
Cover the bowl with a plate or plastic wrap and let stand for 20 minutes or until
all the liquid is absorbed . 
Place the raisins in a small bowl . Pour just enough boiling water into the bowl
to cover the raisins . Cover the bowl with a plate or plastic wrap . 
Separate the stems from the leaves of the chard . Cut the stems into ½-inch
pieces . Cut the leaves into bite-size pieces . Bring 1 cup of water to a boil in a
large pot . Add the chard stems and cook for about 5 minutes . Add the leaves and
cover the pot tightly . Steam the chard until it is tender , about 4 minutes , stirring
occasionally . Drain the chard and place it in a strainer over a bowl . When it is
cool enough to handle , squeeze out as much liquid as possible . 
In a wide skillet , heat the oil over medium-high heat . Sauté the leeks and 2
teaspoons of the garlic for 2 minutes . Drain the water from the raisins into the
skillet . Cook until all the water has evaporated . Add the bulgur , raisins , chard , 
and nutmeg to the pan and mix well . Taste the filling and adjust the seasoning
with salt and pepper . Transfer the filling to a bowl and reserve . Wipe the skillet
clean . 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Heat the remaining oil in the skillet over medium
heat and sauté the remaining garlic and walnuts until the walnuts are fragrant . 
Add the breadcrumbs to the skillet and sauté 3 minutes longer . Add the
marjoram and vegetable stock . Bring the mixture to a boil to thicken it . If the
mixture is getting too thick , add tepid water until the consistency is that of
traditional pasta sauce . Stir in the mustard . Remove the sauce from the heat and
reserve . 
Cut the pasta sheets into 4-inch squares . Mound cup of the filling along the
bottom third of one pasta square . Roll the pasta into a tube enclosing the filling . 
Place the cannelloni in a greased rectangular baking pan . Roll the rest of the
cannelloni in the same manner and neatly arrange them in the pan . Drizzle ½ cup
of water over the cannelloni . Cover the cannelloni with the walnut sauce . Cover
the baking dish with aluminum foil and bake for 25 minutes . Remove the pan
from the oven and let stand for 10 minutes before serving . To serve , garnish the
cannelloni with chopped walnuts and parsley . 
Makes 6 side-dish servings or 4 main-course servings . 
Macaroni and Cheeze
¼ cup nutritional yeast
½ cup all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon light miso
½ teaspoon garlic powder
¼ teaspoon paprika
¼ cup vegan margarine or ¼ cup grapeseed oil
2 teaspoons grainy mustard or ½ teaspoon dried mustard
4 cups cooked macaroni
In a medium saucepan over low heat , toast the yeast and flour just until the flour
begins to take on some color and the yeast is lightly toasted . Carefully whisk 2
cups of water ( or soymilk ) into the flour mixture , making sure no lumps form . 
Add the miso , garlic powder , and paprika and whisk to blend thoroughly . Gently
cook the mixture until it is thick , about 8 to 10 minutes . Add the margarine and
mustard and mix well . Taste and adjust the seasonings . Stir in the macaroni and
heat through . Serve immediately or reserve in a warm oven . 
Makes 4 servings . 
MIDDLE EASTERN PASTA
Couscous is the pasta central to Middle Eastern cuisine . It is often referred to
as a grain , but it is no more a grain than spaghetti is . Made of semolina flour , 
couscous is a pasta that traditionally was mixed with water and rubbed between
the palms of the hands until the water was absorbed . 
Modern cooks will certainly find it easier to cook couscous in boiling water . 
As with most pasta , the cooking time and the amount of water absorbed by
couscous will vary depending on what type of wheat is used to make the
couscous . Even the same brand may perform differently at different times . It ’ s
best to slightly undercook the pasta and complete the cooking when adding any
vegetables or seasonings . 
The small couscous that looks like yellow sand is called French couscous and
the larger , whitish pellets are toasted Israeli couscous . The larger couscous is
easy to overcook and will get gummy . If the couscous is not overcooked , it will
keep in the refrigerator for several days . 
Basic Couscous
2 cups couscous
2 tablespoons oil
Combine the couscous and oil in a large bowl and mix well . Bring a scant 2 cups
of water to a boil in a pot with a tight-fitting lid . Stir in the couscous , remove
from the heat , and cover tightly . Let stand for 15 minutes . The water should be
completely absorbed . Using a fork or spoon , gently separate the grains of
couscous and fluff them up . 
Makes 4 cups . 
Couscous with Peas and Mint
½ cup peas , fresh or frozen
1½ cups cooked couscous , still warm
1 tablespoon chopped fresh mint
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
Salt and pepper
In a steamer , steam the peas until they are just tender . In a medium bowl , mix the
peas with the warm couscous . Stir in the mint , lemon juice , and salt and pepper
to taste . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Couscous with Raisins and Pine Nuts
Couscous can take on many personalities . Vary the seasonings according to the
dishes it will be accompanying . Pine nuts can be expensive and hard to find , so
substitute slivered almonds if you like . 
¼ cup raisins
3 tablespoons pine nuts
2 teaspoons oil
1 medium onion , finely diced
½ teaspoon fresh thyme or lemon thyme
2 cups cooked couscous Pinch ground nutmeg
Cover the raisins with boiling water in a small bowl or cup . Cover with a small
plate or plastic wrap and let the raisins stand for 10 to 15 minutes . 
Heat a skillet over medium heat . Add the pine nuts and cook , shaking the pan , 
until the pine nuts are evenly toasted , about 3 minutes . Remove the pine nuts to a
plate and reserve . 
Heat the oil in a skillet and sauté the onion until it is translucent . Turn the heat
to low . Add the thyme , couscous , and nutmeg and mix well . Lift the raisins from
the water and add to the couscous . If the mixture is too dry , add 2 tablespoons of
the raisin liquid and stir until it is absorbed . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Curried Couscous
This versatile dish can be served hot , room temperature , or cold . In summer , it is
good cold as the base of a composed salad with field greens and heirloom
tomatoes , or hot with green beans and almonds . In winter , you may want to top it
with some cauliflower with toasted cumin seeds or spicy chickpea stew . 
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon oil
1 medium onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
1 teaspoon curry powder
½ teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground ginger
¼ teaspoon ground coriander
¼ teaspoon dry mustard or 1 teaspoon black mustard seeds ( optional ) 
2 cups cooked couscous
2 carrots , finely diced
1 small green bell pepper , finely diced
½ red bell pepper , finely diced
1 tomato , seeded and finely diced , or 1 Granny Smith apple , finely diced
¼ cup toasted sliced almonds
In a wide skillet , heat 1 tablespoon of the oil over medium heat and sauté the
onion , garlic , and ginger just until the onion begins to cook . Add the dry spices
and mix well . The mixture will become stiff . If it begins to stick on the bottom , 
reduce the heat . Cook the mixture for 10 minutes , stirring occasionally . The
mixture should be quite fragrant . Add the couscous to the skillet and mix well . 
Remove the couscous to a bowl and reserve . 
Wipe the skillet clean . Heat the remaining teaspoon of oil over medium-high
heat and sauté the carrots for 1 to 2 minutes . Add the peppers and sauté for 1 to 3
minutes longer . Mix the carrots , peppers , tomato or apple , and almonds with the
couscous . 
Make 2 servings . 
ASIAN PASTA
Asian pastas can seem intimidating . Not only are unfamiliar ingredients used , 
like mung bean flour , but the translated names on packages—like “ starch
noodle ” or “ alimentary paste ” —can give little indication of what type of noodle
is inside . And the term “ noodles ” itself is often omitted now that the United
States government requires that any product with that name contain at least 5 . 5
percent egg solids . 
Mung bean noodles , also called glass , cellophane , or transparent noodles , are
clear when cooked and can be found in both flat noodles and long , thin noodles . 
Rice noodles have a delicate flavor and are susceptible to overcooking . They
are found as flat , wide noodles and long , thin vermicelli ( Italian for “ little
worms ”  )  . Some care must be taken when cooking these noodles so that they
retain their shape throughout the stir-frying process . 
Wheat and buckwheat noodles such as ramen and soba are sturdier than rice
noodles , though they normally are only available in the thin , long-strand variety . 
Noodles and Broccoli with Spicy
Peanut Sauce
Noodles with peanut sauce , once thought to be a strange , exotic combination , is
now a staple of take-out sections in many grocery and gourmet stores . Our love
affair with peanut butter makes this an easy dish to embrace . If you are trying to
eat more vegetables , add another cup of broccoli florets or peel and chop the
stems and add them , too . Zucchini , red pepper , and blanched cauliflower work
well in this dish also . 
With delicate Asian pastas , it is important that the pasta water never really
come to a boil . Therefore , cold water is added with the pasta to maintain a
temperature just below boiling . 
½ pound fresh wheat or rice vermicelli or 2 ounces dry noodles
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium onion , cut into halves vertically , then into thin half-moon slices
2 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 cup broccoli florets
1 cup Peanut Sauce ( page 136 ) 
1 tablespoon fresh lime or lemon juice
1 small cucumber , thinly sliced
¼ cup chopped fresh cilantro
2 tablespoons chopped , roasted peanuts
Bring 2 quarts of unsalted water to a boil in a large pot . Stir in the noodles . 
When the water returns to a full boil , add 3 cups of cold water . Reduce the heat
to medium-high and continue to cook the noodles until they are al dente . Drain
in a colander and rinse with cool water . Reserve . 
In a wok or large , wide skillet , heat the oil over high heat , swirling to coat the
bottom and side of the pan . Add the onion and garlic and cook , stirring
constantly , until the onion begins to develop some color , about 2 minutes . Add
the ginger , red pepper flakes , and broccoli . Stir-fry until the broccoli is crisptender , about 4 minutes . Add the peanut sauce and lime juice and heat through . 
Add the noodles and mix well . Garnish with cucumber slices , cilantro , and
peanuts and serve immediately . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Pad Thai
There are as many versions of this Thai staple as there are cooks in Thailand . 
The sriracha sauce adds a distinctive , fiery bite . If you can ’ t find it , use a hot
sauce that ’ s not too vinegary or use ½ teaspoon crushed red pepper . Add 2
tablespoons of diced pickled radish for an authentic touch . 
8 ounces wide , flat rice noodles
2 tablespoons fresh lime or lemon juice
1 teaspoon soy sauce
2 tablepoons ketchup or chili sauce
1 teaspoon sriracha sauce
2 teaspoons oil
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon grated ginger
1 carrot , cut into matchsticks
3 green onions , cut on the diagonal into -inch lengths
½ cup snow peas , cut into matchsticks
4 ounces firm tofu , cut into ½-inch cubes
¼ jicama , cut into matchsticks ( optional ) 
¼ cup chopped peanuts
¼ cup sunflower or mung bean sprouts
1 tablespoon chopped fresh cilantro
1 tablespoon chopped Thai basil
Bring 3 quarts of water to a boil in a large pot . When the water boils , turn the
heat off and add the noodles . Let the noodles soak in the water until they are
barely tender , about 15 minutes . Drain the noodles in a colander and rinse with
cold water . Reserve . 
In a small bowl , combine the lime juice , soy sauce , ketchup , sriracha , and 2
tablespoons of water . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet or a wok over medium heat and sauté the garlic
and ginger for 30 seconds . Add the carrot and green onions . Sauté for another 1
to 2 minutes , until the carrot is just barely crisp-tender . Add the snow peas , tofu , 
and jicama and stir briefly . Add the lime juice mixture and stir to coat the tofu
and vegetables , being careful not to break the tofu up too much . 
Add the noodles and toss or stir until they are fully cooked and heated
through , about 2 minutes . Garnish with chopped peanuts , sprouts , cilantro , and
basil . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Chow Fun with Hot and Smoky Tofu
This is another recipe for those flat , wide rice noodles . This Chinese Stir-fry is
called chow fun . I like using a hot , smoky prepared tofu because it tastes so good
with the caramelized pieces of noodles , which are my favorite part of the dish . 
Try to get fresh rice noodles from a local Asian grocery , but use dry if you must . 
1 tablespoon mushroom soy sauce
2 tablespoons soy sauce
1 tablespoon Chinese sweet rice wine or sherry
2 teaspoons sugar
1 tablespoon hoisin sauce
8 ounces fresh wide , flat rice noodles or 2 ounces dry rice noodles
3 teaspoons vegetable oil
1 yellow onion , cut into halves and thinly sliced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
1 carrot , cut into matchsticks
6 shiitake mushrooms , stemmed and thinly sliced
½ cup broccoli florets
4 ounces seasoned baked tofu , cut into strips
1 red bell pepper , cut into thin strips
1 teaspoon toasted sesame oil
Dash white pepper
1 green onion , cut on the diagonal into very thin slices
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro
In a small bowl , whisk the soy sauces , wine , sugar , and hoisin sauce . Reserve . 
In a large pot of water just below the boiling point , cook fresh noodles for 2
minutes or dry noodles for 5 minutes . Drain the noodles in a colander , rinse with
cold water , and reserve . 
Heat a wok or large , wide skillet over high heat . Add 2 teaspoons oil and swirl
the wok to coat the bottom and side . When the oil is hot , add the noodles and
stir-fry for 2 to 3 minutes or until the noodles begin to take on some color . 
Remove the noodles to a serving platter and reserve . 
Return the wok or skillet to the heat and add another teaspoon of oil . Add the
onion , garlic , ginger , carrot , and mushrooms and cook , stirring constantly , for 2
to 3 minutes , or until the onion is translucent . Add the broccoli , tofu , and red
pepper and stir-fry for 2 minutes longer , or until the broccoli is crisp-tender . 
Add the soy sauce mixture , sesame oil , and pepper to the wok and gently stir
to coat the tofu and vegetables , being careful not to break the tofu up too much . 
Add the noodles and toss or stir to mix everything well . Cook until the noodles
are heated through and the sauce is reduced by half . 
Mound the stir-fry on a serving platter and garnish with green onion and
cilantro . 
Makes 2 to 3 servings . 
Chilled Soba Noodles on
Painted Plates
Pasta salad may seem to us like an invention of the 1970s , but Japanese cuisine
has been featuring chilled noodles for quite some time . This recipe is meant to
dazzle both the eyes and the palate . It looks complicated , but with a little
forethought it is quite easy to put together . When dividing the pasta among
individual plates or serving on a large platter , make sure not to cover up your
work of art . 
Wasabi is the pungent green paste you get with sushi . Buy the powdered
wasabi as opposed to the paste , since once the wasabi is mixed with water , it
begins to lose its heat . It is sharp like horseradish and not to everyone ’ s taste . If
you don ’ t know the heat tolerance of your guests , use wasabi sparingly , but have
some extra wasabi oil available at the table . 
A Japanese mandoline allows you to cut the vegetables so their shape mimics
that of the noodles . If you don ’ t have one , simply cut your vegetables into
delicate strips . If taste , not presentation , is your concern , dice the vegetables and
toss them with the pasta . 
Soy Syrup ( recipe follows ) 
Walnut Dipping Sauce ( recipe follows ) 
Wasabi Oil ( recipe follows ) 
8 ounces soba noodles ( buckwheat or wheat ) 
1 bunch watercress , trimmed , or mesclun greens
2 sheets of nori or ¼ cup shredded nori
1 red bell pepper , cut into very thin strips
2 shiitake mushrooms reserved from Soy Syrup recipe ( see below )  , cut into thin strips
1 3-inch piece daikon radish , peeled and cut into long strips
1 English or hothouse cucumber , peeled , seeded , and cut into long strips
2 green onions , cut on the diagonal into thin slices
¼ cup toasted sesame seeds
Make the Soy Syrup and Dipping Sauce several hours to a day in advance . Chill
the plates or serving platter you will be using . Make the Wasabi Oil before
beginning the noodles . Put the Soy Syrup and Wasabi Oil into squeeze bottles . 
Bring 2 quarts of unsalted water to boil in a large pot . Add the noodles and
stir . When the water returns to a full boil , add 3 cups of cold water . Reduce heat
to medium-high and continue to cook the noodles until they are a little softer
than al dente . Drain in a colander and rinse with cool water . Reserve . 
Toast the nori either by holding it with tongs over the open flame of a gas
stove , or by placing it in a dry cast iron skillet on the open flame , in a toaster
oven on low heat , or under a broiler . The nori should be slightly fragrant and
crisp . With sharp scissors , cut the nori into very thin strips and reserve . 
Just before serving , remove the plates or platter from the refrigerator . Dry any
condensation off the plates . Using sweeping motions , drizzle long lines of the
Soy Syrup across the plates , all the way to the edge , in a pleasing pattern . In a
random pattern , dot the plates with the Wasabi Oil , making your pattern all the
way to the edge of the plate . 
Place a small fan of watercress at 10 o ’ clock on each of four plates or a single
large serving platter . Carefully mound the noodles on the watercress , piling them
as high as possible so that much of your painting is still visible . Arrange the nori , 
red pepper , reserved shiitakes , and daikon around the noodles in a spoke pattern . 
Top the noodles with a tuft of the cucumber . Scatter the green onions on the
noodles and the sesame seeds over the entire plate . Serve the dipping sauce in a
small bowl . To eat , pick up some noodles and vegetables with your chopsticks . 
Drag your catch through the wasabi and soy syrup , and then dip into the dipping
sauce and devour . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Soy Syrup
2 dried shiitake mushrooms
1 cup thin soy sauce
½ cup Chinese dim sum vinegar or ½ cup balsamic vinegar
2 ¼-inch slices fresh ginger
¼ cup brown sugar
In a small pot , soak the mushrooms in 1¼ cups water until they are soft , about 2
hours . Add the soy sauce , vinegar , ginger , and sugar . Simmer until the liquid is
reduced by half . Remove the mushrooms and reserve . 
Continue to cook the liquid until it is syrupy . Be careful to not to scorch the
syrup or it will taste burnt . Cool to room temperature . Do not refrigerate . 
Makes about 1½ cups . 
Walnut Dipping Sauce
2 cups Japanese Seaweed Broth ( page 68 ) 
½ cup soy sauce
½ cup sake or dry sherry
½ cup rice wine vinegar
cup sugar
1 cup toasted , finely chopped walnuts
In a small pot , heat the stock , soy sauce , sake , vinegar , and sugar to boiling . Add
the walnuts . Turn the heat off and let the sauce cool to room temperature . Chill
for 2 to 24 hours . 
Makes about 4 cups . 
Wasabi Oil
3 tablespoons wasabi powder
1 tablespoon mirin ( Japanese rice wine ) 
¼ cup grapeseed oil or other neutral oil
In a small bowl , mix the wasabi with 1 tablespoon of water until a thick paste
forms . Cover and let stand for 10 minutes . Whisk the mirin and oil into the
wasabi . Cover and chill the mixture . 
Makes about ½ cup . 
vegetables
Artichoke and Arugula Salad
Grilled Asparagus and Leeks with Almonds
Orange-Ginger Beets and Greens
Roasted Broccoli
Broccoli Rabe with SunDried Tomatoes and Pine Nuts
Brussels Sprouts with Hazelnuts
Szechuan Cabbage
Cabbage Rolls with Kasha
Tunisian Carrot Salad
Cauliflower with Capers
Spicy Cauliflower
Spicy Corn on the Cob
Creamed Corn
Eggplant Rollatini
Fennel Baked with Olives and Tomatoes
Roasted Garlic
Green Beans with Almonds and Mustard
Peppery Mustard Greens
Leek Tomato Sauce
Shiitakes with Corn and Red Peppers
Okra with Tomatoes and Dill
Sweet Onion Caviar
Garden Peas with Saffron and Tomatoes
Roasted Peppers on the Run
Roasted Garlic Mashed Potatoes
Zucchini with Balsamic Vinegar and Mint
Acorn Squash Stuffed with Wild Rice and Winter Fruits
Sweet Potatoes with Pineapple and Peppers
Oven-Roasted Tomatoes
Fried Green Tomatoes
Turnips with Apples and Leeks
Now is the time to start your love affair with vegetables . Vegetables must be
forgiven for whatever emotional trauma they caused in your childhood and
embraced and appreciated for what they are . Vegetables are loaded with all the
things your body needs and wants : protein , vitamins , minerals , fiber , and flavor . 
Too often , vegetables are used as mere side dishes without respect for their
nutritive value or main-course potential . The recipes in this chapter are designed
to give you some new options for serving vegetables . Lots of people have eaten
steamed artichokes or marinated artichoke hearts , but how many of us have tried
them raw ? Harvard beets may have been a standard at your mother ’ s table , but
have you tried roasting beets ? Each recipe here is designed to bring out the best
in a particular vegetable . You will also find tips and suggestions on preparing
each vegetable that should inspire you to create your own delicious vegetablecentered meals . So eat your vegetables . And enjoy ! 
Cooking Methods
Most vegetables can be cooked by any of the following methods . Blanching
hard vegetables , like corn , winter squash , cauliflower , and even green beans and
asparagus will give you more options for preparation . Once they are partially
cooked , they can be grilled or sautéed . Roasting is usually reserved for hard
vegetables like potatoes and winter squash , but asparagus , broccoli , and zucchini
are all delightful roasted . Experimenting with new ways of cooking familiar
foods can significantly expand your culinary repertoire . 
When working with mixtures of vegetables , remember either to equalize the
cooking time by cutting the long-cooking vegetables smaller than the quickcooking vegetables , or to cook the vegetables separately and then mix them
together . Some vegetables require specific preparation or cooking techniques . 
These are noted in their individual sections . 
Blanching : Cook the vegetables in barely boiling water until the vegetable is
crisp-tender , usually 3 minutes or less . Rinse under cool water or plunge into ice
water to stop the cooking . Often vegetables are blanched before using in a recipe
to speed up cooking times . Vegetables that are frequently blanched include green
beans , broccoli , broccoli rabe , bean sprouts , and many vegetables that will be
grilled . 
Steaming : This technique preserves the shapes and textures of vegetables . 
Steaming prevents loss of nutrients that might occur if the vegetables were
submerged in boiling water . Place the vegetables in a steamer basket set over
salted water . Keep the water at a low boil so the steam is consistent . Good
vegetables for steaming include carrots , cabbage , cauliflower , green beans , 
zucchini , squash , cauliflower , broccoli , and broccoli rabe . 
Roasting : The goal in roasting is a slightly crisp , browned exterior and a soft , 
moist interior . Brush or toss prepared vegetables with a little oil and any
seasonings . Arrange the vegetables in a single layer on a baking sheet . Using
parchment paper on the baking sheet will speed cleanup time and prevent the
vegetables from sticking . Crowding the vegetables will cause them to steam
instead of roast and will result in uneven cooking . 
Roasting temperatures range from 325° to 400° . If roasting at a high
temperature ( 400° )  , cut the vegetables in small chunks , about ¾ inch thick , so
the inside cooks before the outside burns . Roasting at lower temperatures ( 325° ) 
intensifies the flavors of the vegetables and prevents burning . Rotate the pan at
least once and turn the vegetables with a spatula . Vegetables that are good
roasted include summer squash , winter squash , broccoli , beets , garlic , leeks , 
onions , rutabagas , turnips , sweet potatoes , and potatoes . 
Grilling : Prepare the vegetables as for roasting , but place on a clean , oiled
grill over medium to medium-high heat . Some vegetables , such as eggplant and
portobello mushrooms , can absorb a fair amount of oil . They have a tendency to
release the oil as they get hot , and the oil drips onto the coals , smoking or even
catching fire . If this happens , remove the vegetables immediately to prevent
them from burning . Pat the excess oil off the vegetables with paper towels . Once
the grill has calmed down , clean the grill rack to remove the soot and then start
again . Patience is key to grilling . Cook the vegetables on one side until they are
about 60 percent cooked before turning them over . This will help keep the
vegetables moist . Vegetables that are good grilled include squash , eggplant , 
mushrooms , bell peppers , onions , leeks , and asparagus . 
Baking : This method is used for potatoes and other vegetables that are cooked
in their skins and also for mixtures of vegetables and wet ingredients . For
vegetables cooked in their own skins , place either directly on the oven rack or on
a baking tray and bake at a medium-low ( 325° ) to medium-high ( 400° ) 
temperature until the vegetable is easily pierced with a fork and the middle is
cooked . Vegetables that benefit from baking include eggplant , sweet potatoes , 
potatoes , and beets . Almost any vegetable may be baked as part of a casserole . 
Sautéing : Sautéing requires a medium to high heat and a little oil . Cooking
times and temperatures will vary widely depending on the desired effect . For
instance , when caramelizing onions , the onions are placed in the hot oil and
allowed to sit for a minute or so to develop some color before stirring , but
spinach needs a quick hand and careful attention since it is ruined if it develops a
deep color . Since sautéing is generally quite fast , vegetables should either be cut
into small enough pieces to allow for even cooking or blanched beforehand . 
Carrots , peppers , leeks , onions , broccoli , summer squash , mushrooms , fennel , 
and cabbage can all be cooked from the raw state . Winter squash , cauliflower , 
large asparagus , green beans , and brussels sprouts are normally blanched first . 
Artichokes
Artichokes can be eaten raw or cooked . They can be baked , boiled , roasted , or
steamed . Artichokes have such a luxurious flavor and texture that they need little
more than lemon juice , olive oil , and salt . The artichoke supply and quality are
best in the spring . Look for artichokes with very tight leaves . 
While artichokes can easily stand on their own as part of a meal , they make
convenient containers for a wide variety of grain dishes . Artichokes supply
folate , fiber , and magnesium . 
To trim : Cut the stem off the artichoke , and if it is tender , peel it and reserve
for stuffing or another use . With a sharp knife , cut ½ to ¾ inch off the top of the
artichoke . Trim the sharp points from the leaves with scissors . Rub the cut
surfaces with lemon juice to keep them from discoloring . 
To boil : Choose a stainless steel pot that will comfortably hold the artichokes
in a single layer with no crowding . Bring enough salted water to a boil to
completely cover the artichokes . Add 1 or 2 tablespoons of lemon juice to the
water . Place the artichokes in the water and cover with a plate that is small
enough to weigh down the artichokes but large enough not to fall into the water . 
Simmer the artichokes for 25 to 40 minutes ( depending on size and age ) or until
a leaf in the middle can be pulled out easily . Drain the artichokes in a colander
and refresh with some cold water ( or drop into ice water if you plan to serve
them cold )  . Arrange the artichokes upside-down in the colander to drain . 
To steam : Place the artichokes in a steamer basket set over salted water . 
Steam for 30 to 40 minutes or until a leaf in the middle can be pulled out easily . 
Refresh with some cold water ( or drop into ice water if you plan to serve them
cold )  . Arrange the artichokes upside-down in a colander to drain . 
To microwave : Cut an X into the bottom of each artichoke . Wrap each one in
plastic wrap and put them on a plate , leaving at least 2 inches between
artichokes . Microwave for 6 to 10 minutes or until a center leaf can be pulled out
easily . Remove the plastic wrap carefully to avoid being burned by the steam . 
Drop the artichokes into ice water if you plan to serve them cold . 
To serve : Carefully pull out the very center leaves to expose the hair-like
choke . Using a small spoon , gently scrape the choke out , being careful not to
take too much of the heart . Serve the artichokes as they are , fill them , or chill
them for later use . 
To roast : Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut each artichoke into sixths for large
artichokes and quarters for medium ones . Cut out the hair-like choke . Rub all
over with lemon juice , then olive oil and garlic , if desired . Place the artichokes
in a roasting pan just large enough to hold them . Add a couple of sprigs of thyme
and 2 tablespoons of dry white wine or water for each artichoke . Cover the pan
with waxed paper then foil and bake for 40 minutes . Remove the waxed paper
and foil and roast until browned , about 20 minutes longer . 
To serve artichokes uncooked : Beginning near the stem , bend the leaves
backwards and break off the green part , making sure the plump , light green nub
remains attached to the heart . When the leaves are removed , gently pull the
choke away from the heart . Trim the stem . Using a mandoline , the side of a box
grater , or a revolving grater , cut the artichoke so it is paper-thin . Immediately
toss with some lemon juice . 
Artichoke and Arugula Salad
This salad has a lot of big , bitter flavors that are balanced by the sweetness of
the pepper and mushrooms . Spinach or mixed baby greens can be substituted for
the arugula . 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
teaspoon salt
Freshly ground black pepper
2 large artichokes , prepared uncooked ( see above ) 
1 red bell pepper , sliced into matchsticks
cup paper-thin slices of button or shiitake mushrooms
2 tablespoons shredded basil , preferably lemon basil or Thai basil
2 bunches arugula
Whisk the lemon juice , olive oil , salt , and pepper in a medium bowl . Drop the
artichoke pieces into the dressing immediately after cutting them . Add the bell
pepper and mushrooms to the bowl and toss to blend . Let the salad stand for 10
to 15 minutes . 
Just before serving , add the basil and toss again . Divide the arugula among 4
salad plates and top with the artichoke salad . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Asparagus
Asparagus is the quintessential spring vegetable . The early crop can be a little
pricey , but asparagus becomes more affordable as the season progresses . Enjoy it
while it lasts , through mid-June or so . While the asparagus sold in the grocery
store is wonderful , it has been out of the ground for a few days . Stores usually
carry varieties that travel well and are not quite as tender as those grown for
immediate consumption . I like asparagus raw only if it is fresh from the garden
or farmers ’ market . Asparagus is rich in vitamins A , C , E , and folate as well as
potassium . 
Although considered a tender and delicate vegetable , asparagus can stand up
to assertive flavors . Its affinity for ginger , green onions , soy , and garlic make it a
natural in Asian dishes . Mustard , onions , mushrooms , lemon , tomatoes , and
orange are all good partners for asparagus . It is also glorious on its own—hot , 
warm , or cold . 
To prepare asparagus for cooking : Snap the woody ends off the asparagus .  
( They are great for Vegetable Stock , page 65 .  ) If the asparagus seems tough , use
a vegetable peeler to remove the green skin and reveal the pale green flesh . 
To blanch : Drop the asparagus into a pot of salted water , at just below
boiling . Cook for 3 to 6 minutes , depending on thickness . Drain the asparagus
carefully so as not to snap the tips . Refresh with cold water if serving chilled or
using in another dish . 
To steam : Put the asparagus in a steamer basket over salted water and steam
for 4 to 8 minutes or until crisp-tender . 
Grilled Asparagus and Leeks
with Almonds
1 large or 2 small leeks , trimmed
1 pound asparagus , blanched ( see instructions above ) 
1 tablespoon seasoned oil
Salt and pepper
¼ cup Mustard-Sherry Vinaigrette ( page 112 )  , at room temperature
¼ cup sliced almonds , toasted
In a wide , deep skillet , simmer the leeks in salted water until they are crisptender , about 3 to 5 minutes . Rinse the leeks under cool water and pat dry . Cut
the leeks into halves lengthwise . Rinse under cool water if there seems to be any
sand in the leeks . Dry thoroughly . Rub the asparagus and leeks with the oil and
lightly salt and pepper them . Grill the leeks , cut side down , for several minutes
until heated all the way through . Turn them over and grill the other side . Grill the
asparagus until they develop good color . Arrange the vegetables on a serving
platter . Drizzle with vinaigrette and top with toasted almonds . Serve
immediately . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Beets
Beets can be found almost any time of year . In the spring , their tender greens
are a vegetable unto themselves . Look in farmers ’ markets or specialty produce
stores for the exciting candy stripe or yellow beet varieties . Keep in mind that
beet juice stains linens and clothing . It stains hands , too , so wear latex gloves
when working with beets . 
Often the wallflower of the produce section , beets are wonderful partnered
with onions , apples , ginger , orange , lemon , tarragon , or white beans . Beets hold
their own , hot or cold , in soups ( see Chunky Polish Borscht , page 76 , and
Chilled Beet and Cucumber Soup , page 94 )  , salads , or side dishes . Beets are a
good source of folate , magnesium , and potassium . 
To roast : Almost any oven temperature will do for roasting beets . I prefer a
cooler oven , around 300° , but if it is convenient to use 400° , that ’ s fine . Just cut
the chunks a bit smaller so the insides will cook before the outside burns . 
Peel the beets and cut into large chunks . Toss with oil , salt , and pepper . Spread
in a single layer on a baking sheet covered with parchment paper and roast until
they are easily pierced with a fork . 
To boil : Combine whole , unpeeled beets and enough water to cover by 3
inches in a pot . Bring the water to a gradual boil , then reduce the heat and
simmer until a fork easily pierces the beets , about 20 minutes for small beets and
35 minutes for large beets . Rinse under cool water . When cool enough to handle , 
peel the beets . 
To steam : Steam whole , unpeeled beets in a steamer basket . Cooking times
for steamed beets are about the same as boiling times . 
Orange-Ginger Beets and Greens
1 bunch small beets with their greens
2 teaspoons oil
1 small red onion , cut into halves lengthwise and thinly sliced
1½ teaspoons grated ginger
cup orange juice
2 teaspoons rice wine vinegar
1½ teaspoons cornstarch
Salt and pepper
Cut the greens off the beets . Trim the roots from the beets and steam or boil until
just tender . Peel the beets . Very small beets should be left whole ; larger beets
should be cut into halves or quarters . Wash the beet greens well and cut the
leaves crosswise into 1-inch ribbons . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Sauté the onion until it begins
to soften . Add the beet greens and sauté until they are wilted . Transfer to a
serving dish . 
Mix the ginger , orange juice , vinegar , and cornstarch in a small bowl . Add the
beets to the skillet and turn the heat to medium-low . When the beets are warm , 
pour the orange juice mixture over them and cook , stirring , until the mixture just
begins to thicken . Season with salt and pepper . Arrange the greens and onions
around the edge of a serving dish and place the beets in the center of the plate . 
Makes 4 side-dish servings . 
Broccoli
It ’ s hard to imagine Brooklyn as the birthplace of an agricultural craze . After
realizing some commercial success from harvesting broccoli in Brooklyn , the
D ’ Arrigo Brothers Company made a trial planting of broccoli in California . 
They shipped the produce back east to Boston , and by 1925 the American
broccoli market was established . California continues to grow over 90 percent of
the country ’ s broccoli . 
Broccoli , a member of the cabbage family , can be eaten raw or cooked ; it can
be blanched , boiled , stewed , or roasted . The stems can be peeled and grated for
slaw-like salads . The trimmings make a fine addition to vegetable stocks . 
Broccoli and its cousin , broccoli rabe , have substantial amounts of vitamin C and
calcium , along with vitamins K and A , folate , and fiber . 
When blanching or steaming broccoli , be careful to cook until just crisptender . Overcooking makes broccoli mushy . Excess water will dilute sauces and
thin the flavor of a dish . 
Roasted Broccoli
This is my favorite way to eat broccoli . The roasting intensifies both the sweet
and bitter qualities of the little trees and gives it a chewy texture and slightly
smoky flavor that I find appealing . Serve with brown rice and Leek Tomato
Sauce ( page 226 )  . 
1 head broccoli , cut into 3-inch florets
Olive oil
Salt and pepper
Preheat the oven to 300° to 350° . In a small bowl , toss the broccoli with enough
oil to lightly coat it . Season the broccoli with salt and pepper . Arrange the
broccoli in a single layer on a baking sheet and roast until the broccoli ’ s edges
begin to brown and the stems are tender , about 20 minutes , rotating the pan and
stirring the broccoli halfway through cooking . 
Makes 3 servings . 
Broccoli Rabe
While broccoli looks like a little tree , broccoli rabe looks more like a shrub , 
with a slender stalk , buds on the verge of flowering , and copious leaves . While
broccoli stems are tough and should be peeled , broccoli rabe stems are usually
tender . Just cut off the dry base of the stalk . Like many popular Italian
vegetables , broccoli rabe has a pleasant bitter taste and pairs well with slightly
sweet ingredients such as nuts , sun-dried tomatoes , extra virgin olive oil , and
raisins . Like its more muscular cousin , broccoli rabe packs a mighty nutritional
wallop . 
Though a little pricey at times , broccoli rabe is available year-round . It is at its
peak in late fall through early spring . 
Broccoli Rabe with
SunDried Tomatoes and Pine Nuts
2 tablespoons thinly sliced sun-dried tomatoes ( use ¼ cup if oil packed ) 
2 teaspoons oil
1 teaspoon minced garlic
teaspoon red pepper flakes
2 bunches broccoli rabe , cut into 2-inch pieces
2 tablespoons pine nuts , toasted
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
Cover the sun-dried tomatoes with boiling water in a very small bowl or custard
cup . Let stand for 10 minutes , drain , and reserve .  ( If using oil-packed tomatoes , 
omit this step .  ) 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Add the garlic and pepper
flakes and sauté until the garlic is fragrant , about 40 seconds . Add the broccoli
rabe and cook until it turns a brilliant green . If the garlic begins to brown , add a
few ounces of water to the pan . Add the pine nuts , tomatoes , olive oil , salt , and
pepper and toss to mix thoroughly . Serve immediately or reserve in a warm oven
for up to 20 minutes . 
Makes 2 to 3 servings . 
Brussels Sprouts
Yet another cabbage relative , brussels sprouts grow in tightly packed rows of
tiny , cabbage-like heads on a single , sturdy stem . They are at their best in the
early to late fall , though they are available throughout the winter . Brussels
sprouts provide vitamin C , folate , and fiber . 
Since overcooking releases the unpleasant-smelling sulfurous compounds that
cause the “ boiled cabbage ” odor , stick with brief blanching . Brussels sprouts
may be sautéed or roasted , but should be blanched beforehand to ensure even
cooking . 
Brussels Sprouts with Hazelnuts
This recipe has converted many a brussels sprout hater , accustomed to
overcooked , gray-green blobs in cream sauce . This dish may be served hot , cold , 
or at room temperature . 
1 pint brussels sprouts
2 tablespoons chopped hazelnuts , toasted
1½ tablespoons hazelnut oil ( available in specialty food shops ) 
Salt
Remove any yellow leaves from the sprouts . Trim the base , cutting off any stem
that has been left . Carefully cut the brussels sprouts into quarters . Cook the
brussels sprouts in a small amount of boiling salted water until they turn bright
green and are just tender , about 4 minutes for young sprouts , up to 10 minutes
for older sprouts . Drain thoroughly . To serve cold , cool the brussels sprouts
under cold running water or in ice water . 
Toss the brussels sprouts with the hazelnuts , oil , and salt . Serve immediately
or reserve in a warm oven for up to 15 minutes . 
Makes 2 generous servings . 
Cabbage
Perhaps its year-round availability and relatively low price have contributed to
cabbage ’ s reputation as a second-rate vegetable . More likely , it ’ s the sulfurous
smell of boiled cabbage that has relegated this versatile vegetable to the back of
our refrigerators . It needn ’ t be that way . Many recipes require only brief
cooking . For long-simmered cabbage dishes the addition of onions , garlic , 
thyme , or bay leaves can mitigate the smell . 
There is very little waste with cabbages . Head cabbages should have the core
removed before cooking . To prepare leaf cabbages , cut out and discard the ribs
from the outer leaves . One pound of cabbage yields 6 cups of shredded or cut
cabbage , enough for 4 generous servings . Cabbage is an excellent source of
vitamins C and K , fiber , and antioxidant phytochemicals . 
The cabbage family encompasses some of our favorite vegetables—broccoli , 
cauliflower , brussels sprouts , kale , and kohlrabi . Cabbage itself comes in an
assortment of shapes , textures , and flavors , from red and green cabbage with
their tight round heads and waxy leaves to leafy green Chinese mustard cabbage
with its peppery bite . 
Green and red cabbage are the familiar heavy , round heads available yearround . They keep seemingly forever in the refrigerator . 
Savoy is a loose head cabbage with crinkled leaves and a mild flavor . The
leaves are thin and crisp and require a much shorter cooking time than ordinary
green cabbage . Savoy cabbage has a shorter season than green cabbage . It is
available in early spring , fall , and early winter but not in the summer or in the
coldest months . 
Bok choy , also called pak choy , is a mild , versatile vegetable with crunchy
white stalks , tender , dark green leaves , and a flavor like Swiss chard . It
resembles a bunch of wide-stalked celery with long , full leaves . Bok choy is
related to napa cabbage but is not the same . Shanghai bok choy is slightly
smaller , smoother , and greener than bok choy . The leaves and stems are tender
and the flavor is mild . 
Napa cabbage , also called Chinese cabbage , has a loose , oval head with
crinkled , veined leaves that are white at the base and light green at the tip . The
flavor is delicate and the leaves are thin and crisp . Use raw , or sauté , bake , or
braise . Chinese cabbage is a good source of vitamin A , folic acid , and potassium . 
Mustard cabbage ( gai choy ) is the vegetable of choice for pickling . Rarely
found in regular grocery stores , it is more common in Asian markets . Gai choy
can be added to long-simmered soups and stews . 
Szechuan Cabbage
2 tablespoons soy sauce
2 teaspoons dry sherry
1 teaspoon sugar
2 teaspoons rice wine vinegar
1 teaspoon sesame oil
2 tablespoons oil
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes
2 teaspoons grated ginger
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 small head cabbage , cut into long , thin strips or 2-inch squares
In a small bowl , whisk the soy sauce , sherry , sugar , vinegar , and sesame oil until
blended . Reserve . 
Heat the oil in a wok or wide skillet over high heat . Working quickly , add the
red pepper flakes , ginger , and garlic and stir-fry until the mixture is fragrant , 
about 30 to 45 seconds . Add the cabbage and mix well . Cook just until the
cabbage begins to wilt , about 3 minutes for green or red cabbage and 1 minute
for napa cabbage . Add the reserved sauce and mix well . Cook green or red
cabbage until cooked through but not mushy , about 4 or 5 minutes longer . Cook
napa cabbage until crisp-tender , about 2 minutes longer . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Cabbage Rolls with Kasha
Select cabbage leaves large enough to hold about ½ cup of filling . If the cabbage
is small , you may need to blanch a few extra leaves and piece them together . You
may wish to use Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) rather than water to swell the kasha , 
as it gives the filling a more complex flavor . 
16 large cabbage leaves , savoy , green , or napa
2 cups kasha ( buckwheat groats ) or coarse bulgur
2 tablespoons oil
2 medium onions , diced
4 stalks celery , diced
1 medium carrot , diced ( optional ) 
2 teaspoons minced garlic
2 cups sliced shiitake mushrooms
¼ cup toasted almond butter
4 ounces prepared seitan or tempeh ( optional )  , crumbled
1 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves
Salt and pepper
2 cups tomato sauce
1 cup Mushroom Stock ( page 67 ) or water
Blanch the cabbage leaves , a few at a time , in boiling salted water . When the
leaves are pliable , remove from the water and cool under running water or in ice
water . Green cabbage may take 2 to 4 minutes , savoy a bit less , and napa only a
minute or less . Pat the leaves dry and reserve . 
In a wide skillet over medium-low heat , toast the kasha until it is fragrant and
just starting to brown . Transfer the kasha to a bowl and pour 3 cups of boiling
water or vegetable stock over it . Cover the bowl and let stand for 15 minutes or
until the water is absorbed . 
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat and sauté the onions , celery , carrots , 
garlic , and shiitakes until the onions have softened . Turn the heat off and add the
almond butter and seitan . Season with thyme , salt , and pepper and mix well . Add
the kasha to the skillet and mix well . The mixture should just hold together . Add
a little water or more almond butter to adjust the consistency . 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Lightly oil or spray a 9x13-inch baking dish . Mix
the tomato sauce and stock and pour half of it into the baking dish . 
Mound ½ cup of the kasha mixture at the root end of each cabbage leaf . Fold
the sides of the leaf over the filling and roll the leaf to enclose the filling and
form a small packet . Arrange the cabbage rolls in the baking dish . Top the rolls
with the reserved sauce . Cover with plastic or waxed paper , then with aluminum
foil . Bake for 1 hour or until the sauce is bubbly and the rolls are heated through . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Carrots
Carrots are an amazingly adaptable vegetable . They can be juiced , puréed , 
boiled , blanched , steamed , sautéed , roasted , eaten raw , or fried plain as chips or
in tempura batter . Generally , younger carrots tend to be sweeter and are favored
by children . As with other sweet vegetables , they pair well with salty and acidic
ingredients such as lemon juice , seaweed , and vinegar . Carrots are used in soups
and casseroles to temper the bitterness of garlic , onions , and herbs . 
Carrots are packed with beta-carotene , a precursor to vitamin A , as well as
flavanoids and phytochemicals . They are readily available year-round . 
Tunisian Carrot Salad
2 cloves garlic , crushed
teaspoon cayenne
½ teaspoon cumin seed , toasted
½ teaspoon ground coriander
2 tablespoons lemon juice
3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
4 carrots , shredded or cut into matchsticks
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro
Salt and pepper
1 head butter lettuce , washed and trimmed
4 yellow pear tomatoes , cut into halves
4 cherry tomatoes , cut into halves
Mix the garlic , spices , lemon juice , and olive oil in a medium bowl . Add the
carrots and cilantro and mix well . Let stand for 15 minutes for the flavors to
develop . Taste the salad and season with salt and pepper . Arrange the lettuce on
4 salad plates . Top the lettuce with the carrots . Arrange the tomatoes on the
salads . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Cauliflower
The snowy white florets of cauliflower , another member of the cabbage
family , can be eaten raw , lightly blanched , steamed , stewed , or roasted . As with
all cabbage relations , overcooking tends to release sulfurous odors that are not
appetizing . Cauliflower comes into the market in late summer and is available
through early spring . When selecting cauliflower , avoid heads with a grainy
texture or yellow to brown color , indicators of age . Cauliflower is a good source
of vitamins C and K . 
Cauliflower with Capers
2 tablespoons lemon juice
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
2 tablespoons capers
teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley ( optional ) 
1 head cauliflower , cut into florets and steamed
Whisk the lemon juice , oil , capers , salt , and parsley together . Add the hot
cauliflower and toss to mix well . Serve the cauliflower hot or room temperature . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Spicy Cauliflower
2 teaspoons oil
½ teaspoon cumin seeds
½ teaspoon black mustard seeds
1 small hot chili , seeded , or ¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger or ½ teaspoon dried ginger
½ teaspoon chili powder
½ teaspoon ground coriander
¼ teaspoon salt
Freshly ground black pepper
1 large head cauliflower , cut into florets and blanched
2 teaspoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Add the cumin seeds , mustard
seeds , and the chili . When the mustard seeds begin to pop , add the ginger , chili
powder , coriander , salt , pepper , and cauliflower and mix well . Add ½ cup of
water and cover the pan . Let the cauliflower steam for 3 or 4 minutes , until it is
heated through . Add the lemon juice and cilantro and mix well . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Corn
Summertime would be canceled by popular demand if fresh corn were not the
reward for enduring the long , hot season . Most varieties available in the
supermarket are either “ sweet ,  ” with 5 to 10 percent sugar , or supersweet , with
30 percent . The sweetness of older varieties of corn deteriorated quickly , with
the sugar turning to starch . Selective breeding has slowed this process , 
dramatically improving the shelf life of fresh corn . The local farmers ’ market , 
however , remains your best bet for fresh corn . 
Ripe corn has a milky white juice and tender kernels . If the juice runs clear , 
the kernels are immature and should be cut off and discarded . If you are not
going to cook corn right away , leave it in the husk and keep refrigerated . Bring
the corn to room temperature before shucking and cooking . Corn is a good
source of folate , thiamin , vitamin K , and fiber . See page 172 for a discussion of
the uses of corn as a grain . 
To prepare corn for cooking : Pull the husks off the cob ( that is , shuck the
corn )  . Remove the silk . Trim and discard the stalk and any tough small kernels . 
If the silk end has some insect damage , cut away the damaged piece and wash
the cob well . 
To cut kernels from the cob : Shuck the corn but do not trim the silk end . Set
a baking dish on a work surface . Hold the corn cob at an angle , with the silk end
in the dish . Beginning at the stalk end , slide your knife between the kernels and
the cob as far down the cob as you can without hitting the baking dish . Turn the
cob and continue cutting until all the kernels are cut away . Scrape the cob with
your knife to get the juices and cornstarch from the cob . Remove stubborn
kernels with a paring knife . 
Spicy Corn on the Cob
Do not salt the water , as this will toughen the corn . Because the corn comes into
contact with direct heat , this recipe works best with tender , fresh corn . 
2 ears corn , shucked and cut into 3-inch lengths
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium onion , cut into halves and thinly sliced
2 cloves garlic , very thinly sliced
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes
¼ teaspoon ground cumin ( optional ) 
¼ teaspoon chili powder
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
Bring a large pot of water to a boil , add the corn , and boil for 3 to 4 minutes . 
Meanwhile , heat the oil in a large , wide skillet over medium-high heat and sauté
the onion , garlic , and spices until the onion is slightly browned . Remove the corn
from the water with tongs and add it to the skillet . Stir to coat with oil . Cook the
corn until some of the kernels are lightly browned . Transfer to a serving platter
and pour the onions and any pan juices over the corn . 
Makes 2 to 4 servings . 
Creamed Corn
Did you know that creamed corn contains no cream ? The corn ’ s starch acts as a
thickener for the juices . Make sure to scrape every drop of juice from the cobs
for this recipe .  ( This recipe does not work with canned or frozen corn .  ) 3 or 4 ears
fresh corn
Salt
1 teaspoon sugar ( optional ) 
Cut the corn from the cobs using the method described on the preceding page . 
Be sure to scrape the cobs well to obtain all the starch and juice . Put the corn and
all its juices in a small pot over medium heat and pour 1 cup of boiling water
over it . Bring the mixture to a boil and cook , stirring , for 5 minutes or until
thickened . Taste and adjust the seasonings with salt and sugar . Remove from the
heat and let stand , covered , for 5 minutes before serving . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Eggplant
Eggplant presents itself in many guises : puréed in Baba Ganoush ( page 47 )  ; 
cubed and dressed in Caponata ( page 46 )  ; sliced , roasted , and rolled in rollatini . 
Anyway you cut it , eggplant is a treat . It is very low in calories , is a good source
of potassium and magnesium , and contains some Vitamin A . Eggplants come in
a variety of shapes , sizes , and colors . Japanese or Chinese eggplants are long and
thin . These have a smooth , creamy flesh and thin skin . Italian white eggplants
have a thick , white peel over a dense creamy interior . 
When choosing eggplants , look for a smooth skin with no soft brown spots . 
The eggplant should give under slight pressure . Very hard eggplants are old and
may be especially bitter . 
Eggplant , especially the large variety , can be bitter , so it ’ s always a safe bet to
salt and drain it to ensure sweet , tender flesh . The exceptions are skinny Asian
eggplants , very young eggplants , and those you have grown yourself . 
When grilling or roasting slices of eggplant , the skin may be left on ; for stews , 
soups , and casseroles , it is safer to peel the eggplant completely since the skin
may become bitter on sitting . Eggplants have a spongy texture that easily
absorbs liquid ingredients , so be sparing in the use of oil . Sauté eggplant cubes at
medium-high temperatures to minimize the amount of oil absorbed . 
To salt eggplant : Cut the eggplants into 1-inch-thick slices or chunks . 
Liberally sprinkle salt all over and lay the slices in a colander . Allow the
eggplants to drain for 20 to 30 minutes . When the eggplants have released a fair
amount of brown liquid , rinse each slice briefly under cold water and pat dry . 
To cook chunks or slices : Brush eggplant slices sparingly with seasoned oil . 
Arrange the eggplant in a single layer on a baking sheet covered with parchment . 
Roast , grill , or broil the eggplant about 3 to 7 minutes on each side until
cooked through , depending on your cooking method . 
To bake whole eggplant : Rub the eggplant with oil and prick the skin in
several places . Bake the eggplant on a baking sheet in a 400° oven . For recipes
requiring a purée or custard-like texture , bake until the eggplant collapses on
itself , about 40 minutes . For recipes where the flesh will be chopped and sautéed
or stewed , bake until a fork easily pierces the flesh , about 25 minutes . 
Eggplant Rollatini
¼ pan Roasted Garlic Polenta ( recipe follows )  , at room temperature
2 medium eggplants
Salt
Seasoned oil
½ cup roasted red peppers
2 tablespoons chopped fresh basil
2 cups tomato sauce , warm
Preheat the oven to 350° . Lightly oil or spray a 9x13-inch glass or ceramic
baking dish . 
Cut the polenta into pieces 3 inches long and ¾ inch thick . Cut the eggplant
lengthwise into long slices , ½ inch thick . Remove as much skin as possible from
the first and last slices . Salt the slices and place them in a colander to drain for
30 minutes . Rinse and pat dry . Brush the slices with seasoned oil and grill or
roast them until tender . 
Arrange a strip of red pepper , a sprinkling of basil , and a piece of polenta at
the narrow end of the eggplant . Fold the narrow end of the eggplant over the
polenta and roll to enclose the filling . Repeat with the remaining eggplant slices . 
Spread the tomato sauce in the baking dish . Arrange the rollatini , seam side
down , in the sauce . Bake for 20 minutes , or until the sauce is bubbling and the
rollatini are heated through . 
Makes 2 to 4 servings . 
Roasted Garlic Polenta : Prepare Basic Polenta ( page 172 )  , adding the paste
from 1 head of Roasted Garlic ( page 223 ) along with the olive oil and raw garlic . 
Fennel
Much loved in Italy and Provence , fennel is just beginning to come into its
own in the rest of the world . The slightly sweet , anise-scented bulbs are quite
versatile—they are good raw with a little olive oil and lemon juice , or baked , 
grilled , puréed , or stewed . Fennel and fennel seeds have a long history in folk
medicine . Modern science finds fennel a good source of vitamin A ; it also
provides some calcium , potassium , and phosphorus . 
To prepare fennel for cooking , cut off the stalks . Separate the delicate greens
from the stalks and reserve them for garnish , or chop them and add them to the
dish at the very end of cooking ( so their color is retained )  . Reserve the stalks for
stock . With a paring knife , cut any discoloration or bruises from the outer layer . 
If the fennel is being braised or grilled , cut the bulb into halves horizontally . For
other dishes , quarter the bulb and remove the core . Fennel is structured like an
onion , with layers that may be separated from one another . To get the most
consistent cut , separate the layers and cut each one separately . 
Fennel Baked with Olives
and Tomatoes
Browning the fennel and onions before baking them significantly reduces the
cooking time . The olives are salty , so use salt sparingly . 
1 tablespoon oil
2 fennel bulbs , cut into halves horizontally
2 small red onions , cut into 1-inch chunks
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
cup dry white wine
2 tablespoons lemon juice
8 cloves garlic , peeled
1 large sprig thyme
¼ cup oil-cured or kalamata olives , pitted and quartered
1 cup diced fresh tomatoes
2 tablespoons chopped fresh basil
Preheat the oven to 400° . Lightly oil or spray a 9x13-inch glass baking dish . 
In a wide skillet over medium-high heat , heat the oil until it is almost smoking . 
Carefully add the fennel and onions , cut side down . Do not separate the onions
into rings . Allow the onions and fennel to brown in the skillet , about 3 to 4
minutes . Turn and brown the other side . 
Carefully transfer the onions and fennel to the baking dish . Season with a little
salt and lots of black pepper , if desired . Add the wine , lemon juice , garlic , 
thyme , and olives to the baking dish . Cover the dish with waxed paper , then
tightly with aluminum foil . Bake for 30 minutes , until the fennel is soft but not
mushy . Add the tomatoes to the baking dish and place it under the broiler until
the edges of the fennel and onion are just crisped . Add the basil and toss to mix . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Garlic
Garlic thwarted Circe as she tried to turn Odysseus into a pig . It has prevented
the spread of vampires and was eaten by the Israelites before fleeing from Egypt . 
The first known mention of garlic was four thousand years ago , and since then it
has been alternately praised and vilified with great passion . In various cultures , 
garlic has been recommended as a cure for bee stings , tumors , and most ailments
in between . However , in the Ayurvedic tradition of southern India it is
considered an impure plant not worthy of offering to Krishna . 
Garlic , like the onion , is a member of the lily family . It is a compound bulb
made up of four to fifteen cloves . The papery skins can be a whitish tan or a
striped purple . Purple garlic , which matures later than the tan type , has a sharper
taste . Elephant garlic has cloves the size of brazil nuts and a very mild flavor . 
Allicin , a sulfur compound , is responsible for both garlic ’ s characteristic odor
and its medicinal benefits . Cooking breaks down the allicin and softens the
flavor of the garlic . Roasting garlic produces a sweet , creamy paste that is a
wonderful addition to sauces and tastes great spread on Italian bread . 
Roasted Garlic
1 whole head garlic
Olive oil
Cut off the stem end of the garlic to expose the tops of the cloves . Liberally rub
the garlic with olive oil and wrap tightly in aluminum foil . Bake the garlic at a
temperature between 300° and 400° ( you can bake it while something else
bakes ) until it is quite soft and fragrant , about 20 minutes for a small head at
400° and up to an hour for a large head at 300° . Garlic that is roasted at 300° to
325° is sweetest . 
Makes 1 head of roasted garlic . 
Green Beans
Not long ago , green beans were commonly referred to as “ string beans ,  ” a
reminder of the tough string that ran down one or two sides of the bean . Now
many varieties have no fibrous appendage—to prepare them , simply remove the
stem end . Green beans are suited to steaming , sautéing , and even quick frying . 
Steaming green beans helps preserve their high vitamin C content . Green beans
are also a good source of vitamin A and fiber . They go well with mushrooms , 
tomatoes , fennel , peppers , onions , walnuts , almonds , garlic , ginger , tarragon , and
thyme . Green beans are equally satisfying whether prepared cold or hot , simply
or lavishly . 
Green Beans with Almonds and Mustard
1 pound green beans
1 tablespoon oil
1 small red onion , cut into halves and thinly sliced
½ teaspoon minced garlic
½ teaspoon grated fresh ginger
3 tablespoons grainy mustard
teaspoon sea salt
Pinch ground white pepper
¼ cup sliced almonds , toasted
Steam or blanch the green beans and keep warm . Heat the oil in a wide skillet
over medium heat . Add the onion , garlic , and ginger to the pan and sauté until
the onion wilts slightly , about 2 minutes . Add the mustard , salt , pepper , and ¼
cup of water to the pan and heat to boiling . Add the green beans and toss to coat
with the sauce . Add half the almonds and mix well . Transfer the beans to a
serving dish and garnish with the remaining almonds . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Greens
Large and leafy , greens are an important component of the vegan diet . Some
are slightly bitter when raw but develop a certain sweetness with long cooking . 
Greens like arugula , frisée , watercress , and spinach are delightful raw . Others
like kale and collards can be blanched before cooking to tone down their bitter
nature . Their thick stalks can usually be cut and cooked alongside the leaves . 
Preparation of escarole , mustard greens , and chard depends on the age of the
leaves . Young tender leaves can be quickly sautéed ; older , tougher leaves may
require blanching and long cooking . Young mustard or dandelion greens can be
eaten raw in salads for a radish-like bite . Slow-cooking creates a mellow flavor . 
Greens are high in folate , phytochemicals , vitamins A and C , and calcium . 
Long cooking will destroy some of the nutrients , especially vitamin C . Oxalates , 
which bind iron and calcium , are found in high concentration in spinach , Swiss
chard , and beet greens . To optimize your calcium intake , cook greens in an
excess of water to wash away the oxalates . To get as much vitamin C as possible , 
use a minimum amount of water or eat the greens raw . 
For other ways of addings greens to your diet see Caldo Verde ( page 74 )  , 
Escarole and White Bean Soup ( page 87 )  , Watercress and Spicy Glass Noodles 
( page 101 )  , or Swiss Chard Cannelloni ( page 192 )  . 
Peppery Mustard Greens
Carl Lewis
4 to 5 bunches flat-leaf mustard greens
1 bunch spinach
1 bunch arugula
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 small onion , finely chopped
1 teaspoon sea salt
2 teaspoons lemon pepper
2 teaspoons garlic pepper or garlic powder
1 teaspoon black pepper
Wash all the greens . Reserve the spinach and arugula separately from the
mustard greens . Cut the mustard greens into 1-inch strips , place in a large pot , 
and add ¾ cup of water . Cook over medium-high heat for 20 minutes , adding
more water as needed . Heat the olive oil in a large , wide skillet over medium
heat . Sauté the onion with the seasonings until the onion is tender . Add the onion
mixture , spinach , and arugula to the mustard greens . Cook for an additional 20
minutes over medium-low heat . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Leeks
In A . D . 626 , the Welsh king Cadwallon was defeated by Edwin of
Northumbria and exiled to Ireland . On his return seven years later , he instructed
his men to wear a leek in their helmets so he could easily identify them . The
battle was won and the king repatriated , so the leek became the national symbol
of Wales .  ( Cadwallon survived only a year before being killed by Oswald . 
Perhaps he had stopped eating leeks .  ) Leeks have a rich flavor and texture . Like
garlic and onions , leeks contain some vitamin C , along with , perhaps more
importantly , the phytochemicals allicin and quercetin , which may boost the
immune system . Leeks are suitable for grilling , braising , sautéing , and puréeing . 
They are available most of the year , with the best supplies in the fall . The flat
leaves of leeks tend to capture a lot of the sandy soil that they are grown in , so it
is important to clean them carefully . The cleaning method varies according to
whether the leeks will be used whole , cut in halves , or sliced . 
To trim leeks : The easiest method for trimming leeks is to cut straight across
the leek where the leaves begin to turn from white to green . You can discard the
tough green tops , but considering the steep price of leeks , you may want to try
this : Cut off the green leaves of the leeks , leaving about 2 to 3 inches of green
above the white part . With a sharp knife , pare the green outer leaves away . The
center will be white or very pale green and tender enough to use . Some people
reserve leek greens for soup stock , but I think they impart an unpleasant taste . 
To clean and prepare whole leeks : Cut an X in the stem end ( the opposite
end from the root ) of the leek . Place the leek perpendicular to swift running
water and thoroughly rinse the leaves .  ( If you let the water run directly into the
heart of the leek , any sand will become imbedded in the leek and be impossible
to get out without cutting .  ) Shake the leaves out and rinse several more times . 
Cut off the root end . 
To clean and prepare leek halves : Cut the leeks into halves lengthwise . Hold
the leek by the root end and place the leek at a downward angle under running
water . Separate the leaves to let water run through the layers and rinse
thoroughly . Cut off the root end . 
To clean and prepare sliced leeks : Trim the leeks , cut in half lengthwise , 
then slice to the desired thickness . Place the leek slices in a large bowl of cold
water . Swirl the leeks in the water to loosen the sand . Make sure that the leeks
are floating with a few inches of water below so the sand will settle to the
bottom and not on the leeks . Lift the leeks out of the water and drain them in a
colander . Discard the first wash water . If there is lots of sand in the bottom , 
repeat the rinsing until the leeks are clean . 
Leek Tomato Sauce
This sauce is equally good tossed with pasta , on top of grilled vegetables , with
Fried Green Tomatoes ( page 240 )  , or over tempeh with brown rice . 
2 tablespoons oil
3 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
2 to 4 leeks , cleaned and cut into ¾-inch pieces
¼ cup dry white wine
6 roma tomatoes , seeded and chopped
1 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Add the garlic and leeks and
sauté until the leeks begin to wilt , about 2 minutes . Add the wine to the pan and
cook until the liquid is reduced to 1 tablespoon . Add the tomatoes and thyme and
cook until the tomatoes are just warmed through . Season the sauce with salt and
pepper . The sauce will become more liquid the longer the tomatoes cook . For a
fresh chunky sauce , remove the skillet from the heat at this point . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Mushrooms
The sudden appearance of mushrooms can be so mysterious that people once
thought they were gifts from the gods . With their meaty texture and earthy
flavors , mushrooms are a favorite ingredient in meatless meals . Of course , 
mushrooms are fungi , not vegetables , but they have the same role as vegetables
in cuisines worldwide . They are adaptable to most cooking methods—except
perhaps steaming . 
With a water content of up to 90 percent and only 10 calories per ½-cup
serving , mushrooms are not normally eaten for their nutritional content . 
However , they contain a surprising amount of vitamin D , along with several
trace minerals like copper and selenium . Shiitakes , along with maitake and wood
ear mushrooms , have a long history in Asian medical traditions . 
When buying mushrooms , look at the gills , the fan-like structures under the
smooth cap . The gills should be tight and dry and have a pleasant , earthy smell . 
If the gills are matted or slimy , the mushroom has been mishandled . The more
open the gills , the older the mushroom and the deeper the flavor . If you are
looking for mushrooms to use raw in a salad , try to find young mushrooms with
tight or unexposed gills . 
White or button mushrooms are creamy white in color , with a mild , woodsy
flavor . Young mushrooms have tender stems that can be prepared along with the
caps . Older mushrooms with more open caps may have woody stems that should
be discarded or used to make stock . 
Cremini ( Italian brown mushrooms ) are related to button mushrooms , but
have a deeper flavor . 
Portobello mushrooms are creminis allowed to grow to full maturity . Their
meaty texture has made them a favorite meat alternative . They are sturdy enough
to stand up to extreme cooking procedures—grilling , marinating , and roasting . 
Trim the dirt from the bottom of the stem and discard . If the stem is tender , it
may be chopped and prepared along with the cap . If the stem is woody , discard it
or save it for stock . Some recipes may call for removing the gills . This is
primarily an aesthetic preference . 
Shiitake mushrooms have caps that are either flat or domed , with edges that
curl under tightly to meet the gills . The mushrooms may be light or dark brown . 
Shiitakes have a rich , earthy flavor and firm texture , making them another
favorite meat substitute . The stems of shiitakes are woody and should be cut off
and used for stock or discarded . 
Oyster mushrooms resemble soft gray fans flowing from a central base . The
caps have tight gills on the undersides . The very bottom of the mushroom is
woody , but the rest is edible , though it is generally not eaten raw . When cooked , 
oyster mushrooms have a silky texture and delicate flavor . 
Shiitakes with Corn and Red Peppers
Canned or frozen corn will work in this recipe , though fresh gives the dish a
fuller flavor . Instead of flat-leaf parsley , you may use basil , thyme , or rosemary . 
However , I prefer flat-leaf parsley because it does not distract so much from the
vegetables ’ flavor . 
2 teaspoons oil
1 medium onion , cut into halves and thinly sliced
2 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
1 cup sliced shiitake mushrooms
1 large red bell pepper , cut into -inch strips
2 cups corn kernels , preferably fresh
1 tablespoon chopped flat-leaf parsley
Salt and pepper
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Add the onion and garlic and
sauté until the onion begins to soften , about 2 minutes . Add the shiitakes and
peppers and cook for 3 minutes longer . When the peppers have started to soften , 
add the corn . If the vegetables are sticking to the pan , add a little water . Cover
the skillet , turn the heat to low , and simmer the mixture for 5 minutes . Stir in the
parsley and season the mixture with salt and pepper . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Okra
Like corn , okra is a vegetable of high summer . Don ’ t think of it as slimy—
think of it as a thickener and use it as a stew ingredient with tomatoes or other
acidic ingredients that counter its texture . Choose pods smaller than your thumb
if possible , as the seeds of older okra are quite hard . When I was finally
successful in growing okra , there was such an abundance I couldn ’ t imagine
eating any more—so a friend sliced it , tossed it with a little salt , and dehydrated
it in a 250° oven , and we ate it for snacks . Okra has substantial amounts of
vitamins A and C . 
Okra with Tomatoes and Dill
1 teaspoon oil
1 medium onion , cut into halves and thinly sliced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon turmeric
1 pound okra , cut into 1-inch pieces
1 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
1 12-ounce can chickpeas , drained or 1 cup cooked chickpeas
2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill
1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley
Hot cooked rice
Heat the oil in a deep skillet over medium heat and sauté the onion , garlic , and
turmeric until the onion begins to soften , about 2 minutes . Add the okra and
cook for 2 minutes longer . Add the tomatoes , chickpeas , and dill and simmer the
mixture for 15 minutes or until the okra is tender but not too soft . Stir in the
parsley . Serve with rice . 
Makes 4 main-course servings or 6 side-dish servings . 
Onions
Onions are a magical food . They can take center stage or play a small
supporting role for which they receive no credit . Raw , they have a sharp bite ; 
caramelized , they have a nutty sweetness . Vidalia , SuperSweet , and OsoSweet
onions can be almost candy-sweet and can be used raw . To dull their sharp bite , 
other onions should be soaked for 15 minutes in water with a little lemon juice
before being added raw to a dish . Rosemary and thyme are especially good with
onions . Onions provide some vitamin C , as well as the pytochemicals allicin and
quercetin . 
Sweet Onion Caviar
1 cup chopped sweet onion , such as Vidalia
1 cup cooked black-eyed peas
1 medium green bell pepper , diced
1 medium red bell pepper , diced
½ teaspoon minced garlic
1 tablespoon brown mustard
1 fresh jalapeño , minced
¼ cup Basic Vinaigrette ( see page 110 ) 
In a medium serving bowl , combine all the ingredients and mix well . Refrigerate
for several hours before serving . If a firmer consistency is desired , purée about
one-fourth of the salad and then mix with the whole salad . 
Makes 4 cups . 
Peas
All peas belong to the legume family , which means they are technically beans . 
If the fresh green peas that we eat were allowed to mature fully , they would
become dried pulses like chickpeas or lentils . Fortunately , they are harvested
when they are tender and sweet . Peas are nice with tarragon , mushrooms , pearl
onions , sage , marjoram , and savory . Several varieties of peas , all high in vitamin
C , are readily available . 
English peas , or common garden peas , grow in a pod and must be shelled . 
Young peas are tender and require only brief cooking time , just a minute or two
in boiling water . Older peas will take a little longer . For most recipes , fresh
young peas can be added toward the end of cooking . Frozen peas make an
adequate substitute for fresh , especially in the winter . 
Sugar snap peas have a sweet , edible , puffy pod . They require little
preparation except for the occasional removal of tough strings on older pods . 
Sugar snaps are good raw or blanched very briefly to retain their characteristic
crunch . 
Snow peas are another pea with an edible pod . They are flat and tender with a
subtle crunch . Snow peas are used quite often in stir-fried dishes . 
Edamame , or young soybeans , are a crunchy , sweet variety of pea ( see pages
20 and 249–250 for more on edamame )  . 
Garden Peas with Saffron
and Tomatoes
Since saffron is expensive and a little bit goes a long way , use it sparingly in this
dish . 
1 teaspoon oil
4 strands saffron
½ teaspoon minced garlic
1 small leek , washed ( pages 225–226 )  , cut into halves lengthwise , and sliced inch thick
3 tablespoons orange juice
½ teaspoon sugar
1 cup fresh peas
½ cup diced fresh tomatoes
2 teaspoons chopped fresh dill
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium-low heat and add the saffron . When the
saffron turns from bright red to slightly brown , add the garlic and leeks . Sauté
until the leeks begin to wilt , about 3 to 4 minutes . Raise the heat to medium-high
and add the orange juice and sugar . When the liquid has reduced by a third , add
the peas , reduce the heat to medium-low , and cook just until the peas are tender , 
about 3 minutes . Add the tomatoes and dill and mix well . Season with salt and
pepper . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Peppers
With the astonishing variety of peppers available , it ’ s no wonder that this
humble vegetable maintains a loyal following that produces cookbooks , 
magazines , and websites to sing its praises . Peppers can be eaten raw , pickled , 
roasted , or sautéed . They can be sweet , mild , or hotter than you thought possible . 
All peppers are a good source of vitamin C when raw . Vitamin A content
increases as the peppers ripen from green to whatever hue they manifest on
maturity . Peppers are also good sources of phytochemicals and flavanoids . 
The following list describes the more popular and readily available peppers . 
For more recipes , see Vegan Chilies Rellenos ( page 58 )  , Romesco Sauce ( page
129 )  , Roasted Red Pepper Coulis ( page 131 )  , or Millet Paella ( page 174 )  . 
Banana peppers , also called Hungarian peppers or wax peppers , are yellow
peppers , 3 to 5 inches long , with a mild to medium hot flavor . They have few
seeds and thick walls , making them well suited to pickling . 
Bell peppers are green when immature , and most will turn red when left on
the plant to ripen . Some varieties produce yellow , purple ,  “ chocolate ,  ” or orange
peppers . Each color has a slightly different flavor profile . 
Chilies , or hot peppers , come in a dazzling array of colors and flavors . Some
of the most widely used varieties are listed below . 
Jalapeños , probably the best-known chilies , are two to three inches long , 
smooth and green , and relatively mild in flavor . 
Serranos resemble a small jalapeño but are usually hotter and have a more
distinctive flavor . 
Poblanos are large , deep green , and mild with a full , earthy flavor . They are
most commonly used for stuffing or are dried . When dried , they are known as
ancho chilies and are commonly ground for chili powder . 
Habaneros , available in orange , red , and green , resemble colorful paper
lanterns . Their cheerful appearance belies their super-hot disposition . 
When preparing peppers , make sure to remove the seeds and white membrane
completely , as they can become bitter during cooking . Those who find the skins
indigestible can use a vegetable peeler to remove the tough skins . 
To handle chilies : It is best to use disposable gloves when handling hot
chilies . If you are bare-handed , wash your hands with cold water and soap after
handling the peppers . Use a knife to cut out the ribs and then tap the pepper to
dislodge the seeds . Avoid touching your eyes or nose for at least an hour after
working with hot peppers . 
To roast bell peppers and chilies : Roasting peppers mellows the flavors , 
reduces the heat , and develops the sugars more fully . Lightly oil the skin . Hold
the pepper over an open flame with a pair of tongs until most of the skin is
blistered . Alternatively , broil the pepper on a pan under the broiler , turning
frequently so the skin blackens evenly . Remove the peppers . Place large peppers
in a paper or plastic bag and close it . Let stand 15 minutes . Remove and slip off
the skins . Let the peppers cool and then cut open and scoop out the seeds and
white pith . 
Roasted Peppers on the Run
Carl Lewis
2 green bell peppers
2 red bell peppers
2 yellow bell peppers
4 banana peppers
24 button mushrooms
¼ cup olive oil
1 teaspoon lemon pepper
1 teaspoon dried basil
1 teaspoon dried parsley
1 teaspoon garlic pepper
4 sprigs fresh parsley
Cut off the tops of the peppers and remove the seeds and white membrane . Slice
the peppers into 1-inch strips . Place vegetables on a greased baking pan , placing
mushrooms between rows of peppers . Brush with olive oil . In a small bowl mix
the lemon pepper , basil , dried parsley , and garlic pepper . Sprinkle on the
vegetables . Broil on low for 5 to 6 minutes . Garnish with fresh parsley . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Potatoes
Potatoes were first brought to Europe in the middle of the sixteenth century by
the Spaniards returning from South America . Members of the nightshade family , 
potatoes , like tomatoes , were thought to be poisonous , despite their long history
of cultivation by the Incas in Peru . Where would the potato be if Sir Walter
Raleigh had not championed its cause by planting a tract on land he held in
Ireland ? The Irish quickly embraced these delicious tubers and by the end of the
seventeenth century , potatoes were a major crop in Ireland . A hundred years
later , potatoes were a key crop throughout Europe , especially in Germany and
England . The potato famine of the mid–nineteenth century , which sent thousands
of Irish to Ellis Island , pointed to the need to maintain a diverse base in both diet
and agriculture . 
Potatoes are a good source of vitamin C , potassium , and folate . Their
reputation for being fattening is undeserved : 100 grams of pure unadorned baked
potato ( half a large potato ) has about 100 calories , 1 . 10 gram of fat , and 8
milligrams of sodium . On the other hand , 100 grams of French fries ( about 10 to
15 fries ) has 342 calories , 18 grams of fat , and 198 milligrams of sodium . In
potato chips , most of the water in the potato is replaced with fat . A 4-ounce bag 
( a little less than 100 grams of chips ) contains about 536 calories , 35 grams of
fat , and 1 , 275 grams of salt . Now , potato chips on an occasional basis do not
pose a major health risk , but if you are going to incorporate one of the world ’ s
most adaptable foods into your diet , try a healthier option such as Skordalia 
( page 46 )  , Potato Soup ( page 77 )  , or Italian Potato Salad ( page 109 )  . 
Yellow potatoes : Yukon Gold and Yellow Fin are the two most popular of
these thin-skinned boiling potatoes . These make excellent mashers . 
New potatoes : Young potatoes of any variety are new potatoes , but generally
groceries carry small , round , redskin potatoes . These young potatoes have a
waxy texture and slightly sweet flavor . They can be boiled and either served hot
or used in potato salad . New potatoes are also good for roasting , either whole or
cut into wedges . These do not make the best mashed potatoes . 
Russet potatoes : These potatoes are low in moisture and high in starch , 
which makes them the perfect baking potato . Often they are called Idaho
potatoes , no matter where they come from . The skin is a rough brown and the
flesh is fluffy white . 
Fingerling potatoes : These small , elongated potatoes are becoming
increasingly available in retail markets . They have thin skins and slightly waxy
flesh . Fingerling potatoes can be boiled or roasted whole . 
Roasted Garlic Mashed Potatoes
A potato masher or stand-up mixer makes good fluffy mashed potatoes . Using a
food processor will give the potatoes a stringy , glue-like texture . 
3 pounds potatoes , peeled and cut into 1-to 2-inch chunks
2 teaspoons salt
1 large head Roasted Garlic ( page 223 ) 
¼ cup olive oil
Sea salt and pepper
Combine the potatoes , salt , and water to cover by 3 inches in a large pot . Bring
to a boil over high heat . Lower the temperature slightly and boil the potatoes for
10 minutes longer or until they are cooked through . Reserve 2 cups of the
cooking liquid . Drain the potatoes and mash with a potato masher , ricer , or
mixer . 
Gently squeeze the garlic head to remove the cloves . Mash the potatoes with
the garlic and olive oil . Slowly add back 1 cup of the cooking liquid or enough
to give it a moist , fluffy consistency . Season with sea salt and pepper . If you are
not planning on serving the potatoes right away , add a little extra water , cover
the bowl loosely with foil , and reserve in a slightly warm oven . Whip the
potatoes again just before serving . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Squash , Summer
Tender , quick cooking , and amazingly prolific , summer squash are versatile , 
showing up in salads , stews , muffins , and cakes . Their mild flavor and springy
texture allow them to take on many roles . Summer squash can be sautéed , 
roasted , grilled , steamed , or boiled . Like many summer vegetables , squash is
high in vitamins A and C , but squash also contains some niacin . 
Zucchini are the most widely grown of the summer squashes . They have a
thin green skin and white flesh . They are available almost all year from
California , Florida , or Mexico . Zucchini are often hollowed out and used as
baking vessels for grain-based fillings . 
Yellow squash are the most inconsistent of the summer squashes . Their skin
can be smooth and thin or warty and thick . The condition of their skin often
indicates their age . Older squash have well-developed seeds that should be
discarded before cooking because they are bitter and tough . Otherwise , they are
prepared and used the same ways as zucchini . 
Scallop or patty pan squash are pale green with creamy white flesh . Use
them as you might portobello mushrooms , cutting them into slabs and sautéing
them , though they are more subtly flavored than mushrooms . They also hold
their shape and texture when cubed and added to stews . Of course , they are quite
enjoyable simply sautéed in a little olive oil with salt and pepper . 
Zucchini with Balsamic Vinegar
and Mint
This dish requires a very quick hand . Have all your ingredients prepared and
close by before beginning . 
1 tablespoon olive oil
2 medium zucchini , cut into halves lengthwise and sliced ½ inch thick
2 cloves garlic , thinly sliced
teaspoon sea salt
Pinch freshly ground black pepper
2 tablespoons aged balsamic vinegar
1 teaspoon minced fresh mint
1 teaspoon minced fresh basil , preferably Genovese or Thai basil
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over high heat . When the oil is hot , add the
zucchini . It should begin to brown immediately . Toss or stir the zucchini for 1
minute . Add the garlic , salt , and pepper . Continue to cook the zucchini until it is
evenly browned , about 3 minutes longer . Add the balsamic vinegar to the hot
pan and allow it to reduce and lightly glaze the zucchini . Remove the pan from
the heat and stir in the mint and basil . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Squash , Winter
Winter squash have thick , hard shells and well-developed seed cavities like
melons . This is not surprising , since botanically , squash is a fruit , not a
vegetable . The yellow-orange flesh of these squash hint at their high vitamin A , 
carotenoid , and phytochemical content . Squash with a deep orange flesh , like
butternut , are usually high in vitamin C also . 
The sweet , firm flesh of these hard-shell squash pairs nicely with the hot and
spicy flavors of curry , chipotles , ancho chili powder , or black pepper ; the tart
flavors of lemons , oranges , or green apples ; the sweet flavors of maple syrup , 
cinnamon , vanilla , ginger , brown sugar , apples , or pears ; and the savory flavors
of onions , garlic , rosemary , thyme , and sage . Squash also taste great with nuts , 
celery root , turnips , and rutabagas . 
Butternut squash have deep orange flesh , with the seed cavity conveniently
located at one end . Microwaving the squash for 3 minutes simplifies the peeling
process . 
Acorn squash cannot be peeled because of their thickly lobed sides ; instead
they should be steamed or baked . Use them as convenient containers for hot , 
spicy fillings , which complement the sweet flesh . 
Spaghetti squash is a mysterious vegetable . There are no definitive answers
to questions about its origin . It seemed to simply show up one day with very
little fanfare or explanation . Use this squash as you would pasta . To prepare the 
 “ spaghetti ,  ” simply cut the squash into halves lengthwise ( you may wish to
microwave it for 2 to 3 minutes first )  , scoop out the seeds , and place in a baking
dish with 1½ inches of water . Bake the squash at 350° for 40 minutes or until a
fork easily pierces the skin . Remove the squash from the baking pan and place it
on a clean surface , cut side up , to cool . Scrape the flesh with a fork to separate it
into strings and remove it from the shell . 
Acorn Squash Stuffed
with Wild Rice and Winter Fruits
Steaming the squash prior to filling and baking ensures that the squash bakes
evenly and the stuffing doesn ’ t dry out . If you omit this step , clean the squash , fill
with the wild rice mixture , add 1 inch of water to the baking pan , and bake the
squash for 25 minutes covered with foil , then 35 minutes uncovered . 
Dried thyme has a mellow flavor that I enjoy in the winter . 
2 small to medium acorn squash
6 dried apricots , thinly sliced
1 tablespoon dried cherries
1 tablespoon dried cranberries
1 tablespoon oil
1 medium onion , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
Pinch cayenne
4 stalks celery , diced
2 medium carrots , diced
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
¼ teaspoon dried thyme
2 cups cooked wild rice
Sea salt and freshly ground pepper
Cut off the stem end of the squash . Cut a small piece off of the other end to
allow the squash to sit upright . Scoop out the seeds . Place the squash , cut side
down , in a steamer basket . Steam until the squash are about half-cooked , 10 to
20 minutes . Steam the tops of the squash separately . When the tops have cooled , 
scrape out the flesh , coarsely chop , and reserve . 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Lightly oil or spray a non-aluminum baking dish just
large enough to hold the squash . 
In a small bowl , combine the dried fruits . Pour boiling water over the fruits so
they are covered by 1 inch of water . Cover the bowl and reserve . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Add the onion , garlic , 
cayenne , celery , carrots , ginger , and thyme . Cook the vegetables until the onion
begins to soften , about 2 minutes . Add the fruits and their soaking liquid . Cook
until the liquid is reduced by half . Add the wild rice and the reserved squash and
mix well . Season with salt and pepper . 
Fill the squash with the stuffing . Bake for 35 minutes or until the squash can
easily be pierced with a fork . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Sweet Potatoes
Peanuts were not the only concern of nineteenth-century botanist George
Washington Carver . In addition to his How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of
Preparing It for Human Consumption , he also published a treatise devoted to the
sweet potato . In this pamphlet are recipes for sweet potato doughnuts , biscuits , 
flour , and candy . Carver was drawn to the tuber ’ s high nutrient content and great
flavor . One serving of cooked sweet potato is high in vitamins A , C , and E ; 
folate ; copper ; and iron . 
Sweet potatoes can be boiled , baked , steamed , or roasted . However , they have
a higher moisture and sugar content than white potatoes , making them more
difficult to fry . Before frying sweet potato slices , allow them to air-dry in a wellventilated spot for 30 minutes to 1 hour or until the slices feel dry to the touch
and are slightly white . Sweet potatoes for chips should be sliced as thinly as
possible on a mandoline or the side of a box grater . Try lightly brushing the
slices with oil , and drying them in 250° to 350° oven . The resulting chips will be
crisp and fairly low in fat . Sprinkle the dried chips with salt or chili powder . 
Sweet Potatoes with Pineapple
and Peppers
Serve this as an accompaniment to beans and rice , or mix it with black beans
and serve on top of a crisp corn tortilla . 
1 teaspoon fine sea salt
1 teaspoon chili powder
½ teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground coriander
½ teaspoon ground black pepper
¼ teaspoon cayenne
3 sweet potatoes , peeled and cut into ¾-inch chunks
3 tablespoons oil
1 medium onion , peeled and cut into 1-inch pieces
1 green bell pepper , seeded and cut into 1-inch pieces
1 red bell pepper , seeded and cut into 1-inch pieces
1 cup 1-inch chunks of fresh pineapple
½ teaspoon minced garlic
Preheat the oven to 375° . Fit 2 standard baking sheets with parchment paper . 
Combine the salt , chili powder , cumin , coriander , black pepper , and cayenne
in a small bowl and mix well . In a mixing bowl , toss the sweet potatoes with half
the oil . Add the spice mixture a little at a time until the desired degree of hotness
is reached . Arrange the potatoes in a single layer on one of the baking sheets . 
Combine the onion , peppers , pineapple , and garlic in the mixing bowl and toss
with the remaining oil . Arrange the vegetables in a single layer on the other
baking sheet . Roast the vegetables in the oven for 30 minutes or until the sweet
potatoes and onions are soft . The sweet potatoes may take more time than the
other vegetables . Rotate the pans and turn the vegetables once or twice during
cooking . If the pans do not fit on the same rack in the oven , alternate the pans
between racks every 10 minutes . This may add to your roasting time . Serve
immediately or reserve in a warm oven . 
237 Makes 2 to 4 servings . 
Tomatoes
Botanically , tomatoes , like cucumbers and squash , are a fruit . Legally , they are
a vegetable . In 1893 , in the tariff dispute Nix v . Hedden , the Supreme Court
declared that because tomatoes are “ served at dinner in , with , or after the soup , 
fish or meats which constitute the principal part of the repast , and not , like fruits
generally , as dessert ” they are properly treated—and taxed—as a vegetable . 
Quite a controversy for a plant that was thought to be poisonous less than a
century earlier . Thomas Jefferson pioneered the cultivation of tomatoes , growing
them first as ornamentals . Today tomatoes are prized as nutritional powerhouses , 
supplying vitamin C , potassium , and iron . Several phytochemicals found in
tomatoes—phenolic acid and carotenoids such as lycopene—are being studied
for their antioxident properties . Tomatoes come in a broad range of sizes , shapes , 
colors , and flavors . 
Slicing tomatoes are juicy and mild . 
Beefsteak tomatoes are larger , with a meaty texture and a more robust flavor . 
Roma tomatoes have fewer seeds and thicker walls of flesh . They are great
for cutting into wedges and adding to salads or peeling , seeding , and cooking
down to a sauce . 
Green tomatoes are unripe and too astringent to be eaten uncooked . Cooking
and pickling mellow the sharp flavor to an agreeable taste . 
Cherry tomatoes are bite-sized—perfect for snacking , salads , or a quick
sauté . Grape tomatoes are smaller than cherry tomatoes with a milder flavor and
firmer flesh . A traditionally produced hybrid , grape tomatoes can be found in
both red and green . Because they are lower in acid with less juice and fewer
seeds , they are often more palatable than regular tomatoes to the younger set . 
Sungold tomatoes , a yellow cherry variety , are quite popular in England . They , 
too , have a lower acid content and a mild , pleasing flavor . 
Heirloom tomatoes are varieties with histories that predate modern
agribusiness . Many of them were bred by small farmers in the nineteenth
century . Thankfully , through seed exchanges and as family heirlooms , they have
survived into modern times . Heirloom tomatoes come in a wide array of colors , 
shapes , and flavors . Brandywine , Mortgage Lifter , and Black Krim are distinctly
aromatic , with deep pink to maroon flesh . Yellow tomatoes include Lemon Boy , 
Sun Gold , or Rainbow . Yellow and pink tomatoes are lower in acid than their red
cousins . 
Sun-dried tomatoes are available either dry or packed in oil . Drying the
tomatoes intensifies both the sweet and sour flavors and gives a substantial
texture , in addition to concentrating the iron . 
Tomatoes are marvelous raw , juiced , grilled , stewed , or puréed . The seeds and
skins of tomatoes can become bitter when left in raw preparations for more than
a few hours or in long-simmered dishes . Do not save tomato seeds for stock . 
To skin tomatoes : Tough skins can sometimes be removed with a vegetable
peeler . For more than one tomato , though , it ’ s probably easier to use the boiling
water method . Bring a large pot of water to a boil . Have a large bowl of ice
water handy . Cut an X in the bottom of each tomato . Slide the tomatoes into the
boiling water a few at a time . Do not crowd the pot . When the edges of the X
begin to curl away from the flesh , lift the tomato out of the water . Ripe tomatoes
may need only 15 seconds in the water ; less ripe tomatoes may need almost a
full minute . Plunge the tomatoes into the ice water . Coax the skins off with a
paring knife . If the skins are stubborn , return the tomatoes to the water for an
additional 15 to 30 seconds . 
To remove seeds : Cut the tomato into halves horizontally . Using a small
spoon , scoop the seeds out of the pockets . Squeezing the seeds out of the tomato
is acceptable only if the final texture of the tomato is not important , for example , 
in a stew . When the tomatoes are to be eaten raw or only lightly cooked , 
squeezing them will give them a mushy texture . 
To reconstitute sun-dried tomatoes : Cover dried tomatoes with boiling
water in a small bowl . Cover the container and let the tomatoes absorb the water
and become soft , about 15 minutes . Drain the tomatoes ( the liquid can be used in
stews , soups , and tomato sauces )  . Add a very small amount of minced garlic and
some extra virgin olive oil to the tomatoes and mix well . Store in the refrigerator . 
Oven-Roasted Tomatoes
An alternative to sun-dried tomatoes , oven-roasted tomatoes are semi-dry and
have an “ in-between ” taste and texture . They do not have the insistent sweetness
of sun-dried tomatoes or the astonishing acidity of fresh tomatoes . Their texture
is not as firm as a fresh tomato or as runny as a cooked tomato . Use them in
place of fresh or sun-dried tomatoes for a different twist . Try them in Bulgur
Pilaf with Cashews and Oven-Roasted Tomatoes ( page 170 )  . 
4 ripe medium tomatoes
Sea salt
2 tablespoons olive oil
Preheat the oven to 250° . Fit a rimmed baking sheet with parchment paper . 
Cut the tomatoes into 1-inch slices . 
Arrange the slices in a single , uncrowded layer on the baking sheet . Season the
tomatoes lightly with sea salt and drizzle with olive oil . Bake the tomatoes for 2
to 3 hours or until they are wrinkled but not dried out . Let the tomatoes cool to
room temperature . Store in the refrigerator . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Fried Green Tomatoes
1 cup fine cornmeal
½ cup whole wheat pastry flour
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon pepper
4 large green tomatoes , cut into ¾-inch slices
1 cup creamy soymilk
Oil for frying
In a baking dish , whisk the cornmeal , flour , salt , and pepper . Dip the tomato
slices one at time in the soymilk . Coat the tomatoes with the cornmeal mix . In a
wide , deep skillet , heat ½ inch of oil over medium heat . Test the oil by dipping a
rim of a tomato slice in the oil . If the tomato begins frying immediately , the oil is
ready . Gently slide the tomatoes in the oil and fry until golden brown on one
side , about 2 to 4 minutes . Turn the tomatoes and fry the other side , about 2
minutes longer . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Turnips / Rutabagas
These peppery roots are unfairly ignored . The turnip bulb provides lots of
fiber and vitamin C , while the leaves provide carotenoids , iron , riboflavin , and
calcium , with the calcium being more readily available than in most greens . 
Rutabagas are rich in vitamins A and C . Turnips are generally smaller and milder
than rutabagas . Tender young turnips may not need peeling , whereas the thickly
waxed rutabagas should have all of the waxy coating and fibrous rind removed . 
Both turnips and rutabagas can be boiled , steamed , roasted , or braised . 
Turnips with Apples and Leeks
4 tablespoons vegan margarine
2 pounds turnips , peeled and cut into ¾-inch cubes
2 leeks , cleaned ( pages 225– 226 )  , halved , and sliced
2 firm , tart apples , cored and cut into wedges
½ cup fruity white wine , such as Riesling or Moscati
1 teaspoon Succanat or brown sugar
1 small sprig thyme
Pinch sea salt
Pinch ground white pepper
Melt the margarine in a wide skillet over medium heat . Add the turnips and sauté
until they begin to brown , about 7 minutes . Add the leeks and cook for 3 minutes
longer . When the leeks begin to soften , add the apples and cook for 2 minutes
longer . Add the wine and cook until the liquid is reduced to 2 tablespoons . Add
½ cup of water , sugar , thyme , salt , and pepper and simmer until the turnips are
nearly soft , about 5 to 10 minutes longer . Remove them to a bowl with a slotted
spoon . Turn the heat to high and reduce the liquid until it is thick enough to coat
the vegetables . Adjust the seasonings . 
Makes 6 servings . 
soy foods
Seared Tofu
Glazed Tofu
Baked Tofu
Baked Barbecued Tofu
Afghan Spinach and Tofu
Ma-Po Tofu
Curried Tofu in Acorn Squash
Edamame with Hijiki and Brown Rice
Edamame with Zucchini , Tomatoes , and Tarragon
Spicy Soy Nuts
Ginger-Fried Tempeh
Tempeh in Tomato Gravy
Tempeh Sauerbraten
No Sheep Shepherd ’ s Pie
As evidence of its health benefits continues to grow , soy is being welcomed into
more and more meals . What once seemed like a chore—trying to consume 25 to
30 grams of soy protein a day—is rapidly becoming a pleasure . Soymilk comes
in vanilla , chocolate , coffee , and fruit flavors ; in half-gallon containers or
convenient “ juice boxes .  ” Tofu is available fresh , baked , smoked , or seasoned . 
Tempeh makes a convenient replacement for chicken or beef in many recipes , 
while soy protein granules substitute for ground beef . Edamame ( fresh green
soybeans )  , a popular bar snack in Japan , are finding their way into frozen entrées
and salad bars . 
While tofu and tempeh may be new to you , they are easy to work with and
very forgiving . Since they are already fully cooked , undercooking isn ’ t a
problem , and if they are accidentally overcooked , they will lose some texture but
no flavor . Dried soybeans can be sprouted and stir-fried or cooked like any other
dried bean in soups , stews , or casseroles .  ( They do take longer than most beans
to cook , about 2 to 3 hours .  ) Although the word “ edamame ” may be unfamiliar , 
if you ’ ve ever cooked lima beans or fava beans , you won ’ t find anything
mysterious in the preparation of these fresh , raw soybeans . The only mystery
will be why you never tried them before ! 
The Versatile Soybean
Soy can be easily incorporated into any meal . For more information on soy , see pages 20–
24 . To illustrate the variety of dishes that can be made with soy , here are just a few examples
of recipes from other chapters in this book . For more recipes , see the index . 
Miso Soup ( page 70 ) 
Tofu No-Egg Salad Pita ( page 148 ) 
Tempeh Reuben ( page 160 ) 
Chow Fun with Hot and Smoky
Tofu ( page 199 ) 
Scrambled Tofu ( page 275 ) 
Country-Style Tempeh Sausages ( page 277 ) 
Cheesecake ( page 296 ) 
Easy Chocolate Pudding ( page 303 ) 
Chocolate Peanut Butter Shake ( page 318 )  . 
Tofu
Think of tofu as you would a potato—a highly nutritious , versatile everyday
food that can be baked , broiled , sautéed , or fried . Also like a potato , tofu has a
flavor that on its own is a bit bland , making it a good partner for almost any
other ingredient . However , tofu is high in protein and calcium whereas potatoes
have lots of carbohydrates , vitamin C , potassium , and folate . You may need to
try several different brands of tofu until you find one to your liking . 
There is nothing quite like tofu in the Western culinary canon , so take some
time to familiarize yourself with these easy procedures for making the most of
this versatile ingredient . 
Simmering tofu : This technique is used to firm the texture of silken tofu so it
will hold its shape in cooked dishes . For 10 ounces of tofu , heat 4 cups of water
and 1 teaspoon of salt in a small pot . When the water is on the verge of boiling , 
add the tofu and simmer for about 3 minutes—1 to 2 minutes for very small
pieces and 5 to 7 minutes for very large pieces . Lift the tofu from the pot with a
slotted spoon or a small strainer and blot on absorbent towels for a minute or
two . 
In addition to firming the tofu , simmering also salts it and heats it through so
cooking time is decreased after the tofu is added to the dish . This helps prevent
the tofu from breaking up when stirred . 
Pressing tofu : Pressing tofu firms it , but it also displaces water so that the
tofu can more readily accept the sauce around it . For recipes in which the tofu
will be puréed or crumbled , it is often sufficient to press the tofu by hand , firmly
but gently squeezing the water out . 
Place the tofu on a plate . Elevate one end of the plate so the water can run off
the tofu as it drains—preferably not onto the floor . Find a heavy object that will
sit on the tofu without sliding off . Either wrap the tofu in a towel or place a
towel between the tofu and the weight . Leave the tofu to drain for an hour or up
to 12 hours . 
Seared Tofu
While fried tofu is more traditional , it tends to absorb lots of oil and get quite
chewy . Searing the tofu gives it a chewy exterior and creamy interior . It can be
served simply with Peanut Sauce ( page 136 )  , gomaiso ( a sesame-seaweed
seasoning )  , or soy sauce . I like to cut the tofu in half to form two thinner slabs , 
then cut each slab into 2 triangles . Most any shape of tofu will do , but to ensure
even cooking , your tofu should be less than 1½ inches thick . 
6 ounces silken tofu
1 scant teaspoon oil
In a small pan over medium heat , simmer the tofu for 3 minutes in salted water . 
Gently lift the tofu onto an absorbent towel and let rest for a few minutes . 
Heat the oil in a nonstick pan over high heat . Be careful not to let any water
get into the oil or it will splatter . Sear the tofu until it is golden brown on one
side , about 3 to 7 minutes . Turn the tofu and brown the other side . Serve
immediately . 
Makes 1 or 2 servings . 
Clockwise from top : Hijiki , edamame in the pod and shelled , brown rice , 
Edamame with Hijiki and Brown Rice ( page 249 )  . 
Millet Paella ( page 174 )  . 
Facing page : Soy Foods Clockwise from top : Easy Chocolate Pudding 
( page 303 )  , soymilk , dried soy beans , Spicy Soy Nuts ( page 250 )  , Miso
Soup ( page 70 )  , miso , soy lecithin granules , soy sauce , soy flour , fermented
black beans , barbecued tempeh ( made with garden vegetable tempeh )  , 
Ginger-Fried Tempeh ( page 251 ; made with sea vegetable tempeh )  , glazed
tofu ( white )  , seared tofu ( brown )  . Center , top to bottom : firm tofu , sea
vegetable tempeh ( triangle )  , garden vegetable tempeh ( square )  . 
Top right to bottom left : Cauliflower with Capers ( page 218 )  , Tunisian
Carrot Salad ( page 217 )  , Spicy Corn on the Cob ( page 219 )  . 
Glazed Tofu
This is a slight variation on seared tofu . Adding barbecue sauce ( prepared or see
page 133 )  , thinned with a little water , works nicely , too . 
2 teaspoons soy sauce
¼ teaspoon grated fresh ginger
teaspoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon sriracha or other hot sauce ( optional ) 
1 scant teaspoon oil
6 ounces medium tofu
½ teaspoon sesame oil ( optional ) 
Mix the soy sauce , ginger , garlic , and hot sauce with 1 teaspoon of water in a
small bowl . Reserve . 
Heat the oil in a nonstick pan over high heat . Sear the tofu until it is golden
brown on one side , about 3 to 7 minutes . Turn the tofu and brown the other side . 
Add the reserved sauce . Turn the tofu to coat it completely with the sauce . Cook
until the pan is dry and the sauce has glazed the tofu . Remove from heat . Drizzle
with sesame oil . Serve immediately . 
Makes 1 or 2 servings . 
Baked Tofu
Some tofu is firm enough to be pressed gently with the hands . Some is quite dry
and needs no pressing at all . If you are using silken tofu , you will need to press it
as described on the preceding page . Baked tofu has a pleasant chewy texture—
it ’ s rather like fried tofu , but without all the fat . 
1 10-ounce package medium to firm tofu
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
Press the tofu for 30 to 60 minutes . Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut the tofu into
cubes or desired shape . Toss the tofu with the soy sauce and ginger . Place the
tofu on a baking sheet that is either fitted with parchment paper or lightly oiled . 
Bake the tofu for 15 to 30 minutes . Serve immediately . 
Makes 2 to 3 servings . 
Baked Barbecued Tofu
This is a simple variation on the baked tofu recipe . Any good barbecue sauce
will work well . Try tossing some zucchini , red pepper , and onion in barbecue
sauce and roasting them along with the tofu for a quick meal . 
1 10-ounce package medium to firm tofu
¼ cup Orange-Chipotle Barbecue Sauce ( page 134 ) 
Press the tofu for 30 to 60 minutes , if desired . Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut the
tofu into cubes or desired shapes . Thin the barbecue sauce with 2 tablespoons of
water . Toss the tofu with the sauce . Place the tofu on a baking sheet that is either
fitted with parchment paper or lightly oiled . Bake the tofu for 15 to 30 minutes . 
Serve immediately . 
Makes 2 to 3 servings . 
Afghan Spinach and Tofu
To cut the spinach into ribbons easily , stack several slices , then roll them into a
thick green cigar . Cut slices off the cigar so you have ribbons of spinach . 
3 tablespoons oil
2 medium onions , cut into ¼-inch slices
2 tablespoons grated fresh ginger
2 tablespoons minced garlic
2 teaspoons ground cumin
2 teaspoons ground coriander
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
3 cups Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
1 pound firm silken tofu , cut into ¾-inch cubes
2 pounds fresh spinach , trimmed and cut into ribbons
2 tablespoons raisins
2 tablespoons soy sauce
4 teaspoons sesame oil
½ teaspoon sugar
¼ cup toasted pine nuts
Hot cooked basmati rice
Heat the oil in a soup pot over medium heat . Sauté the onions , ginger , garlic , and
spices , stirring constantly . When the mixture becomes fragrant , lower the heat
and cook for 10 minutes more . If the mixture begins to stick , add more oil . 
Add the stock to the soup pot and bring to a boil over medium-high heat . Stir
to loosen any bits that stick to the bottom of the pot . When the stock boils , lower
the heat to medium and add the tofu . Simmer for 3 minutes . 
Add the spinach and raisins to the soup pot and stir gently . Cover the pot and
let the mixture stew for 10 minutes . Add the soy sauce , sesame oil , sugar , and
pine nuts and mix well . Serve over basmati rice . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Ma-Po Tofu
I don ’ t remember how I happened across my first bag of fermented black beans , 
but this discovery was soon followed by repeated experiments with Ma-Po Tofu . 
For years I thought these beans were black turtle beans . Imagine my surprise
when I finally discovered that they were in fact a variety of soybean ! 
In Chinese restaurants , I have actively sought out the vegetarian versions of
this Szechuan classic ( which typically contains pork )  . Some have been
spectacular , with melting , delicate , fresh tofu as a counterpoint to the sharp , 
salty fermented beans . Others were disappointing , with frozen peas and carrots
that had been added at the last minute . 
Ma-po tofu can be prepared with no vegetables , with peas , or with broccoli . I
prefer broccoli to peas since it can absorb so much more sauce . Blanching the
broccoli before stir-frying dramatically decreases the amount of oil needed to
stir-fry it to doneness . 
1 bunch broccoli
3 tablespoons fermented black beans
2 tablespoons soy sauce
2 tablespoons sherry
1 teaspoon sugar
1 pound firm silken tofu , cut into ¾-inch cubes
2 teaspoons oil
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 dried chili
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
6 green onions , cut diagonally into ½-inch pieces
¼ teaspoon ground Szechuan peppercorns ( optional ) 
2 teaspoons garlic chili paste
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon water ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon sesame oil
Hot cooked rice
Separate the broccoli into florets about 1 inch thick . Peel the stems and slice
inch thick . Blanch the broccoli ( page 205 )  , refresh under cool water , and pat dry . 
Soak the beans in ½ cup of boiling water for 10 minutes . Drain the beans , 
reserving ¼ cup of the liquid . Coarsely chop the beans . Reserve . 
In a small bowl , mix the soy sauce , sherry , and sugar . Reserve . In a small pot , 
simmer the tofu in 4 cups of water for 3 minutes . Gently lift the tofu from the
water and reserve . 
In a wok or wide , deep skillet , heat the oil over high heat . When the oil is
quite hot , stir-fry the garlic , chili , ginger , and green onions for 1 minute . Add the
peppercorns and chili paste and stir-fry for 1 minute longer . Reduce the heat to
medium . 
Add the reserved bean water and the soy sauce mixture to the wok . Add the
broccoli and stir-fry for 2 or 3 minutes , or until the broccoli is hot . Add the
cornstarch mixture and cook , stirring , until thickened . If the sauce becomes too
thick , add more water , 1 tablespoon at a time . Add the tofu and sesame oil and
mix gently . Let the mixture simmer for 1 to 2 minutes , or until the tofu is heated
through . Serve over rice . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Curried Tofu in Acorn Squash
Don ’ t be afraid to make the tofu spicy—the sweetness of the squash will cool the
palate . Serve each squash on a bed of Couscous with Raisins and Pine Nuts 
( page 195 )  . 
2 small to medium acorn squash
1 medium onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
2 teaspoons curry powder
1 tablespoon oil
1 teaspoon ground cumin
½ teaspoon ground coriander
¼ teaspoon dry mustard
1 15-ounce package firm tofu , cut into ½-inch cubes
1 red bell pepper , cut into fine matchsticks
1 green bell pepper , cut into fine matchsticks
1 tablespoon chopped basil , preferably Thai or lemon basil
Cut off the stem end of the squash . Scoop out the seeds . Cut a small piece off the
other end to allow the squash to stand upright . Place the squash , cut side down , 
in a steamer basket over boiling water . Steam until the squash are cooked
through , 20 to 30 minutes .  ( Alternatively , place the squash , cut side down , in a
baking dish with 1 inch of hot water . Bake the squash at 350° for 30 minutes .  ) 
Do not overcook the squash , as this will cause them to lose their shape . 
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat and sauté the onion , garlic , ginger , 
and spices , stirring constantly , until the mixture is fragrant . Turn the heat to low
and cook for 10 minutes longer . If the mixture sticks to the pan , add more oil . 
In a small pot , simmer the tofu in 4 cups of water for 3 minutes . Gently lift the
tofu from the water and add to the pan along with the peppers and half the basil . 
Toss or gently stir to mix well . Cook for 3 minutes longer . Stuff the tofu into the
squash and garnish with the remaining basil . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Whole Soybeans
Fresh soybeans are called edamame ( ´-da-MA-may )  . Similar in size to butter
beans , fresh soybeans have a crunch and sweet taste something like English
peas . They have a very high protein content , so they do not have the grainy , 
starchy texture of lima beans . Sold shelled or in the pod , edamame should be
briefly blanched ( page 205 ) and then refreshed in cold water before use . A good
addition to salads and stir-fries , edamame can also be used much like English
peas or fava beans—tossed into rice for a quick pilaf , strewn over a salad , or
puréed . 
Dried soybeans can be cooked like pinto beans and used in chilies , stews , and
casseroles . 
Edamame with Hijiki and Brown Rice
¼ cup hijiki or wakame seaweed
1 tablespoon soy sauce
2 teaspoons sesame oil
1 tablespoon lemon juice
2 tablespoons canola or grapeseed oil
2 cups cooked short-grain brown rice
½ teaspoon minced garlic
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
1 medium carrot , cut into matchsticks
4 green onions , cut diagonally into ¼-inch pieces
½ cup shelled edamame , fresh or thawed
In a small bowl , cover the hijiki with 2 inches of boiling water . Cover and let the
seaweed soak for 10 minutes . Drain and reserve . 
Whisk together the soy sauce , sesame oil , lemon juice , and oil in a small bowl . 
Mix together the rice , garlic , ginger , carrot , green onions , edamame , hijiki , 
and soy sauce mixture . Let stand 20 minutes for the flavors to develop . Serve
warm or at room temperature . 
Makes 2 to 4 servings . 
Edamame with Zucchini , Tomatoes , and Tarragon
2 teaspoons oil
1 small red onion , cut into halves and thinly sliced
1 clove garlic , thinly sliced
1 medium zucchini , chopped
¼ cup blanched edamame
½ cup diced tomatoes , preferably fresh
1 tablespoon minced fresh tarragon
Salt and pepper
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat . Sauté the onion and garlic for 2
minutes and add the zucchini . Cook the vegetables until the zucchini is crisptender , about 5 to 7 minutes . Add the edamame , tomatoes , and the tarragon and
heat through . Season with salt and pepper . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Spicy Soy Nuts
Just about everyone likes something salty and crunchy every now and then . 
These easy treats compare more than favorably to potato chips , with 5 times the
protein , 40 percent less fat , 6 times the calcium , and 5 times the folate . 
2 cups dried soybeans
2 teaspoons chili powder
2 teaspoons ground cumin
1 teaspoon ground coriander
¼ teaspoon cayenne ( optional ) 
¼ teaspoon smoked Spanish paprika ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons canola oil
Soak the soybeans using either the quick-or long-soaking method ( page 163 )  . 
Preheat the oven to 300° . Drain and rinse the beans and pat dry . In a small
bowl , combine the chili powder , cumin , coriander , cayenne , paprika , and salt . In
a large bowl , toss the beans with the canola oil . Sprinkle the spice mixture over
the beans and mix well . Spread the beans in a single layer on a baking sheet . 
Bake in the center of the oven for about an hour , stirring the soybeans every 15
minutes or so . The beans are done when they just begin to brown and are dry all
the way through . 
Makes 3 cups
Tempeh
Originally from Indonesia , tempeh is a mixture of soybeans and grains that is
fermented and then pressed into a cake . While the concept of fermented food
may seem strange , remember that bread , coffee beans , cacao beans ( used to
make chocolate )  , and most alcoholic beverages are all fermented . The beans in
tempeh are kept whole , giving it a substantial texture that can withstand most
cooking methods . 
Use tempeh as you might portobellos . It is particularly good barbecued and
served with rice and grilled vegetables . If the tempeh feels quite hard , you may
try simmering it in vegetable stock or water to which you ’ ve added onions , 
celery , carrots , salt and pepper . This will soften the beans and make the tempeh
more digestible . Be careful not to boil the tempeh—it may fall apart . 
Ginger-Fried Tempeh
This is a simple preparation that can accompany rice and vegetables as a meal
or can be served as an appetizer with Apricot Mustard ( page 122 )  , Curry
Ketchup ( page 121 )  , or Peanut Sauce ( page 136 )  . 
1 tablespoon oil
1 clove garlic , crushed
½ inch fresh ginger , thinly sliced
8 ounces tempeh , cut crosswise into -inch slices
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat . Fry the garlic and ginger until they
are fragrant and beginning to brown . Remove them from the pan and add the
tempeh slices . Do not crowd the pan . Fry the tempeh in batches until golden
brown , about 2 to 3 minutes on each side , adding oil as needed . Serve
immediately or reserve in a warm oven . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Tempeh in Tomato Gravy
1 tablespoon oil
¼ teaspoon yellow mustard seeds
1 large onion , cut into halves and sliced ¼ inch thick
½ teaspoon chili powder
½ teaspoon ground turmeric
1 cup diced tomatoes , fresh or canned
½ teaspoon salt ( optional ) 
1 8-ounce package tempeh , cut into ½-inch-thick slices
Hot cooked basmati rice
2 teaspoons chopped fresh cilantro
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat . Add the mustard seeds . When
the mustard seeds begin to pop , add the onion , chili powder , and turmeric . Cook
this mixture for about 10 minutes . Add the tomatoes , salt , and tempeh . Cook the
mixture until thickened , about 10 to 15 minutes . Serve over basmati rice and
garnish with fresh cilantro . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Tempeh Sauerbraten
For a warming winter feast , serve this as the beef version is served , 
accompanied by potato pancakes , applesauce , and braised red cabbage . 
3 teaspoons oil
1 medium onion , diced
3 stalks celery , diced
2 medium carrots , diced
teaspoon caraway seeds
5 black peppercorns
teaspoon ground ginger
½ teaspoon salt
3 8-ounce blocks tempeh , cut into halves
½ cup red wine
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
½ cup Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) 
1 teaspoon cornstarch mixed with 1 tablespoon water
Heat 2 teaspoons of the oil in a wide skillet over medium-high heat and sauté the
onion , celery , carrots , and spices for 6 minutes or until the onion is soft . Move
the vegetables to one side and add the tempeh to the pan . Drizzle another
teaspoon or two of oil around the tempeh . Fry the tempeh until just browned on
each side . Add the wine and vinegar and cook until reduced by half . Add the
stock and mix the vegetables and the tempeh together . Reduce the heat to
medium-low and simmer for 10 minutes . Add the cornstarch and mix well so no
lumps form . Cook , stirring , until the sauce has thickened slightly . Serve
immediately . To make the dish ahead of time , omit the cornstarch , reheat the
tempeh and sauce , then add the cornstarch and cook until thickened just before
serving . 
Makes 4 to 6 servings . 
Soy Protein
Usually called TVP or TSP , soy protein can include okara , the pulpy
byproduct of tofu or soymilk production , or can more simply be made from
processed soy flour . All formulations are high in protein and fiber . Use it in
chilies , burgers , lentil loaf , or spaghetti sauce . 
To rehydrate soy protein , pour ¾ cup of boiling water over 1 cup of the
protein . Cover and let stand for 15 minutes . Once rehydrated , it keeps in the
refrigerator for 2 to 3 days . 
No Sheep Shepherd ’ s Pie
1½ cups soy protein
1 tablespoon oil
1 large onion , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 stalks celery , diced
2 medium carrots , diced
1 small eggplant , cubed , salted , drained , and rinsed ( pages 220–221 ) 
1 cup sliced mushrooms
1 cup Vegetable Stock ( page 65 ) or Mushroom Stock ( page 67 ) 
2 teaspoons mushroom soy sauce
1 teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary
½ teaspoon fresh thyme leaves
1 cup diced tomatoes
3 cups mashed potatoes , warmed
Preheat the oven to 375° . Lightly oil or spray a 2-quart round baking dish . In a
small mixing bowl , pour 1 cup of boiling water over the soy protein . Cover and
let stand for 15 minutes . Meanwhile , in a large , wide skillet , heat the oil over
medium-high heat and sauté the onion , garlic , celery , and carrots until the onion
begins to soften , about 5 minutes . Add the eggplant and mushrooms and sauté
for 4 minutes longer . Add the soy protein , stock , soy sauce , and herbs . Reduce
the heat to medium and simmer the mixture for 20 minutes or until it is thick . 
Add the tomatoes and mix well . Pour into the prepared baking dish . 
Spread the mashed potatoes over the soy mixture , making sure to seal the
edges . Brush a small amount of olive oil on the potatoes . Bake for 35 to 40
minutes or until the stew is bubbly and the potatoes are browned . 
Makes 8 servings . 
breads
Quick Breads
Biscuits
Sweet Potato Biscuits
Corn Bread
Tofu Banana Bread
Pumpkin Bread
Whole Wheat Quick Bread
Yeast Breads
Potato Rolls
Big Fat Sandwich Loaf
Everything Bread
Focaccia
Flatbreads
Pizza Crust
Pizza Sauce
Potato and Rosemary Pizza
Bianca Pizza with Tofu Boursin
Two-Tone Tomato Pizza with Basil and Garlic
Vegetable Tofu Pizza
Torta Rustica
Whole Wheat Pita Bread
Green Onion Pancakes
Bread , the staff of life , is an integral part of the base of any food pyramid . Its
carbohydrates give us energy to fuel our day , its proteins build our cells , and its
vitamins and minerals sustain our body ’ s chemistry . Bread can stand alone in
muffins or sweet quick breads . It can act as a backdrop for simple sandwiches
like peanut butter and jelly , or elaborate creations like torta rustica . 
Any way you slice it , bread takes a central role in the vegan diet . The recipes
in this chapter are both familiar and innovative . An array of textures are
represented , from flaky biscuits to a chewy multigrain bread with lentils . For
information on ingredients for baking , see pages 289–290 . 
QUICK BREADS
If you haven ’ t done much baking , quick breads are a great way to start . There
are two things to avoid : overworking the dough and working too slowly . 
Overworking the dough will develop the gluten too much and can turn a light , 
fluffy biscuit into a leaden mass . In addition , overmixing releases carbon dioxide
from the batter and reduces leavening action . Working quickly optimizes the
rising power of the baking powder and baking soda . The baking powder and
soda release their carbon dioxide—the gas that gets trapped and makes baked
goods rise—when liquid first hits them . Ideally , you should get batter breads into
the oven shortly after the wet and dry ingredients have been mixed . 
Biscuits
Biscuits do not contain any eggs so the transition to a vegan version is quite
easy , requiring only the substitution of soymilk for cow ’ s milk . You can also sour
1 cup of soymilk with 1 tablespoon lemon juice to substitute for buttermilk in
your favorite recipe . Vegetable shortening produces a light , airy biscuit . For a
lower fat biscuit , without shortening , see Sweet Potato Biscuits ( page 258 )  . 
2 cups flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
½ teaspoon salt
¼ cup shortening
¾ to 1 cup soymilk
Preheat the oven to 450° . Sift the flour , baking powder , and salt into a bowl . Cut
in the shortening with a pastry blender or two knives until the mixture resembles
coarse crumbs . Stir in just enough soymilk to form a soft dough . Do not
overmix . Place the dough on a lightly floured board and knead 3 or 4 times only . 
Roll the dough out to a thickness of ½ inch . Cut with a 2-inch round cookie
cutter . Place on an ungreased baking sheet . Brush the tops with olive oil , if
desired . Bake for 12 to 15 minutes . 
Makes 12 biscuits . 
Sweet Potato Biscuits
These biscuits contain no shortening so are relatively low in fat . 
1 cup sifted bread flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
¾ teaspoon salt
teaspoon cayenne
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 cup mashed sweet potatoes
¼ cup diced red bell pepper
2 to 4 tablespoons soymilk
Preheat the oven to 450° . Combine the flour , baking powder , salt , and cayenne in
a bowl . Add the olive oil , mashed potatoes , and peppers and mix until the
mixture resembles a coarse meal . Stir in just enough soymilk to form a soft
dough . Do not overmix . Place the dough on a lightly floured board and knead 3
or 4 times . Roll the dough out ¾ inch thick and cut with a 2-inch round cookie
cutter . Place ½ inch apart on an ungreased baking sheet . Brush the tops with
olive oil , if desired . Bake for 12 to 15 minutes . 
Makes 12 biscuits . 
Corn Bread
1 cup yellow cornmeal
1 cup flour
1½ teaspoons baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ cup maple syrup
cup soymilk
1 tablespoon lemon juice
3 tablespoons oil
Preheat the oven to 375° . Grease a 9-inch square or round pan . Sift the dry
ingredients together into a large bowl . Combine the syrup , soymilk , lemon juice , 
¾ cup of warm water , and warm oil . Stir into the dry mixture and beat until
smooth . Pour into the prepared pan and bake for 25 minutes . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Tofu Banana Bread
Carl Lewis
¾ cup ( about 6 ounces ) medium tofu
1 cup mashed ripe bananas
1 cup sugar
¼ cup olive oil or canola oil
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 cups whole wheat pastry flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon sea salt
¾ cup coarsely chopped walnuts
Preheat the oven to 350° . Grease a loaf pan . Puree the tofu with ½ cup of
banana , sugar , olive oil , and vanilla . Stir in remaining banana . In a separate
medium bowl , stir together the flour , baking powder , baking soda , and salt . Add
the flour mixture to the tofu mixture and mix gently . Fold in the walnuts . Pour
into the prepared pan . Bake for 45 to 50 minutes . When bread is cool enough to
handle , remove from the pan and cool on a wire rack . 
Makes 1 loaf . 
Pumpkin Bread
The ingredient list is long but the recipe is quite easy . The spices can be replaced
by 2 teaspoons of pumpkin pie spice . Try substituting an equal amount of mashed
sweet potato for the pumpkin . 
2 tablespoons flaxseeds
1½ cups sugar
1 cup pumpkin purée
½ cup applesauce
1 cups all-purpose flour
cup whole wheat flour
1 teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon baking powder
¾ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon ground nutmeg
¼ teaspoon ground cloves
Preheat the oven to 350° . Grease and flour a 9-inch loaf pan . In a blender or food
processor , blend together the flaxseeds and 6 tablespoons of water until light and
frothy . In a large mixing bowl , whisk together the flaxseed mixture , sugar , 
pumpkin , and applesauce . 
Sift the flours , baking soda , baking powder , salt , cinnamon , nutmeg , and
cloves into a bowl . Add to the pumpkin mixture and mix well . Pour the batter
into the prepared pan . Bake in the center of the oven for 1 hour to 1 hour and 15
minutes . When bread is cool enough to handle , remove from the pan and cool on
a wire rack . 
Makes 1 loaf . 
Whole Wheat Quick Bread
If you are intimidated by yeast breads or feel you don ’ t have the time for them , 
try this amazingly fast recipe . It has a rustic taste and texture and is good for
sopping up soups and stews . 
1½ cups creamy soymilk
1 tablespoon lemon juice
2 cups whole wheat pastry flour
½ cup all-purpose flour or soy flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
¼ cup canola oil
¼ cup molasses
Preheat the oven to 375° . Grease and flour a 9-inch loaf pan . Mix the soymilk
and lemon juice and let stand for 5 minutes or until the soymilk has curdled . Mix
the flours , baking powder , baking soda , and salt in a bowl . Mix the soymilk with
the oil and molasses . Add the wet ingredients to the dry and stir until blended . 
Pour the batter into the pan and bake for about 50 minutes . When the bread is
cool enough to handle , remove from the pan and cool on a rack . 
Makes 1 loaf . 
YEAST BREADS
Many conventional yeast breads use few eggs or dairy products , so using or
adapting your favorite recipes should be fairly simple . The recipes that follow
are perennial favorites . 
Bread baking falls somewhere between science and art . For more information
on theory and practice , you should consult one of the many excellent bread
books available . The following recipes include instructions for working the
dough by hand or with a standing mixer . You may also use a food processor , if
you have one that can handle bread dough . Of course , you may also use a bread
machine , adapting the recipes to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . 
Potato Rolls
Since the dough for these rolls must be refrigerated for several hours , it is
convenient to mix it up after dinner , using leftover mashed potatoes . This dough
also makes a great base for cinnamon rolls or sticky buns . 
1 teaspoon sugar or barley malt
½ cup warm water , about 110°
1½ tablespoons ( 2 envelopes ) dry active yeast
¼ cup olive oil
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup mashed potatoes , at room temperature
4½ cups all-purpose flour
In a large mixing bowl , dissolve the sugar in the water and sprinkle the yeast on
the water . Let stand until foamy . Whisk in the oil , salt , and potatoes . Add half the
flour and beat with a wooden spoon until a sticky batter forms . Add the
remaining flour . Coat your hands with flour and knead the dough in the bowl
until it forms a ball . Add a little extra water or flour as needed . Turn the dough
out onto a lightly floured surface and knead the dough until it is quite elastic , 
about 12 to 15 minutes by hand or 8 to 10 minutes in a standing mixer fitted with
a dough hook . Form the dough into a tight ball . 
Place the dough in a lightly oiled bowl . Turn the dough to coat with oil all
over . Cover the bowl with plastic wrap and let the dough rise in the refrigerator
for 8 to 18 hours . 
Remove the dough from the refrigerator 1½ hours before you want to make
the rolls . When the dough has come to room temperature , punch it down and
turn it out onto a lightly floured surface . Knead the dough a few times to
eliminate any large air pockets . 
Divide the dough into 12 equal pieces . Shape the rolls and place them , seam
side down , on a lightly oiled baking sheet . Cut a slash in the top of each roll and
cover the rolls with a clean kitchen towel . Let the rolls rise until they have
doubled in bulk , about 25 to 35 minutes . 
Preheat the oven to 375° . Bake the rolls until the crusts just begin to brown
and the rolls sound hollow when tapped . For a crunchy crust , spray the rolls with
clean water from a clean spray bottle before putting them in the oven and then
every 2 minutes for the first 8 minutes . 
Makes 12 rolls . 
Big Fat Sandwich Loaf
This is the perfect loaf for Muffuletta ( page 150 ) or any large , communal
sandwich . You may also make long Italian loaves with this dough . Just divide the
dough into two equal pieces and shape into long loaves . Whole wheat pastry
flour may be substituted for the all-purpose flour . 
2¾ cups all-purpose flour
2½ cups bread flour
1 tablespoon sugar
1 cup warm water , 110°
1½ tablespoons ( 2 envelopes ) dry active yeast
3 tablespoons oil
1 teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons oil
1 teaspoon sesame seeds
In a medium bowl , mix the all-purpose and the bread flours together . In a large
mixing bowl , dissolve the sugar in the water . Sprinkle the yeast over the water
and let it soften . Beat 2½ cups of the flour mixture into the yeast mixture . Cover
the bowl and let the mixture ( called a “ sponge ”  ) rise until doubled in bulk , about
20 minutes . 
Using a spoon or dough hook , beat the oil , salt , and remaining flours into the
sponge . Knead until the dough is smooth and elastic , about 10 minutes in a
mixer or 15 minutes by hand . This long kneading will give the bread a fine
grain . The dough will be quite soft and easy to work . 
Shape the dough into a ball and place it , seam side down , on a baking sheet
lined with parchment or lightly greased . Preheat the oven to 375° . Let the bread
rise for about 20 to 30 minutes or until it is puffy . Do not let it rise too long or it
will fall during baking . Brush the top lightly with oil and sprinkle with sesame
seeds . Bake for 20 to 25 minutes . If a crispy crust is desired , spray the bread
with clean water from a clean spray bottle every 6 minutes . 
Makes 1 big , fat loaf . 
Everything Bread
Your local health food store may not carry millet and barley flours . If you can ’ t
find these , you can grind the grains in a coffee grinder . Millet is quite soft , so it
grinds easily and even some food processors can handle grinding it into flour . 
Barley is harder and very few food processors are up to the job . The coffee
grinder works well , but you ’ ll need to grind it in small batches . I prefer to use
whole barley rather than pearled barley for the added texture and nutrition , but
pearled is much softer and easier to grind . 
The water measurements in the recipe are not exact since everyone ’ s lentils
will be different . It is better for the dough to be a little wet than a little dry . This
dough is relatively low in gluten , so it will not have that familiar elastic texture . 
2 teaspoons ( 1 envelope ) dry active yeast
2 cups spelt flour
¾ cup barley flour
½ cup soy flour
¼ cup millet flour
2 tablespoons rye flour
½ teaspoon dried thyme
1 teaspoon sea salt
½ cup cooked lentils , mashed
1 tablespoon olive oil
Sprinkle the yeast over ½ cup of warm water in a small bowl and let stand for 10
minutes . 
Mix the flours , thyme , and salt in a bowl . In a large mixing bowl , blend the
lentils and olive oil with ½ cup of warm water ( ¼ cup if the lentils are really
mushy )  . Add the yeast mixture and 2 cups of the flour mixture and mix well . Stir
in the remaining flour and knead in the bowl until a smooth dough is formed . 
Alternatively , place the ingredients in a standing mixer fitted with a dough hook
and mix on medium-low speed until a smooth dough is formed . Add a little extra
water or flour , if needed , to form a dough that is soft but not too sticky . Shape
the dough into a ball and place it in a bowl greased with olive oil . Turn the
dough to coat with oil all over . Cover the bowl with a clean kitchen towel and let
the dough rise until it is doubled in bulk , about 1 to 1½ hours . 
Grease a 9-inch loaf pan . Punch the dough down and knead lightly . Turn the
dough out onto a lightly floured surface . Shape the dough into a loaf and put it
into the prepared pan . Cover with a clean kitchen towel and let rise until it is
doubled in bulk , about 1 hour . Preheat the oven to 375° . Bake the bread for an
hour or until it sounds hollow when tapped . 
Makes 1 loaf . 
Focaccia
The glory of focaccia comes from the olive oil , so splurge on a rich , fruity extra
virgin oil . Coarse salt and fresh rosemary are helpful also . You can top your
focaccia like a pizza or use it for sandwiches ( try Mixed Vegetable Romesco
Focaccia , page 153 )  , but I prefer it in its naked , oily glory . 
Let the focaccia rise at room temperature , rather than in a very warm spot . 
The long rising time allows the gluten to develop , giving the bread its slightly
chewy texture . The dough can be made the night before and refrigerated after its
first rising or after shaping the final loaf . Make sure the dough comes to room
temperature before you work with it . 
1½ tablespoons ( 2 envelopes ) dry active yeast
1¾ cups warm water , about 110°
¼ cup olive oil
4 cups all-purpose flour , or 2 cups all-purpose flour and 2 cups bread flour
3 teaspoons salt
¼ to cup extra virgin olive oil
1 teaspoon kosher salt
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh rosemary
In the bowl of a mixer or a large mixing bowl , sprinkle the yeast over ½ cup of
the warm water . Let stand 5 minutes . Add the oil and remaining 1¼ cups of
warm water . In another bowl , whisk the flour and salt together . Add half the
flour mixture to the yeast mixture . Stir with a wooden spoon until a sticky dough
forms . Add the remaining flour . With a mixer fitted with a dough hook , blend the
flour into the dough on low speed until it comes together in a ball , about 2
minutes . Scrape the sides of the bowl and knead the dough with the dough hook
until elastic , about 6 minutes . If working by hand , mix the remaining flour into
the dough . Knead the dough in the bowl , adding a little extra water or flour as
needed until the dough comes together in a ball and is soft but not sticky . 
Continue to knead the dough in the bowl until it is quite elastic , about 12 to 15
minutes . 
Shape the dough into a ball and place in a medium mixing bowl lightly coated
with olive oil . Turn the dough to coat with oil all over . Cover the bowl with a
clean kitchen towel and let the dough rise until it is doubled in bulk , about 1 to
1½ hours . 
Punch the dough down , fold it into thirds , and form it into a ball . Turn the ball
to coat with oil . Cover the bowl with a clean kitchen towel and let the dough rise
until it is doubled in bulk , about 45 minutes to an hour . 
Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface . Starting from the middle of
the dough , push the dough down and away from you with the palm of your hand . 
Burst any bubbles that appear on the surface of the dough . Gently work the
dough into a rectangle the size of a cookie sheet or a circle the size of a 12-inch
pizza pan . Fold the shaped dough in half or thirds and lay it on a lightly oiled
pan . Unfold the dough and shape it to the pan so the dough is uniform in
thickness . 
With clean fingers , poke deep dents all over the dough . Drizzle the olive oil
evenly over the dough . Sprinkle the kosher salt and rosemary over the dough . 
Cover the focaccia lightly with plastic wrap ( which won ’ t absorb the precious
oil ) and let rise until double in height , about 1 hour . 
Preheat the oven to 400° . Bake the focaccia in the center of the oven . For a
crispy crust , spray the focaccia with clean water from a clean spray bottle every
3 minutes for the first 10 minutes . Then allow the focaccia to brown lightly , 
another 2 to 5 minutes . 
Makes 12 servings . 
FLATBREADS
Most cuisines have a particular flatbread that helps to define them . Some of
these are not worth the trouble to prepare at home . While tortillas are not hard to
make , it can be difficult to duplicate the results obtained from baking on a
comal . Injera , an Ethiopian flatbread , is a fabulous light creation made from teff , 
a cousin of millet , but it takes three or four days to prepare by the traditional
method . Fortunately , most groceries have a wide variety of flatbreads available
—crackers , tortillas , lavosh , and Scandinavian flatbrod . In this section we
include several recipes for an all-time favorite—pizza—because of its
adaptability to the vegan diet and its ease of preparation . 
Pizza Crust
Pizza crust is a scaled-down version of focaccia . 
2 teaspoons ( 1 envelope ) dry active yeast
1 cups warm water , about 110°
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 cups all-purpose flour
2 teaspoons salt
¼ cup wheat bran ( optional ) 
In the bowl of a mixer or a large mixing bowl , sprinkle the yeast over cup of
the warm water . Let stand 5 minutes , then add the oil and remaining 1 cup of
warm water . In another bowl , whisk the flour and salt together . Add half the
flour mixture to the yeast and water . Stir with a wooden spoon until a sticky
dough is formed . Add the remaining flour and wheat bran . With a mixer fitted
with a dough hook , blend the flour into the dough on low speed until it comes
together in a ball , about 2 minutes . Scrape the bowl down , turn the mixer on
medium , and knead the dough until elastic , about 6 minutes . If working by hand , 
mix the remaining flour into the dough . Knead the dough in the bowl , adding a
little extra water or flour as needed until the dough comes together in a ball and
is soft but not sticky . Continue to knead the dough in the bowl until it is quite
elastic , about 12 to 15 minutes . 
Place the ball of dough in a medium mixing bowl lightly coated with olive oil . 
Turn the dough to coat with oil all over . Cover the bowl with a clean kitchen
towel and let rise until it is doubled in bulk , about 1 to 1½ hours . 
Punch the dough down . Turn out onto a lightly floured surface . Divide the
dough in half . Turn each ball of dough inside out , then form into a smooth ball
with no air pockets . Take each dough ball and rotate it in a little clockwise circle
on the countertop ( this will makes the dough easier to roll out into a circle later )  . 
If you are making only one pizza , wrap the remaining dough tightly in plastic
wrap and refrigerate . Cover the dough with a clean kitchen towel and let it rest
for 20 to 45 minutes . 
Preheat the oven to 400° . Place the dough on a lightly floured surface . Put the
palm of your hand in the middle of the ball and flatten with a clockwise twist . 
Roll or press the dough into a circle or rectangle slightly larger than your pan , 
working from the center of the dough out to the edges in a clockwise direction . 
As you work , occasionally pick up the dough and re-flour the surface underneath
so the dough doesn ’ t stick . Fold the shaped dough in half or thirds and lay it on
the pan . Unfold the dough and fit it into the pan . Pop any visible air bubbles . Top
the pizza and bake for 10 to 15 minutes or until the crust just begins to brown
and the toppings are bubbling . 
Makes 2 12-inch pizza crusts . 
Whole Wheat Pizza Crust : For the all-purpose flour , substitute 2 cups of allpurpose flour and 2 cups of whole wheat flour , or 4 cups of whole wheat pastry
flour . 
Pizza Sauce
Any bottled pizza or marinara sauce will work on your pizza , but I prefer this
very simple sauce , which is barely cooked and somewhat chunky . 
1 28-ounce can good quality diced tomatoes , preferably roma
2 tablespoons olive oil
1½ teaspoons minced garlic
teaspoon red pepper flakes ( optional ) 
teaspoon sea salt
Pinch ground black pepper
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
Drain the tomatoes , reserving the juice for making Vegetable Stock ( page 65 )  , if
desired . Heat the oil in a wide skillet . Sauté the garlic and pepper flakes with the
salt and pepper . Do not brown the garlic . When the garlic is fragrant , add the
tomatoes . Stir the tomatoes until they are barely warm and turn off the heat . Use
a potato masher to crush the tomatoes . Add the basil and mix well . Taste and
adjust the seasonings with salt and pepper . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Potato and Rosemary Pizza
1 to 2 pounds new potatoes or Yukon Gold potatoes
1 12-inch Pizza Crust ( page 266 )  , unbaked
2 to 3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1 teaspoon kosher salt
1½ tablespoons chopped fresh rosemary
Freshly ground black pepper
Steam , boil , or microwave the potatoes until they are about half-cooked . Let the
potatoes cool completely . Slice the potatoes paper-thin on a mandoline or with
the side of a box grater . 
Brush the pizza crust with half of the olive oil . Sprinkle half the salt and 1
tablespoon of the rosemary on the oil . Grind a little black pepper over the crust . 
Preheat the oven to 375° . Arrange the potato slices decoratively over the pizza
to within ½ inch of the edge . The potatoes should overlap a bit but should be no
more than 2 layers thick anywhere on the pizza . Do not use the thick end slices , 
as they will not cook at the same rate as the rest of the potatoes . 
Brush the remaining olive oil on the potatoes and sprinkle them with the rest
of the salt . Bake the pizza in the oven until the potatoes are tender and just
starting to brown , about 12 to 15 minutes . 
Sprinkle with the remaining rosemary and serve immediately . 
Makes 12 appetizer servings or 4 main-course servings . 
Bianca Pizza with Tofu Boursin
For many vegans , the bianca is a pizza favorite that ’ s hard to give up . 
Fortunately , there ’ s no need to deprive yourself . 
1 12-inch Pizza Crust ( page 266 )  , unbaked
1½ tablespoons olive oil
¼ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon minced fresh garlic
Freshly ground black pepper
2 cups Tofu Boursin ( page 154 ) 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh chives
Preheat the oven to 400° . Brush the pizza crust with half the olive oil . Sprinkle
with half the salt and all the garlic . Grind a little pepper over the crust and spread
the boursin to within ¾ inch of the edge . Brush the pizza with the remaining
olive oil . Bake in the lower third of the oven until the crust just begins to brown , 
about 10 to 15 minutes . Sprinkle with the remaining salt and chives just before
serving . 
Makes 12 appetizer servings or 4 main-course servings . 
Two-Tone Tomato Pizza with
Basil and Garlic
Meaty tomatoes work best in this recipe , since juicy tomatoes can make for a
soggy crust . For added visual appeal and flavor , just before serving , paint the
top of the pizza with Soy Syrup ( page 201 ) made with balsamic vinegar and
without the ginger . 
2 pounds ripe red tomatoes
2 pounds yellow , pink , or striped tomatoes
1 teaspoon kosher salt
1 12-inch Pizza Crust ( page 266 )  , unbaked
1 tablespoon olive oil
½ teaspoon minced garlic
Freshly ground black pepper
1 cup Pizza Sauce ( page 267 ) 
½ cup fresh whole basil leaves
Preheat the oven to 400° . Slice the tomatoes as thinly as possible . Sprinkle with
half the salt and let the tomatoes drain in a colander while preparing the rest of
the pizza . 
Brush the pizza crust with half the olive oil . Sprinkle with the garlic . Grind a
little black pepper over the crust and spread the pizza sauce to within ¾ inch of
the edge . Arrange half the basil leaves on the pizza sauce . Arrange the tomatoes
and remaining basil in a decorative pattern over the pizza . Sprinkle the
remaining salt over the tomatoes and drizzle with the remaining olive oil . Bake
the pizza until the crust begins to brown , about 12 to 15 minutes . 
Makes 12 appetizer servings or 4 main-course servings . 
Vegetable Tofu Pizza
Carl Lewis
1 12-inch Whole Wheat Pizza Crust ( page 267 )  , unbaked
1 cup Pizza Sauce ( page 267 ) 
½ cup sun-dried tomatoes , rehydrated and drained
2 medium tomatoes , thinly sliced
½ cup thinly sliced mushrooms
1 10-ounce package extra firm tofu , thinly sliced
cup sliced green olives
1 medium red onion , thinly sliced ( optional ) 
cup spicy brown mustard ( optional ) 
Preheat the oven to 375° . Place the pizza crust on a baking sheet or pizza pan . 
Spread the Pizza Sauce to within ¾ inch of the edge . Arrange the tomatoes , 
mushrooms , tofu , olives , and onion over the sauce . Bake the pizza until the crust
just begins to brown , about 12 to 15 minutes . Serve with mustard , if desired . 
Makes 12 appetizer servings or 4 main-course servings . 
Torta Rustica
This is a great way to use up leftover grilled or roasted vegetables . Just about
any assortment of veggies will do , but the ones listed below make for a stunning
presentation . 
Dough for 2 12-inch Pizza Crusts ( page 266 ) 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh basil
1 teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary
1 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves
2 tablespoons olive oil
¼ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon minced garlic
Freshly ground black pepper
1 medium eggplant , sliced and grilled or roasted
¾ cup roasted peppers
1 cup Tofu Boursin ( optional , page 154 ) 
1 medium zucchini , sliced , and grilled or roasted
2 medium tomatoes , sliced
1 large bulb fennel , trimmed ( page 222 )  , thinly sliced , and grilled or roasted
Preheat the oven to 350° . Roll one pizza crust 12 inches in diameter and the
other 14 inches . Place the 12inch crust on a pizza pan or large , lightly oiled sheet
pan . 
Mix the basil , rosemary , and thyme in a small bowl . If any of the cooked
vegetables have expressed any liquid , pat them dry with paper towels . 
Brush the 12-inch crust with half the olive oil . Sprinkle the salt , garlic , and a
third of the herbs on the crust . Grind a little black pepper over the crust . Arrange
half the eggplant over the crust , leaving a 2-inch margin around the edge of the
pizza . Top with half the roasted peppers and half the boursin . Layer on all the
zucchini , then the tomatoes . Sprinkle with a third of the herbs . Top with all the
fennel , the remaining roasted peppers , boursin , and eggplant . Sprinkle with the
last of the herbs . 
Carefully lay the 14-inch crust over the torta so that the dough comes to
within ½ inch of the bottom ’ s edge . Once the top crust is on , gently press down
to remove any air pockets . Try to shape the torta so it is a uniform height and
straight-sided . Fold the bottom crust over the top crust and crimp them together
so an airtight seal is formed all around the torta . Brush all over with the rest of
the olive oil . 
Cover the torta loosely with aluminum foil to prevent overbrowning and bake
for 15 minutes . Uncover and bake for 15 to 25 minutes longer . 
Makes 6 to 8 main-course servings . 
Whole Wheat Pita Bread
If these pitas are baked at the right temperature , they will form pockets like those
found in the store . 
2 teaspoons sugar
2 cups warm water , about 110°
1½ tablespoons ( 2 envelopes ) dry active yeast
2 cups whole wheat flour
3 cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon salt
In a large mixing bowl , combine the sugar with ½ cup of the warm water , 
sprinkle the yeast on top , and let stand until foamy , about 5 to 8 minutes . Mix the
flours and salt together . Add the rest of the water to the yeast mixture and beat in
half the flour mixture until a thick , smooth batter is formed . Add the rest of the
flour and knead until the dough is smooth and elastic , about 10 minutes by hand
or 6 minutes in a standing mixer fitted with a dough hook . Put the dough into a
bowl lightly coated with olive oil . Turn the dough to coat with oil all over . Cover
the dough with a clean kitchen towel and let rise until doubled in bulk , about 1
hour . 
Preheat the oven to 450° . Punch the dough down and let rest for 15 minutes . 
Divide the dough into 8 pieces . On a lightly floured surface , roll each piece of
dough into 6to 8-inch circles .  ( Alternatively , with lightly floured hands , slap the
dough from palm to palm until the circle is formed .  ) Keep the edges of the pitas
thicker than the middles ( to prevent sandwich filling leakage later )  . For best
results preheat 2 baking sheets for 5 minutes . Place the pitas on the hot baking
sheets and bake in the center of the oven for 10 to 12 minutes , or until lightly
browned and puffy in the middle . 
Makes 8 pitas . 
Green Onion Pancakes
Try serving these tasty pancakes with Simple Soy Dipping Sauce ( page 138 )  , 
Sweet and Sour Dipping Sauce ( page 138 )  , or Vietnamese Lime Dipping Sauce 
( page 139 )  . 
2 cups all-purpose flour , or 1 cup all-purpose flour and 1 cup cake flour
2 teaspoons salt
1 tablespoon peanut , blended , or canola oil
1 cup boiling water
1 teaspoon sesame oil
½ cup very thinly sliced green onions
Peanut oil , for frying
Combine the flour and salt in a large mixing bowl . Add the oil and stir with a
wooden spoon while gradually pouring in the boiling water . Beat until a dough
forms . When the dough is cool enough to handle , knead it for 10 minutes by
hand or 6 minutes with a standing mixer fitted with a dough hook , or until the
dough is elastic . Place dough in a bowl and cover with a clean , damp kitchen
towel for 30 minutes . 
Roll the dough out to a 10x15-inch rectangle that is about ¼ inch thick . Brush
the sesame oil evenly over the dough . Sprinkle the green onions over the dough . 
Roll up the dough jellyroll style . Cut the roll into 8 thick slices . Flatten each
slice slightly with your hand . Roll out each piece , turning it to keep it circular , 
until it is ¼ inch thick and about 6 inches in diameter . Keep the finished
pancakes covered with a damp towel while you work . 
Heat a skillet over high heat . When it is hot , pour in oil to a depth of ¼ inch . 
When the oil is hot , turn the heat to medium-low . Cook the pancakes in the oil , 
one at a time , for about 2 to 3 minutes on each side , until they are golden . 
Replenish the oil as needed . 
Makes 8 pancakes . 
breakfast
Scrambled Tofu
Migas
Seitan Chorizo
Country-Style Tempeh Sausages
Hash Browns
Congee
Pancakes
Crepes
Buckwheat Cakes
Waffles
Toppings for Pancakes , Waffles , and Crepes
Coffee Cake
Scones
Date–Oat Bran Scones
Good Morning Muffins
Polka Dot Muffins
Blueberry Bran Muffins
Adults seem to have a love-hate relationship with breakfast—either it is a
nuisance to be disposed of as quickly as possible with coffee and a doughnut or
it evokes nostalgic reminiscences of a simpler time when someone else fed us a
wholesome morning meal . In making the decision to adopt a plant-based diet , 
you ’ ve made a commitment to be the one nurturing your body , so it ’ s time to
make breakfast a healthy , enjoyable part of your day . 
The following recipes closely parallel the most familiar breakfast choices . But
don ’ t let your old notions of breakfast limit your options . Instead of using
soymilk on your granola , try orange juice . Why not have a SunDried Tomato and
Lentil Burger ( page 155 ) or some Caponata ( pages 46 ) with a crusty roll ? Check
out the smoothies in “ Beverages ”  ( pages 317–320 ) for quick liquid pick-me-ups . 
And don ’ t forget the easiest recipe for health :  “ 1 apple , washed . Eat . Makes 1
serving .  ” 
Scrambled Tofu
The health food sections of most grocery stores carry pre-packaged mixes for
scrambling tofu , but it is so easy to do yourself . The turmeric is more for color
than flavor , in case you are trying to fool the kids or a reluctant spouse . If you
are too bleary-eyed in the morning to be wielding a knife , substitute ½ teaspoon
of onion powder and ¼ teaspoon of garlic powder for the vegetables . 
2 teaspoons oil
1 small onion , diced
1 teaspoon minced garlic
1 small green bell pepper
8 ounces tofu
1 tablespoon nutritional yeast
¼ teaspoon ground turmeric
2 teaspoons soy sauce
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat . Sauté the onion , garlic , and green
pepper until the onion is soft . Crumble the tofu into the vegetables . Add the
yeast , turmeric , and soy sauce . Mix thoroughly and heat through . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Migas
Migas means rags in Spanish and refers to the shreds of tortilla that are
scrambled along with whatever snippets of vegetables may be lurking in the
fridge . Despite its humble name , this is a dish with extravagant flavors . For a
quick meal on the go , roll the migas in a whole wheat tortilla . Serve migas with
a light salsa . 
2 teaspoons oil
1 medium onion , diced
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 small jalapeño , minced ( optional ) 
1 medium green bell pepper , diced
1 medium red bell pepper , diced
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
¼ teaspoon ground cumin
1 pound tofu
1 tablespoon nutritional yeast
1 medium tomato , diced
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro
1 tablespoon soy sauce
2 6-inch uncooked corn tortillas , cut into strips , or ½ cup tortilla chip crumbs
Heat the oil in a skillet over medium heat . Sauté the onion , garlic , and peppers
until the onion is soft . Mix the turmeric and cumin into the vegetables . Crumble
the tofu into the vegetables . Add the yeast , tomato , cilantro , and soy sauce and
mix well . Add the tortillas and heat through . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Seitan Chorizo
This spicy Spanish sausage can be served for breakfast or used in casseroles
such as Millet Paella ( page 174 )  . The flaxseed in this recipe will help to hold the
sausage together and give a more sausage-like texture , but the recipe works well
without it also . 
1 tablespoon flaxseed ( optional ) 
2 tablespoons canola oil
½ cup finely diced yellow onion
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1 teaspoon cayenne
1 teaspoon ground cumin
2 teaspoons paprika , preferably smoked paprika
2 teaspoons black pepper
½ teaspoon fennel seed
¼ teaspoon dried oregano
1 pound seitan , chopped fine
½ cup dry red wine
1 tablespoon soy sauce
In a blender or small food processor , grind the flaxseed with ¼ cup of water . 
Pour into a small bowl and cover . 
Heat the oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Sauté the onion , garlic , and
dry spices until the onion is soft and a hearty aroma rises from the pan . Add the
seitan and heat through . Add the wine and soy sauce to the pan and cook until
the mixture is dry . Remove the pan from the heat . Stir in the reserved flaxseed . 
Adjust the seasonings . 
When the mixture is cool enough to handle , shape the sausage into patties or
links . Cook the formed sausages in a clean skillet over medium heat with more
canola oil until well browned , about 5 to 7 minutes on each side .  ( Since this
sausage is so lean , it may require more oil .  ) Sausages may be cooked and frozen
for later use . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Country-Style Tempeh Sausages
2 8-ounce packages tempeh , cut into 1-inch cubes
½ teaspoon dried thyme
1½ teaspoons rubbed sage
¼ teaspoon dried savory
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
¼ teaspoon pepper
½ cup whole wheat flour
1 tablespoon soy sauce
¼ cup olive oil
Canola oil for frying
Steam the tempeh in a steamer basket over simmering water for 15 minutes . 
Alternatively , microwave the tempeh , covered by plastic wrap , for 1 or 2
minutes , or put the tempeh cubes into a mixing bowl and pour 2 cups of boiling
water over them . Cover the bowl and let rest for 15 minutes . Drain . 
Crumble the tempeh , add the dry spices , and mix well . Add the flour , soy
sauce , and oil and mix well . Let the sausage rest for 10 minutes . With moistened
hands , form the sausage into 8 patties . Put the patties onto a baking sheet lined
with waxed paper or parchment . Chill for 1 hour . 
Cook the formed sausages in a clean skillet over medium heat with canola oil
until well browned , about 5 to 7 minutes on each side .  ( Since this sausage is so
lean , it may require more oil .  ) Sausages may be cooked and frozen for later use . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Hash Browns
There are endless variations on this morning favorite . I prefer to slice the
potatoes rather than grate them , but either method works . The secret is not to
rush . Let the onions caramelize and the potatoes get crispy before turning . And
use a metal spatula , not a spoon .  ( If using a nonstick pan , use a rubber spatula .  ) 
I like to use Yukon Gold potatoes here for their waxy texture , but just about any
potato will do . 
1½ pounds potatoes
1 medium onion
3 cloves garlic , peeled
Oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
Scrub the potatoes . Place the potatoes in a pot of cold , salted water . Bring the
water to a boil and cook the potatoes until they are about half done . Cool . 
Remove the skins if desired and cut into ½-inch slices . 
Peel the onion and discard the root end . Cut the onion into halves and slice ¼
inch thick . Slice the garlic cloves as thinly as possible . 
Heat 1 tablespoon of oil in a wide skillet over medium heat . Add the onions
and garlic in an even layer on the bottom of the pan . Top the vegetables with the
potato slices . Season the potatoes with salt and pepper . Cook the potatoes
undisturbed for 5 to 10 minutes . When the onions have begun to caramelize in
the bottom of the pan , gently turn the mixture over so the potatoes are on the
bottom and the onions are approximately on top . This will not form a cake , so
it ’ s fine if the mix has fallen apart . 
Cook the potatoes undisturbed for another 5 to 10 minutes or until they begin
to brown , adding more oil as needed . Continue cooking the potatoes , stirring
more frequently , until they are done to your liking . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Congee
Eaten sweet or savory , congee , or rice soup , is a healing , comforting way to
begin your day . The strength of congee is said to increase with cooking time , so
try cooking this in an electric slow cooker overnight . 
½ cup short grain rice
2¼-inch slices fresh ginger
1 2-inch square of kombu or other seaweed
SWEET TOPPINGS
Almond milk
Cinnamon
Cane juice sweetener
SAVORY TOPPINGS
2 tablespoons sliced green onions
3 teaspoons chopped peanuts
4 teaspoons chopped fresh cilantro
2 tablespoons Asian pickled vegetables
Electric slow cooker method : Place the rice , ginger , and seaweed in a slow
cooker with 3 cups of water . Cook at high setting for 30 minutes , and then
reduce the heat to low . Let cook for 8 or more hours . 
Stovetop method : Place all ingredients ( except toppings ) in a heavy pot and bring
to a boil . Reduce the heat to very low and cook for 2 hours or until the rice has
fallen apart . 
Remove the ginger before serving . Pour into two bowls . For sweet congee , 
drizzle with almond milk , sprinkle with cinnamon , and add cane juice sweetener . 
For savory congee , top each bowl with green onions , peanuts , cilantro , and
pickled vegetables . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Pancakes
Derived from various flatbreads , pancakes have taken on a life of their own as a
breakfast food . When buying a mix , check the ingredients carefully for dried eggs
or dairy products . 
2 cups all-purpose flour
2 teaspoons baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons applesauce or mashed banana
1 tablespoon maple syrup
1 cup soymilk
½ cup apple juice
2 tablespoons canola oil
Nonstick cooking spray or additional oil
Combine the flour , baking powder , baking soda , and salt in a medium mixing
bowl . Add the applesauce , maple syrup , soymilk , apple juice , and canola oil and
stir just until blended . 
Heat a heavy skillet or griddle over medium to medium-high heat . Brush
lightly with oil or coat with nonstick cooking spray . When the griddle is hot , 
drop the batter by spoonfuls . Do not crowd the pan . Cook the pancakes until
bubbles form on the tops and the edges appear firm . Turn the pancakes with a
spatula and cook on the other side until they are puffed and are golden on the
bottom . 
Serve immediately or reserve in a warm oven . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Crepes
The secret to making good crepes is to make the batter the night before you plan
to cook them . This gives the gluten time to develop and keeps the crepes from
breaking . 
A crepe pan should have sloping sides so that when you are rotating the batter
in the pan the bottom is evenly covered . Pans 6 to 8 inches in diameter are
comfortable for most people , though the adventurous can try using a 10-inch
pan . A nonstick pan and a heat-resistant rubber spatula simplify crepe making . 
Roll these crepes around Strawberries Romanoff ( page 283 )  , maple-sweetened
whipped tofu , or even creamed tempeh and shiitakes . 
1 tablespoon potato starch or gluten flour
1 cup all-purpose flour
½ teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons vegan margarine , melted
½ cup soymilk
Oil or nonstick cooking spray
Food processor method : Place the dry ingredients in the bowl of a food
processor . With the motor running , drizzle ¾ cup of water through the feed tube
until a paste forms . Add the margarine and soymilk—the texture of the batter
should be between those of pancake batter and soymilk . Put the batter into a
bowl , cover , and let rest at least 2 hours at room temperature or for 8 hours or
more in the refrigerator . 
Manual method : Combine the dry ingredients in a medium mixing bowl . With a
wooden spoon , stir ¾ cup of water into the dry ingredients , being careful not to
form lumps . The dough will be stiff and a little hard to work . Persevere because
it is this step that develops the gluten . Beat the margarine into the dough . 
Gradually add the soymilk . When the dough has become a thick batter , whisk
until smooth . If the batter is lumpy , strain it through a fine wire sieve , discarding
any hard bits of dough . Cover the batter and let rest at least 2 hours at room
temperature or for 8 hours or more in the refrigerator . 
To cook the crepes , heat the pan over medium heat for a few minutes Set the
batter in a convenient spot near the pan and place a small ladle in it . When the
pan is hot , turn the heat to high . Lightly brush the bottom of the pan with oil or
coat with cooking spray . Hold the pan at a 45° angle to the stove . Place a ladleful
of batter at the bottom of the pan . Quickly tilt the pan with a circular motion to
distribute the batter evenly . The batter will be cooking as it hits the pan . When an
even layer of batter covers the bottom of the pan , put the pan back on the heat . 
Cook the crepe until small bubbles form on the top , about 2 to 3 minutes . Flip
the crepe with a rubber spatula or superior pan-flipping technique , and cook on
the other side for about a minute or until just lightly browned . It may take a
couple of tries to get the pan temperature , amount of batter , and wrist action just
right . Don ’ t be discouraged . Just eat your mistakes and try again . 
Place the cooked crepes on a dinner plate and cover with a clean kitchen towel
to keep them warm . 
Makes 24 crepes . 
Buckwheat Cakes
This make-ahead batter is perfect for those mornings when time is limited but
hunger is not . Use a nonmetal bowl or container that can hold 8 cups because
the batter will expand in the night . The dough will keep for 2 or 3 days before it
becomes sour . 
2 tablespoons molasses
2 teaspoons ( 1 package ) dry active yeast
1 cup soymilk
2 cups buckwheat flour
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon salt
Oil or nonstick cooking spray
Dissolve the molasses in 2 cups of warm water . Sprinkle the yeast on top of the
water . Let yeast stand for 5 to 10 minutes or until it is foamy . Whisk the soymilk
into the yeast , breaking up any lumps that may have formed . Stir in the flours
and salt . Combine thoroughly but do not overmix . Cover and refrigerate for 8 or
more hours . 
When ready to cook , remove the dough from the refrigerator and stir it down . 
Heat a heavy skillet or griddle over medium to medium-high heat . Brush lightly
with oil or coat with nonstick cooking spray . When the griddle is hot , drop the
batter by tablespoonfuls . Do not crowd the pan . Cook the pancakes until bubbles
form on the tops and the edges appear firm . Turn the pancakes with a spatula and
cook on the other side until they are puffed and are golden brown on the bottom . 
Serve immediately or reserve in a warm oven . 
Makes 6 servings . 
Waffles
1 tablespoon egg replacer mixed with ¼ cup water
1 cup soymilk
2 tablespoons oil
1 cup whole wheat pastry flour
½ cup all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
2 teaspoons sugar
½ teaspoon salt
Nonstick cooking spray or additional oil
Whisk the egg replacer , soymilk , and oil together . Stir in the dry ingredients and
mix until blended . Heat the waffle iron and spray with cooking spray or brush
with oil . Pour in just enough batter to fill the iron . Close and bake until the
waffle has puffed up and steam stops coming from the sides . 
Makes 6 to 8 waffles . 
Toppings for Pancakes , Crepes , 
and Waffles
Raspberry Sauce
½ cup seedless raspberry preserves ( preferably an all-fruit variety ) 
2 tablespoons Framboise liqueur or water
Tiniest pinch salt
¼ cup fresh or frozen raspberries
In a small saucepan , thin the preserves with the liqueur or water and warm all the
way through . Add the salt . Just before serving , add the raspberries . Heat
thoroughly and serve . 
Makes ¾ cup . 
Spiced Blueberry Sauce
1 pint fresh blueberries
½ cup sugar
1 stick cinnamon
1 whole clove
Pinch salt
2 teaspoons cornstarch
2 tablespoons lemon juice
Place the fresh blueberries in a small saucepan with the sugar . Add the
cinnamon , clove , and salt . Add enough water to cover the blueberries by 1 inch . 
Turn the heat to high . When the blueberries have just begun to burst , remove the
pan from the heat . Dissolve the cornstarch in the lemon juice . Add to the hot
blueberries . If the mixture doesn ’ t thicken right away , return the pan to a low
heat and cook with occasional stirring for 3 to 5 minutes . Remove cinnamon
stick and clove before serving . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Strawberries Romanoff
1 pint of fresh strawberries
¼ to ½ cup sugar
1 teaspoon fresh orange zest
½ cup Cointreau or orange liquer
Wash and hull the strawberries . Cut the strawberries into quarters ( or smaller if
they are large )  . Add the sugar , orange zest , and Cointreau or orange liqueur . 
Allow the fruit to macerate overnight . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Spiced Apple Maple Sauce
1 tart apple
1 teaspoon oil
½ cup maple syrup
½ cup applesauce
1 teaspoon lemon juice
¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
teaspoon ground nutmeg
Pinch salt
Cut the apple into ½-inch chunks . Heat the oil in a small saucepan over medium
heat . When the pan is hot , put the apples in the pan and allow them to cook until
they caramelize slightly . In a bowl , whisk the maple syrup with applesauce , ¼
cup of water , lemon juice , cinnamon , nutmeg , and salt . Add to the pan and cook
until the apples are crisp-tender . 
Makes about 2 cups . 
Coffee Cake
cup brown sugar
cup whole wheat flour
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
cup chopped nuts ( optional ) 
2 tablespoons canola oil
1 cup all-purpose flour
cup sugar
¾ teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
¼ teaspoon salt
cup vegan sour cream or 6 ounces silken tofu blended with 1 tablespoon lemon juice and 1 tablespoon
oil
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
Mix the brown sugar , whole wheat flour , cinnamon , and nuts . Add the oil and
blend . If the mixture is too crumbly to make a good streusel , add 1 tablespoon of
water and blend until it resembles coarse crumbs . 
Grease an 8-inch square baking dish . Preheat the oven to 350° . 
Mix the all-purpose flour , sugar , baking soda , cinnamon , nutmeg , and salt in a
medium bowl . Stir in the sour cream and vanilla . Stir just until the mixture is
blended . Pour the batter into the prepared pan . Top evenly with the streusel
mixture . Bake for 25 to 30 minutes . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Scones
This is a basic recipe . Blueberries , chocolate chips , or diced apricots can easily
be substituted for the currants . If you are using a very moist fruit , reduce the
soymilk . For best results , cut the margarine into small cubes and chill well in the
refrigerator or freezer . 
2 cups all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
¼ cup sugar
teaspoon salt
4 tablespoons vegan margarine
¼ cup currants or chopped raisins
1 cup soymilk
Soymilk for brushing
Preheat the oven to 375° . Combine the flour , baking powder , sugar , and salt in a
large bowl and mix well . Cut in the margarine with a pastry cutter , two knives , 
or in a food processor until the mixture resembles a coarse meal . Add the
currants and mix well . Add the soymilk and stir just until the dough holds
together . Put the dough on a floured surface and knead 10 times . Overkneading
will make the scones tough . 
Roll the dough into a square about 1 inch thick . Cut the square into quarters . 
Cut the resulting squares into halves to form triangles . Place the scones 1 inch
apart on an ungreased baking sheet . Brush the tops of the scones with soymilk if
desired . Bake for 15 minutes or until golden brown . 
Makes 8 scones . 
Date–Oat Bran Scones
1 cup oat bran
1½ cups all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon ground cardamom
teaspoon ground cinnamon
teaspoon ground nutmeg
8 ounces pitted date pieces
½ cup cold vegan margarine , cut into cubes
¾ cup soymilk or rice milk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Soymilk for brushing
2 tablespoons rolled oats
Preheat the oven to 375° . 
Mix the oat bran , flour , baking powder , baking soda , spices , and dates together . 
Cut the margarine into the flour mixture with a pastry cutter , two knives , or in a
food processor until it resembles coarse meal . Add the soymilk and vanilla . Mix
just until the dough holds together . Put the dough on a floured surface and knead
10 times . Overkneading will make the scones tough . 
Roll the dough into a circle about 1 inch thick . Cut the circle into 8 wedges . 
Place the scones 1 inch apart on an ungreased baking sheet . Brush the scones
with soymilk and sprinkle with the rolled oats . Bake for 15 minutes or until
golden brown . 
Makes 8 scones . 
Good Morning Muffins
These muffins will give you a jump start on eating right for the day . 
1 cup whole wheat pastry flour
¼ cup soy flour
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
¼ teaspoon ground allspice or mace
½ teaspoon salt
½ cup sugar
½ cup raisins
2 tablespoons flaxseeds
¼ cup molasses
½ cup applesauce
1 cup soymilk
¼ cup oil
Preheat the oven to 375° . Spray a 12-cup muffin tin with nonstick cooking spray
and fit paper liners into the cups if desired . 
In a medium mixing bowl , combine the flours , baking powder , cinnamon , 
nutmeg , allspice , salt , and sugar . Add the raisins and toss to coat with the flour
mixture . Purée the flaxseeds with 2 tablespoons of water . In a small bowl , whisk
the molasses , puréed flaxseeds , and applesauce until well blended . Whisk the
soymilk and oil into the applesauce mixture . 
Add the wet ingredients to the dry ingredients and stir just until the mixture is
blended . Fill the muffin tins two-thirds full . Bake for 20 to 25 minutes . 
Makes 12 muffins . 
Polka Dot Muffins
Can ’ t get the kids to eat hot cream of wheat ? They ’ ll never suspect that these
charming little muffins are packed with iron . Use a chunky jam for this one—
jelly will make a mess . If you are using oil instead of margarine , reduce the
soymilk to ¾ of a cup and add an extra ¼ cup of flour . 
1¼ cups all-purpose flour
1 cup uncooked cream of wheat
½ cup sugar
1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons baking powder
½ teaspoon salt
1 cup soymilk
¾ cup vegan margarine , melted
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
12 teaspoons jam
Preheat the oven to 375° . Spray a 12-cup muffin tin with nonstick cooking spray
and fit paper liners into the cups if desired . 
In a medium bowl , combine the flour , cream of wheat , sugar , baking powder , 
and salt and mix well . Add the soymilk , margarine , and vanilla . Stir just until the
ingredients are blended . 
Divide the batter among the 12 muffin cups . Poke a small indentation into the
top of each muffin . Drop 1 teaspoon of jam into each indentation . Bake for 35
minutes . 
Makes 12 muffins . 
Blueberry Bran Muffins
Do you feel deprived when you choose a bran muffin over a blueberry one , but
do you feel guilty if you just get the blueberry ? Don ’ t hurt your brain like that in
the morning ! These muffins give you the best of both worlds . Use a bran cereal
that is fortified with vitamin B-12 . 
If you are using frozen blueberries , do not defrost them before mixing them
into the batter—unless you like blue food . 
1 cup All-Bran cereal
1 cup raw wheat germ
½ cup oil
1 cup soy-gurt
1 cup soymilk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 cup all-purpose flour
½ cup soy flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
1 cup sugar
1½ cups blueberries , fresh or frozen
Preheat the oven to 375° . Spray a 12-cup muffin tin with nonstick cooking spray
and fit paper liners into the cups if desired . 
In a medium bowl , mix the cereal , wheat germ , oil , soy-gurt , milk , and
vanilla . Let the mixture stand for a few minutes while you assemble the dry
ingredients . 
In a large bowl , mix the flours , baking powder , baking soda , salt , and sugar . 
Add the wet ingredients to the dry ingredients and stir just until they are blended . 
Gently fold in the blueberries , being careful that they don ’ t burst . Fill the muffin
tins about two-thirds full . Bake for 25 to 30 minutes . 
Makes 12 muffins . 
desserts
Cakes
Everyday Chocolate Cake
Company Chocolate Cake
Chocolate Raspberry Torte
Yellow Cake
Carrot Cake
Gingerbread
Cheesecake
Frostings
Chocolate Icing
Chocolate Glaze
Thin Chocolate Ganache
Thick Chocolate Ganache
Fluffy White Icing
Tofu Walnut Frosting
Lemon Glaze
Bars , Cookies , and Candy
Brownies
Oatmeal Ginger Bars
Linzer Cookie Squares
Chocolate Chip Cookies
Sugar Cookies
Chocolate Raisin Fudge
Peanut Butter Candy
Puddings
Easy Chocolate Pudding
Vanilla Pudding
Lebanese Rice Pudding
Mango Tapioca Pudding
Coconut Flan
Pies and Fruit Crisps
Shortening Crust
Oil Crust
Mango Cream Pie
Apple Cranberry Pie
Easy Peach Crisp
Pear Betty
Frozen Desserts
Soft-Serve Ice Cream
Strawberry-Banana Blast Ice Cream
Watermelon Ice
Learning to make your favorite desserts without butter or eggs can be a
challenge . Fortunately , with a little planning you can still indulge your taste for
sweets . Here are some tips on equipment , ingredients , and baking techniques that
will help you create mouth-watering vegan desserts . 
Pans : Vegan baked goods stick and burn more easily because they lack the
lecithin found in eggs and because they use oil instead of butter . Therefore , I
highly recommend that you invest in a heavy-gauge , insulated , air-bake cake pan
and cookie sheet—especially if your oven has uneven temperature control . 
These pans are more forgiving than other types of pans . 
To help prevent baked goods from sticking , add a small amount of liquid
lecithin to a dough or batter or to the oil or shortening used to grease the pans . 
You can also line the pans with parchment or waxed paper , then grease the paper
before baking . For cakes , sprinkle flour on the oiled parchment , shake until it is
evenly distributed , then tap out the excess . 
Shortening and margarine : Use shortenings and margarines which do not
contain hydrogenated fats . There are a few brands on the market which use
expeller pressed palm oil to produce a neutral , white shortening which is great
for vegan baking . 
When substituting shortening for butter , add 1 tablespoon of water to the
recipe for each ½ cup of shortening . 
When substituting margarine for butter , use an equal amount . When
substituting margarine for shortening , reduce the liquid in the recipe by 1½
tablespoons for each ½ cup ( or stick ) of margarine used . See the discussion of
fats and oils for more details , pages 24–29 . 
Egg replacers : Eggs provide leavening , strengthen gluten to provide
elasticity , retain moisture , give a good “ crumb ,  ” and help distribute fat evenly
throughout the product . Don ’ t be fooled by those cartons of egg replacers in the
dairy section : they are all based on eggs themselves , usually the whites . 
EnerG makes an easy-to-use egg replacement powder . Mix 1½ teaspoons of
powder with 2 tablespoons of water to make a reasonable substitution for one
whole egg ( in baking , not over-easy or in quiche )  . One package replaces 9½
dozen eggs , which explains the hefty price tag . 
For most recipes in which eggs are not a major ingredient , you can use 1½
tablespoons of oil , 1½ tablespoons of water , 1 teaspoon of baking powder , and a
tiny drizzle of liquid soy lecithin in place of one egg . If you want to reduce the
fat content of the recipe , you may substitute 3 tablespoons applesauce , mashed
banana , or mashed potato plus 1 teaspoon baking powder for one egg . One
tablespoon flaxseed blended with 1 tablespoon of water makes an acceptable
substitute , though you may need to add more leavening . See the discussion of
flaxseed oil on page 27 . 
To date , there is no good substitute for egg whites . 
Flours : In most recipes , a good quality , soft whole wheat pastry flour can
substitute for the all purpose flour . One-fourth of the all-purpose flour can be
replaced by soy flour with no additional adjustments . If you are using whole soy
flour ( not de-fatted )  , make sure the flour smells fresh before using it . Compared
to wheat flour , most other flours have a low gluten content . Gluten forms the
structure of the baked good . Guar gum and xanthan gum improve the quality of
gluten-free baked goods by helping to trap air , binding water , and improving
elasticity . To substitute a low-gluten flour for wheat flour , use ¾ cup of alternate
flour , ¼ cup of potato starch , and ¼ teaspoon of guar or xanthan gum . 
Technique : You probably don ’ t realize it , but when you are beating margarine
and sugar together or puréeing tofu with oil and sugar , you are helping to form
the air pockets that will keep your baked goods light . That is why it is very
important that you take some care with this step . Margarine and shortening
should be soft enough to beat with a spoon but not so soft that they are runny or
don ’ t hold a shape when the sugar is incorporated . Cut the cold margarine into
small cubes and sprinkle the sugar over it before you beat them together . Beat
them thoroughly , until the mixture is pale and fluffy . Introducing air
mechanically allows you to use less chemical leavening . 
Most chemical leavening agents release their carbon dioxide—the gas that
gets trapped and makes baked goods rise—when liquid first hits them . This is
why so many recipes admonish you to work quickly , stirring just until all
ingredients are mixed before pouring into a prepared pan . Overmixing releases
the carbon dioxide from the batter and significantly reduces the leavening action . 
CAKES
Where there ’ s a cake , there ’ s a celebration— even if you ’ re just celebrating
the end of a meal . I ’ m not sure that cakes can ever be considered healthful in the
same way salads are , but omitting them from our celebrations of life ’ s major
milestones would certainly be harmful to our mental health . 
Everyday Chocolate Cake
Most people would not consider changing their eating habits if it meant giving
up chocolate cake . So thank goodness there are plenty of recipes for vegan
chocolate cake—even The Joy of Cooking has one . 
This is a quick , easy cake . It ’ s not terribly sophisticated , but it certainly hits
the chocolate spot . This cake is moist enough to eat plain or sprinkled with
confectioners ’ sugar , but who ’ s going to argue with chocolate icing ? 
¾ cup boiling water
½ cup cocoa powder
1 tablespoon instant coffee powder
1 cup soy mayonnaise ( see the note below for a substitution ) 
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
2½cups flour
2 teaspoons baking soda
1 cup sugar
1 recipe Chocolate Icing ( page 297 , optional ) 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut 2 8-inch rounds of waxed or parchment paper . 
Lightly grease the bottoms of 2 8-inch round cake pans . Fit the waxed paper into
the bottoms of the cake pans . Grease and flour the sides and bottoms . 
In a small bowl , whisk the boiling water into the cocoa powder and instant
coffee . Allow the mixture to cool . Whisk the mayonnaise and vanilla extract into
the cocoa mixture . Mix the flour , soda , and sugar together . Add the cocoa
mixture and ½ cup of cold water to the dry ingredients and stir just until the
ingredients are blended but with no large lumps . Pour the batter into the prepared
pan and bake for 25 to 30 minutes . The cake will not pull away from the side of
the pan until after it begins cooling , so touch the top of the cake to determine
doneness . Allow the cakes to cool in the pans and invert to remove them . 
If icing the cake , when the cake is cool , trim the rounded tops off the layers so
they will be even . Place one layer , bottom up , on a cake plate .  ( This will help
prevent crumbs from mixing in with the icing .  ) Spread one-third of the icing to
within 1 inch of the cake ’ s edge . Place the second cake layer , bottom up , on top
of the first . Spread most of the remaining icing on the top of the cake , leaving a
thick border of icing around the edge . Carefully work the icing from the edge , 
down the side of the cake . Rotate the cake and continue until there is an even
layer of icing covering the whole cake . 
Makes 8 to 12 servings ( 2 8-inch cake layers )  . 
Note : You may make your own substitute for soy mayonnaise by combining 6
ounces of tofu , 2 teaspoons of lime juice , 1 teaspoon of lecithin , 1 tablespoon of
vegetable oil , and ½ teaspoon of salt in a blender . 
Company Chocolate Cake
This is a more refined cake , with a more delicate crumb , than the Everyday
Chocolate Cake above . It requires a quick hand and a watchful eye but is well
worth the attention . If your oven is temperamental , as my home oven is , keep a
close eye on it during the first 10 minutes of baking . If the oven is too hot , the
cake will rise too quickly and then fall . 
This recipe requires vegetable shortening . The margarines I tried were not
able to retain enough air during the beating process . So while it ’ s desirable to
avoid hydrogenated fats , you can make an exception for this cake as long as you
don ’ t eat the whole thing in one sitting . 
2 ounces unsweetened chocolate
½ cup ( 8 tablespoons ) vegetable shortening
1½ cups sugar
1 tablespoon oil
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
2½ cups cake flour
1½ teaspoons baking powder
1½ teaspoons baking soda
1 recipe Chocolate Icing ( page 297 ) or Thin Chocolate Ganache ( page 298 ) 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut 2 8-inch rounds of waxed or parchment paper . 
Lightly grease the bottom of 2 8-inch round cake pans . Fit the waxed paper into
the bottom of the cake pans . Grease and flour the sides and bottoms of the pans . 
Melt the chocolate and cool to room temperature . Beat the shortening and
sugar until well blended . Add the oil and beat until the mixture is quite fluffy
and forms a ball . Beat in the cooled chocolate .  ( Do not add the chocolate warm .  ) 
Beat in the vanilla extract . Add the flour , baking powder , baking soda , and 1½
cups of cold water . Working very quickly , beat all the ingredients together just
until they are mixed . The batter will be a bit stiff . Divide the batter between the
prepared pans and smooth the tops . Bake on the center rack of the oven for 20 to
30 minutes or just until the cakes begin to pull away from the sides of the pans
and the centers feel set . Allow the cakes to cool in the pans and invert to remove
them . 
When the cake is cool , trim the rounded tops off of the layers so they are even . 
Place one layer , bottom up , on a cake plate .  ( This will help prevent crumbs from
mixing in with the icing .  ) Spread one-third of the icing ( or ganache ) to within 1
inch of the cake ’ s edge . Place the second cake layer , bottom up , on top of the
first . Spread most of the remaining icing on the top of the cake , leaving a thick
border of icing around the edge . Carefully work the icing from the edge down
the side of the cake . Rotate the cake and continue until there is an even layer of
icing covering the whole cake . Use any leftover icing to patch any remaining
bare spots . 
Makes 8 to 12 servings ( 2 8-inch cake layers )  . 
Chocolate Raspberry Torte
This recipe uses Company Chocolate Cake , Thin Chocolate Ganache , and Thick
Chocolate Raspberry Ganache to create a sophisticated dessert . If you do not
plan to decorate the top of the cake with the Thick Chocolate Raspberry
Ganache , one recipe will be enough to fill the cake . 
The jam layer prevents the cake from absorbing the Thick Chocolate
Raspberry Ganache . When left overnight , the cake will absorb much of the Thin
Chocolate Ganache topping . If you are concerned about presentation , you may
want to use the Chocolate Glaze instead . When preparing this recipe , be sure to
make the ganaches or glaze in the order described in the method . 
2 Company Chocolate Cake layers , unfrosted ( page 292 ) 
1 12-ounce jar seedless raspberry preserves
¼ cup raspberry liqueur
2 recipes Thick Chocolate Raspberry Ganache ( page 298 ) 
1 generous pint fresh raspberries
1 recipe Thin Chocolate Ganache ( page 298 ) or 2 recipes Chocolate Glaze ( page 297 ) 
When the cake layers are cool , trim the rounded tops off of the layers to make
them flat . Cut each layer into halves horizontally . You may do this with a long
knife , or use a long length of dental floss as a saw to cut the layers . Melt the
raspberry preserves with the raspberry liqueur . Brush each of the four layers with
the warm raspberry preserves . Reserve the flattest , most uniform layer for the
top of the cake . 
Make the Thick Chocolate Raspberry Ganache and spoon ½ cup of it into a
pastry bag fitted with a decorative tip and reserve in a cool place . Evenly divide
the remaining ganache among the three bottom layers and spread evenly . 
Reserve 12 beautiful raspberries for garnishing the top of the cake . Divide the
remaining raspberries evenly among the bottom three layers of the cake . 
Assemble the torte , placing the reserved layer , cut side down , on top of the
bottom layers . Make the Thin Chocolate Ganache or Chocolate Glaze after the
cake has been assembled . Immediately frost the cake . Allow the frosting to cool . 
Use the pastry bag filled with Thick Chocolate Raspberry Ganache to pipe 12
swirls around the top edge of the cake . If the ganache in the pastry bag doesn ’ t
hold its shape on piping , refrigerate briefly until it does . Place a raspberry on
each swirl . Chill the cake for an hour or so or until the icings have set . 
Makes 12 servings . 
Yellow Cake
1½ cups flour
1 cup sugar
1 teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
½ cup oil
1 cup soymilk
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1 tablespoon vinegar
1 recipe Fluffy White Icing ( page 299 ) 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut an 8-inch round of waxed or parchment paper . 
Lightly grease the bottom of an 8-inch round cake pan . Fit the waxed paper into
the bottom of the cake pan . Grease and flour the side and bottom of the pan . 
In a medium mixing bowl , whisk the flour , sugar , baking soda , and salt
together . Add the oil , soymilk , and vanilla extract to the flour mixture and whisk
until smooth . Add the vinegar to the batter , mix briefly , and immediately pour
into the prepared pan . Bake on the center rack of the oven for 20 to 30 minutes
or just until the cake begins to pull away from the side of the pan and the center
of the cake feels set . Let cool in the pan for 2 minutes and invert onto a serving
plate . Fill and frost with Fluffy White Icing . 
Makes 6 servings ( 1 8-inch cake layer )  . 
Carrot Cake
1¾ cups whole wheat flour
½ cup soy flour
¼ cup shredded coconut
¾ cup walnuts ( optional ) 
½ teaspoon salt
1½ teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
¼ teaspoon ground allspice
Zest of 1 lemon
3 tablespoons oil
1 cup maple syrup
¼ cup molasses
¼ cup raisins
2½ cups grated carrots
1 recipe Tofu Walnut Frosting ( page 299 ) 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Grease and flour 2 9-inch round cake pans or 1 9x13-
inch pan . Combine the flours , coconut , walnuts , salt , baking powder , cinnamon , 
nutmeg , allspice , and lemon zest in a large bowl and mix well . Combine the oil , 
syrup , molasses , ¼ cup of water , raisins , and carrots in a large bowl and beat
until light . Add the flour mixture and mix just until blended . Do not overmix . 
Pour the batter into the pans and smooth the tops . Bake for 30 to 40 minutes or
until a wooden toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean . Let cool in the
pan for 2 minutes and invert onto a serving plate . Frost with Tofu Walnut
Frosting . 
Makes 12 servings . 
Gingerbread
Serve this perennial favorite plain , with applesauce , or topped with Lemon Glaze 
( page 299 ) or Fluffy White Icing ( page 299 )  . 
1 stick vegan margarine
1 cup sugar
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
½ cup molasses
2½ cups whole wheat pastry flour
1 tablespoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons powdered ginger
Preheat the oven to 350° . Cut an 8-inch round of waxed or parchment paper . 
Lightly grease the bottom of an 8inch round cake pan . Fit the waxed paper into
the bottom of the cake pan . Grease and flour the side and bottom of the pan . 
In a large bowl , beat the margarine , sugar , and fresh ginger together until the
mixture is light and fluffy . In a separate small bowl , mix the molasses with ½
cup of warm water . In another bowl , mix the flour , baking soda , salt , and
powdered ginger together . Add the molasses mixture to the margarine-and-sugar
mixture . Add the flour mixture and stir just until the ingredients are blended but
with no large lumps . Pour the batter into the prepared pan and bake for 35
minutes or until a toothpick comes out clean . Allow the gingerbread to cool in
the pan and invert to remove . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Cheesecake
Cheesecake can be tricky . I regulate the oven temperature by cracking the oven
door if the cake seems to be cooking too quickly . This cake does not brown at all , 
so if it begins to develop color in the first 15 minutes of baking , your oven
temperature is too high . You may also bake the cake in a water bath . Place the
cheesecake pan in a baking dish large enough to hold it with at least an inch all
around . Pull the center rack of the oven out halfway and set the pans in the
center . Pour boiling water in the bottom pan until the water reaches halfway up
the side of the cheesecake pan . Cooking time may or may not be affected , 
depending on your oven . 
½ cup whole wheat pastry flour
¼ cup toasted wheat germ
½ cup ground almonds
2 tablespoons vegan margarine , softened
2 tablespoons oil
Pinch salt
2 pounds silken tofu
1 cup sugar
½ cup maple syrup
¼ cup oil
½ cup soymilk
2 tablespoons cornstarch or ¼ cup all-purpose flour
1½ tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons orange juice or water
Zest of 1 orange or lemon
2 tablespoons Grand Marnier
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
Preheat the oven to 275° . Combine the flour , wheat germ , ground almonds , 
margarine , oil , and salt in a medium bowl and mix until the mixture resembles
crumbs . Press the mixture into the bottom of an 8-or 9inch springform pan or a
cake pan . Lightly grease the sides of the pan . 
Squeeze the tofu to remove excess water . In a blender or food processor , purée
the tofu , sugar , maple syrup , and oil . When the mixture is quite smooth , add the
remaining ingredients and purée again until quite smooth . Pour the batter over
the crust and bake in the center of the oven for 15 minutes . Insert a dinner knife
between the cake and the pan . Slide the knife around the perimeter of the pan to
separate the cake from the side of the pan . This will simplify the removal of the
cake from the pan later . Repeat this procedure a couple more times during
baking and again when you remove the cake from the oven . The cake is done
when it stops jiggling in the center when shaken , about 1¼ to 1½ hours total
baking time . Allow the cheesecake to cool completely in the pan . If the cake
does not begin to fall out of the pan when you carefully invert it , place the pan
on the burner at very low heat for 30 seconds and then try again . 
Makes 8 to 12 servings . 
Chocolate Cheesecake : Melt cup of semisweet chocolate chips , cool them to
room temperature , and add to the batter just before pouring into the shell . 
FROSTINGS
Chocolate Icing
This is just like the icings we used to make when I was a child . The only
difference is the use of vegan margarine and 10X sugar . If you can ’ t locate vegan
10X sugar , process 2 cups of vegan sugar with 1 tablespoon cornstarch in a food
processor until the sugar is quite fine . If the blades on your food processor are
not sharp enough , process the sugar in batches in a coffee grinder or blender . 
cup semisweet vegan chocolate chips
1 stick ( 8 tablespoons ) vegan margarine
3 cups 10X confectioners ’ sugar
2 tablespoons soymilk
Pinch salt
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Melt the chocolate and cool to room temperature . Beat the margarine , sugar , 
soymilk , salt , and vanilla extract together until the icing is quite fluffy . Beat the
cooled chocolate into the icing . 
Makes enough to frost 2 8-inch cake layers . 
Chocolate Glaze
3 ounces semisweet vegan chocolate chips
1 tablespoon vegan margarine
1 tablespoon corn syrup
Melt the chocolate chips in a small bowl or pan . While the chocolate is still hot , 
add the margarine and syrup . Stir until ingredients are well blended . Immediately
pour over cake and allow to drip over the sides . 
Makes enough to drizzle over 1 8-inch cake layer . 
Thin Chocolate Ganache
Ganache is a thin , rich chocolate icing . This version can be spread over a warm
cake to give an elegant , glossy finish . This recipe has a higher water content
than traditional ganache , so it will be absorbed over time by baked goods . 
However , the fat content of this ganache is significantly lower—and I prefer the
taste and texture . If you are icing a cake ahead of time and want a more
attractive appearance , you may opt for the Chocolate Glaze ( page 297 )  . 
cup semisweet vegan chocolate chips
2 ounces tofu , at room temperature
1 tablespoon maple syrup
1 small dribble lecithin
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 tablespoons vegan margarine , softened
Melt the chocolate chips . Blend the tofu , syrup , lecithin , vanilla extract , 2
tablespoons of hot water , and margarine until smooth . Add the melted chocolate
while still warm and blend thoroughly . Spread over a warm cake . If the ganache
has hardened or the cake is cold , spread the ganache as much as you can , then
place the plate with the half-iced cake in a slightly warm oven until the ganache
becomes workable . Remove the cake from the oven and spread the ganache over
the cake . 
Makes enough to glaze 2 8-inch cake layers . 
Thick Chocolate Ganache
This is the type of ganache used as filling . Any rum or liqueur can be used . 
½ cup semisweet vegan chocolate chips
2 ounces tofu , at room temperature
1 tablespoon maple syrup
1 small dribble lecithin
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 tablespoons vegan margarine , softened
1 tablespoon liqueur or dark rum , or 2 teaspoons vanilla extract or rum extract
Melt the chocolate chips . Blend the tofu , syrup , lecithin , vanilla extract , and
margarine together in a food processor or blender . Add the melted chocolate
while still warm . Allow the ganache to cool in the processor or blender . When
the ganache seems fairly stiff , add the liqueur or extract and blend until it is light
and fluffy . 
Makes enough to generously fill an 8-inch , 2-layer cake . 
Thick Chocolate Raspberry Ganache : For the liqueur , rum , or extract , sustitute 1
tablespoon of Framboise , raspberry brandy , or raspberry extract . 
Fluffy White Icing
4 ounces firm tofu , at room temperature
1 tablespoon maple syrup
2 cups 10X confectioners ’ sugar
1 small dribble lecithin
1 tablespoon lemon juice
Pinch salt
3 tablespoons vegan margarine , softened
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
Squeeze the excess water from the tofu . Combine all the ingredients in a blender
or food processor and purée . Let the icing rest in the blender or food processor
for 5 to 20 minutes , until the mixture seems fairly thick . If you are using a
blender , put the icing in a bowl and chill slightly during the resting time . When
the icing seems fairly stiff , whisk or process again until the icing is light and
fluffy . 
Makes enough to generously frost 1 8-inch cake layer . 
Tofu Walnut Frosting
¾ cup walnuts
1 pound tofu
cup maple syrup
¼ cup coconut
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1 cup coarsely chopped walnuts
Process the ¾ cup of walnuts in a food processor until they are a fine powder but
have not become pasty . Add the tofu and blend thoroughly . Add the maple syrup , 
coconut , and vanilla extract and process until thoroughly blended . Add a little
soymilk if the mixture seems too thick . 
Spread the icing evenly over the cooled cake . Press the chopped walnuts into
the side of the cake or sprinkle on top . 
Makes enough to frost and fill 2 9-inch cake layers . 
Lemon Glaze
1 cup 10X confectioners ’ sugar
2 teaspoons lemon juice
Whisk all the ingredients and 2 tablespoons of water in a bowl until there are no
lumps . Use immediately . 
Makes enough to glaze 1 9-inch cake layer . 
BARS , COOKIES , AND CANDY
Most people can ’ t resist a chewy chocolate brownie or warm chocolate chip
cookie . Cookies are an anytime treat . Eaten from your hand , they don ’ t require a
plate , fork , or knife , though you may want a napkin for the crumbs at the edge of
your mouth . 
Brownies
½ cup very hot espresso or strong coffee
cup cocoa
1 cup sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
cup vegetable oil , preferably grapeseed or canola
1¼ cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon salt
Preheat the oven to 350° . Grease an 8-inch square baking pan . Whisk the hot
coffee into the cocoa and sugar until smooth . Add the vanilla extract and oil and
whisk to blend thoroughly . Stir in the remaining ingredients just until blended . 
Excessive stirring will toughen the brownies . 
Pour the batter into the pan . Bake for 35 minutes . Let the brownies cool to
room temperature before cutting . 
Makes 12 brownies . 
Oatmeal Ginger Bars
2 cups rolled oats
1½ cups flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon ground ginger
1 cup sugar
½ teaspoon salt
¼ cup crystallized ginger , finely chopped
1 cup applesauce
½ cup vegetable oil
1 recipe Lemon Glaze ( page 299 ) 
Preheat the oven to 350° . Combine the oats , flour , baking powder , ginger , sugar , 
salt , and crystallized ginger . Add the applesauce and oil and stir just until
blended . Pour the mixture into a greased and floured 9x13-inch pan . Bake for 20
to 25 minutes or until the bars feel set in the center .  ( The toothpick test is not
reliable with applesauce-based baked goods .  ) When the cake is still slightly
warm , cut it into bars and drizzle with Lemon Glaze . 
Makes 24 bars . 
Linzer Cookie Squares
These are easier to make and lower in fat than traditional Linzertorten , but have
just as much flavor . Most any thick jam will work for the filling . All-fruit jams
will run more during baking , so to avoid an unpleasant burnt jam mess , make
sure the bottom layer of dough seals the pan tightly . 
4 tablespoons vegan margarine
2 tablespoons oil
½ cup corn syrup or barley malt
1½ cups flour
½ cup ground almonds
1 tablespoon baking powder
1½ teaspoons salt
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
¼ teaspoon ground allspice
½ cup water or soymilk
½ teaspoon almond extract
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
¾ cup raspberry jam , preferably seedless
½ cup sliced almonds ( optional ) 
Preheat the oven to 375° . Grease an 11x7-inch baking pan . Beat the margarine , 
oil , and syrup until light and fluffy . Combine the flour , almonds , baking powder , 
salt , and spices in a bowl and mix well . Cut the dry ingredients into the
margarine mixture until it resembles a coarse meal . Add the water or soymilk , 
almond extract , and vanilla extract and mix until a dough forms . 
Press half the dough into the pan , making sure there are no cracks . Spread the
jam over the dough . Crumble the remaining dough into tiny pieces over the jam . 
Press the dough together to form a solid layer of dough over the jam . Sprinkle
the sliced almonds over the dough and gently press into the dough . Bake for 20
to 25 minutes . Let the bars cool before cutting them . 
Makes 24 bars . 
Chocolate Chip Cookies
2 sticks vegan margarine
1½ cups Succanat or brown sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
½ cup whole wheat pastry flour
1½ cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
teaspoon salt
2 cups vegan chocolate chips
1 cup chopped nuts ( optional ) 
Preheat the oven to 375° . Lightly grease 2 cookie sheets or fit with parchment
paper . In a large bowl , beat the margarine , sugar , and vanilla until the mixture is
light and fluffy . Beat in 2 tablespoons of cold water . In a separate bowl , combine
the flours , baking powder , soda , and salt . Stir the flour mixture into the
margarine-sugar mixture . Add the chocolate chips and nuts . 
Drop by heaping tablespoonfuls onto the prepared cookie sheets . Flatten the
cookies slightly with your fingertips . Bake the cookies for 8 to 10 minutes or
until the edges just begin to brown . Remove from the cookie sheet immediately
and place on a cooling rack . 
Make 36 cookies . 
Sugar Cookies
cup sugar
3 tablespoons vegan margarine
2 tablespoons oil
1 tablespoon lemon juice
1½ cups all-purpose flour
½ teaspoon baking soda
Preheat the oven to 375° . Cover 2 cookie sheets with parchment or spray with
nonstick cooking spray . Beat the sugar with the margarine . Add the oil and
lemon juice and beat until the mixture is light and fluffy . Add the flour and
baking soda and mix until the dough forms a ball . Cover the dough with plastic
wrap or waxed paper and refrigerate until thoroughly chilled . 
Working on a lightly floured board , roll out half the dough to a thickness of
about to ¼ inch . Cut out shapes with cookie cutters dipped into flour . Place
the cookies on the prepared cookie sheets and bake for 8 to 10 minutes or until
the edges of the cookies just begin to brown . You may use all of the dough or
refrigerate a portion of the dough , wrapped in plastic wrap or waxed paper , for
later use . 
Make about 24 cookies . 
Chocolate Raisin Fudge
2 cups semisweet vegan chocolate chips
½ cup raisins
12 ounces firm tofu , at room temperature
½ cup brown rice syrup
1 small dribble lecithin
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 stick vegan margarine , softened
½ cup chopped , toasted peanuts or hazelnuts
Oil an 8-inch square pan . Melt the chocolate chips . Soak the raisins in ¾ cup of
hot water for 10 minutes . Blend the tofu , syrup , lecithin , vanilla extract , and
margarine together in a blender or food processor . Add the melted chocolate
while still warm and process until smooth . Transfer the tofu mixture to a small
mixing bowl . Drain the raisins . Stir in the raisins and nuts . Spread into the
prepared pan . Let the fudge cool completely and then refrigerate for several
hours . 
Makes 16 squares . 
Peanut Butter Candy
½ cup smooth peanut butter
½ cup brown rice syrup
1 cup toasted wheat germ
½ cup unsweetened shredded coconut or chopped nuts
Mix the peanut butter , syrup , and wheat germ . The mixture should be stiff
enough to hold its shape but a bit sticky . Form the mixture into small balls . Roll
the candies in the coconut or nuts and pat firmly . 
Makes 24 candies . 
Chocolate Peanut Butter Candy : Add ½ cup of melted vegan chocolate chips to
the initial mixture . 
PUDDINGS
I find the cool , creamy texture of puddings , custards , and flan to be very
soothing . There are several vegan pudding mixes for tofu available that are fast
and easy . Even without a mix , tofu puddings are as easy as puréeing tofu with a
little sweetener and enough soymilk to get the consistency you like , and perhaps
adding a little vanilla or orange zest . 
When storing puddings , cover with plastic wrap touching the surface to
prevent formation of a tough skin . 
Easy Chocolate Pudding
12 ounces soft tofu
1 small banana
¼ to ½ cup vanilla soymilk
2 or 3 tablespoons chocolate syrup
1 teaspoon vanilla extract Pinch salt
Purée all ingredients together in a blender or food processor . Pour into individual
dessert glasses and chill . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Vanilla Pudding
Use a full-flavored soymilk for this dessert . If the soymilk looks thin and watery , 
blend a couple of ounces of silken tofu into it . If you are using vanilla soymilk , 
reduce the sugar and use just 1 teaspoon of vanilla extract . 
cup sugar
2½ tablespoons cornstarch
teaspoon salt
2 cups creamy soymilk
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
2 tablespoons vegan margarine ( optional ) 
In a heavybottomed , medium saucepan , mix the sugar , cornstarch , and salt . 
Whisk in the soymilk slowly so no lumps form . Cook the mixture over medium
heat , stirring constantly , until it begins to thicken . Lower the heat and continue
cooking for another minute or so until it is fairly thick . Add the vanilla extract
and margarine . Pour the pudding into a bowl or 4 individual cups . Cover with
plastic wrap , pressing the wrap so that it touches the surface of the pudding .  
( This will prevent the formation of a tough skin .  ) Refrigerate the pudding for
several hours . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Lebanese Rice Pudding
cup cream of rice cereal , uncooked
2 cups water
1 cup soymilk ( or 1 additional cup water ) 
½ cup Sugar Syrup ( recipe follows ) or ¼ cup sugar
½ teaspoon cardamom
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon ground ginger
½ cup sugar syrup ( recipe on page 305 ) 
1 tablespoon chopped pistachios ( optional ) 
Mix the cream of rice , water , and soymilk in a pan until smooth . Slowly bring to
a simmer , and then cook over low heat , stirring constantly , until quite thick , 
about 15 minutes . Add the Sugar Syrup or sugar , cardamom , cinnamon , and
ginger to the cream of rice and mix well . 
Pour the pudding into 4 lightly oiled custard cups or 1 quart bowl . Tamp the
cups or bowl against a counter to remove air bubbles and chill until set . Turn the
puddings out onto dessert plates . Pour Sugar Syrup around the pudding and top
with chopped nuts . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Sugar Syrup
1 cup sugar
¼ teaspoon orange blossom or rose water
Heat the sugar and cup of water in a small pot over low heat , stirring , until
the sugar melts . Bring the syrup to a boil with no further stirring . Wash down
any sugar crystals that may form on the side of the pan with some cold water and
a pastry brush . When the syrup has boiled for about 3 minutes , remove it from
the heat and let cool to lukewarm . Add the orange blossom water ( or rosewater )  , 
mix well , and chill thoroughly . 
Makes about 1 cup . 
Mango Tapioca Pudding
If you can ’ t find mangoes , replace the water with mango or apricot nectar . In
fact most fruit juices will work well here . 
Mangoes can be intimidating if you are not accustomed to them . Examine the
fruit to determine where the large flat seed is located . Then , using a sharp chef ’ s
knife , cut the mango halves away from the flat sides of the seed . Cut a
checkerboard pattern into the flesh of each mango half with a paring knife , 
taking care not to cut through the skin . Place the mango half skin-side-down on
a cutting board . Flatten the mango against the board . Slip the knife between the
skin and the flesh to cut the pieces of flesh away from the skin . With a paring
knife , peel the skin from the remaining flesh on the seed . Cut the flesh from the
seed and cut into cubes . This may take some practice but once mastered , you will
have many years of mango happiness . The cook ’ s reward is that the pit can be
gnawed and sucked to release the last of its goodness . 
Don ’ t pass by those small mangoes in your supermarket . Often these are much
sweeter and less stringy than their larger cousins . 
cup sugar
3 tablespoons quick-cooking tapioca
Pinch salt
1 large or 2 small mangoes , peeled , seeded , and chopped or puréed
½ cup fresh raspberries
Mix the sugar , tapioca , and salt in a medium saucepan . Whisk in 2 cups of water . 
Cover and let stand for 5 minutes . 
Bring the mixture to a boil over medium heat . Cook for two minutes and
remove from heat . Let cool to warm . Add the mango . Divide the pudding among
4 serving cups and chill . Just before serving , garnish with fresh raspberries . 
Makes 4 servings . 
Coconut Flan
If your agar is in a light , puffy block or long , thin strands , crumble well before
using . 
¾ cup sugar
1 14-ounce can unsweetened coconut milk
1¾ cups almond milk
½ cup sugar
1 tablespoon agar
Put the sugar in a small , heavy saucepan . Drizzle 2 tablespoons of water over the
sugar . Do not stir . Place the pan over medium heat . When the sugar begins to
melt , gently swirl the pan . If any sugar crystals stick to the sides , brush them
down with a pastry brush dipped in a very small amount of cold water . When the
sugar turns a very light amber color , remove from the stove . The sugar will
continue to darken , so work quickly . Pour the caramel into ungreased custard
cups or a 1-quart serving bowl and swirl to coat the bottom and a portion of the
side with caramel . Do not pour caramel into all 4 custard cups at once or it may
harden before you have a chance to swirl it . 
Mix the coconut milk , almond milk , sugar , and agar in a small saucepan . Stir
to dissolve the sugar ; the agar may not fully dissolve until heated . Bring the
mixture to a boil over medium heat . Reduce the heat to medium-low and simmer
for 6 minutes , making sure that all of the agar has dissolved . Pour the flan into a
bowl set over ice . Stir the flan until it has cooled from hot to warm ( about 100° )  . 
Pour the flan on top of the caramelized sugar . Let stand for at least 2 hours or
overnight . 
Makes 4 servings . 
PIES AND FRUIT CRISPS
Finding just the right touch with piecrust dough takes some experience . If
dough is worked too much when mixing or handling , the gluten will develop and
the crust will be tough . If it is not mixed enough , the fat won ’ t be evenly
distributed and the texture will be uneven . 
I was lucky enough to be able to observe my mother as she rolled out perfect
crusts every time . Practice makes perfect so get rolling ! And if you ’ re pressed
for time or just feeling lazy , try a fruit crisp . These desserts combine the “ pastry ” 
with the fruit and are relatively quick and easy . 
Here are general instructions for rolling and baking perfect piecrust . 
Rolling the crust : On a lightly floured board , begin in the middle and lightly
roll the dough into a circle , turning the dough as you go . If the dough sticks , run
a floured hand under the crust . The dough circle should be 1 inch larger in
diameter than the top of your pie pan and have an even thickness . 
Fold the dough in half or roll it up onto the rolling pin and lay it over the pie
pan . Gently fit the dough into the pan . Trim any dough so that 1 inch of dough
hangs over the edge of the pan . 
The top crust should be rolled out in the same fashion—perhaps a little thinner
if the pie filling is voluminous , as in apple pies . 
Blind baking : Crusts are prebaked for fully cooked fillings .  “ Blind ” baking
means that the crust is hidden from sight when it ’ s being cooked . Just keep an
eye on the edges and the middle will take care of itself . Preheat the oven to 400° . 
Prick the bottom of the piecrust all over with a fork . Place a piece of parchment
or waxed paper over the crust . Fill the pie with weights or beans . Bake the crust
until the edges just begin to brown , about 15 minutes , checking frequently to
make sure that it is not browning too quickly . 
Shortening Crust
This is an old-standby recipe . Shortening produces a crisp , flaky crust that is
hard to match . Chilling your shortening will produce a tender crust . 
2 cups flour
1 teaspoon salt
¾ cup vegetable shortening
Mix the flour and salt together . Using a food processor , a pastry cutter , or two
knives , cut the shortening into the flour until it resembles very coarse meal . 
Sprinkle 5 tablespoons of cold water over the flour and pulse in a food processor
or mix with a fork until the dough just holds together in a ball . If it is sticky , dust
with a little flour . 
Cut the ball in half with a knife and , with lightly floured hands , form each half
into a 6-inch disc . Wrap the discs in plastic or waxed paper and refrigerate until
ready to use . 
Remove the dough from the refrigerator 15 minutes before using it . 
Makes enough dough for 2 piecrusts . 
Oil Crust
This crust will not have the flaky texture of a shortening crust , but it also won ’ t
have the saturated fat or trans–fatty acid content . Because this dough is so lean , 
take care not to overmix it or handle it too much , as it can easily grow tough . 
2 cups flour
1 teaspoon salt
½ cup oil
¼ cup soymilk
Mix all the ingredients together with a fork or pulse in the food processor just
until blended . Shape the dough into 2 6-inch discs and refrigerate for 10 minutes
before using . 
Makes enough dough for 2 piecrusts . 
Clockwise from top : 
Apple Energizer ( page 319 )  , Chocolate Peanut Butter Shake ( page 318 )  , 
Strawberry-Banana Smoothie ( page 318 )  , Creamy Dreamy Orange
Smoothie ( page 318 )  , V-5 ( page 320 )  . 
Hash Browns ( page 278 )  , Scrambled Tofu ( page 275 )  , Country-Style
Tempeh Sausages ( page 277 )  . 
Company Chocolate Cake ( page 292 ) with Chocolate Icing ( page 297 ) 
and toasted almonds . 
Large plate on left : Peanut Butter Candy ( page 303 )  , 
Chocolate Peanut Butter Candy ( page 303 )  , 
Brownies ( page 300 )  , Lebanese Rice Pudding ( page 304 )  . 
Small plate in back : Coconut Flan ( page 306 )  . 
Small plate in front : Chocolate Raisin Fudge ( page 302 )  . 
Mango Cream Pie
½ recipe Shortening Crust ( page 308 ) 
1 15-ounce package firm silken tofu , at room temperature
2 large mangoes , peeled , seeded , and diced ( page 305 ) 
1 teaspoon guar gum ( optional ) 
cup sugar
2 teaspoons lime juice
Tofu Cream ( recipe follows ) 
Roll the dough and bake the piecrust according to the directions on page 307 . 
Purée the tofu with the mangoes . Add the guar gum , sugar , and lime juice and
purée until the mixture is quite smooth . Pour the filling into the prepared crust . 
Cover the pie and refrigerate until well chilled , about 2 hours . Top with Tofu
Cream . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Tofu Cream
6 ounces firm silken tofu
2 tablespoons soymilk
½ teaspoon guar gum
2 tablespoons maple syrup or 3 tablespoons sugar
1 teaspoon lime juice
1 tablespoon oil or softened vegan margarine
1 teaspoon vanilla extract Pinch sea salt
Purée all the ingredients together . Let the mixture stand for 15 minutes , and
whisk or whip again until light and fluffy . 
Makes about 1 cup . 
Apple Cranberry Pie
Fruit pie recipes often call for adding flour to the filling to thicken the fruit
juices . My mother taught me to replace flour with tapioca , which doesn ’ t obscure
the pure fruit flavors the way flour can . 
If you are using sweetened , dried cranberries , reduce the sugar to 3 . 4 cup . 
1 recipe Oil Crust ( page 308 ) 
4 Granny Smith apples , peeled , cored , and cut into thick slices
cup cranberries , dried or fresh
2 tablespoons thinly sliced crystallized ginger
1 cup sugar
3 tablespoons tapioca
Pinch sea salt
2 tablespoons oil , preferably canola ( optional ) 
Roll the dough according to the directions on page 307 . Fit one crust in the pie
pan . Preheat the oven to 350° . In a large bowl , toss the apples , cranberries , 
ginger , sugar , tapioca , salt , and oil until well blended . Mound the applecranberry mixture in the piecrust . Cover the filling with the second piecrust and
press the edges together with a fork , or pinch decoratively . Cut a few small vent
holes in the upper crust . Set the pie on a baking sheet in the oven and bake until
the apples are tender and the crust has browned , about 1 hour . Cool the pie
before cutting , about 30 minutes . Serve warm or at room temperature . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Easy Peach Crisp
6 cups frozen peaches
2 teaspoons lemon juice
½ cup sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground ginger
teaspoon ground nutmeg
1½ cups granola , preferably gingersnap
2 tablespoons vegan margarine , melted
Preheat the oven to 350° . Oil an 8-inch square glass baking dish . 
Toss the peaches with the lemon juice , sugar , salt , and spices . Put the peaches
in the prepared pan and top with the granola . Cover the pan with aluminum foil
and bake for 30 minutes or until the peaches are very tender . Remove the foil . 
Drizzle the granola with the margarine . Place the pan under the broiler and
gently brown the granola . Serve hot or at room temperature . 
Makes 8 servings . 
Pear Betty
1 cup rolled oats
½ cup all-purpose flour
1¼ cups Succanat or brown sugar
cup toasted sliced almonds or hazelnuts
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground ginger
Pinch sea salt
4 tablespoons vegan margarine or ¼ cup oil
4 pounds ripe pears , cored and cut into wedges
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
½ cup raisins
Preheat the oven to 400° . Lightly oil or spray a 9x13-inch baking dish . Combine
the oats , flour , ½ cup of sugar , nuts , spices , and salt in a bowl and mix well . 
Work the margarine or oil into the dry ingredients until it resembles coarse
crumbs . Sprinkle cup of cold water over the mixture and stir to incorporate . 
Reserve . 
Toss the pears with the lemon juice , remaining ¾ cup of sugar , and raisins . 
Pour the fruit in the baking dish . Top with the oat mixture . Bake until the pears
soften and the topping is golden , about 40 minutes . Cool on a rack for at least 15
minutes before serving . 
Makes 8 servings . 
FROZEN DESSERTS
On a hot summer day , nothing is more refreshing than fruit ices or ice cream . 
Fruit ices , of course , don ’ t need to be adapted for a vegan diet . Ice cream
obviously requires some modification , but with some soymilk and tofu , you can
make a tasty frozen treat . The total preparation time for frozen desserts is much
reduced if all the ingredients are chilled . For more frozen dessert ideas , check
out the smoothie recipes in “ Beverages ”  ( pages 317–320 )  . 
Soft-Serve Ice Cream
If you have a small ice cream maker , this recipe may be processed into a more
traditional ice cream . The blender method , however , produces a nostalgic treat . 
1 cup flavored soymilk
1 10-ounce package silken tofu
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
Pinch sea salt
Process all the ingredients in a blender or food processor until smooth . Freeze
the mixture in ice cube trays . When the cubes are frozen , grind them in the food
processor until smooth and airy , adding more soymilk if needed . Serve
immediately . 
Makes 2 to 4 servings . 
Strawberry-Banana Blast Ice Cream
2 cups soymilk
1 tablespoon agar flakes
16 ounces silken tofu
1 pint strawberries , hulled
2 bananas
1 6-ounce can orange juice concentrate
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Heat the soymilk in a small pan . Add the agar and bring to a boil . Reduce the
heat and simmer for 5 minutes or until the flakes have dissolved . Let cool to
room temperature . Blend the tofu , strawberries , bananas , juice concentrate , and
vanilla extract in a food processor . Add the soymilk and blend again . Freeze the
mixture in an ice cream freezer . 
Makes 8 to 10 servings . 
Watermelon Ice
4 cups 1-inch watermelon cubes , seeds removed
1 teaspoon fresh lime juice ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon chopped fresh mint leaves
Pinch sea salt
Combine all the ingredients in a bowl and toss to blend . Transfer the mixture to a
flat-bottomed , glass or ceramic baking dish . Cover the dish tightly and freeze for
about 2 hours or until the watermelon is frozen solid . Process half of the frozen
watermelon in a food processor until grainy . Repeat with the remaining
watermelon . Spoon the mixture back into the container . Cover the container
tightly and freeze . Stir after 30 minutes . Return to the freezer and stir again after
another 30 minutes . Freeze for 1 hour or until frozen solid . With an ice cream
scoop , using long , scraping strokes , shave the watermelon ice and put into
chilled glasses . For a smoother consistency , process the mixture again in a food
processor . Serve immediately or cover the glasses and freeze the watermelon ice
until ready to serve . 
Makes 2 to 4 servings . 
beverages
Milks
Banana Milk
Oatmeal Banana Milk
Almond Milk
Rice Milk
Smoothies
Chocolate Peanut Butter Shake
Strawberry-Banana Smoothie
Creamy Dreamy Orange Smoothie
Piña Colada Smoothie
Apple Energizer
Mango Lassi
V-5
Ginger Mint Julep
Ades and Teas
Strawberry-Basil Lemonade
Easy Soda
Hibiscus Tea
Chai Concentrate
Water is essential to life , so my initial inclination was to have only one recipe in
this chapter :  “ Water : Drink cold , hot , or room temperature . Catch on the tongue
during a spring shower , or eat as fresh snow .  ” 
But variety is the spice of life , so here are some refreshing beverages that will
let you increase your water intake in style . In addition to being thirst quenching , 
many of these drinks provide a nutritional boost as well . For the best results , use
fresh ingredients with filtered or spring water . 
MILKS
While you can make soymilk at home , it is a long , tedious process with results
that are often inferior to the soymilk sold at the grocery store . It ’ s hard to
improve on commercial soymilk , which has a pleasant flavor and texture and is
fortified with vitamins A , D , and E , riboflavin ( B-2 )  , and calcium . 
However , there are other delicious milk drinks that you can efficiently prepare
yourself . To add body to the milk , substitute brown rice or corn syrup for sugar . 
Carageenan , xanthan gum , or guar gum will also thicken the milk . If you want to
experiment with these additives , start with a very small amount , teaspoon for
2 cups of water , since they do impart a slight taste . 
Banana Milk
This is a quick answer to the question ,  “ What am I going to put on my cereal ?  ” 
1 banana
1 cup water
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
Blend all ingredients in a blender or food processor until smooth . Drink or use
immediately , as the banana will discolor in a short time . 
Makes about 1½ cups . 
Oatmeal Banana Milk
1 banana
1 cup cooked oatmeal
2 cups water
½ teaspoon lemon juice
1 teaspoon vanilla extract ( optional ) 
Blend all ingredients in a blender or food processor until smooth . Use
immediately or refrigerate for up to 2 days . 
Makes about 3¼ cups . 
Almond Milk
Nut milks are particularly good as the bases for sauces . If you are using this as a
beverage , a little vanilla , nutmeg , and sweetener are tasty additions . Almonds
make the most pleasing beverage , but cashews may be used also . 
1 cup raw blanched almonds
Soak the almonds for 8 to 12 hours in 3 cups of water . Strain and rinse the nuts . 
In a blender or food processor , purée the almonds with 4 cups of hot water . Purée
for 3 minutes or until the mixture is as smooth as possible . Strain the milk
through cheesecloth , squeezing out all the liquid . Sweeten if desired . Use
immediately or refrigerate for up to 5 days . 
Makes about 4 cups . 
Rice Milk
Aromatic rice , such as jasmine or basmati , produces flavorful results , but almost
any rice will do . However , if you choose to use brown rice , the Rice Milk will
take 2 to 3 hours to cook . If you omit the cashews and sweeteners , you will have
made congee , or Chinese rice porridge . Congee ( page 279 ) is served with
various toppings for breakfast or lunch . Make sure to save some unsweetened
Rice Milk for Vegan Gravy ( page 144 )  . Rice Milk keeps for 5 days in the
refrigerator . 
¾ cup raw white rice
¼ cup cashews or almonds
6 cups water
¼ cup Succanat or sugar ( optional ) 
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
teaspoon salt
Place the rice in a large pot and cover with cold water . Agitate the rice to release
any debris . Drain the rinse water and add the cashews and 6 cups of water to the
pot . Bring the rice to a boil . Reduce the heat to medium-low and simmer for 2
hours . Check the pot periodically and add water , typically 2 to 3 cups more , to
maintain the same level of water in the pot . The rice should be falling apart and
the liquid quite milky . Cover the pot and allow it to cool to room temperature . 
Add sugar , vanilla , and salt . Blend the milk with an immersion blender . Keep
refrigerated . 
Makes about 2 quarts . 
SMOOTHIES
Smoothies are often spontaneous concoctions , with bits and pieces of fruits , 
flavorings , and fillers coming together in serendipitous harmony . My favorite
smoothies are made from fresh fruits in season—when the price is the lowest
and I can indulge with abandon . 
Thickeners for smoothies : To add body and improve the texture in
combinations with little bulk , add tofu , almonds , cashews , tahini , bananas , 
peanut butter , cooked oatmeal , or ice . Use frozen fruit or frozen juice to provide
the texture of ice along with intense flavor . Individually quick-frozen fruit ( often
labeled IQF ) works best since it has no added sugars . 
Plan ahead for your spontaneous treats by cutting peeled bananas into chunks , 
wrapping them in plastic wrap , and freezing them like ice cubes . You can also
freeze fruit juice in ice cube trays . 
Healthful additions : Since smoothies often replace a regular meal , it ’ s a good
idea to try packing in some added nutrition . Remember that blending or puréeing
retains all of the vegetable fiber that would be left behind in a juicer . For a
healthy boost , try adding wheat germ , flaxseed , flaxseed oil , kelp , parsley , 
ginger , parsley , or miso . 
Chocolate Peanut Butter Shake
3 tablespoons smooth peanut butter
1 cup soymilk
2 tablespoons chocolate syrup
Ice cubes
Combine the peanut butter and a little soymilk to thin the peanut butter ; this will
ensure even processing . Blend the peanut butter , soymilk , and chocolate syrup in
a blender or food processor until smooth . Add ice cubes and process until it is
thick and frosty . 
Makes 1 serving . 
Strawberry-Banana Smoothie
1 banana , peeled
1 cup pineapple juice or vanilla soymilk
1 cup individually quick-frozen ( IQF ) strawberries
Blend all ingredients together in a blender or food processor , adding the
strawberries last . Adjust the consistency with soymilk , water , juice , or ice . 
Makes 1 to 2 servings . 
Creamy Dreamy Orange Smoothie
2 cups vanilla soymilk
1 16-ounce can frozen orange juice concentrate
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 tray ice cubes
Blend all ingredients together in a blender or food processor , adding the ice last . 
Adjust the consistency with soymilk , water , juice , or ice . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Piña Colada Smoothie
2 bananas
1 cup pineapple , fresh or canned
1 14-ounce can unsweetened coconut milk
4 ounces silken tofu
2 tablespoons maple syrup
Ice cubes
Blend all ingredients together in a blender or food processor , adding the ice last . 
Adjust the consistency with soymilk , water , juice , or ice . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Apple Energizer
I like using Granny Smith apples for their bright green color . For the best
presentation , add the carrot at the end of blending . You ’ ll get bright orange
flecks suspended in the beautiful pale green smoothie . 
2 small apples , cored and cut into chunks
1 stalk celery , thinly sliced
2 thin slices peeled ginger
1 cup water or orange juice
8 sprigs parsley
1 small carrot , peeled and thinly sliced
Blend all ingredients together in a blender or food processor until puréed . Adjust
the consistency with soymilk , water , juice , or ice . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Mango Lassi
1 mango , peeled , seeded and diced
1 cup soy-gurt or kefir , or 1 cup soymilk and 2 teaspoons lime juice
2 tablespoons sugar ( omit if using vanilla yogurt or soymilk ) 
Ice cubes
Blend all ingredients together in a blender or food processor , adding the ice last . 
Adjust the consistency with soymilk , water , juice , or ice . 
Makes 2 servings . 
V-5
2 cups water or tomato juice
2 medium-size ripe tomatoes
1 stalk celery , thinly sliced
¼ medium green bell pepper , thinly sliced
1 green onion , thinly sliced
8 sprigs parsley or basil
½ teaspoon kelp powder or 2 teaspoons miso
Blend all ingredients together in a blender or food processor until puréed . Adjust
the consistency with water , juice , or ice . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Ginger Mint Julep
2 cups water
2 cups sugar
2 inches fresh ginger , thinly sliced
1 cup loosely packed mint leaves
Bourbon ( optional ) 
In a small saucepan , boil the water , sugar , and ginger for 5 minutes . Turn off the
heat . Add the mint leaves to the syrup . Cover the pan and let the syrup cool to
room temperature . Strain the syrup , pressing the mint leaves to release all the
liquid . Store in the refrigerator . Keeps for 1 week . 
To serve , mix equal parts syrup and water or bourbon and serve over crushed
ice . Alternatively , place the water and syrup in a blender and add 1 glassful of
ice cubes . 
Makes about 2½ cups syrup , enough for 12 bourbon or 6 virgin juleps . 
ADES AND TEAS
There are times when water simply doesn ’ t slake a thirst . Our bodies are
calling for something more refreshing . Ades and teas can give you that extra
little something your body is calling for , keeping you hydrated and happy at the
same time . 
Strawberry-Basil Lemonade
1¼ cups strawberries , fresh or individually quick-frozen
12 fresh basil leaves
½ cup sugar
1½ cups fresh lemon juice from 6 to 9 lemons
5 to 6 cups water
Purée the strawberries and basil with the sugar . Combine the strawberry mixture , 
lemon juice , and water in a pitcher and mix well . Taste and adjust the sweetness
with additional sugar . Serve over ice . 
Makes 2 quarts . 
Easy Soda
Making your own soda can eliminate the preservatives and artificial colors
found in so many packaged drinks . These can be of particular concern to parents
of children with chemical sensitivities . If you are adventurous , try buying a soda
siphon . This will allow you to carbonate almost any beverage . 
1 can all-fruit juice concentrate
2 liters seltzer water
Combine the concentrate and seltzer water in a pitcher and mix well . Serve
immediately over ice . 
Makes 2½ quarts . 
Hibiscus Tea
This is a traditional rehydration drink . Look for hibiscus flowers in Caribbean
markets . 
4 cups boiling water
4 ounces dried hibiscus flowers , also called dried sorrel
1 tablespoon grated fresh ginger
2 whole cloves
Zest of 1 lime
Zest of 1 orange
½ cup sweetener
Pour the water over the hibiscus , ginger , cloves , and zests . Cover the tea and
steep for 12 to 24 hours . Strain the tea concentrate and sweeten to taste . 
To serve , mix the concentrate with an equal volume of water . Add ice and
serve with a wedge of lime . 
Makes enough for 2 quarts of tea . 
Chai Concentrate
I don ’ t remember the circumstances of my first cup of chai , but I do remember
the enchantment of the heady spices , strong tea , and rich milk . If your only
experience of this North Indian specialty is at your local coffee shop ( which is
probably using a concentrate )  , try making your own . You can adapt the spice
blend to your personal taste , increasing the ginger in winter to help ward off the
sniffles . 
If you use ground cinnamon instead of cinnamon sticks , remember that a little
goes a long way . 
4 cups water
2 cinnamon sticks or ground cinnamon
4 cardamom pods , lightly crushed to break pods
6 whole cloves
1 inch fresh ginger , thinly sliced
7 or 8 black , pink , or white peppercorns
Pinch fennel seeds
3 tablespoons loose leaf tea , preferably Assam
½ cup sugar
4 cups soymilk
Bring the water to a boil in a saucepan . Reduce the heat and add the spices . 
Simmer for 10 minutes . Add the tea and steep for 5 minutes . Strain the tea and
add the sugar . Let cool and then refrigerate . 
To serve , warm equal parts soymilk and tea . Sweeten as desired . 
Makes enough for 8 to 10 cups tea . 
treats for kids
Ants on a Log
Red Ant Attack
Birds ’ Nests
Cinnamon Monster Fingers
Sunflower Salad
Dirt Pudding
Special-Occasion Crispy Rice Bars
Popcorn Balls
Sometimes we have to trick children into eating what ’ s healthy for them . 
Nutritious food can be a hard sell to a generation constantly bombarded by
images of empty calories . To entice your kids , try presenting healthy food in fun
ways . Children can help with most of these recipes . It can be a little messy , but
it ’ s fun—for the child , at least . 
Ants on a Log
2 stalks celery
1 tablespoon peanut butter
1 tablespoon raisins
Fill the celery stalks with peanut butter . Arrange raisin “ ants ” in a line on top . 
For ants on a tree , use stalks that still have the leaves attached . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Red Ant Attack
Here is a good way to disguise tofu . The acid from the pineapple thickens the
tofu a bit , but depending on the brand you are using , you may want to add a few
raw , ground cashews to give this a slightly better texture . 
2 ounces firm tofu or cream cheese substitute
2 tablespoons crushed pineapple
1 teaspoon brown rice syrup
2 stalks celery
1 tablespoon dried cranberries
Mash or purée the tofu , pineapple , and brown rice syrup together until well
blended . Fill the celery stalks with the tofu mixture . Arrange dried cranberry 
 “ ants ” in a line on top of the pineapple mixture . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Birds ’ Nests
Use fortified bran cereal to add a nutritional boost to snack time . Shredded
carrots , apples , or coconut may be added to make nests for different species . Any
small round fruit will work here . Use a dried apricot half for an ostrich egg or
fresh blueberries for robins ’ eggs . 
2 slices whole wheat bread
2 tablespoons peanut butter
1 tablespoon jam or jelly
cup bran cereal
2 teaspoons raisins
Using a biscuit cutter , cut 2 3-inch rounds from the bread and spread peanut
butter on them . In a small pan on the stove or in the microwave , melt the jelly
over low heat . Mix the bran cereal with the jelly . Using a spoon , arrange the bran
cereal around the edge of the bread to resemble the twigs of a nest . Arrange the
raisin “ eggs ” in the center of the nest . Let the nest cool completely before giving
it to your child . 
Makes 2 servings . 
Cinnamon Monster Fingers
This just may be the way to get your kids to eat whole grain bread . Use a moist
whole grain bread like Everything Bread ( page 263 ) to get a crunchy outside
and chewy inside that closely resembles the texture of a monster . 
If turbinado sugar is your sweetener of choice , be warned that it is usually too
coarse for this recipe . You may wish to grind it to a finer texture in a food
processor or coffee grinder . Cinnamon sugar is normally 1 part ground
cinnamon to 4 parts sugar . 
1 loaf whole grain bread , unsliced
Softened vegan margarine About cup cinnamon sugar
Preheat the broiler . Cut the bread into 1¼-inch slices . Cut off the crusts . Cut
each slice into 1¼-inch strips . Place the bread fingers on a baking sheet and broil
until the fingers are lightly toasted , turning once . Generously spread the softened
margarine on the fingers and roll them in cinnamon sugar . Return to the broiler
and broil until the sugar is bubbly . Sprinkle with a little more cinnamon sugar if
necessary . Let the fingers cool slightly before giving them to children . 
Makes about 24 pieces . 
Sunflower Salad
1 tablespoon dried dates
2 tablespoons raisins
1 orange
2 tablespoons sunflower seeds
Mint sprigs
Place the dates and raisins in a small bowl . Pour 2 tablespoons of boiling water
over the fruit , and cover with a plate or plastic wrap . Alternatively , put the
raisins , dates , and 2 tablespoons of water in a small microwave-safe bowl and
microwave them until the mixture is warm but not boiling . 
Cut away the pith and peel of the orange to expose the pulp . Cut the sections
out of the membrane . Drain any excess water from the dates and raisins . Squeeze
the juice from the orange membrane over the dates and raisins . 
In a food processor , pulse the dates , raisins , and 1 tablespoon of sunflower
seeds together . Put this mixture in the middle of a plate . Arrange the remaining
sunflower seeds on top to resemble the middle of a blooming sunflower . Arrange
the orange “ petals ” around the center . Construct a stem and leaves from the mint
sprigs . 
Makes 2 child-size servings . 
Dirt Pudding
The Everyday Chocolate Cake recipe can be halved successfully , but it can ’ t be
quartered successfully . I recommend that you halve the recipe and freeze the
unused portion of the cooked cake for another day . Serve the pudding in colorful
paper party cups for easy cleanup . 
¼ Everyday Chocolate Cake ( page 291 ) 
2 recipes Vanilla Pudding ( page 304 ) 
1 6-or 8-ounce package Gummi Worms ( make sure the brand you choose is made with cornstarch , not
gelatin ) 
Crumble the cake into small pieces . Layer a third of the crumbs in a large
serving bowl or individual 8-ounce custard cups . Cover cake crumbs with half
the pudding . Layer another third of the cake crumbs on the pudding , followed by
the rest of the pudding . Crumble half of the remaining cake crumbs on top of the
pudding . Randomly distribute the worms over the surface , burying them in the 
 “ dirt ” at different levels . Sprinkle the remaining cake crumbs over the worms . 
Makes 6 to 8 servings . 
Special-Occasion Crispy Rice Bars
Log Cabin makes a cinnamon syrup meant for pancakes that can substitute for
the corn syrup to add a kick to these treats . 
1 cup smooth peanut butter
1 cup corn syrup
1 cup sugar
1 tablespoon vegan margarine
7 cups crispy rice cereal
1 cup vegan butterscotch chips
1 cup vegan chocolate chips
In a Dutch oven or large , wide pot , melt the peanut butter , syrup , sugar , and
margarine together . When the sugar is dissolved and the mixture is warm , add
the rice cereal and mix well . Oil your hands slightly and pat the mixture into a 9-
inch square pan . Melt the butterscotch chips in the microwave and spread over
the bars . Melt the chocolate chips in the microwave and spread over the
butterscotch layer . Refrigerate until the chocolate layer hardens slightly . Cut the
mixture into bars before the chocolate layer becomes really hard . If the chocolate
or butterscotch cracks when you try to cut the bars , heat a sharp knife under hot
water before cutting . 
Makes 9 1-inch bars . 
Popcorn Balls
If possible , have someone help you form the popcorn balls because speed is of
the essence . Keep a bowl of cold water and a hand towel close by to cool your
hands . You can try adding a tablespoon of nutritional yeast to the corn before
mixing with the syrup . The yeast will add a nutty flavor and lots of good B
vitamins . 
8 cups unsalted popped popcorn
1 cup sugar
½ cup molasses
2 teaspoons vinegar
¼ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon vegan margarine
½ cup peanuts
Put the popcorn into a large bowl and keep warm . Whisk the sugar , molasses , ¼
cup of water , and vinegar in a small saucepan . When the sugar is dissolved , 
bring the syrup to a boil over medium heat . Cook the syrup to 270° ( hard ball
stage ) or until a bit of it dropped into cold water turns brittle . Remove from the
heat and stir in the margarine and peanuts . Drizzle the syrup over the popcorn
and quickly toss with a fork until it is evenly mixed . Oil your hands slightly and
quickly form the mixture into balls . When they are completely cool , wrap each
in plastic wrap and decorate with curling ribbon . 
Makes 8 to 12 large balls or 16 to 18 small balls . 
