Introduction
Thank you and congratulations for downloading Simple Thai Cooking. My
name’s Dutduen Lancaster (formerly Dutduen Heomkhunthod) people call me
Duen for short.
I was born in Nakhon Ratchasima (Korat) in the Northeast (Isaan) of Thailand,
hence the author name Duen Na Korat . I grew up in a very large family, mom,
dad, brothers, grandmother, aunties, uncles and cousins, altogether about 30
family members, all living and working as farmers on the same area of land. We
hardly ever used money because we had everything we needed, we grew all our
own rice, vegetables, fruit, herbs and spices, we had cows, pigs, chickens, ducks
and we used buffalo to plow the rice fields. Everybody had to work hard but
everyone was very happy. This is how a lot Thai people traditional lived and the
role of women of the family was to do the cooking I started cooking at 7 years
old, my mom and grandmother taught me to do things for myself at a young age.
I remember I started with cooking rice which wasn’t easy because we used coal
for cooking and it took me many attempts to light the fire before I was
successful. It wasn’t easy for a 7 year old but I did it. I could make simple dishes
such as stir-fried vegetables with eggs and actually it didn’t taste too bad
because I added sugar, fish sauce, garlic and soy sauce.
In 1991, Nakhon Ratchasima suffered a severe drought, and the farm land didn't
produce enough to support the whole family. Most of my family had to start new
lives and find jobs in the city, most moved to Bangkok and the surrounding
areas. I was 12 years old when my mum, dad, older brother, younger brother and
I moved to Chonburi city and opened a small restaurant, which is still run my
mum and dad today.
I went to high school in the day time and in the evening worked in the restaurant,
cooking, waiting and clearing tables and washing the dishes. It was hard fitting
in at school because I was dark skinned girl from a countryside village and I was
different from the city kids. After I showed my classmates that I was smart, hard
working and studied well I was welcomed in their "gang".
I studied well throughout high school and then at university. I graduated with a
Bachelors Degree in Computer Science. Then I went to work in Bangkok as a
Project Coordinator at a Marketing/Events company. Like many people I was
not really happy in my job and was just working for the money.
In 2008, I met my husband when he came to Thailand for a holiday. Just like me
he wasn't happy with his life in England. After several more visits to Thailand,
we decided we wanted to live together and have a serious relationship. We
moved to Satun, in the south Thailand, in 2010 and opened our own restaurant,
and in 2014 moved to Krabi to open Duen's Thai Cooking School and restaurant.
I am very grateful to my mom who taught me a lot of things about cooking and I
didn’t know back then that it would become such a huge part of my life and
business in the future. Now look at me, I have my own restaurant and cooking
school here in Krabi, I cook for parties and events, and now here I am writing a
cookbook. Cooking is in my soul, I love it. I feel so happy when I cook and I see
people enjoy my food.
I have written this cookbook to share my knowledge and what I have learned
from my experience with anyone who wants to know and wants to cook Thai
food. I write about traditional Thai cooking and use authentic recipes and
techniques but you can make these dishes too and it’s easier than you may think.
Occasionally you may have to substitute ingredients if they are hard to find
where you live but most will be available. If you want really authentic Thai food
you are welcome to come and visit me here in Krabi, Thailand and I will cook
for you personally.
Have fun, you are going to do a great job and your meals will taste delicious, just
follow me step by step and I will also tell you some tips you probably have never
heard of before. If you do have any questions about anything, such as what
ingredients you can use for substitutes or recipe requests, no problem, just email
me at duennakorat@gmail.com or message me on Facebook at
www.facebook.com/DuensThaiCookingSchoolKrabi
Common Ingredients
Thai fish sauce known in Thai as “Nam Plaa” is used in most dishes either as a
condiment or main ingredient such as marinade for fish or meat. Good fish sauce
is made from fermenting fish for at least 1 year. The best Thai fish sauce is from
Thailand and is readily available in supermarkets all over the world but if you
want to substitute fish sauce, for any reason, the easiest way is to use light soy
sauce. The taste is not exactly the same but you will get the saltiness you get
from fish sauce and it has a nice flavor.
Curry paste. There is a tutorial in this book if you would like to make your own
but many cooks in Thailand buy premade curry paste. Red varieties made from
dried red chilies and green varieties made from fresh green chilies can be found
in most supermarkets.
Coconut milk is used in curries to give richness, body and smoothness. I
recommend Aroy-D 100% coconut milk this coconut milk is the closest one to
freshly made coconut milk. Canned coconut milk has lost some of the flavor and
doesn’t taste like fresh coconut milk. When cooking curries we cook a long time
to get the fat to separate away from the coconut milk but this doesn’t happen
with canned brands.
Jasmine rice also known as “Thai fragrance rice” is long grain rice that comes
from Thailand and is available in most cities around the world. It has a slightly
sticky texture and a flowery aroma.
Chilies: I have mentioned dry red and green chilies in curry paste. Fresh
cayenne chilies are also used in curries. Hot Thai “bird” chilies are used in stirfries and sauces. If you can’t find bird or cayenne you can use Serrano or
jalapeno chilies.
Limes: Lime juice is squeeze over dishes when they are ready to serve, such as
salads, Pad Thai or Fried Rice. If you cook lime juice it will lose its refreshing
citrus flavor. Lime leaves are often used in Thai cooking but if they are hard to
find you can substitute with grated lime zest to give a similar aroma.
Garlic is crushed in a mortar and added to hot oil to flavor fried dishes.
Useful Thai Cooking Equipment
These tools and utensils are worth investing in if you plan to do a lot of Thai
cooking.
Chopping board: A good size board is essential for cooking meat and fish. (buy
here)
Cleaver: A large sharp knife for chopping, slicing and dicing meats, vegetables
and herbs (buy here)
Sharpening stone: It’s important that your knife is sharp. (buy here)
Mortar and pestle: You will use this in almost every recipe, for crushing garlic,
chilies or bruising lemon grass, citrus rind and coriander roots or for making
curry pastes. (buy here)
Wok: This will distribute the heat more evenly when cooking. Used for
conventional frying, stir-frying and deep fat frying. If you don’t get a wok then
at least use a non-stick frying pan. Stir-fries are cooked on high heat and
washing up can be difficult. (buy here)
Spatula: Made from metal or wood with a wooden handle, used for stir-frying.
(buy here)
Standard Thai Condiments
If you have ever been to Thailand you would have seen a bunch of condiments
on the table. In Thai we call this “krueng prung” which means condiment. You
can make these at home, it’s easy. Thai food is a blend of salty, sweet, sour and
spicy but everyone’s taste is different so normally people add condiments to suit
their personal taste. The sweet component is sugar, you can use white or brown.
The salty component is “prik nam plaa” which means chili fish sauce, which is
exactly what it is, finely chopped chilies in fish sauce, use small red and green
chilies. The sour component is “prik nam som” which means chili vinegar, we
usually use a big mild chili for this something like “prik chee far” or you could
use jalapeno or Serrano. The spicy component is chili powder.
How to Make a Good Stock
One of the most important ingredients for Thai cooking is a good stock.
Knowing how to make a good stock is an essential skill for Thai cooking
because a good stock will make the difference between a good meal and an
excellent meal. There are many recipes that require stock. In Thai cuisine, pork
stock is most commonly used. If you wish to make chicken or beef stock just use
chicken or beef bones instead of pork.
Pork Stock Ingredients
2lbs (900g) pork bones
3.5L water
1 tsp salt
4-5 cloves of garlic
2 cilantro (coriander) roots (if you can’t find roots you can use cilantro stems)
1/2 tsp white peppercorns Muslin cloth (20 x 20 cm) You can get pork bones at
most butchers. Tell them you want to use the bones to make stock. You can use
bones from any part of the pig but more cartilage means more flavorsome. In my
restaurant I use the femur (thigh) bone because it produces the best taste.
Preparation
Wash the bones.
Crush the garlic.
Wash and bruise the cilantro roots.
Grind the pepper corns in a mortar or crush with the flat side of a knife.
Put the (aromatics) garlic, cilantro roots and pepper in a 20x20cm piece of
muslin cloth and tie it so that the ingredients are enclosed. If you can’t find
muslin do not put the aromatics in at the start.
Cooking Instructions
Add the cold water to the stock pot and bring to the boil before adding the bones.
Bring to a simmer. Add the cloth with aromatics in. If you don’t have muslin
cloth, simmer for 1 hour and then skim the scum off the top of the stock before
adding the aromatic ingredients.
After 1 hour skim the scum off the top of the stock.
Simmer for at least 2 hours. For the best tasting stock simmer for 5 hours.
Take out the bones and muslin and sieve the stock.
To store the stock put it in a freezer zip lock bag (A4 paper size) and store it in
the freezer.
Duen’s Tips
For an extra tasty stock use a combination of pork and chicken bones, weight
ratio 50/50. For the recipe above use 1lb (450g) chicken bones and 1lb (450g)
pork bones. Put the bones in muslin cloth as you did for the aromatics above, to
make it easier when taking the bones out later.
How to Make Red Curry Paste (Prig Gaeng Kua)
10 Servings, Prep Time: 15 Minutes, Total Time: 40-60 Minutes It may be a
long process from sourcing the ingredients to pounding the paste but it is
rewarding and the benefit of making your own paste is that the taste will be
exactly how you like it, if you don’t like it too spicy you can add less chilies.
This is the most basic and versatile curry paste, you can make other curry pastes
by starting with this as a base and adding to it.
Ingredients
1 cilantro (coriander) root (if you can’t find roots you can use cilantro stems) 3
dried whole large chilies
1 1/2 tablespoons galangal
1/4 cup garlic
3-4 tablespoons sliced lemongrass 1 tablespoon salt
3/4 cup shallots
1 tsp shrimp paste
1 tsp Kaffir Lime Zest
1/4 tsp white peppercorns
Preparation
Remove the seeds and pith from the chilies. Most Thai cooks will tell you to
rehydrating the chilies, but from my experience I have found the best way is to
dry them in a pan on a very low heat and constantly stir for about 5 minutes, you
don’t want to see any smoke the idea is to make them super dry. This will make
it easy to grind to a power without making a mess as you would with chilies that
have been soaked.
Grate or thinly slice lime zest.
Wash, dry and chop the cilantro root.
Remove the dry outer leaves from the lemongrass.
Chop the galangal and shallots and the light part of the lemongrass into very
small pieces.
Instructions
The order that ingredients go into the mortar is most hard and dry ingredients
first to most soft and wet last. Pound and grind until you get a consistent mix of
all ingredients before adding the next ingredient, add a small amount then mix
before adding more.
First add the chilies with the salt. The salt will help with the grinding. Cover the
opening with your free hand when you are grinding.
Next add the white peppercorns, pound and grind until mixed with chili powder.
Next add lemon grass and galangal and grind into a fibrous paste.
Add garlic, lime zest and cilantro root and pound at a 70 degree angle into the
deepest part of the mortar. Cover the opening with your free hand when you are
grinding.
Add the shallots and pound and grind in the same way.
Last add the shrimp paste. Pound and mix it into one consistent color. The whole
process will take at least 20 minutes Duen’s Tips
Of course you could cheat and put all the ingredients in a food processor but the
taste would not be as good and you wouldn’t have the pride and satisfaction of
making curry paste yourself the traditional Thai way. If you do use a food
processor, grind the coriander seeds, cumin seeds and peppercorns into a powder
first before adding the other ingredients.
How to Make Thai Green Curry Paste (Nam Prik
Gaeng Khiaw Waan)
10 Servings, Prep Time: 15 Minutes, Total Time: 40-60 Minutes Ingredients
1 cilantro (coriander) root (if you can’t find roots you can use cilantro stems) 1
tablespoon coriander seeds
1/2 tablespoon cumin seeds
1 1/2 tablespoons galangal
1/4 cup garlic
3-4 tablespoons sliced lemongrass 1 tablespoon salt
3/4 cup shallots
1 tsp shrimp paste
1 tsp Kaffir Lime Zest
1/4 tsp white peppercorns
10-15 green Thai chili peppers
Preparation
Toast the coriander seeds, cumin seeds and peppercorns in a pan, when you hear
a cracking sound they are ready. Leave to cool.
Grate or thinly slice lime zest.
Wash, dry and chop the cilantro root.
Chop the galangal, shallots and lemongrass into very small pieces, removing the
hard outer leaves first and use the pale part of the lemongrass.
Instructions
The order that ingredients go into the mortar is most hard and dry ingredients
first to most soft and wet last. Pound and grind until you get a consistent mix of
all ingredients before adding the next ingredient, add a small amount then mix
before adding more.
First add the coriander seeds, cumin seeds and peppercorns and grind into a
powder.
Next add lemon grass and galangal and grind into a fibrous paste.
Add garlic, lime zest and cilantro root and pound at a 70 degree angle into the
deepest part of the mortar. Cover the opening with your free hand when you are
grinding.
Add the shallots and fresh green chili pepper pound and grind in the same way.
Last add the shrimp paste. Pound and mix it into one consistent color. The whole
process will take at least 20 minutes.
Duen’s Tips
Of course you could cheat and put all the ingredients in a food processor but the
taste would not be as good and you wouldn’t have the pride and satisfaction of
making curry paste yourself the traditional Thai way. If you do use a food
processor, grind the coriander seeds, cumin seeds and peppercorns into a powder
first before adding the other ingredients.
---SOUPS---
Spicy Sour Shrimp Soup (Tom Yung Goong)
2 servings, Difficulty: easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 20 minutes
Ingredients
1lb (450g) prawns or 0.5lb (200g) if peeled 3 lemon grass stalks
3-4 kaffir lime leaves
5-6 galangal rounds
5-6 Thai chilies (Pik ki nu) or more or less depending on how spicy you like it 4-
5 red shallots
6-7 mushrooms
2 spring onion
3 cilantro (coriander) sprigs including roots if you can 5-6 tomatoes
1 lime (more if you like sour)
1-2 tsp salt
2 tablespoons fish sauce
2 tablespoons chili paste in soy bean oil (nam prik pao)(optional) 3 cups chicken
stock (see tutorial on how to make a good stock or you can use stock cubes)
Preparation
Peel, de-vein and wash the shrimp
Smash the back of a knife to bruise and cut lemon grass into 1-2inch pieces Tear
kaffir lime leaves
Thinly slice the galangal (3mm)
Crush the shallots and chili
Cut tomatoes & mushrooms (mouth sized pieces) Wash and cut spring onions
and cilantro (coriander) into 1-2cm pieces.
Cooking Instructions
Put a saucepan on a medium heat and boil the stock (or water and stock cubes).
Add the galangal, kaffir lime leaves, lemongrass, fish sauce and salt. Bring back
to the boil and cook for about 2 minutes.
Then, add the tomatoes, shallots, mushrooms and chilies and stir.
Bring back to the boil then add the shrimp.
Cook for 2 minutes then add the spring onions, cilantro and chili paste in soy
bean oil and stir.
Turn off the heat. Add the juice from one lime or more if you like it sour.
Serve in a large bowl with cilantro as leaves as garnish.
Duen’s Tips
Serve with Jasmine rice or pour over rice noodles to make Tom Yum Noodles
(Kuay Tiew Tom Yum).
Chicken Coconut Soup (Tom Kha Gai)
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 15 minutes
2 cups plain water or homemade, unsalted, chicken stock (For How to Make a
Good Stock <<< click here and use chicken bones) 1 1/2 cups coconut milk
1 tsp salt
450g (1 lb) chicken breast (cut into bite sized pieces) 1 stalk lemongrass
10-15 rounds galangal
4-5 kaffir lime leaves
3-4 chilies
1½-2 tablespoons fish sauce
1 tsp palm sugar or standard granulated white sugar 150g oyster mushrooms (or
any mushrooms that you like) 2-2½ tablespoons lime juice
1/2 cup cilantro (coriander)
1 spring onion
Preparation
Slice 5-6 thin slices of lemongrass off the bottom, white part, of the stalk.
Slice 10-15 thin slices of galangal.
Cut the roots off the mushrooms and wash.
Cut the Kaffir lime leaves in half alone the stem.
Cut the cilantro stalks into 1-2cm pieces and roughly chop the leaves.
Cut off the roots and clean the green onions and finely slice them.
Crush the chilies with the side of your knife and cut them in half along the
length.
Cooking Instructions
Into a pot put 2 cups of water or chicken broth and bring it to the boil.
Put in the lemongrass, galangal and cilantro and simmer for 5-6 minutes, until
you get an aromatic smell.
Then add the chicken, fish sauce and sugar and boil for 5-6 minutes.
When the chicken is cooked, add the coconut milk and mushrooms and leave it
to boil on a medium heat.
Prepare your serving dish by adding lime juice, chilies and spring onions.
Add the soup from the pot to the serving dish and add more spring onions and
cilantro to garnish.
Serve and enjoy!
Duen’s Tips
You could replace the chicken with shrimp or seafood, which would also make a
great soup. You can also put other vegetables such as onions, carrots or cabbage.
---STIR-FRIES---
Stir-Fried Pork and Vegetables (Moo Pad Pak).
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 5 minutes
This is a quick and simple recipe, good for if you don’t have much time for
cooking. Use fresh vegetables in season. Serve with Jasmine rice.
Ingredients
200g vegetables
250g of thinly slices pork (instead you can use prawns, chicken or squid) 2
tablespoons crushed garlic
2 tablespoons light soy sauce
1 tablespoon oyster sauce
1 tablespoon brown sugar
2 tablespoons corn flour
1 cup of water
1 tablespoon of vegetable oil
Preparation
Wash the vegetables you want to cook then cut them into 2 inch lengths Crush
the garlic in a mortar, enough to fill 2 tablespoons Slice the pork
Prepare all the sauces ready for cooking.
Mix corn flour in water.
Cooking Instructions
Heat the pan then put the oil in and use a high heat. After that add the crushed
garlic and stir until you can smell aromatic garlic and the color turns slightly
brown.
Add pork and stir until it’s cooked (about 5 minutes).
Add the soy sauce, oyster sauce and sugar, stir and taste the sauce. If required
add ingredients half teaspoon (small amount) at a time and taste until you get the
taste you like.
Then add all vegetables then stir quickly after 20 seconds add the corn flour
water mixture a small amount at a time and stir for a few seconds. The corn flour
water will make the sauce thicker. When the sauce turns from white to brown it
is cooked. Turn off the heat and remove from pan.
Serve with Jasmine rice.
Stir-Fried Noodles in Soy Sauce (Pad See Ew)
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 10-15 minutes, Cook Time: 5
minutes Pad See Ew is an easy stir-fry dish and the ingredients are easy to find
too. You can you use dry noodles if you can’t find fresh noodles but you have to
make the noodles soft first. Soak them in lukewarm water for 5 to 10 minutes
and as soon as they are soft rinse them under cold water to prevent overcooking.
Drain the noodles ready for cooking. For vegetables in Thailand we always use
Chinese broccoli because it is easy to find and not expensive here but you can
use broccoli and other vegetables you like such as kale, cabbage, bean sprouts,
baby corn, sprouts, carrot etc.
Ingredients
2 -3 stalks Chinese broccoli
1 tablespoon dark sweet soy sauce
2 eggs
450g (1lb) fresh flat rice noodles
2 cloves crushed garlic
2 tablespoons light soy sauce
1 tablespoon oyster sauce
200g cup thinly sliced (3mm) pork (instead you can use prawns, chicken or
squid) 1 tablespoon sugar
1 tablespoon of vegetable oil
Pork Marinade
1 large egg
1/4 tsp sesame oil
1/4 tsp white pepper
2 tsp oyster sauce
2 tsp soy sauce
2 tablespoons tapioca starch
Preparation
Marinate the pork for at least 30 minutes Mix the pork with all the marinade. I
normally do this the day before and the result is delicious.
Cut Chinese broccoli into 1 to 2 inch lengths. Thick stems take longer to cook so
cut them at an angle (on the bias) into thin pieces. Now the leaves and stems will
cook at the same rate.
Crush the garlic in a mortar.
Slice pork thinly.
Prepare all the sauces ready for cooking.
Cooking Instructions
Heat the pan then put the oil in and use a high heat. After that add the crushed
garlic and stir until you get an aromatic garlic smell and the color is slightly
brown.
Add pork and stir until it’s cooked (about 5 minutes).
Add 2 eggs and scramble until it is almost all cooked (not watery anymore) Stir
to break up the noodles.
Add seasoning and dark sweet soy sauce and sugar, stir and mix with noodles
and pork.
Add the Chinese broccoli stems first. I usually add half the leaves and stir until
they wilt then add the rest of the leaves but if you have room you can add all at
the same time. As soon as the Chinese broccoli is cooked, turn off the heat.
Serve and season with white pepper and eat while hot.
Sprinkle with white pepper on top and serve with standard Thai condiments.
Duen’s Tips
For a vegetarian dish, just leave out the pork. Add firm tofu and peanuts and
leave out the oyster sauce if you like. I often enjoy Pad See Ew with just egg and
chopped peanuts.
Dark sweet soy sauce colors the noodles while the light soy sauce seasons the
dish.
If Chinese broccoli is hard to find where you live, try kale or vegetables you like
and put more or less as you prefer.
If you still have some ingredients left from Pad See Ew, we can cook the next
dish because it is a similar recipe. It is called Rad Na, it is a popular Thai lunch
and the warm gravy and the soft noodles make a good comfort food.
Stir Fried Noodles in Gravy (Rad Na)
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 30 minutes, Cook Time: 5 minutes
There are several versions of Rad Na. Your choice of noodles ranges from thick
flat rice noodles to thin vermicelli to fried egg noodles, crispy yellow noodles. If
you don’t like oil or you on a diet then you can cook noodles with hot water
instead. The meat can be pork, chicken or seafood. The most common Rad Na is
Rad Na Moo or Pork Rad Na. A good Pork Rad Na has tender pork with soft
chewy noodles and plenty of gravy. The vegetables we can use the same as we
use for Pad See Ew.
Ingredients
2 -3 stalks Chinese broccoli
1 tablespoon dark sweet soy sauce
450g (1lb) fresh flat rice noodles
1 tablespoon of vegetable oil
Pork Marinade
1 large egg
1/4 tsp sesame oil
1/4 tsp white pepper
2 tsp oyster sauce
2 tsp soy sauce
2 tablespoons tapioca starch
1/2 cup of water
Rad Na Gravy
2 tablespoon corn flour or tapioca starch teaspoon white pepper 1 tablespoon
sugar
1/2 tablespoon Maggi or Golden Mountain sauce 1 tablespoon soy sauce
2 cups chicken or pork stock (homemade with no salt added) 2 tablespoon “tao
jiew” or fermented soy bean paste 2 tablespoon chopped garlic
Preparation
For a delicious homemade pork stock go to How to Make a Good Stock or, for
an easier, but less authentic and less tasty, alternative, use stock cubes.
Marinate the pork for at least 30 minutes Mix the pork with all the marinade. I
normally do this the day before and the result is delicious.
Cut Chinese broccoli into 1 to 2 inch lengths. Thick stems take longer to cook so
cut them at an angle (on the bias) into thin pieces. Now the leaves and stems will
cook at the same rate.
Chop the garlic.
Slice pork thinly.
Dissolve the corn flour or tapioca starch with water.
Prepare all the sauces ready for cooking.
Cooking Instructions
Heat the pan then put the oil in and use a high heat. Add the noodles with the
dark soy sauce. Stir the noodles quickly. When there is some browning of the
noodles remove them from the heat and set aside.
In a separate pan heat some oil in and add the crushed garlic and fermented soy
bean paste and stir until you get an aromatic garlic smell and the garlic turns
slightly brown.
Add the stock, soy sauce, Maggi sauce and sugar.
When the sauce is boiling add the pork and stir, then add the Chinese broccoli.
Pour the starch/water mixture a small amount at a time and wait until the gravy
turn brown, keep added the starch/water until you get the consistency you are
happy with.
Remove from heat. Plate the noodles and pour gravy on top.
Sprinkle with white pepper on top and serve with standard Thai condiments.
Drunken Noodles (Pad Kee Mao)
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 15 minutes, Cook Time: 5 minutes
Ingredients
450g flat, wide rice noodles
6-8 cloves garlic
1-5 Thai chilies, to taste
250g Pork (instead you can use prawns, chicken or squid) 10 pcs baby corn, cut
each into 3
4 stalks Chinese broccoli, cut into 2 inch lengths 4 tablespoons base stir fry
sauce (see recipe below) 2 teaspoon black soy sauce
3 teaspoon sugar
1 cup holy basil leaves
Base Stir Fry Sauce
1/2 cup oyster sauce
4 tablespoon light soy sauce
2 tablespoons Golden Mountain or Maggi 4 teaspoons fish sauce
Vegetarian Base Stir Fry Sauce
1/2 cup light soy sauce
4 tablespoon Golden Mountain or Maggi Cooking Instructions
Mix the base stir-fry sauce and put aside in a small bowl. It will keep in the
fridge for many weeks if you put it in a sealed container. It’s great to use with
stir fries and fried rice.
Crush the garlic and chilies in a mortar into a rough paste, make sure chilies are
mashed up. Set aside.
Have all ingredients prepared to cook because cooking is done fast in less than 5
minutes.
Turn on the heat. Add 2 tablespoon of vegetable and tilt the pan to coat the
bottom. Cook on a high heat. Add the chili and garlic mixture and stir until you
get an aromatic garlic smell and the color is slightly brown.
Add pork and cook until half way done. Add vegetables stir and toss until wilted.
Add the noodles, sugar and base stir fry sauce, stir and toss together.
Let the noodles absorb the sauce and flip once or twice before turning off the
heat. Add the basil and toss the basil will cook from the residual heat and wilt.
Serve with Standard Thai Condiments for noodles.
Pad Thai Noodles
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 15 minutes, Cook Time: 12 minutes
Sauce
35g finely chopped palm sugar (about 3 tightly packed tablespoons) 1/4 cup of
tamarind concentrate 2 tablespoons fish sauce
3 tablespoons water
Pad Thai
4oz (110g) dry rice noodles
10 shrimp, or as many as you like peeled and deveined 1 small head shallot,
sliced thinly, about 3 tablespoons 2 cloves garlic, chopped
1/4 cup chopped sweet preserved daikon radish (in Thai“dang chai”) 1 piece
pressed tofu, cut into cubes 1-2cm wide 2 eggs
2.5 cups bean sprouts
1 tablespoon chopped dried shrimp 1/4 cup chopped roasted peanuts 1 cup garlic
chives cut into 2 inch pieces (if you can’t find these you can use spring onions) 1
lime
Preparation
If you can find fresh rice noodles these are better but more widely available are
dry noodles. Soak the rice noodles in lukewarm water for 5 to 10 minutes and as
soon as they are soft rinse them under cold water to prevent overcooking. (Some
brands may take longer) While you are waiting for your noodles make the sauce
by dissolving the palm sugar in water and added the tamarind concentrate and
fish sauce. (Leftover sauce can be stored in the fridge for up to 3 weeks)
Cooking Instructions
Add 2 tablespoons of oil to a wok or large pan and heat on a high heat. When the
wok is very hot add the shrimp don’t move them until half cooked then turn
them over to cook the other side. Remove the shrimp from the wok and set aside.
Add more oil to the pan, 2 tablespoons. Add the garlic, preserved radish, tofu
and shallots.
When the garlic has turned golden brown add the noodles and the sauce and stir
until all the sauce has been absorbed by the noodles. If you are using fresh
noodles taste the noodles and if they are chewy then add ¼ cup water to the pan.
Stir again until all liquid has been absorbed and taste again. Repeat until you are
happy with the noodles.
Push the noodles aside to make a space in the pan to cook the eggs. Add the eggs
and scramble gently. When half set put the noodles on top of the eggs and let the
eggs cook completely then stir and break up the eggs.
Add the shrimp, garlic chives, bean sprouts and half of the peanuts.
Plates the noodles and sprinkle the remaining half of peanuts over the top. Serve
with a piece of lime, fresh bean sprouts, garlic chives and standard Thai
condiments for noodles.
Normally Thai people will squeeze the lime and toss the noodles with a fork or
chopsticks to mix. Enjoy this delicious dish!
Glass Noodle Stir-Fry (Pad Woon Sen)
2 servings (served on its own) 3-4 servings (if served with rice), Difficulty:
Easy, Prep Time: 15 minutes, Cook Time: 12 minutes In Thailand Pad Woon
Sen is normally eaten with rice but it can be eaten on its own as a single dish. If
you intend to eat this dish with rice then this recipe will make enough for 3-4
servings. For 2 servings (with rice) I recommend using half the ingredients listed
below.
Ingredients
80g Glass noodles
1/2 onion
4-6 cloves garlic
3 eggs
1/2 teaspoon white pepper
2 tablespoons oyster sauce 1 tablespoon Golden Mountain sauce (or Maggi
sauce) 1 tablespoon soy sauce
3 tablespoon sugar
300g chicken marinated (you could also pork, beef, shrimp or no meat
altogether) 2 tomatos, seeds removed
2/3 cup carrot
1 cup cabbage
Preparation
Marinate the chicken in 1 tablespoon of soy sauce If the noodles are fresh, great,
they are ready to cook but if they are dry noodles you will need to soak them in
water at room temperature for about 10 minutes until soft and pliable.
Put the soy sauce, oyster sauce and Golden mountain sauce into one cup.
Cut up all the vegetables and garlic Deseed the tomatoes and cut up Cooking
Instructions
Add 2 tablespoons of oil to a wok or large pan and heat on a high heat.
Add the garlic and onions. Cook until the garlic is golden brown.
Then add the chicken and cook until the chicken splits apart and is about half
cooked.
Make space in the pan for the eggs and add some more oil to the pan and then
add the eggs and scramble gently. When the eggs are half set put the chicken,
garlic and onions on top then stir and break up the eggs, it should take less than a
minute to cook the eggs completely.
Then add the cabbage and carrots. Now add about half of the sauce to flavor the
vegetables and chicken. Stir.
Add the noodles the rest of the sauce, sugar and pepper. Toss everything
together until sauce is well distributed.
Add the tomatoes last and don’t cook them too long or else they will become
mushy.
Turn of the heat and plate up and serve with rice.
---RICE DISHES---
Hainanese Chicken Rice (Kao Man Gai)
3-4 servings, Difficulty: Medium, Prep Time: 1 hour, Cook Time: 45
minutes
The Chicken
1 whole chicken
2 Cilantro (coriander) roots (if you can’t find roots you can use cilantro stems) 4
cloves garlic
Half an onion
1/2 tsp white peppercorns
2 slices ginger
1-2 tablespoons salt
The Rice
2 cups Jasmine rice
2 2/3 - 3 cups chicken stock (from cooking chicken) 2-3 tablespoons chicken fat
2 tablespoons chopped garlic
Dipping Sauce 1: Nam Jim Tao Jiew 1-inch knob ginger, finely chopped 2
chilies
3 tablespoons Tao Jiew (preserved soy bean dip) 1 tablespoon Sugar
2 tablespoon See Ew Dum (Thai dark soy sauce) 1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 tsp vinegar
Dipping Sauce 2: Nam Jim Hai Lam 2 tablespoons ginger
2 cloves garlic
2 Thai chilies
2 tablespoons cilantro (coriander) roots 2 tablespoon soy sauce
2 tablespoon lime juice
Cooking Instructions
In a stock pot put the cut off chicken neck, feet and wing tips. Add cilantro roots,
onions, garlic, white peppercorns and ginger and cover with water. Simmer for
20 minutes.
In a pot you will use to cook your rice add the fatty parts of the chicken, set
aside for later.
When the stock is ready, add a tablespoon of salt and add some cold water to
bring the temperature down. It should taste like a mildly salted soup, add more
salt if necessary. The whole chicken should be submerged, if not, add more cold
water. Now, heat the water to 165 to 170 degrees Fahrenheit, if you don’t have a
thermometer at this temperature there will be steam coming off the water but
absolutely no bubbles. Hold it at this temperature until the thickest part of the
thigh reaches 165 degrees Fahrenheit. Start timing from when the water reaches
165 degrees Fahrenheit. A 2.5lb (1.1kg) chicken will take about 30 minutes, 40 –
50 minutes for a larger chicken.
Once the chicken is completely cooked, remove it from the stock and leave to
cool.
Now is time to make the rice. On a medium heat melt the chicken fat until you
have 2-3 tablespoons of fat. Be careful not to fry or burn the chicken fat, don’t
use a high heat. Discard the solid pieces. Add garlic and cook unlit golden
brown, then add 1 cup of rice per person to the pot (don’t forget to wash the rice
first and rinse off excess water). Stir and coat the rice with fat. Add 1 1/3 cup
chicken stock per 1 cup of rice. Cook and stir until the fat no longer floats to the
top and the rice is thick. Then cover and cook as you normally would for rice,
10-15 minutes.
To make Nam Jim Tao Jiew (dipping sauce 1) pound together chilies and ginger.
Then add fermented soy bean paste, regular soy sauce, black soy sauce, sugar
and vinegar.
To make Nam Jim Tao Jiew (dipping sauce 1) pound together chilies and ginger.
Then add fermented soy bean paste, regular soy sauce, black soy sauce, sugar
and vinegar.
To make Nam Jim Hai Lam (dipping sauce 2) pound together garlic, chilies,
ginger and cilantro stems. Then add soy sauce and lime juice.
Carve the chicken and chop it up, with a clever if you have one, into bite size
pieces. Serve on top of the rice with the 2 dipping sauces on the side in small
bowls or you can put the sauce straight onto the chicken but only use a small
amount because it is very strong in flavor. Serve with extra stock on the side as
soup.
Pineapple Fried Rice (Kao Pad Supparod)
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 1 hour, Cook Time: 45 minutes
Ingredients
8 Shrimp (cut 4 into small pieces and leave 4 whole) 1 egg
1 1/2 cups of rice
1/4 cup diced onions
1 tablespoon Thai soy sauce
1 tsp fish sauce
1 tsp sugar
1/8 tsp salt
1 tsp curry powder
1/4 tsp White pepper
1/2 cup Pineapple, fresh if you can, cut into small pieces 1/3 cup roasted or fried
cashews, unsalted 2 green onions, chopped
1/2 cup tomatoes, seeds removed, cut into half inch cubes Cucumber slices for
serving
Preparation
Cook the rice and drain well. You don’t want the rice to be too wet.
Chop up 4 of the shrimp.
Chop the onions and tomatoes, removing the tomato seeds, and put them
together in a small bowl.
Put all the dry ingredients, curry powder, white pepper, sugar and salt, together
in a small bowl.
Put all the wet ingredients together, the soy sauce and fish sauce.
Cooking Instructions
Heat a wok or large pan on a high heat and add 2 tablespoons of oil.
Fry the whole shrimp completely and remove and set aside. Now, fry the cut up
shrimp and set aside.
Add more oil to the empty pan. Add the eggs and beak it up slightly. When half
cooked, add the cooked rice to the top and mix together.
Add the diced onions and mix.
Add curry powder, white pepper, sugar, salt, soy sauce and fish sauce.
Toss and mix until everything is well distributed.
Add the cashews, pineapple, and small pieces of shrimp; cook and mix until the
pineapples turn slightly darker.
Turn off the heat and add in the tomatoes and green onions and mix.
Serve with whole shrimps on top, extra green onions and cucumber slices.
Shrimp Fried Rice (Kao Pad Gung)
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 10 minutes
Ingredients
10 shrimp
1/2 tablespoon finely chopped garlic 2 tablespoons finely diced carrot 2
tablespoons diced tomatoes
2 tablespoons diced onions
2 tablespoons chopped spring onion 1 lime
1 cucumber
1/2 tsp white pepper
2 tablespoons Golden Mountain or Maggi sauce 1 tablespoon sugar
2 eggs
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 1/2 cups jasmine rice
Preparation
To cook the rice on the stove, use 1 1/2 cups of rice and add enough water to
cover the rice plus another 5mm on top of the rice. Bring to the boil quickly and
turn heat down to simmer, you want to see steam but no bubbles. Stir
continuously until the water has been absorbed then turn the heat down low and
close the lid of the pan until cooked about 90%, not too soft.
To cook in a rice cooker, use 1 1/2 cups of rice and add enough water to cover
the rice plus another 5mm on top of the rice and follow the normal instructions
for your rice cooker. This will cook your rice to about 90% because the water is
less than you would normally use for standard rich dishes.
Chop all the vegetables.
Peel and devein the shrimp.
Cooking Instructions
Heat the pan then put the oil in and use a high heat. Add the chopped garlic and
stir until you can smell aromatic garlic and the color turns slightly brown.
Add the shrimp to the garlic and cook.
Add tomatoes, onion and carrots, stir and cook.
Cook the eggs and scramble.
Add the cooked rice and mix together.
Add the Maggi sauce and sugar, mix and taste add more if you like.
Turn off the heat. Add spring onions and stir.
Plate and season with white pepper, add 2 or 3 slices of cucumber and a 1/3 of
lime on the side of the plate.
Serve with Standard Thai Condiments
Squeeze the lime over the rice, add the condiments that you like and mix
together and enjoy!
---CURRIES---
Thai Chicken Green Curry (Gaeng Keow Waan Gai)
2 servings, Difficulty: easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 20 minutes
Ingredients
1 large chicken breast
1 tablespoon green curry paste (check out the recipe or buy readymade) 500 ml
coconut milk (100% I use Aroy-D) 1/2 cup sweet basil leaves
5 Thai eggplants (golf ball size-see photo) alternatively you could use potatoes
or pumpkin)
2 large kaffir Lime Leaves
2 Thai Chilies
2 tablespoons fish sauce
1 tablespoon palm sugar (alternatively brown sugar) 1 tsp chicken stock powder
(1/2 cube)
1/2 cup of water
Preparation
Wash the chicken and slice thinly
Slice Thai chilies on a bias to use for garnish Cut the eggplants into 4 to 8 pieces
depending on the size. Cut all pieces to the same size.
Wash the sweet basil leaves and tear off half a cup Cooking Instructions
Put a pan or wok on a high heat and add 250ml of the coconut milk bring it to
the boil and stir occasionally until the oil in the coconut milk breaks away, after
about 10 minutes. You will see a layer of oil on top of the milk. You will use this
to sauté the curry paste. If you don’t use 100% coconut milk this will probably
not happen because of the additional additives. If you can’t find 100% coconut
milk you should sauté the curry paste first in vegetable oil and then add the
coconut milk.
Add the curry paste, stir and break up any lumps until you can smell the
aromatics, about 1 minute.
Add the chicken and stir until it is half cooked. Then add fish sauce, sugar and
chicken stock powder stir until mixed Add the rest of the coconut milk, bring
back to boil and simmer for 2-3 minutes. Add the 1/2 cup of water and bring
back to boil.
Add the egg plants and simmer until al dente (soft), about 2 minutes Make sure
the chicken is cooked before turning off the heat and taste and add more fish
sauce or sugar if you like.
Now add the Thai basil while it is hot, stir a few time around until wilted.
Plate and garnish with Thai chilies (optional).
Serve with Jasmine rice. Delicious!
Stir-Fried Chicken with Red Curry Paste (Gai Pad
Prik)
2 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 10 minutes
Ingredients 10oz (280g) chicken breast 1 cup of string beans (long beans) 4
kaffir lime leaves 1 1/2 tablespoons red curry paste(check out the recipe or buy
readymade) 1 1/2 tablespoons palm sugar (you can use ordinary white sugar) 1
tsp fish sauce 2 tablespoons vegetable oil Preparation Cut the chicken into bite
size pieces.
Cut beans into 1-2 inch pieces.
Finely cut the kaffir lime leaves. Leave some for garnish.
Cooking Instructions Heat the oil in a wok or large pan on a high heat. When
the oil is hot add the chicken and space it out in the pan and leave it for 1 minute
to brown.
Add the curry paste, palm sugar and kaffir leaves and stir until the sugar melts.
Add the string beans and stir until cooked.
Plate and garnish with kaffir leaves and serve with jasmine rice.
Serve with Standard Thai Condiments
Chicken Red Curry (Gaeng Gai)
2 servings, Difficulty: easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 20 minutes
Ingredients
500g chicken breast
1 tablespoon red curry paste (check out the recipe or buy readymade) 400 ml
coconut milk (100% I use Aroy-D) 15 sweet basil leaves
4-5 Thai eggplants (golf ball size-see photo) alternatively you could use potatoes
or pumpkin) 3 Large Kaffir Lime Leaves
2-3 Thai Chilies (depends on size and how spicy you like it) 2 tablespoons fish
sauce
1/2 tablespoon palm sugar (alternatively brown sugar) 1 chicken stock cube
1 cup of water
Preparation
Wash the chicken and slice thinly
Slice Thai chilies on a bias to use for garnish Cut the eggplants into 4 to 8 pieces
depending on the size. Cut all pieces to the same size.
Wash the sweet basil leaves and tear off half a cup Cooking Instructions
Put a pan or wok on a high heat and add 200ml of the coconut milk and bring it
to the boil. Stir occasionally until the oil in the coconut milk breaks away, after
about 10 minutes. You will see a layer of oil on top of the milk this is what you
use to sauté the curry paste. If you don’t use 100% coconut milk this will
probably not happen because of the additional additives. If you can’t find 100%
coconut milk you should sauté the curry paste first in vegetable oil and then add
the coconut milk after.
Add the curry paste, stir and break up any lumps until you can smell the
aromatics, about 1 minute.
Add the chicken and stir until it is half cooked. Then add fish sauce, sugar and
chicken stock cube stir until mixed.
Add the rest of the coconut milk, bring back to boil and simmer for 2-3 minutes.
Add the cup of water and bring back to boil.
Add the egg plants and simmer until al dente (soft), about 2 minutes.
Make sure the chicken is cooked before turning off the heat and taste and add
more fish sauce or sugar if you like.
Now add the Thai basil while it is hot, stir a few time around until wilted.
Plate and garnish with Thai chilies (optional).
Serve with Jasmine rice. Enjoy!
---SWEETS---
Thai Coconut Jelly (Wun Gati Bai Tooey)
Coconut Milk Layer
1 1/4 tablespoons agar powder 2 1/2 cups coconut milk
1/2 cup sugar
1/2 tsp salt
Pandan Leaves Layer
1 cup pandan leaves water 1 1/2 cups jasmine water
3/4 or 1 cup sugar
1 1/4 tablespoon agar powder 3 - 4 drops jasmine extract (if required)
Instructions
For the first layer, mix agar powder with coconut milk in a sauce pan. Stir until
the agar powder is dissolved. Set aside in the pan.
For the second layer, add agar powder and jasmine water to another pan and stir
until dissolved. If you don’t have jasmine water, you can use regular water and
add 2 or 3 drops of jasmine extract.
Put both pans on the stove, the first, coconut, layer on a medium heat and the
second, clear, layer on a low heat. When the coconut milk starts to boil you will
see bubbles, then add the sugar and salt and stir until dissolved. Bring it back to
the boil and then turn off the heat.
Then bring the other pan, with the clear liquid in it, to the boil and then turn
down the heat and add sugar and pandan leaves water and stir until dissolved.
Bring back to the boil then turn it down and leave on a low heat while you put
the first layer in to your moulds.
Use a tablespoon to put the coconut layer in the mould. Give it a little wiggle to
see if it’s slightly set before adding the next layer, the green pandan layer. If it is
completely set the layers will not stick together so don’t leave it too long. Repeat
several time.
Leave in the fridge for an hour.
And there you have it, beautiful and delicious sweets to impress your friends and
family with.
Have fun.
Duen’s Tips
You can make multi colored jelly by replacing the pandan leaves with a few
drops of food coloring, any color you desire.
Mango and Sticky Rice (Khao Niaow Ma Muang)
4 servings, Difficulty: Easy, Prep Time: 10 minutes, Cook Time: 10 minutes
Ingredients
2 ripe mangoes
Sweet sticky rice
1 cup white glutinous white rice 2/3 cup coconut milk 1/2 tsp salt
1/2 cup of sugar
Salted coconut sauce
1/2 cup coconut milk
1/4 tsp salt
1 tsp rice flour
1 tablespoons water
Instructions
Wash the excess starch from the rice with cold water using your hand. Pour
away the cloudy water and repeat this until the water is clear.
Soak the rice in cold water for at least 4 hours.
Thoroughly drain the rice and steam for 30 minutes.
At the same time as the rice is cooking, add sugar and salt to coconut milk in a
saucepan. Cook on a low heat and stir until the sugar has dissolved. Cover and
keep warm.
As soon as the rice is done pour the sweetened coconut milk over it.
Break up any lumps of rice and stir. Cover and leave for 20 minutes. The rice
will absorb the coconut milk. After 20 minutes stir the rice again, cover and
leave at least 20 minutes before serving.
For the salted coconut sauce: In a small cup add 1 tablespoon of water and 1
tsp rice flour stir until dissolved.
In a small pot or pan add rice flour water to coconut milk and salt. Gently boil
the mixture on a medium heat to make thick, sweet syrup. Let it cool down.
Slice the mango for presentation and plate it with a scoop of rice. Spoon the
salted coconut sauce over the rice and serve. Yummy!
---DRINKS---
Thai Iced Coffee (Gafae Yen)
1 serving, Difficulty: Easy, Total time: 10mins Ingredients
3 tablespoons Thai coffee (Olieng powder) 3/4 cup of boiling water
2 tablespoons sweetened condensed milk 2 tsp sugar
Pinch of salt
Glass full of ice
2-3 tablespoons evaporated milk Instruction
Take the boiling water and mix with coffee in a cup, leave it for 3 to 5 minutes.
In that time you can mix together the sweetened condensed milk, sugar and
pinch of salt in a glass.
Filter the coffee water through a fine filter or muslin cloth and add it to the glass
and mix to dissolve.
At this point it should be slightly over strong and over sweet because the ice will
dilute it and it will then taste just right. Taste and add more sugar if you like.
When completely dissolved pour it into another glass filled with ice. Top with as
much evaporated milk as you like and serve.
Thai Iced Tea (Cha Yen)
1 serving, Difficulty: Easy, Total time: 10mins Ingredients
3 tablespoons Thai tea leaves (any brand is fine) 1 cup of boiling water
1 1/2 tablespoons sweetened condensed milk 2 tsp sugar
Pinch of salt
Glass full of ice
1-2 tablespoons evaporated milk Instruction
Take the boiling water and mix with the tea leaves in a cup, leave it for 3 to 5
minutes.
In that time you can mix together the sweetened condensed milk, sugar and
pinch of salt in a glass.
Filter the tea through a fine paper or cloth filter or muslin cloth and add it to the
glass and mix to dissolve the sugar the sugar.
At this point it should be slightly over strong and over sweet because the ice will
dilute it and it will then taste just right. Taste and add more sugar if you like.
When completely dissolved pour it into another glass filled with ice. Top with as
much evaporated milk as you like and serve.
Thai Lemon Iced Tea (Cha Manao)
1 serving, Difficulty: Easy, Total time: 10mins Ingredients
2 tablespoons Thai tea leaves (any brand is fine) 1 cup of boiling water
4-5 tsp sugar
Juice from half a lime
Glass full of ice
Instruction
Take the boiling water and mix with tea leaves in a cup, leave it for 3 to 5
minutes.
Filter the tea water through a fine filter or muslin cloth and add it to the glass
and mix in the sugar to dissolve.
At this point it should be slightly over strong and over sweet because the ice will
dilute it and it will then taste just right. Taste and add more sugar if you like.
Leave to cool or add an ice cube.
Squeeze the juice from half a lime into a glass full of ice.
Add the cooled tea to the ice and lime juice, stir and serve.
Thai Black Iced Tea (Cha Dam)
1 serving, Difficulty: Easy, Total time: 10mins Ingredients
2 tablespoons Thai tea leaves (any brand is fine) 1 cup of boiling water
4-5 tsp sugar
Glass full of ice
Instructions
Take the boiling water and mix with tea leaves in a cup, leave it for 3 to 5
minutes.
Filter the tea water through a fine filter or muslin cloth and add it to the glass
and mix in the sugar to dissolve.
At this point it should be slightly over strong and over sweet because the ice will
dilute it and it will then taste just right. Taste and add more sugar if you like.
Add the tea to a glass full of ice and serve.
English Translation of Thai Menu
Cooking Terms
Tod = To deep fry
Pad = To Stir fry e.g. Pad Kee Mao Gang, Kaeng, Gaeng = Curry e.g. Gang
Keow Waan Yum = A type of salad e.g. Yum Woon Sen Neung = To steam
e.g. Pla Neung Manao
Seafood Ahaan Talay = Seafood (noun) Talay = Seafood (adjective), literally
means the sea Hoi, Hoy = General terms for mollusks, e.g. clams, mussels,
oysters, scallops Goong, Gung = Shrimp – Tom Yum Goong Bpu, Pu, Bhu,
Phu = Crab - Kao Pad Bpu Pla = Fish - Pla Raad Prik
Pla Meuk = Squid
Meat and Poultry
Bped, Ped, Phed, Bhed = Duck Gai = Chicken - Tom Kha Gai Neua, Nua =
Beef
Moo = Pork - Larb Moo
Miscellaneous
Pak = Vegetables
Ped = Spicy
Prik, Prig = Chilies - Pla Raad Prik Kao, Khao = Rice - Kao Pad
Grob, Krob = Crispy
Conclusion
Thank you again for downloading this book!
I hope this book was able to help you to cook some amazing meals and impress
your loved ones.
The next step is to subscribe to my weekly newsletter via email then each week
you will get an email with a new recipe along with my tips. Just go to
http://duensthaicookingschool.info/ and enter your email address.
Finally, if you enjoyed this book, then I’d like to ask you for a favor, would you
be kind enough to leave a review for this book on Amazon? It ’ d be greatly
appreciated!