People are growing food in underwater greenhouses on the coast of Italy 

Nemo ' s Garden
Nemo ' s Garden - Copyright OceanReefGroup2021
By Doloresz Katanich  & Giorgia Orlandi • Updated : 11 / 03 / 2022
The world ' s first underwater farm , dubbed ' Nemo ’ s Garden '  , is producing fruit and vegetables off the coast of Italy . 

In Noli , a unique structure consisting of six underwater greenhouses was by the Ocean Reef Group in 2012 . Step by step , the project started to yield various herbs such as basil different types of salad , tomatoes , courgettes , beans , green peas , aloe vera , mushrooms and strawberries .  
 
 " Every year , we are discovering new possible applications for the biospheres ,  ” says Gianni Fontanesi , project coordinator at Nemo ’ s Garden . These include eco-tourism , fish farming , seaweed farming , scientific research labs or underwater stations for monitoring wildlife research . 


But the project suffered serious storm damage in October 2019 and was very close to ending altogether . The team worked on giving new life to the six underwater air-filled pods anchored to the bottom of the sea in order to keep the farm up and running . 

Flooded and forgotten : How Europe ' s disused coal mines could help heat our homes 
 ' I am the man who skis with eagles '  : Meet the skier bringing back birds from extinction
Seals with helmets are helping scientists with climate research in Antarctica
Soon another challenge came looming . Due to COVID-19 restrictions , they had to leave the habitat unguarded for months . Yet , the structure fended for itself , unguarded , and the farm has just been re-opened more resilient than ever . 


By 2050 , we will need to feed a global population of 9 billion with an increasingly unstable climate . Ocean Reef Group believes that underwater farms could provide a source of food for coastal communities where agriculture needs to get creative . 

The organisation gives the example of the Maldives which imports nearly 100 per cent of its fresh produce by air . Places like this could be " transformed into a self-sustaining agricultural nation using underwater greenhouses to cater to the local and tourism industry .  " 


Researchers also say that the Italian farm is improving the local marine ecosystem too . At the Liguria facility , seahorses have been found in an area they have never been seen before . 

Click on the video above to see the fruit and veg growing in the underwater garden . 