TO THE MEMORY OF MY GOOD FRIEND , JOHN J . MOSKO ( 1919-1992 )  .  
 ' This day is called the feast of Crispian : 
He that outlives this day , and comes home safe , 
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named , 
And rouse him at the name of Crispian .  ' 
_AN IMPORTANT NOTE . _
This book is not intended as a substitute for the medical recommendations of
doctors or other healthcare providers . Rather , it is intended to offer information to help
the reader cooperate with doctors and health professionals in a mutual quest for optimum
well-being . 
The identities of people described in the case histories have been changed to
protect patient confidentiality . 
The publisher and author are not responsible for any goods and / or services offered
or referred to in this book and expressly disclaim all liability in connection with the
fulfilment of orders for any such goods and / or services and for any damage , loss or
expense to the person or property arising out of or relating to them . 
The UK publishers have made all efforts to check that the food products
recommended in this book are available in this country , and concede that some may only
be found in specialist health food shops or grocers .  
= ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .  = 
There are many people to thank , as no scientific pursuit is solitary . Along the way , 
I have been driven , inspired and supported by many people who placed their confidence
in me . In particular , I give deep thanks to my wife , Martha Mosko D ' Adamo , for her love
and friendship ; my parents , James D ' Adamo Sr .  , N . D . and Christiana , for teaching me to
trust in my intuition ; and my brother , James D ' Adamo Jr .  , for believing in me . 
I am also more grateful than I can express to : 
Joseph Pizzorno , N . D .  , for inspiring me to trust in the science of natural medicine ; 
Catherine Whitney , my writer , who imparted a style and organization to the raw
material characteristic of a true wordsmith ; 
Gail Winston , the editor who long ago , out of the clear blue sky , rang me up and
asked me if I wanted to write a book about natural medicine ; 
My literary agent , Janis Vallely , who saw the promise of my work and didn ' t allow
it to languish somewhere in a dusty filing cabinet ; 
Amy Hertz , my editor at Riverhead / Putnam , whose vision turned the manuscript
into the rich and important document I believe it has now become . 
I am also thankful to : 
Dorothy Mosko , for her invaluable assistance in the preparation of the early
manuscript ; 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Scott Carlson , my erstwhile assistant , who never missed a UPS pickup ; 
Carolyn Knight , R . N .  , my right-hand nurse and expert phlebotomist ; 
Jane Dystel , Catherine ' s literary agent , whose advice was always on target ; 
Paul Krafin , who lent his sharp writing and editing skills to the revision process ; 
Dina Khader , R . D .  , who helped with the recipes and meal planning ; 
Michael Schacter , M . D .  , Jonathon Wright , M . D .  , and Alan Datner , M . D .  , for their
valuable suggestions and guidance ; 
John Schuler , who designed the illustrations . 
I also wish to thank the research interns at Bastyr University , who expertly sifted
through the extensive medical literature pertaining to blood type , helping to make this
book as complete an account of the subject as possible . 
Lastly , I thank all the wonderful patients , who in their quest for health and
happiness chose to honor me with their trust .  
= Introduction .  = 
THE WORK OF TWO LIVES . 
I BELIEVED THAT NO TWO PEOPLE ON THE FACE OF THE EARTH
WERE ALIKE ; NO TWO PEOPLE HAVE THE SAME FINGERPRINTS , LIP PRINTS , 
OR VOICE PRINTS . NO TWO BLADES OF GRASS OR SNOWFLAKES ARE
ALIKE . BECAUSE I FELT THAT ALL PEOPLE WERE DIFFERENT FROM ONE
ANOTHER , I DID NOT THINK IT WAS LOGICAL THAT THEY SHOULD EAT THE
SAME FOODS . IT BECAME CLEAR TO ME THAT SINCE EACH PERSON WAS
HOUSED IN A SPECIAL BODY WITH DIFFERENT STRENGTHS , WEAKNESSES
AND NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS , THE ONLY WAY TO MAINTAIN HEALTH
OR CURE ILLNESS WAS TO ACCOMMODATE TO THAT PARTICULAR
PATIENT ' S SPECIFIC NEEDS . 
James D ' Adamo , my father . 
Your blood type is the key that unlocks the door to the mysteries of health , 
disease , longevity , physical vitality and emotional strength . Your blood type determines
your susceptibility to illness , which foods you should eat and how you should exercise . It
is a factor in your energy levels , the efficiency with which you burn calories , your
emotional response to stress and perhaps even your personality . 
The connection between blood type and diet may sound radical , but it is not . We
have long realized that there was a missing link in our comprehension of the process that
leads either to the path of wellness or the dismal trail of disease . There had to be a reason
why there were so many paradoxes in dietary studies and disease survival . There also had
to be an explanation for why some people were able to lose weight on particular diets , 
while others were not ; why some people retained vitality late into life , while others
deteriorated mentally and physically . Blood type analysis has given us a way to explain
these paradoxes . And the more we explore the connection , the more valid it becomes . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Blood types are as fundamental as creation itself . In the masterful logic of nature , 
the blood types follow an unbroken trail from the earliest moment of human creation to
the present day . They are the signature of our ancient ancestors on the indestructible
parchment of history . 
Now we have begun to discover how to use the blood type as a cellular fingerprint
that unravels many of the major mysteries surrounding our quest for good health . This
work is an extension of the recent groundbreaking findings concerning human DNA . Our
understanding of blood type takes the science of genetics one step further by stating
unequivocally that every human being is utterly unique . There is no right or wrong
lifestyle or diet ; there are only right or wrong choices to be made based on our individual
genetic codes . 
-How I Found the Missing Blood Type Link . -
My work in the field of blood type analysis is the fulfilment of a lifetime pursuit--
not only my own but also my father ' s . I am a second-generation naturopathic physician . 
Dr . James D ' Adamo , my father , graduated from naturopathic college ( a four-year
postgraduate programme ) in 1957 and later studied in Europe at several of the great spas . 
He noticed that although many patients did well on strict vegetarian and low-fat diets , 
which are the hallmarks of ' spa cuisine '  , a certain number of patients did not appear to
improve , and some did poorly or even worsened . A sensitive man with keen powers of
deduction and insight , my father reasoned that there should be some sort of blueprint that
he could use to determine differences in the dietary needs of his patients . He rationalized
that since blood was the fundamental source of nourishment to the body , perhaps some
aspect of the blood could help to identify these differences . My father set about testing
this theory by blood typing his patients and observing individualized reactions when they
were prescribed different diets . 
Through the years and with countless patients , a pattern began to emerge . He
noticed that patients who were Type A seemed to do poorly on high-protein diets that
included generous portions of meat , but did very well on vegetable proteins such as soya
and tofus . Dairy products tended to produce copious amounts of mucus discharge in the
sinuses and respiratory passages of Type As . When told to increase their levels of
physical activity and exercise , Type As usually felt fatigued and unwell ; when they
performed lighter forms of exercise , such as yoga , they felt alert and energized . 
On the other hand , Type O patients thrived on high-protein diets , and they felt
invigorated by intense physical activities , such as jogging and aerobics . The more my
father tested the different blood types , the greater his conviction became that each of
them followed a distinct path to wellness . 
Inspired by the saying ' One man ' s food is another man ' s poison '  , my father
condensed his observations and dietary recommendations into a book he titled ONE
MAN ' S FOOD . When the book was published in 1980 , I was in my third year of
naturopathic studies at Seattle ' s John Bastyr College . During this time revolutionary gains
were being achieved in naturopathic education . The goal of Bastyr College was nothing
less than to produce the complete alternative physician , the intellectual and scientific
equal of a medical internist , but with specialized naturopathic training . For the first time
naturopathic techniques , procedures and substances could be scientifically evaluated with
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
the benefits of modern technology . I waited for an opportunity to research my father ' s
blood type theory . I wanted to assure myself that it carried valid scientific weight . 
My chance came in 1982 when , for a clinical rounds requirement in my senior
year , I began scanning the medical literature to see if I could find any correlation between
the ABO blood types and a predilection for certain diseases , and whether any of this
supported my father ' s diet theory . Since my father ' s book was based on his subjective
impressions of the blood types rather than on an objective method of evaluation , I wasn ' t
certain that I would be able to find any scientific basis for his theories . But I was amazed
at what I learned . 
My first breakthrough came with the discovery that two major diseases of the
stomach were associated with blood type . The first was the peptic ulcer , a condition often
related to higher than average stomach acid levels . This condition was reported to be
more common in people with Type O blood than in people with other blood types . I was
immediately intrigued , since my father had observed that Type O patients did well on
animal products and protein diets--foods that require more stomach acid for proper
digestion . 
The second correlation was an association between Type A and stomach cancer . 
Stomach cancer was often linked to low levels of stomach acid production , as was
pernicious anaemia , another disorder found more often in Type A individuals . Pernicious
anaemia is related to a lack of vitamin B12 , which requires sufficient stomach acid for its
absorption . 
As I studied these facts I realized that on the one hand , Type O blood predisposed
people to an illness associated with too much stomach acid , while on the other hand , Type
A blood predisposed people to two illnesses associated with too little stomach acid . That
was the link I ' d been looking for . There was absolutely a scientific basis for my father ' s
observations . And so began my ongoing love affair with the science and anthropology of
the blood types . In time , I found that my father ' s initial work on the correlation between
blood type , diet and health was far more significant than he had ever imagined . 
-Four Simple Keys to Unlock Life ' s Mysteries . -
I grew up in a family that was mostly Blood Type A , and because of my father ' s
work we ate a basically vegetarian diet consisting of foods such as tofu , steamed
vegetables and salads . As a child I was often embarrassed and felt somewhat deprived , 
because none of my friends ate weird foods like tofu . On the contrary , they were happily
engaged in another kind of ' diet revolution ' sweeping America in the 1950s ; their diets
consisted of hamburgers , hot dogs , greasy chips , candy bars , ice-cream and lots of fizzy
drinks . 
Today , I still eat the way I did as a child , and I love it . Every day I eat the foods
that my Type A body craves , and it ' s immensely satisfying . 
In EAT RIGHT 4 YOUR TYPE I will teach you about the fundamental
relationship between your blood type and the dietary and lifestyle choices that will help
you live at your very best . The essence of the blood type connection rests in these facts : 
__ Your blood type--O , A , B or AB--is a powerful genetic fingerprint that
identifies you as surely as your DNA . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
__ When you use the individualized characteristics of your blood type as a guide
for eating and living you will be healthier , you will easily reach your ideal weight and
you will slow the process of ageing . 
__ Your blood type is a more reliable measure of your identity than race , culture
or geography . It is a genetic blueprint for who you are , a guide to how you can live most
fully . 
__ The key to the significance of blood type can be found in the story of human
evolution : Type O is the oldest ; Type A evolved with the agrarian society ; Type B
emerged as humans migrated north into colder , harsher territories ; and Type AB was a
thoroughly modern adaptation , a result of the intermingling of disparate groups . This
evolutionary story relates directly to the dietary needs of each blood type today . 
-What is this remarkable factor , the blood type ? -
Blood type is one of several medically recognized variations , much like hair and
eye colour . Many of these variations , such as fingerprint patterns and the more recent
DNA analysis , are used extensively by forensic scientists and criminologists , as well as
those who research the causes and cures of disease . Blood type is every bit as significant
as other variations ; in many ways , it ' s a more useful measure . Blood type analysis is a
logical system . The information is simple to learn and easy to follow . I ' ve taught the
system to numerous doctors , who tell me they are getting good results with patients who
are following its guidelines . Now I will teach it to you . By learning the principles of
blood type analysis , you can tailor the optimal diet for yourself and your family members . 
You can pinpoint the foods that make you sick , contribute to weight gain and lead to
chronic disease . 
Early on , I realized that blood type analysis offered a powerful means of
interpreting individual variations in health and disease . Given the amount of available
research data , it is surprising that the effects of blood type on our health have not received
the measure of attention that they deserve . But now I am prepared to make that
information available--not just to my fellow scientists and colleagues in the medical
community , but to you . 
At first glance , the science of blood type may seem daunting , but I assure you it is
as simple and basic as life itself . I will tell you about the ancient trail of the evolution of
blood types ( as riveting as the story of human history )  , and demystify the science of
blood types to provide a clear and simple plan that you will be able to follow . 
Maybe this all sounds a little too obvious to you . Maybe this sounds a little farfetched . But even if you don ' t believe it will work , just try it for two weeks . Stick to the
letter of your blood type diet for just two weeks . My patients have experienced increased
energy and the beginnings of weight loss after that short period of time . Give your blood
type diet a chance to bring you the benefits I ' ve seen it bring to the more than 4 , 000
people I ' ve put on the diet . Blood not only provides our most vital nourishment , but now
proves itself a vehicle for our future well-being . 
Peter D ' Adamo , June 1996 . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH










subcontinent , Type B is found in increased numbers from Japan , Mongolia , China , and
India up to the Ural Mountains . From there westward , the percentages fall until a low is
reached at the western tip of Europe . 
The small numbers of Type B in old and western Europeans represents western
migration by Asian nomadic peoples . This is best seen in the easternmost western
Europeans , the Germans and Austrians , who have an unexpectedly high incidence of
Type B blood compared to their western neighbours . The highest occurrence of Type B in
Germans occurs in the area around the upper and middle Elbe river , which had been
nominally held as the dividing line between civilization and barbarism in ancient times . 
Modern sub-continental Indians , a Caucasian people , have some of the highest
frequencies of Type B blood in the world . The northern Chinese and Koreans have very
high rates of Type B blood and very low rates of Type A . 
The blood type characteristics of the various Jewish populations have long been
of interest to anthropologists . As a general rule , regardless of their nationality or race , 
there is a trend towards higher than average rates of Type B blood . The Ashkenazim and
the Sephardim , the two major Jewish sects , share strong levels of Type B blood , and
appear to have very few differences . The pre-Diaspora Babylonian Jews differ
considerably from the primarily Type O Arabic population of Iraq ( the location of the
biblical Babylon ) in that they are primarily Type B , with some frequency of Type A . 
-AB is for Modern . -
Type AB blood is rare . Emerging from the intermingling of Type A Caucasians
with Type B Mongolians , it is found in less than 5 per cent of the population , and it is the
newest of the blood types . 
Until ten or twelve centuries ago , there was no Type AB blood . Attila the Hun and
other barbarian hordes sliced through the soft underbelly of any collapsing civilizations , 
overrunning the length and breadth of the Roman Empire . As a result of the intermingling
of these Eastern invaders with the last trembling vestiges of European civilization , Type
AB blood came into being . No evidence for the occurrence of this blood type extends
beyond 900-1 , 000 years ago , when a large western migration of eastern peoples took
place . Blood Type AB is rarely found in European graves prior to AD 900 . Studies on
prehistoric grave exhumations in Hungary show a distinct lack of this blood group into
the Langobard age ( 4th to 7th century AD )  . This would seem to indicate that up until that
point in time , European populations of Type A and Type B did not come into common
contact , or if so , did not mingle or intermarry . 
Because Type ABs inherit the tolerance of both Type A and Type B , their immune
systems have an enhanced ability to manufacture more specific antibodies to microbial
infections . This unique quality of possessing neither anti-A nor anti-B antibodies
minimizes their chances of being prone to allergies and other autoimmune diseases like
arthritis , inflammation and lupus . There is , however , a greater predisposition to certain
cancers because Type AB responds to anything A-like or B-like as ' self '  , so it
manufactures no opposing antibodies . 
Type AB presents a multi-faceted , and sometimes perplexing , blood type identity . 
It is the first blood type to adopt an amalgamation of immune characteristics , some of
which make them stronger , and some of which are in conflict . Perhaps Type AB presents
the perfect metaphor for modern life : complex and unsettled . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-The Blending Grounds . -
Blood type , geography and race are woven together to form our human identity . 
We may have cultural differences , but when you look at blood type , you see how
superficial they are . Your blood type is older than your race and more fundamental than
your ethnicity . The blood types were not a hit or miss act of random genetic activity . Each
new blood type was an evolutionary response to a series of cataclysmic chain reactions , 
spread over aeons of environmental upheaval and change . 
Although the early racial changes seem to have occurred in a world that was
composed almost exclusively of Type O blood , the racial diversifications , coupled with
dietary , environmental and geographical adaptations , were part of the evolutionary engine
that ultimately produced the other blood types . 
Some anthropologists believe that classifying humans into races invites oversimplification . Blood type is a far more important determinant of individuality and
similarity than race . For example , an African and Caucasian of Type A blood could
exchange blood or organs and have many of the same aptitudes , digestive functions and
immunological structures--characteristics they would not share with a member of their
own race who was Blood Type B . 
Racial distinctions based on skin colours , ethnic practices , geographical
homelands or cultural roots are not a valid way to distinguish peoples . Mankind has a lot
more in common with one another than we may have ever suspected . We are all
potentially brothers and sisters--in blood .  
*  *  * 
Today , as we look back on this remarkable evolutionary revolution , it is clear that
our ancestors had unique biological blueprints that complemented their environments . It
is this lesson we bring with us into our current understanding of blood types , for the
genetic characteristics of our ancestors live in our blood today . 
__ Type O . 
The oldest and most basic blood type , the survivor at the top of the food chain , 
with a strong and ornery immune system willing to and capable of destroying anyone , 
friend or foe . 
__ Type A . 
The first immigrants , forced by the necessity of migration to adapt to a more
agrarian diet and lifestyle--and a more cooperative personality to get along in crowded
communities . 
__ Type B . 
The assimilator , adapting to new climates and the mingling of populations ; 
representing nature ' s quest for a more balanced force between the tensions of the mind
and the demands of the immune system . 
__ Type AB . 
The delicate offspring of a rare merger between the tolerant Type A and the
formerly barbaric but more balanced Type B . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Our ancestors left each of us a special legacy , imprinted in our blood types . This
legacy exists permanently in the nucleus of each cell . It is here that the anthropology and
science of our blood meet .  
= 2 BLOOD CODE : THE BLUEPRINT OF BLOOD TYPE .  = 
BLOOD IS A force of nature , the ELAN VITAL that has sustained us since time
immemorial . A single drop of blood , too small to see with the naked eye , contains the
entire genetic code of a human being . The DNA blueprint is intact and replicated within
us endlessly--through our blood . 
Our blood also contains aeons of genetic memory--bits and pieces of specific
programming , passed on from our ancestors in codes we are still attempting to
comprehend . One such code rests within our blood type . Perhaps it is the most important
code we can decipher in our attempt to unravel the mysteries of blood and its vital role in
our existence . 
To the naked eye , blood is a homogenous red liquid . But under the microscope
blood shows itself to be composed of many different elements . The abundant red blood
cells contain a special type of iron that our bodies use to carry oxygen and create the
blood ' s characteristic rust colour . White blood cells , far less numerous than red , cruise our
bloodstreams like ever-vigilant troops , protecting us against infection . 
This complex , living fluid also contains proteins that deliver nutrients to the
tissues , platelets that help it to clot and plasma that contains the guardians of our immune
system . 
-The Importance of Blood Type . -
You may be unaware of your own blood type unless you ' ve donated blood or
needed a transfusion . Most people think of blood type as an inert factor , something that
only comes into play when there is a hospital emergency . But now that you have heard
the dramatic story of the evolution of blood type , you are beginning to understand that
blood type has always been the driving force behind human survival , changing and
adapting to new conditions , environments and foods supplies . 
Why is our blood type so powerful ? What is the essential role it plays in our
survival--not just thousands of years ago , but today ? 
Your blood type is the key to your body ' s entire immune system . It controls the
influence of viruses , bacteria , infections , chemicals , stress and the entire assortment of
invaders and conditions that might compromise your immune system . 
The word ' immune ' comes from the Latin IMMUNIS , which denoted a city in the
Roman Empire that was not required to pay taxes .  ( If only your blood type could give
you that kind of immunity !  ) The immune system works to define ' self ' and destroy ' nonself . This is a critical function , for without it your immune system could attack your own
tissues by mistake or allow a dangerous organism access to vital areas of your body . In
spite of all its complexity , the immune system boils down to two basic functions : 
recognizing ' us ' and killing ' them '  . In this respect your body is like a large invitation-only
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
party . If the prospective guest supplies the correct invitation , the security guards allow
him to enter and enjoy himself . If an invitation is lacking or forged , the guest is forcefully
removed . 
-Enter the Blood Type . -
Nature has endowed our immune systems with very sophisticated methods to
determine if a substance in the body is foreign or not . One method involves chemical
markers called ANTIGENS which are found on the cells of our bodies . Every life form , 
from the simplest virus to humans themselves , has unique antigens that form a part of
their chemical fingerprint . One of the most powerful antigens in the human body is the
one that determines your blood type . The different blood type antigens are so sensitive
that when they are operating effectively , they are the immune system ' s greatest security
system . When your immune system sizes up a suspicious character ( i . e . a foreign antigen
from bacteria ) one of the first things it looks for is your blood type antigen to tell it
whether the intruder is friend or foe . 
Each blood type possesses a different antigen with its own special chemical
structure . Your blood type is named for [ sic ] the blood type antigen you possess on your
red blood cells . 
IF YOU ARE : ANTIGEN ( S ) ON
YOUR CELLS . 
----------- ----------------
Blood Type A : A . 
Blood Type B : B . 
Blood Type AB : A and B . 
Blood Type O : no antigens . 
Visualize the chemical structure of blood types as antennae of sorts , projecting
outwards from the surface of our cells into deep space . These antennae are made from
long chains of a repeating sugar called fucose , which by itself forms the simplest of the
blood types , the O antigen of Blood Type O . The early discoveries of blood type called it 
 ' O ' as a way to make us think of ' zero ' or ' no real antigen '  . This antenna also serves as the
base for the other Blood Types , A , B and AB . 
__ Blood Type A is formed when the O antigen , or fucose , plus another sugar
called N-acetyl-galactosamine , is added . So , fucose plus N-acetyl-galactosamine equals
Blood Type A . 
__ Blood Type B is also based on the O antigen , or fucose , but has a different
sugar , named D-galactosamine , added on . So , fucose plus D-galactosamine equals Blood
Type B . 
__ Blood Type AB is based on the O antigen , fucose , plus the two sugars , Nacetyl-galactosamine and D-galactosamine . So , fucose plus N-acetyl-galactosamine plus
D-galactosamine equals Blood Type AB . 
At this point you may be wondering about other blood type identifiers , like
positive and negative , or secretor / non-secretor . Usually , when people state their blood
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
types they say ,  ' I ' m A positive ' or ,  ' I ' m O negative '  . These variations , or sub-groups , within
blood types play relatively insignificant roles . More than 90 per cent of all the factors
associated with your blood type are related to your primary type--O , A , B , or AB .  ( See
Appendix E for details on the meaning of the subgroups .  ) We will concentrate on your
blood type itself .  
[ IMAGE 4 : THE FOUR BLOOD TYPES AND THEIR ANTIGENS . TYPE O IS THE
STALK , FUCOSE ; TYPE A IS FUCOSE PLUS THE SUGAR N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINE ; TYPE B IS FUCOSE PLUS THE SUGAR DGALACTOSAMINE ; TYPE AB IS FUCOSE PLUS THE A-SUGAR AND THE BSUGAR ]  .  [ EATRITE4 . JPG ] 
-Antigens Create Antibodies ( Immune System Smart Bombs )  . -
When your blood type antigen senses that a foreign antigen has entered the
system , the first thing it does is create antibodies to that antigen . These antibodies , 
specialized chemicals manufactured by the cells of the immune system , are designed to
attach to and tag the foreign antigen for destruction . 
Antibodies are the cellular equivalent of the military ' s smart bomb . The cells of
our immune system manufacture countless varieties of antibodies , and each is specifically
designed to identify and attach to one particular foreign antigen . A continual battle wages
between the immune system and intruders who try to change or mutate their antigens into
some new form that the body will not recognize . The immune system responds to this
challenge with an ever-increasing inventory of antibodies . 
When an antibody encounters the antigen of a microbial interloper , a reaction
called agglutination ( gluing ) occurs . The antibody attaches itself to the viral antigen and
makes it very sticky . When cells , viruses , parasites and bacteria are agglutinated , they
stick together and clump up , which makes the job of their disposal all the easier . As
microbes must rely on their slippery powers of evasion , this is a very powerful defence
mechanism . It is rather like handcuffing criminals together ; they become far less
dangerous than when they are allowed to move around freely . Sweeping the system of
odd cells , viruses , parasites and bacteria , the antibodies herd the undesirables together for
easy identification and disposal . 
The system of blood type antigens and antibodies has other ramifications besides
detecting microbial and other invaders . Nearly a century ago , Dr . Karl Landsteiner , a
brilliant Austrian physician and scientist , also found that blood types produced antibodies
to other blood types . His revolutionary discovery explained why some people could
exchange blood , while others could not . Until Dr . Landsteiner ' s time , blood transfusions
were a hit and miss affair . Sometimes they ' took '  , and sometimes they didn ' t and nobody
knew why . Thanks to Dr . Landsteiner , we now know which blood types are recognized as
friend by other blood types , and which are recognized as foe . 
Dr . Landsteiner learned that : 
__ Blood Type A carried anti-B antibodies . Type B would be rejected by Type A . 
__ Blood Type B carried anti-A antibodies . Type A would be rejected by Type B . 
_Thus , Type A and Type B could not exchange blood . _
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
__ Blood Type AB carried no antibodies . The universal receiver , it would accept
any other blood type ! But , because it carried both A and B antigens , it would be rejected
by all other blood types . 
Thus , Type AB could receive blood from everyone , but could give blood to no
one ( except another Type AB , of course )  . 
__ Blood Type O carried anti-A and anti-B antibodies . Type A , Type B and Type
AB would be rejected . 
Thus , Type O could not receive blood from anyone but another Type O . But , free
of A-like and B-like antigens , Type O could give blood to everyone else . Type O is the
universal donor ! 
IF YOU ARE : YOU CARRY
ANTIBODIES
AGAINST . 
----------- -------------
Blood Type A : Blood Type B . 
Blood Type B : Blood Type A . 
Blood Type AB : No antibodies . 
Blood Type O : Blood Type A and
B . 
The ' anti-other-blood-type ' antibodies are the strongest antibodies in our immune
system , and their ability to clump ( agglutinate ) the blood cells of an opposing blood type
is so powerful that it can be immediately observed on a glass slide with the unaided eye . 
Most of our other antibodies require some sort of stimulation ( such as a vaccination or an
infection ) for their production . The blood type antibodies are different : they are produced
automatically , often appearing at birth and reaching almost adult levels by four months of
age . 
But there is much more to the agglutination story . It was also found that many
foods agglutinate the cells of certain blood types ( in a way similar to rejection ) but not
others , meaning that a food which may be harmful to the cells of one blood type may be
beneficial to the cells of another . Not surprisingly , many of the antigens in these foods
had A-like or B-like characteristics . This discovery provided the scientific link between
blood type and diet . Remarkably , however , its revolutionary implications would lie
dormant , gathering dust for most of this century--until a handful of scientists , doctors and
nutritionists began to explore the connection . 
-Lectins : The Diet Connection . -
A chemical reaction occurs between your blood and the foods that you eat . This
reaction is part of your genetic inheritance . It is amazing but true that today , in the late
twentieth century , your immune and digestive systems still maintain a favouritism for
foods that your blood type ancestors ate . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
We know this because of a factor called lectins . Lectins , abundant and diverse
proteins found in foods , have agglutinating properties that affect your blood . Lectins are a
powerful way for organisms to attach themselves to other organisms in nature . Lots of
germs , and even our own immune systems , used this super-glue to their benefit . For
example , cells in our liver ' s bile ducts have lectins on their surfaces to help them snatch
up bacteria and parasites . Bacteria and other microbes have lectins on their surfaces , as
well , which work rather like suction cups , so they can attach to the slippery mucousal
linings of the body . Often , the lectins used by viruses or bacteria can be blood type
specific , making them a stickier pest for a person of that blood type . 
So , too , with the lectins in food . When you eat a food containing protein lectins
that are incompatible with your blood type antigen , the lectins target an organ or bodily
system ( kidney , liver , brain , stomach , etc .  ) and begin to agglutinate blood cells in that
area . 
Many food lectins have characteristics that are close enough to a certain blood
type antigen to make it an ' enemy ' to another . For example , milk has B-like qualities ; if a
person with Type A blood drinks it , their system will immediately start the agglutination
process in order to reject it . 
Here ' s an example of how a lectin agglutinates in the body . Let ' s say a Type A
person drinks a glass of milk . The milk is digested in the stomach through the process of
acid hydrolysis . However , the lectin protein is resistant to acid hydrolysis . It doesn ' t get
digested , but stays intact . It may interact directly with the lining of the stomach or
intestinal tract , or it may get absorbed into our bloodstream along with the digested
nutrients . Different lectins target different organs and body systems . 
Once the intact lectin protein settles somewhere in your body , it literally has a
magnetic effect on the cells in that region . It clumps the cells together and they are
targeted for destruction , as if they , too , were foreign invaders . This clumping can cause
irritable bowel syndrome in the intestines , cirrhosis of the liver , or block the flow of
blood through the kidneys--to name just a few of the effects . 
-Lectins : A Dangerous Glue . -
You may remember the bizarre assassination of Gyorgi Markov in 1978 on a
London street . Markov was killed by an unknown Soviet KGB agent while waiting for a
bus . Initially , the autopsy could not pinpoint how it was done . After a thorough search , 
however , a tiny gold bead was found embedded in Markov ' s leg . The bead was found to
be permeated with a chemical called ricin , which is a toxic lectin extracted from castor
beans . Ricin is so potent an agglutinin that even an infinitesimally small amount can
cause death by swiftly converting the body ' s red blood cells into large clots which block
the arteries . Ricin kills instantaneously . 
Fortunately , most lectins found in the diet are not quite so life-threatening , 
although they can cause a variety of other problems , especially if they are specific to a
particular blood type . For the most part our immune systems protect us from lectins . 
Ninety-five per cent of the lectins we absorb from our typical diets are sloughed off by
the body . But at least 5 per cent of the lectins we eat are filtered into the blood stream , 
where they react with and destroy red and white blood cells . The actions of lectins in the
digestive tract can be even more powerful . There , they often create a violent
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
inflammation of the sensitive mucus of the intestines , and this agglutinative action may
mimic food allergies . Even a minute quantity of a lectin is capable of agglutinating a
huge number of cells if the particular blood type is reactive . 
This is not to say that you should suddenly become fearful of every food you eat . 
After all , lectins are widely abundant in pulses seafood , grains and vegetables . It ' s hard to
bypass them . The key is to avoid the lectins that agglutinate your particular cells--
determined by blood type . For example , gluten , the most common lectin found in wheat
and other grains , binds to the lining of the small intestine , causing substantial
inflammation and painful irritation in some blood types--especially Type O . 
Lectins vary widely according to their source . For example , the lectin found in
wheat has a different shape and attaches to a different combination of sugars than the
lectin found in soya , making each of these foods dangerous for some blood types , but
beneficial for others . 
Nervous tissue as a rule is very sensitive to the agglutinating effect of food lectins . 
This may explain why some researchers feel that allergy-avoidance diets may be of
benefit in treating certain types of nervous disorders , such as hyperactivity , Russian
researchers have noted that the brains of schizophrenics are more sensitive to the
attachment of certain common food lectins . 
Injections of lentil lectin into the knee-joint cavities of non-sensitized rabbits
resulted in the development of arthritis that was indistinguishable from rheumatoid
arthritis . Many people with arthritis feel that avoiding the so-called ' nightshade ' 
vegetables , such as tomatoes , aubergines and white potatoes , seems to help their arthritis . 
That ' s not surprising , since most nightshades are very high in lectins . 
Food lectins can also interact with the surface receptors of the body ' s white cells , 
programming them to multiply rapidly . These lectins are called mitogens because they
cause the white cells to enter mitosis , the process of cell reproduction . They do not clump
blood by gluing cells together ; they merely attach themselves to things , like fleas on a
dog . Occasionally an emergency room doctor will be faced with a very ill but otherwise
apparently normal child who has an extraordinarily high white blood cell count . Although
paediatric leukaemia is usually the first thing to come to mind , the astute doctor will ask
the parent ,  ' Was your child playing in the garden ?  ' If the answer is yes ,  ' Was he eating any
weeds or putting plants in his mouth ?  ' It may turn out that the child was eating the leaves
or shoots of the North American pokeweed plant , which contains a lectin with the potent
ability to stimulate white cell production .  
[ IMAGE 5 :  " Blood-type specific food lectins "  : SINCE EACH BLOOD TYPE
ANTIGEN POSSESSES A UNIQUE SHAPE , MANY LECTINS INTERACT WITH
ONE SPECIFIC BLOOD TYPE BECAUSE THEY FIT THE SHAPE OF THAT
PARTICULAR BLOOD TYPE . IN THE EXAMPLE ABOVE , FOOD LECTINS FROM
A STEAMING PLATE OF LIMA BEANS INTERACT AND AGGLUTINATE TYPE A
CELLS ( ON THE LEFT ) BECAUSE THEY FIT THE SHAPE OF THE A ANTIGEN . 
THE ANTIGEN FOR TYPE B BLOOD ( ON THE RIGHT )  , A DIFFERENT SUGAR
MOLECULE WITH A DIFFERENT SHAPE , IS NOT AFFECTED . CONVERSELY , A
FOOD LECTIN ( SUCH AS BUCKWHEAT ) THAT CAN SPECIFICALLY ATTACH TO
AND AGGLUTINATE CELLS OF BLOOD TYPE B WOULD NOT FIT TYPE A
BLOOD .  ]  [ EATRITE5 . JPG ] 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-How To Detect Your Harmful Lectins . -
I often have the experience of a patient insisting that he or she is following the
blood type diet to the letter and staying away from all the lectins targeted for his or her
blood type--but I know differently . When I challenge the patient ' s assurance , usually the
person will drop all sighs of protest and say in amazement ,  ' How do you know ?  ' 
I know because the effects of lectins on different blood types are not just a theory . 
They ' re based on science . I ' ve tested virtually all common foods for blood type reactions , 
using both clinical and laboratory methods . I can purchase isolated lectins from foods
such as peanuts , lentils , meat or wheat from chemical laboratories and the results are
visible under the microscope : I can see them agglutinating cells in the affected blood
type .  
[ IMAGE 6 :  " The Indican Test .  "  ]  [ EATRITE6 . JPG ] 
There is a scientific barometer that can be used to measure the presence of lectins
in our system . The barometer is a simple urine test called the Indican Scale . The Indican
Scale measures a factor called bowel putrefaction . When the liver and intestines don ' t
properly metabolize proteins , they produce toxic byproducts called indols . The level of
these toxic byproducts is shown on the Indican Scale . 
If you avoid foods containing toxic lectin proteins that do not metabolize properly
in your system , your Indican Scale will be low . 
If , on the other hand , you regularly consume foods that are high in indigestable
lectins , your Indican Scale will be high--meaning that you have a high carcinogenity of
substances in your body . 
My patients with high Indican Scale results often protest that they usually follow
the diet , only easing up occasionally . They can ' t believe that their Indican Scale numbers
are so high . 
Here ' s the reason : The Indican Scale shows that a toxic food entering your system
is magnified to 90 times the effect on someone for whom it is not toxic . For example , if a
Type A eats a processed or cured food , such as bologna ( salami )  , the nitrates are
magnified 90 times in the negative impact they have because Type As are particularly
susceptible to stomach cancer and the toxic effects of nitrites . 
The average person comes into my office with a 2-1 / 2 on the scale--more than
enough toxicity to indicate a problem . The good news is , after only two weeks of
faithfully following the blood type diet , that person ' s Indican Scale number will drop to 1
or even 0 . 
This may be the first time you ' ve ever heard of the Indican Scale , but it has been
widely used in conventional medicine for the last fifty years , and all commercial
laboratories perform it . Ironically , only a year ago , several major laboratory groups
discontinued its use because not enough people were requesting it . I am certain that as
people begin to better understand the blood type-lectin association , the Indican Scale will
be revived . Meanwhile , ask your medical doctor or naturopath to perform the test . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-A Blood Type Lesson : The Rabbi ' s Story . -
Over the years , I have witnessed many transformations as a result of the blood
type diet . But few so moved and inspired me as my experience with a wise , elderly
Brooklyn rabbi . 
In early 1990 , I received an urgent phone call from a New York City doctor who
respected my work . He asked if I could come to see one of his patients , a renowned
Hasidic rabbi who was bedridden .  ' Rabbi Jacob is a very special man ,  ' he told me .  ' It
should be quite an experience for you--and , I hope , for him too .  ' He went on to tell me
that the rabbi , 73 , had a long history of diabetes , which was poorly controlled by
injectable insulin therapy . Now , a massive stroke had left him partially paralyzed . 
When I arrived to see him in his Brooklyn home , I found that Rabbi Jacob was
indeed an impressive man who gave off an air of deep spiritual understanding and quiet
compassion . Once obviously tall and strongly formed , the rabbi lay withered and
exhausted in his bed , his luxuriant white beard almost falling to his chest . In spite of his
medical condition , his eyes were clear , kind , and filled with life . His main interest was
getting out of bed so he could go about his work . But I could see he was in terrible pain . 
Even before the stroke , he told me , his legs had been giving him problems . Poor
circulation had caused swelling and inflammation in both legs and caused him to
experience excruciating jolts of ' pins and needles ' when he tried to walk . Now , his left leg
was not responding to his bidding . 
I wasn ' t surprised to learn that Rabbi Jacob was Blood Type B . Although this
blood type is relatively uncommon in America , it is very common among Hasidic Jews , 
the majority of whom emigrated from Eastern Europe . I realized that in order to help the
rabbi , I must first learn something about the way he lived and the foods he ate . Food was
intimately bound to ritual in Jewish tradition . 
I sat down with Rabbi Jacob ' s wife and daughter , both of whom were unfamiliar
with naturopathic treatments . But they wanted to help the rabbi , and they were eager to
learn .  ' He usually eats the same foods every day ,  ' his daughter told me . Those foods
consisted of boiled chicken ; CHULN , a type of bean paste ; and KASHA , a buckwheat
preparation . Chicken , beans , buckwheat with bow-tie noodles--these are very normal
foods . I asked how the KASHA is made . There was a quick conversation back and forth
between mother and daughter in Yiddish , punctuated with lovely smiles at me , and gales
of laughter .  
 ' Well ,  ' said the daughter in perfect New York English ,  ' first you cook up the
KASHA ( buckwheat ) then you stir it in with the noodles . Then you serve it , say blessings
and eat .  '  
 ' Do you season the KASHA at all ?  ' I innocently asked . Another outbreak of
Yiddish . Then , the rabbi ' s daughter began .  
 ' Kasha , Doctor , well .  .  . you take all the fat you pulled off the chicken while you
were koshering it ; you put it in a heavy saucepan with just a BISSEL [ tiny bit ] of
chopped onion , and you cook it down . You clarify the fat as it cooks , and you ' ve got
beautiful pure chicken fat . We give it to the little ones on a piece of fresh CHALLAH
bread with some salt . It ' s so delicious you could die !  ' Yes , yes you could , I darkly
thought .  
 ' Anyway ,  ' the rabbi ' s daughter continued ,  ' you take some of the GRIBBENES , 
which is what ' s left when you cook the fat away . It ' s all nice and dark and crispy with the
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
caramelized onions , and you put this on the side along with the KASHA for a little treat . 
It tastes better than potato chips . The rabbi loves it ! The chicken fat you ' ve rendered you
mix into the KASHA and noodles . Oh , it ' s just delicious . Delicious !  ' 
I learned that these are very common Hasidic dishes , and they comprised the
family ' s typical Sabbath meal . But it was more than just a weekly ritual for the rabbi . A
pious man who spent most of his time in prayer , the rabbi thought little of food and
simply ate the same meal twice daily , day after day . Although part of a centuries-old
tradition , the rabbi ' s diet was not a good choice for people with Type B blood . The lectins
in foods like chicken , buckwheat , beans and corn ( not to mention the GRIBBENES ) were
causing the cells of his blood to agglutinate , and that was probably a major factor in his
stroke . These particular lectins can also block the effects of insulins , which explains why
Rabbi Jacob ' s diabetes became increasingly difficult to control . 
I understood that Orthodox Jews obeyed the laws of Kashruth ( kosher )  , ancient
dietary principles first laid out in the Old Testament of the Bible . According to these
dietary laws , a number of foods are forbidden , and dairy and meat are never eaten at the
same meal . In fact , there are separate pots , pans , dishes and cutlery for dairy and meat in
kosher homes . And separate sinks to wash all these things , as well . 
I therefore approached the matter of dietary changes carefully with the two
women , not wanting to disrupt the ritual and religious associations that meant so much . I
was also careful not to suggest foods that I knew to be considered ' unclean ' in their
tradition . Fortunately , there were allowable substitutes . I asked Rabbi Jacob ' s wife to vary
the family diet , restricting the rabbi ' s typical dishes to once a week for the actual Sabbath
meal . For his other meals I asked her to prepare lamb , fish or turkey instead of chicken ; 
rice or millet instead of KASHA ; and to vary the beans used to prepare the CHULN . 
Finally , I prescribed several vitamin and herbal combinations to speed his recovery . 
Over the next year , the rabbi made wonderful progress . Within eight weeks he
was walking and doing moderate exercise , which greatly helped to improve his
circulation . He showed remarkable vigour for a man of his age , and shook off the effects
of his stroke . 
At six months he was switched from injectable to oral insulin therapy--a
remarkable achievement considering he had been on injectable insulin for many years . 
There have been no further episodes of stroke , and Rabbi Jacob ' s diabetes is finally under
control . 
Treating the Rabbi gave me a new appreciation for just how ancient and
fundamental the wisdom of the blood types is . It also illustrated that foods chosen for
religious or cultural reasons may not always be the healthiest for a person of that culture ! 
A five- or six-thousand-year-old tradition may appear time-honoured and ancient , but
many of the characteristics of our blood types are thousands of years older . 
As you study your blood type diet , take a lesson from the rabbi . The blood type
diets are not an attempt to superimpose a rigid formula on your diet , or to rob you of the
foods that are important to your culture . Rather , they are a way to fully support your most
basic identity--to lead you back to the essential truths that live in every cell of your body
and link you to your historical , evolutionary ancestry . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH 
= 3 THE BLOOD TYPE SOLUTION : A ROAD MAP .  = 
YOUR BLOOD TYPE PLAN lets you zero in on the health and nutritional
information that corresponds to your exact biological profile . Armed with this new
information , you can now make choices about your diet , exercise regimen and general
health that are based on the dynamic natural forces within your own body . The next four
sections ( in Part II ) supply highly specific diet , supplement and exercise plans for each of
the blood types . These sections are followed , in Part III , by a thorough breakdown of
every common health condition and disease , with your particular blood type
susceptibilities and remedies . If you follow your Blood Type Plan regime carefully , you
can : 
__ Avoid many common viruses and infections . 
__ Lose weight , as your body rids itself of toxins and fats . 
__ Fight back against life-threatening diseases , such as cancer , cardiovascular
disease , diabetes , and liver failure . 
__ Avoid many of the factors that cause rapid cell deterioration , thus slowing
down the ageing process . 
EAT RIGHT 4 YOUR TYPE is not a panacea . But it is a way to restore the natural
protective functions of your immune system , reset your metabolic clock , and clear your
blood of dangerous agglutinating lectins . Depending on the severity of the condition , and
the level of compliance with the plan , every person will realize some benefits . That has
been my experience , and the experience of my colleagues who use this system , with
thousands of patients . It makes perfect scientific sense . 
In this Chapter I will introduce the elements you will find in your Blood Type
Plan . They include : 
__ The Blood Type Diet . 
__ The Weight Loss Factor . 
__ The Supplement Advisory . 
__ The Stress-Exercise Profile . 
__ The Personality Question . 
After you read this Chapter and review your Blood Type Plan , I suggest you read
Part III to get a fuller picture of the specific medical implications your Plan has for you . 
-The Blood Type Diet . -
Your blood type diet is the restoration of your natural genetic rhythm . The
groundwork for the blood type diets was prepared for us many thousands of years ago . 
Perhaps if we had continued to follow the inherent , instinctual messages of our biologic
natures , our current condition would be very different . However , human diversity and the
sweeping forces of technology intervened . 
As already discussed , most , if not all , early humans were Type O hunters and
gatherers who fed on animals , insects , berries , roots and leaves . The range of dietary
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
choices was extended when humans learned how to rear animals for their own use and
how to cultivate crops . But it was not necessarily a smooth and orderly process because
not every society adapted well to this change . In many of the early Type O societies , such
as the Missouri Valley Indians in North America , the change from a meat-eating diet to an
agrarian diet was accompanied by changes in skull formation and the appearance for the
first time of dental cavities . Their systems were simply not suited to the newly introduced
foods . 
Even so , for a long period of time , the traditional agrarian diet provided ample
nutrients to avoid malnutrition and support large populations . This changed as advances
in agricultural and food-processing techniques began to refine foodstuffs even further , 
and remove them more and more from their natural state . For example , the refining of
rice with new milling techniques in twentieth-century Asia caused a scourge of beriberi , a
thiamine-deficiency disease , which resulted in millions of deaths . 
A more current example is the change from breast-feeding to bottle-feeding in
developing Third World countries . This change to a highly-refined , processed infant
formula has been responsible for a great deal of malnutrition , diarrhoea and a lowering of
the natural immune factors passed on through the mother ' s milk . 
Today , it is well accepted that nutrition--or the foods we eat--has a direct impact
on the state of our health and general well-being . But confusing , and often conflicting , 
information about nutrition has created a virtual minefield for health-conscious
consumers . 
How are we to choose which recommendations to follow , and which diet is the
right diet ? The truth is , we can no more choose the right diet than we can choose our hair
colour or gender . It was already chosen for us many thousands of years ago . 
I believe that much of the confusion is the result of a cavalier ' one-diet-fits-all ' 
premise . Although we have seen with our own eyes that certain people respond very well
to particular diets while others do not , we have never made a commitment--in science or
nutrition--to study the specialized characteristics of populations or individuals that might
explain the variety of responses to any given diet . We ' ve been so busy looking at the
characteristics of food that we have failed to examine the characteristics of people . 
Your blood type diet works because you are able to follow a clear , logical , 
scientifically researched and certified dietary blueprint based on your cellular profile . 
-Each of the blood type diets includes 16 food groups : -
Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game . 
Seafood . 
Dairy Products and Eggs . 
Oils and Fats . 
Nuts and Seeds . 
Beans and Pulses . 
Cereals . 
Breads , Crispbreads and Muffins . 
Grains and Pastas . 
Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . 
Fruits . 
Juices and Other Fluids . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Spices , Dried Herbs and Flavourings . 
Condiments . 
Herbal Teas . 
Miscellaneous Beverages . 
Each of these groups divides foods into three categories : HIGHLY BENEFICIAL , 
NEUTRAL and AVOID . Think of the categories this way : 
__ HIGHLY BENEFICIAL is a food that acts like a MEDICINE . 
__ NEUTRAL is a food that acts like a FOOD . 
__ AVOID is a food that acts like a POISON . 
There are a wide variety of foods in each diet , so don ' t worry about limitations . 
When possible , show preference for the highly beneficial foods over the neutral foods , 
but feel free to enjoy the neutral foods that suit you ; they won ' t harm you from the
standpoint of lectins , and they contain nutrients that are necessary for a balanced diet . 
At the top of each food category , you will see a chart that looks something like
this : 
-BLOOD TYPE O . -
Food : All seafood . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-5x . 
Asian : 4-6x . 
The portion suggestions according to ancestry are not meant as firm rules . My
purpose here is to present a way to fine-tune your diet even more , according to what we
know about the particulars of your ancestry . Although peoples of different races and
cultures may share a blood type , they don ' t always have the same frequency of the gene . 
For example , a Type A person may be A meaning both parents were A ' s ; or AO , meaning
one parent was O . Overall , people of Caucasian ancestry tend to have more AA genes ; 
people of African ancestry tend to have more OO genes ; and people of Asian ancestry
tend to have more BB or AA genes . That is one reason why many people of African
descent are lactose intolerant , even if they are Type B ( a blood type that benefits from
dairy foods )  . 
There are also geographical and cultural variations . For example , people of Asian
ancestry are not traditionally exposed to dairy products , so Type Bs of Asian descent may
need to incorporate them more slowly into their diets as their systems adjust to them . 
These refinements also take into account typical differences in the size and weight
of various peoples . Use the refinements if you think they ' re helpful ; ignore them if you
find that they ' re not . In any case , try to formulate your own plan for portion sizes . 
At the back of each blood type diet are three sample menus and several recipes to
give you an idea of how you might incorporate the diet into your life . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-The Weight Loss Factor . -
Being overweight was anathema to our ancient ancestors , whose bodies were
machines which consumed and expended the fuel they needed . Today , obesity has
become one of the biggest health problems in many industrialized societies . For this
reason , losing weight has become an obsession , and naturally many of my patients are
interested in the weight loss aspects of the blood type diet . I always tell them that these
diets were not specifically designed for weight loss ; they were designed for optimum
performance . Having said that , I add that weight loss is one of the natural side effects of
the body ' s restoration . Because the blood type diet is tailored to the cellular composition
of your body ( as opposed to being a generic , one-size-fits-all recommendation )  , specific
foods will cause weight gain or weight loss for you , even though they may have a
different effect on a person of another blood type . 
My patients often ask me about current diet plans that are in vogue . The latest are
the high protein diets , which have made a recent comeback . By severely limiting
carbohydrates , high protein diets force the burning of fats for energy and the production
of ketones , which indicate a high rate of metabolic activity . It doesn ' t surprise me that the
patients who tell me they have lost weight on high protein diets are usually Type Os and
Type Bs . You don ' t see many Type As who do well on these diets ; their systems are
biologically unsuited to metabolize meat as efficiently as Type Os and Type Bs . Nor do
Type ABs lose weight on high protein diets , since these diets lack the balance of A-like
foods that Type ABs require . 
On the other hand , the principles of a macrobiotic diet , which encourage the
consumption of natural foods like vegetables , rice , whole grains , fruits and soya , might
be best suited to Type As , providing that they eat the recommended grains and pulses . 
The bottom line : any time you see a new diet plan that claims to work the same
way for everyone , be sceptical . Listen to your blood type . Appreciate your individuality .  
*  *  * 
Let me tell you about the weight loss potential of each of the blood type diets . 
Actually , the greatest problem most of my patients encounter is that they lose too much
weight very quickly and I have to make adjustments in their diets to slow down the rate
of weight loss . Too much weight loss may seem to be the least of your problems , if
you ' ve always struggled with your weight . But remember , your ultimate goal is optimum
health and performance , and that means achieving a balance between your weight and
your height and shape . Excessive weight loss indicates a malnourished state that will
weaken your immune system--exactly what you are trying to avoid . So use these
guidelines wisely . 
The dynamics of weight loss are related to the changes your body makes when
you follow your genetically tailored diet . There are two factors . 
First , as your body makes the dramatic shift of eliminating foods that are poorly
digested or toxic , the first thing it does is try flush out the toxins that are already there . 
Those toxins are mainly deposited in the fat tissue , so the process of eliminating toxins
also means eliminating fat . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
The second factor is the effects that specific foods have on the bodily systems that
control weight . Depending on your blood type , the lectin activity of certain foods may do
the following : 
__ Interfere with the digestive process . 
__ Slow down the rate of food metabolism , so you don ' t efficiently burn calories
for energy . 
__ Compromise the production of insulin . 
__ Upset the hormonal balance , causing water retention ( oedema )  , thyroid
disorders and other problems . 
Each blood type has its own reactions to certain foods ; these are outlined in your
blood type diet . In the first few weeks you ' ll need to experiment with the guidelines . I ' ve
found that many people approach their diet religiously in the beginning . They eat only the
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL foods , and don ' t even consume NEUTRAL foods . The result is
inevitably a rather unhealthy weight loss . They look gaunt and unwell because they ' re not
getting the full range of nutrients needed for a healthy diet . A better approach is to
eliminate all the foods on your AVOID list , and reduce or eliminate those NEUTRAL
foods that are prone to cause weight gain for your blood type . That will leave you with a
balanced diet and a healthier method of weight loss . 
-The Supplement Advisory . -
Your Blood Type Plan also includes recommendations about vitamin , mineral and
herbal supplements that can enhance the effects of your diet . This is another area where
there is great confusion and misinformation . Popping vitamins , minerals , exotic
preparations and herbal tinctures is a popular thing to do these days . It ' s hard not to be
seduced by the vast array of remedies overflowing the shelves of your local health food
shop . Promising energy , weight loss , pain relief , sexual potency , strength , longevity and
mental power--along with cures for headaches , colds , nerves , stomach pain , arthritis , 
chronic fatigue heart disease , cancer and every other ailment in the book--these tempting
panaceas seem to be the answer we ' ve all been looking for . 
But as with food , nutritional supplements don ' t always work the same way for
everyone . Every vitamin , mineral and herbal supplement plays a specific role in your
body . The miracle remedy your Type B friend raves about may be inert or even harmful
for your Type A system . 
It can be dangerous to self-prescribe vitamin and mineral supplements--many of
which act like drugs in your body . For example , even though they are all readily
available , vitamins A , D , K and B3 ( niacin ) should only be administered under the care of
a doctor . 
However , there are many natural substances in plants , called phytochemicals ( see
Appendix C for definition )  , that are more effective and less damaging than vitamins and
minerals . Your Blood Type Plan recommends individualized phytochemical regimens for
each blood type . 
You may be unfamiliar with the term phytochemicals . Once called weeds or
herbs , modern science has discovered that many of these phytochemicals are sources of
high concentrations of biologically active compounds . These compounds are widely
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
available in other plants , but in far smaller amounts . Many phytochemicals--which I
prefer to think of as food concentrates--are antioxidants , and several of them are many
times more powerful than vitamins . Interestingly , these phytochemical antioxidants
exhibit a remarkable degree of tissue preference , which vitamins do not demonstrate . For
example , the milk thistle ( SILYBUM MARIANUM ) and the spice turmeric ( CURCUMA
LONGA ) both have an antioxidant capability hundreds of times stronger than vitamin E , 
and they deposit with a great degree of preference for liver tissue . These plants are very
beneficial for disorders characterized by inflammation of the liver , such as hepatitis and
cirrhosis . 
Your specialized programme of vitamins , minerals and phytochemicals will round
out the dietary aspect of your programme . 
-The Stress-Exercise Profile . -
It is not only the foods you eat that determine your well-being . It is also the way
your body uses those nutrients for good or ill . That ' s where stress comes in . The concept
of stress is very prominent in modern society . We often hear people remark ,  ' I ' m so
stressed ' or ' My problem is too much stress '  . Indeed , it is true that unbridled stress
reactions are associated with many illnesses . Few people realize , though , that it is not the
stress itself but our reaction to the stress in our environment that depletes our immune
systems and leads to illness . This reaction is as old as human history . It is caused by a
natural chemical response to the perception of danger . The best way to describe the stress
reaction is to get a mental picture of how the body responds to stress . 
Imagine you are man before the dawn of civilization . You lie bundled in the dark
night , pressed together with your kind , sleeping . Suddenly , a huge wild animal appears in
your midst . You feel its hot , rank breath on your flesh . You see it snatch your companion
with its powerful claws and tear him apart with its fierce teeth . Do you grab a weapon
and try to fight ? Or do you turn and run for your life ? 
The body ' s response to stress has been developed and refined over thousands of
years . It is a reflex , an animal instinct , our survival mechanism for dealing with life or
death situations . When danger of any kind is sensed , we mobilize our fight or flight
response , and we either confront what is alarming us or flee from it--mentally or
physically . 
Now , imagine another scenario . You are in bed asleep . All is peaceful and silent . 
Suddenly , there is a thunderous explosion nearby . Your walls , roof and windows shudder . 
You are awake now , aren ' t you ? And how do you feel ? Probably very frightened and most
definitely in some kind of heart-pounding high gear . 
Alarmed , your pituitary and adrenal glands flood your bloodstream with their
excitant hormones . Your pulse quickens . Your lungs suck in more oxygen to fuel your
muscles . Your blood sugar soars to supply a burst of energy . Digestion slows . You break
into a sweat . All of these biological responses happen in an instant , triggered by stress . 
They prepare you--in the same way they prepared our ancient ancestors--for fight or
flight . 
Then the moment ends . The danger passes . Your body begins to change again . In
the secondary , or resistance , stage of stress your body begins to calm down and compose
itself after all of the furore caused by the release of so many chemicals . The resistance
stage is usually reached when whatever caused the alarm is identified and dealt with . And
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
then , if whatever caused the initial stress is resolved , all of the reactions disappear , and
everything is once again in order within the body ' s complex response system . 
If whatever caused the initial stress continues , however , the body ' s ability to adapt
to the stress becomes exhausted . It shuts down . 
Unlike our ancestors , who faced intermittent acute stresses such as the threat of
predators or starvation , our highly pressured , fast-paced world imposes chronic , 
PROLONGED stress . Even though our stress response may be less acute than that of our
ancestors , the fact that it is happening continuously may make the consequences even
worse . Experts generally agree that the stresses of contemporary society and the resultant
diseases--of the body , the mind and the spirit--are very much a product of our
industrialized culture and ' unnatural ' style of living . The artificial pressures and stresses
of a modern technological society exhaust our built-in survival mechanisms and
overwhelm us . We have become socially and culturally conditioned to suppress and
thwart our most natural responses . More stress hormones are being released into our
blood than we can possibly use . 
What is the outcome ? Stress-related disorders cause 50 to 80 per cent of all
illnesses in modern life . We know how powerfully the mind influences the body and the
body influences the mind . The entire range of these interactions is still being explored . 
Problems known to be exacerbated by stress and the mind-body connection are ulcers , 
high blood pressure , heart disease , migraine headaches , arthritis and other inflammatory
diseases , asthma and other respiratory diseases , insomnia and other sleep disorders , 
anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders , and a variety of skin problems ranging from
hives to herpes , from eczema to psoriasis . Stress is disastrous to the immune system , 
leaving the body open to a myriad of opportunistic health problems . 
However , certain stresses , such as physical or creative activity , produce pleasant
emotional states which the body perceives as an enjoyably heightened mental or physical
experience . 
Although each of us reacts to stress in a unique way , no one is immune to its
effects , especially if they are prolonged and unwanted . Many of our internal reactions to
stress are ancient tunes being called up and played by our bodies--the environmental
stresses that shaped the evolution of the various blood types . The cataclysmic changes in
locale , climate and diet imprinted these stress patterns into the genetic memory of each
blood type , and even today determine its internal response to stress . 
My father has devoted the past thirty-five years to studying the stress patterns and
natural energy levels of the different blood types , and devising blood type-specific
exercise programmes that draw from the biological profiles of each . In the process , he has
observed thousands of people , adults and children alike , and his empirical observations
have taken on a valid shape . His findings are remarkably consistent with everything else
we know about what makes each blood type function well . 
The most revolutionary aspect of my father ' s work is the discovery that different
blood types need different forms of physical activity , or exercise , to cope with their
responses to stress . 
Your Blood Type Plan includes a description of your own blood type stress
patterns , along with the recommended course of exercise that will turn stress into a
positive force . This element provides a crucial complement to your diet . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-The Personality Question . -
With all of these fundamental connections at work , it is not surprising that people
might speculate about less tangible characteristics that might be attributed to blood type--
such as personality , attitudes and behaviour . 
I have experienced this personally on many occasions . People often remark about
the fact that I have followed in my father ' s footsteps to become a naturopath .  ' You ' re a
chip off the old block ,  ' some will say . Or ,  ' I guess you ' ve inherited your father ' s passion
for healing '  . And sometimes ,  ' It looks like the D ' Adamos have medical genes '  . 
Even when the observation is made partially in jest , I sense that most people truly
believe that I have inherited something besides my physiological characteristics from my
father--that it isn ' t just an accident that I am drawn to the same work that he is drawn to . 
The idea that certain inherited traits , mannerisms , emotional qualities and life
preferences are buried in our genetic make-up is well accepted , although we aren ' t sure
how to gauge this inheritance scientifically . We don ' t know ( yet !  ) of any genes for
personality . Some might argue that the way we behave has more to do with nurture than
nature . But perhaps it is both . 
Recently , Beverly , a long-time patient , brought her adult daughter in to see me . 
Beverly had told me previously that she was young and unmarried when her daughter
was born , and she gave her up for adoption . For thirty years , Beverly never knew what
had become of her daughter--until the day a familiar-looking young woman appeared on
her doorstep , having found her birth mother through a search organization . It turned out
that Beverly ' s daughter was raised on the American West Coast in a very different
environment to Beverly ' s . Yet , I was astounded to watch the two of them together . They
were mother and daughter in every way . They possessed exactly the same mannerisms
and accents ( even though Beverly was a New Yorker and her daughter was a Californian )  , 
and they seemed to share a similar sense of humour . Amazingly , Beverly ' s daughter had
chosen the same profession as her mother . Both were human resource managers for their
companies . If ever there was evidence of a genetic connection to personality , it was
sitting in my office . 
Of course , I realize this evidence is anecdotal , not scientific . Most of the research
into this aspect of blood types is just that . Still , the connection intrigues us because it
makes some sense that there might be a causal relationship between what occurs at the
cellular level of our beings and our mental , physical and emotional tendencies as
expressed by our blood type . 
Evolutionary changes altered the immune systems and digestive tracts of humans , 
resulting in the development of the blood types . But the mental and emotional response
systems were also altered by evolutionary changes , and , with this alteration , very
different psychological patterns and behaviours emerged . 
Each blood type waged a difficult , and very distinct , battle for its existence a long
time ago . The driven loner Type O would have failed miserably in the orderly , cooperative environment of Type A--a big reason for the blood type adaptation in the first
place . Would it be such a surprise to find many of these primitive characteristics hidden
in some deep remove of our psyches ? 
The belief that personality is determined by one ' s blood type is held in high regard
in Japan . Termed KETSU-EKI-GATA , Japanese blood type analysis is serious business . 
Corporate managers use it to hire workers , market researchers use it to predict buying
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
habits and most people use it to choose friends , romantic partners and lifetime mates . 
Vending machines that offer on-the-spot blood type analysis are widespread in train
stations , department stores , restaurants and other public places . There is even a highly
respected organization , The ABO Society , dedicated to helping individuals and
organizations make the right decisions , consistent with blood type . 
The leading proponent of the blood type-personality connection is a man named
Toshitaka Nomi , whose father first pioneered the theory . In 1980 , Nomi and Alexander
Besher wrote a book called YOU ARE YOUR BLOOD TYPE , which has sold more than
six million copies in Japan . It contains personality profiles for the various blood types--
right down to what you should do for a living , who you should marry and the dire
consequences that might befall you if you should ignore this advice . 
It makes for fun reading and is not unlike astrology , numerology , or other
methods of finding your place in the uncertain scheme of things . I think , however , that
most of the advice in the book should be taken with a pinch of salt . For instance , I don ' t
believe that a soul mate or a romantic partner should be chosen by blood type . I am Type
A and I am deeply in love with my wife , Martha , who is Type O . I would hate to think
that we might have been kept apart forever because of some psychic incompatibility in
our blood types .  ( We do just fine , even though mealtimes can be a little chaotic .  ) 
Furthermore , as with all attempts to label people , this one has ominous
undertones . Once you say ,  ' Type A is this ' or ' Type B is that ' the unavoidable next step is
to say ,  ' Type B is superior ' or ' only a Type O can be president '  . Caste systems develop . A
variation of this happens every day in Japan--for example , when a company advertises
that it is looking for Type Bs to fill middle management positions . 
So , what is the value of this speculation , and why am I including it here ? It ' s very
simple . Although I think the Japanese KETSU-EKI-GATA is extreme , I can ' t deny that
there is probably an essential truth to the theories about a relationship between our cells
and our personalities . 
Modern scientists and doctors have clearly acknowledged the existence of a
biological mind-body connection , and we ' ve already demonstrated earlier in this Chapter
the relationship between your blood type and your response to stress . The idea that your
blood type may relate to your personality is not really so strange . Indeed , if you look at
each of the blood types , you can see a distinct personality emerging--the inheritance of
our ancestral strengths . Perhaps this is just another way for you to play to those strengths . 
The characterizations and suggestions I will make about your ' blood type
personality ' are based on the pooled impressions made from empirical observations of
thousands of people over many years . Perhaps this data will provide a fuller picture of the
vital force of blood type . Just don ' t let it become a source of limitation--rather , let it be a
source of FULFILMENT . 
By playing to your blood type ' s strengths , you may be able to achieve greater
efficiency and accuracy in your work , and greater emotional happiness and security in
your life . 
There is as yet not enough hard evidence to justify any sweeping conclusions
about the use of blood type to determine personality , but a world of information is
waiting to be annexed and explored . A full understanding of the unique cellular blueprint
of our bodies still eludes our deepest probing . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Perhaps in the next century we will finally be able to examine some master plan ; a
map that will show us how to get from here to there within ourselves . But perhaps not . 
There is so much we don ' t understand , so much we may never understand . But we can
speculate , reflect and consider the many possibilities . That is why we have , as a species , 
developed such acute intelligence .  
*  *  * 
These elements--diet , weight management , dietary supplementation , stress control
and personal qualities--form the essential elements of your individual Blood Type Plan . 
Refer back to the information in this Chapter as you familiarize yourself with your blood
type . 
But before you go any further , I suggest you do one more thing : KNOW YOUR
BLOOD TYPE !  
=  = PART TWO .  =  = 
YOUR BLOOD TYPE PLAN .  
= 4 . BLOOD TYPE O PLAN .  = 
TYPE O : THE HUNTER . 
__ Meat-eater . 
__ Hardy digestive tract . 
__ Overactive immune system . 
__ Intolerant to dietary and environmental adaptations . 
__ Responds best to stress with intense physical activity . 
__ Requires an efficient metabolism to stay lean and energetic .  
= CONTENTS .  = 
1 . The Type O Diet . 
2 . Meal Planning . 
3 . Supplement Advisory . 
4 . Stress-Exercise Profile . 
5 . The Personality Question . 
THE TYPE O DIET . 
Type Os thrive on intense physical exercise and animal protein . The digestive
tracts of all Type Os retain the memory of ancient times . The high-protein hunter-gatherer
diet and the enormous physical demands placed on the systems of early Type Os probably
kept most primitive humans in a mild state of KETOSIS--a condition in which the body ' s
metabolism is altered . Ketosis is the result of a high-protein , high-fat diet with few
carbohydrates . The body metabolizes the proteins and fats into KETONES , which are
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
used in place of sugars in an attempt to keep glucose levels steady . The combination of
ketosis , calorie deprivation and constant physical activity made for a lean , mean hunting
machine--the key to the survival of the human race . 
Dietary recommendations today generally discourage the consumption of too
much animal protein because saturated fats have been proven to be a risk factor for heart
disease and cancer . Of course , most of the meat consumed today is shot through with fat
and tainted by the indiscriminate use of hormones and antibiotics .  ' You are what you eat ' 
can take on an ominous meaning when you ' re talking about the modern meat supply . 
Fortunately , organic and free-range meats are becoming more widely available . The
success of the Type O diet depends on your use of lean , organic meats , poultry and fish . 
Type Os don ' t find dairy products and grains quite as user-friendly as most of the
other blood types because the Type O digestive systems have still not adapted to them
fully . After all , you don ' t have to chase down and kill a bowl of wheat or a glass of milk ! 
These foods did not become staples of the human diet until late in the course of our
evolution . 
-The Weight Loss Factor . -
You will lose weight initially on the Type O diet by restricting your consumption
of grains , breads and pulses . The leading factor in weight gain for Type Os is the gluten
found in wheatgerm and wholewheat products . It acts on your metabolism to create the
exact opposite of the state of ketosis . Instead of keeping you lean and in a high energy
state , the gluten lectins inhibit your insulin metabolism , interfering with the efficient use
of calories for energy . Eating gluten is like putting the wrong kind of petrol in your car . 
Instead of fuelling the engine , it clogs the works . I have seen overweight Type Os , who
had been unsuccessful with other diets , quickly lose weight solely by eliminating wheat
from their diets . To a lesser extent , sweetcorn has the same effect , although it ' s not nearly
as influential as wheat in precipitating Type O weight gain . 
There are other factors that contribute to weight gain in Type Os . Certain pulses , 
especially lentils and kidney beans , contain lectins that deposit in muscle tissues , making
them more alkaline and less ' charged ' for physical activity . Type Os are leaner when their
muscle tissues are in a state of slight metabolic acidity . In this state , calories are used
more rapidly .  ( Before jumping to broad conclusions about other blood types , remember
that each blood type has a unique set of factors . Metabolic acidity is not good for
everyone .  ) 
A third factor in Type O weight gain is related to thyroid regulation . Type Os have
a tendency to have low levels of thyroid hormone . This condition , called hypothyroidism , 
occurs because Type Os often exhibit insufficient levels of iodine--a chemical element
whose sole purpose is thyroid hormone production . The symptoms of hypothyroidism
include weight gain , fluid retention , muscle loss and fatigue . 
In addition to moderating food portions and choosing leaner meats , for maximum
weight control benefits , Type Os need to highlight certain foods for their beneficial or
hindering effects . Here ' s a quick guide : 
--Foods That Encourage Weight Gain : --
--wheat gluten :  } interferes with 
 } insulin
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH 
 } production ; slows 
 } metabolic rate . 
--sweetcorn : interferes with insulin production ; slows metabolic rate . 
--kidney beans :  } impair
--navy beans :  } calorie
--lentils :  } utilization . 
--cabbage :  } 
--Brussels sprouts :  } inhibit
--cauliflower :  } thyroid
--mustard greens :  } hormone . 
--Foods That Encourage Weight Loss : --
--kelp :  } contain iodine ; 
--seafood :  } increase thyroid
--iodized salt :  } hormone production . 
--Liver :  } B-vitamin source ;  
} aids efficient 
} metabolism . 
--Red meat :  } 
--kale :  } aid efficient
--spinach :  } metabolism . 
--broccoli :  } 
Incorporate these guidelines into the total picture of the Type O diet which
follows . 
--Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : Lean red meats , offal and game . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6oz ( MEN )  ; 60 / 140g / 2-5oz ( WOMEN & 
CHILDREN )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 5-7x . 
Caucasian : 4-6x . 
Asian : 3-5x . 
Food : Poultry and feathered game . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6oz ( MEN )  ; 60 / 140g / 2-5oz ( WOMEN & 
CHILDREN )  . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-2x . 
Caucasian : 2-3x . 
Asian : 3-4x .  
[  *  ] REMEMBER : THE PORTION RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ALL FOOD
GROUPS ARE MERELY GUIDELINES THAT CAN HELP REFINE YOUR DIET
ACCORDING TO ANCESTRAL PROPENSITIES . 
Eat lean beef , lamb , turkey , chicken or fish as often as you wish . The more
stressful your job or demanding your exercise programme , the higher the grade of protein
you should eat . But beware of portion sizes . Our ancestors didn ' t feast on 450g / 1lb
steaks ; meat was too precious and scarce for that . Try to consume no more than 175g / 
6oz at any one meal . 
Type Os can efficiently digest and metabolize meats because you tend to have
high stomach acid content . This was an essential component in the survival of early Type
Os . However , you must be careful to balance your meat proteins with the appropriate
vegetables and fruits to avoid over-acidification , which can cause irritations of the
stomach lining and ulcers . 
One note : Type Os of African descent should emphasize lean red meats and game
over fattier , more domestic choices , such as lamb or chicken . The gene for Type O
developed in Africa , and your ancestors were the original Type Os . You ' ll benefit by
refining your protein consumption in favour of the varieties of meat that were available to
your African ancestors . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Beef , including minced . 
Buffalo . 
Heart . 
Kidney . 
Lamb . 
Liver--calf , chicken , pig . 
Mutton . 
Oxtail . 
Sweetbreads . 
Tripe . 
Veal . 
Venison . 
NEUTRAL : 
Chicken . 
Duck . 
Partridge . 
Pheasant . 
Poussin . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Quail . 
Rabbit . 
Turkey . 
AVOID : 
Bacon . 
Goose . 
Ham . 
Pork . 
--Seafood . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : All seafood . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-5x . 
Asian : 4-6x . 
Seafood , the second most concentrated animal protein , is best suited for Type Os
of Asian and Eurasian descent , as these were a staple of your coastal ancestors ' diet . 
Richly oiled cold-water fish , such as cod and mackerel , are excellent for Type Os . 
Fish oils are high in vitamin K , which promotes blood clotting . Certain blood clotting
factors evolved as humans adapted to environmental changes , and were not inherent to
the blood of early Type Os . For this reason , Type Os often have ' thin ' blood which resists
clotting . Many seafoods are excellent sources of iodine , which regulates the thyroid
function . Type Os typically have unstable thyroid functions , which cause metabolic
problems and weight gain . 
Make seafood a major component of the Type O diet . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Bluefish . 
Cod . 
Hake . 
Halibut . 
Mackerel . 
Red snapper . 
Perch . 
Pike . 
Rainbow trout . 
Salmon . 
Sardine . 
Snapper . 
Sole . 
Striped bass . 
Sturgeon . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Swordfish . 
NEUTRAL : 
Abalone . 
Albacore ( tuna )  . 
Anchovy . 
Carp . 
Clam . 
Crab . 
Crayfish . 
Crocker . 
Eels . 
Frogs ' legs . 
Grouper . 
Haddock . 
Herring--fresh . 
Lemon sole . 
Lobster . 
Mahi mahi . 
Monkfish . 
Mussels . 
Oysters . 
Prawns . 
Red fish . 
Sailfish . 
Scallops . 
Sea bass . 
Sea trout . 
Shark . 
Smelts . 
Snails . 
Squid . 
AVOID : 
Barracuda . 
Catfish . 
Caviar . 
Conch . 
Herring--pickled . 
Octopus . 
Smoked salmon . 
--Dairy Products and Eggs--
BLOOD TYPE O . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Food : Eggs . 
Portion1 egg . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0 . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 5x . 
Food : Cheeses . 
Portion : 60g / 2oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0 . 
Caucasian : 0-3x . 
Asian : 0-3x . 
Food : Yogurt . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0 . 
Caucasian : 0-3x . 
Asian : 0-3x . 
Food : Milk . 
Portion : 125-175 ml / 4-6 fl oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0 . 
Caucasian : 0-1x . 
Asian : 0-2x . 
Type Os should severely restrict their use of dairy products . Your system is illdesigned for their proper metabolism , and there are no highly beneficial foods in this
group ' s diet . 
If you are a Type O of African ancestry , you should eliminate dairy foods and
eggs altogether . They tend to be even more difficult for you to digest ; indeed , many
Africans are lactose intolerant . Soya milk and soya cheese are excellent , high-protein
alternatives . 
Food allergies are not digestive problems . They are immune system reactions to
certain foods . Your immune system literally creates an antibody that fights the intrusion
of the food into your system . Food intolerances , on the other hand , are digestive reactions
that occur for many reasons , including cultural conditioning , psychological associations , 
poor quality food , additives or just some undefinable quirk in your own system . It makes
sense that anyone of African descent might be lactose intolerant , since their huntergatherer ancestors had no lactose in their diets . 
Other Type Os may eat an occasional egg and small amounts of dairy products , 
but it is generally a poor protein source for your blood type . Be sure , however , to take a
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
daily calcium supplement , especially if you are a woman , since dairy foods are the best
natural source of absorbable calcium . 
NEUTRAL : 
Butter . 
Feta cheese . 
Goat ' s cheese . 
Mozzarella cheese . 
Soya cheese [  *  ]  . 
Soya milk [  *  ]  .  
[  *  ] GOOD DAIRY ALTERNATIVES . 
AVOID : 
Blue cheese . 
Brie . 
Buttermilk . 
Camembert . 
Cheddar cheese . 
Cottage cheese . 
Creme fraiche . 
Edam cheese . 
Emmenthal cheese . 
Fromage frais . 
Goat ' s milk . 
Gouda cheese . 
Gruyere cheese . 
High- low-fat soft cheese . 
Ice-cream . 
Jarlsburg cheese . 
Milk--skimmed . 
Munster cheese . 
Parmesan cheese . 
Provolone cheese . 
Neufachatel cheese . 
Ricotta cheese . 
Whey . 
Yogurt--frozen , Greek-style , with fruit . 
--Oils and Fats . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : Oils / fats . 
Portion : 1 tbsp . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-5x . 
Caucasian : 4-8x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Asian : 3-7x . 
Type Os respond well to oils . They can be an important source of nutrition and an
aid to elimination . You will increase their value in your system if you limit your use to
the mono-unsaturated varieties , such as olive oil and linseed oil . These oils have positive
effects on the heart and arteries , and may even help to reduce blood cholesterol . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Linseed ( flaxseed ) oil . 
Olive oil . 
NEUTRAL : 
Rapeseed ( Canola ) oil . 
Cod liver oil . 
Sesame oil . 
AVOID : 
Corn oil . 
Cottonseed oil . 
Groundnut oil . 
Safflower oil . 
--Nuts and Seeds . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : Nuts and seeds . 
PortionSmall handful . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-5x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
Food : Nut butters . 
Portion15 g -- 1 / 2 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3x . 
Caucasian : 3-7x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Type Os can find a good source of supplemental vegetable protein from some
varieties of nuts and seeds . However , these foods should in no way take the place of highprotein meats . They aren ' t essential in the diet , and should be eaten selectively , as they are
high in fat . Anyone trying to lose weight should avoid them . 
Since nuts can sometimes cause digestive problems , they must be chewed
thoroughly , or used to make nut butters , which are easier to digest . This is especially
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
important for anyone with the colon problems that are more frequently experienced by
Type Os . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Pumpkin Seeds . 
Walnuts . 
NEUTRAL : 
Almonds . 
Almond butter . 
Chestnuts . 
Hazelnuts . 
Hickory nuts . 
Macadamia nuts . 
Pecans . 
Pine nuts . 
Sesame seeds . 
Sesame butter . 
Sunflower margarine . 
Sunflower seeds . 
Tahini ( Sesame seed paste )  . 
AVOID : 
Brazil nuts . 
Cashew nuts . 
Peanuts . 
Peanut butter . 
Pistachio nuts . 
Poppy seeds . 
--Beans and Pulses . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : All recommended beans and pulses . 
Portion : 60-90g / 2-3 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-2x . 
Caucasian : 1-2x . 
Asian : 2-6x . 
Type Os of Asian ancestry utilize beans well because they are culturally
accustomed to them . Even so , beans and pulses are not an important part of any Type O
diet . This is because most beans and pulses contain lectins that deposit in the muscle
tissues and make them less acidic . Type Os perform best when their muscle tissues are
slightly more acidic , as this acidity allows Type Os to burn fat more efficiently . This is
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
not to be confused with the acid / alkaline reaction that occurs in the stomach . In that case , 
the few highly beneficial beans are exceptions . They actually promote the strengthening
of the digestive tract and promote healing of ulcerations--a Type O problem because of
their high levels of stomach acid . Even so , eat dried beans in moderation , as an
occasional side dish . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Aduki beans . 
Black-eyed beans . 
Pinto beans . 
NEUTRAL : 
Black beans . 
Broad beans . 
Cannellini beans . 
Chick-peas . 
Green beans . 
Lima beans . 
Peas--green . 
Sugar-snap beans and peas . 
AVOID : 
Kidney beans . 
Navy beans . 
Lentils--brown , green , red . 
Soya beans . 
--Cereals . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : all recommended cereals . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 2-3x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Type Os do not tolerate wholewheat products at all , and they should be eliminated
completely from the diet . They contain lectins that react both with blood and the digestive
tract , and interfere with the proper absorption of beneficial foods . Wheat products are a
primary culprit in Type O weight gain . The glutens in wheatgerm interfere with Type O
metabolic processes . Inefficient or sluggish metabolism causes food to convert more
slowly to energy , and so store itself as fat . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
NEUTRAL : 
Amaranth . 
Barley . 
Buckwheat . 
Cream of rice . 
Millet--puffed . 
Oat bran . 
Oatmeal . 
Rice bran . 
Rice--puffed . 
Spelt . 
AVOID : 
Cornflakes . 
Cornmeal . 
Cream of wheat . 
Familia . 
Farina . 
Granola . 
Grape nuts . 
Wheat bran . 
Wheatgerm . 
Shredded wheat . 
--Breads , Crispbreads and Muffins . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : Breads , crispbreads . 
Portion : 1 slice . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-4x . 
Caucasian : 0-2x . 
Asian : 0-4x . 
Food : Muffins . 
Portion : 1 Muffin . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-2x . 
Caucasian : 0-1x . 
Asian : 0-1x . 
Obviously , breads and muffins can be a source of trouble for Type Os , since most
of them contain some wheat . It may be difficult at first to eliminate morning toast or a
daily sandwich ; these have become staples of many diets . Even wheat-free breads can be
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
troublesome for Type Os if you eat them often enough ; your genetic make-up is not
assimilated to the consumption of grains . 
The exception is Essene bread , which can be found in some health-food shops . 
The sprouted wheat version of this ancient bread can be assimilable to Type Os because
the gluten lectins ( principally found in the seed coats ) are destroyed by the sprouting
process . Essene bread is a live food with many beneficial enzymes intact . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Sprouted-wheat Essene bread . 
NEUTRAL : 
Brown rice bread . 
Gluten free bread . 
Millet bread . 
Rice cakes . 
100 per cent rye bread . 
Rye crisps . 
Soya flour bread . 
Spelt bread . 
Ryvita crispbreads . 
Fin crisps . 
Wasa bread . 
AVOID : 
Bagels . 
Corn muffins . 
Cornbread . 
Durum wheat bread . 
English muffins . 
Matzos . 
Multi-grain bread . 
Oat bran muffins . 
Polenta . 
Pumpernickel bread . 
Wheat bran muffins . 
Wholewheat bread . 
--Grains and Pastas . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : Grains . 
Portion : 200 g / 7 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-3x . 
Caucasian : 0-3x . 
Asian : 0-3x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Food : Pastas . 
Portion : 140-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-3x . 
Caucasian : 0-3x . 
Asian : 0-3x . 
There are no grains or pastas that could be classified highly beneficial for Type
Os . 
Most pasta is made with semolina wheat , so you ' ll need to select very carefully if
you want an occasional pasta dish . Gluten-free pastas made from buckwheat or rice flours
are better tolerated by Type Os . But these foods are not essential to your diet and should
be limited in favour of more effective animal and fish foods . 
NEUTRAL : 
Buckwheat flour . 
Barley flour . 
Kasha . 
Rye flour . 
Rice flour . 
Spelt flour . 
Quinoa--flour or grain . 
Rice vermicelli . 
Rice--basmati , brown , white . 
Soba ( buckwheat ) noodles . 
Tapioca . 
Wild rice . 
AVOID : 
Couscous . 
Durum wheat flour . 
Gluten flour . 
Graham flour . 
Oat flour . 
Plain flour . 
Self-raising flour . 
Semolina pasta . 
Spinach pasta . 
Sprouted-wheat flour . 
Wholewheat flour . 
--Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Portion ( Raw )  : 140-175 g / 5-6 oz ( prepared )  . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-5x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Portion ( Cooked or steamed )  : 140-175 g / 5-6 oz ( prepared )  . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-5x . 
There are a tremendous number of vegetables available to Type Os , and they form
a critical component of the diet . Do not , however , simply eat all vegetables
indiscriminately . Several classes of vegetables cause big problems for Type Os . For
example , the brassica family--cabbage , brussels sprouts , cauliflower and mustard greens--
can inhibit the thyroid function , which is already somewhat weak in Type Os . 
Leafy green vegetables rich in vitamin K , like kale , collard greens , cos lettuce , 
broccoli and spinach , are very good for Type Os . This vitamin has one purpose only--to
help blood clot . Type Os , as we have discussed , lack several clotting factors , and need
vitamin K to assist in the process . 
Alfalfa sprouts contain components that , by irritating the digestive tract , can
aggravate Type O hypersensitivity problems . The moulds in cultivated and wild shiitake
mushrooms , as well as fermented olives , tend to trigger allergic reactions in Type Os . All
of these foods are foreign to the Type O system , which has not been designed to handle
them . 
The ' nightshade ' vegetables , like aubergine and potatoes , cause arthritic conditions
in Type Os , because their lectins deposit in the tissue surrounding the joints . Sweetcorn
lectins affect the production of insulin , often leading to diabetes and obesity . All Type Os
should avoid sweetcorn , especially if there is a weight problem or a family history of
diabetes . 
Tomatoes , however , are a special case . Heavily laced with powerful lectins , called
PANHAEMAGLUTINANS ( meaning they agglutinate all blood types )  , tomatoes are
trouble for Type A and Type B digestive tracts . However , Type Os can eat tomatoes . They
become neutral in the system . 
Type Os can consume all the acceptable fresh herbs liberally . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Beetroot leaves . 
Broccoli . 
Collard greens . 
Dandelion greens . 
Endive . 
Escarole . 
Garlic . 
Globe artichokes . 
Horseradish . 
Kale . 
Kohlrabi . 
Leeks . 
Okra . 
Onions--red , Spanish , yellow . 
Parsley . 
Parsnips . 
Peppers , red . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Pumpkin . 
Seaweeds . 
Spinach . 
Sweet potatoes . 
Swiss chard . 
Tapioca . 
Turnips . 
NEUTRAL : 
Asparagus . 
Bamboo shoots . 
Beetroots . 
Broad beans . 
Carrots . 
Celery . 
Chervil . 
Chicory . 
Chilli peppers , jalapeno . 
Coriander . 
Courgettes . 
Cucumber . 
Daikons . 
Dill . 
Fennel . 
Ginger . 
Green olives . 
Yicama beans . 
Lettuce--butterhead , cos , iceberg , Webb . 
Mangetouts . 
Mesclun salad mixture . 
Mung bean sprouts . 
Mushrooms--abalone , chantarelles , enoki , porcini , Portobello , tree oyster . 
Peppers--green , yellow . 
Radicchio . 
Radish sprouts . 
Radishes . 
Rappini . 
Rocket . 
Shallots . 
Spring onions . 
Squash--all types . 
Swedes . 
Tempe . 
Tofu . 
Tomatoes . 
Water chestnuts . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Watercress . 
Yams . 
AVOID : 
Alfalfa sprouts . 
Avocado . 
Aubergines . 
Cabbage--Chinese , red , white . 
Cauliflower . 
Mushrooms--cultivated , shiitake . 
Mustard greens . 
Olives--black , Greek , Spanish . 
Potatoes--red , white . 
Sweetcorn . 
--Fruits . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : All recommended fruits . 
Portion : 1 fruit or 90-140 g / 3-5 oz
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-4x . 
Many wonderful fruits are available on the Type O Diet . Fruits are not only an
important source of fibre , vitamins and minerals , but they can be an excellent alternative
to breads and pasta for Type Os . If you eat a piece of fruit rather than a slice of bread , 
your system will be better served--and at the same time you ' ll be supporting any weightloss goals . 
Some of your favourite fruits may be on the avoid list , and some odd choices on
the highly beneficial list . The reason that plums , prunes and figs are so beneficial to this
blood type is that red , blue and purple fruits tend to cause an alkaline , rather than an
acidic , reaction in the digestive tract . The type O digestive tract has high acidity and
needs the balance of the alkaline to reduce the possibility of ulcers and irritations of the
stomach lining . However , just because a fruit is alkaline doesn ' t mean it ' s good for you . 
Melons are also alkaline , but they contain high mould counts to which Type Os have a
proven sensitivity . Most melons should be eaten in moderation , and cantaloupe and
honeydew , which have the highest mould counts of all , should be avoided completely . 
Oranges , tangerines and strawberries should be avoided because of their high acid
content . Grapefruit also has a high acid content , but it can be eaten in moderation because
it exhibits alkaline properties after digestion . Most other berries are OK , but stay away
from blackberries which contain a lectin that aggravates Type O digestion . Type Os also
have an extreme sensitivity to coconut and products containing coconut . Stay away from
these and always check food labels to be sure a product doesn ' t contain coconut oils . 
These oils are high in saturated fat and provide little nutritional benefit . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Figs--fresh , dried . 
Plums--green , purple , red . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Prunes . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apples . 
Apricots . 
Bananas . 
Blackcurrants . 
Blueberries . 
Boysenberries . 
Cherries . 
Cranberries . 
Currants . 
Red dates . 
Elderberries . 
Gooseberries . 
Grapefruit . 
Grapes--green , purple , red . 
Guava . 
Kiwi . 
Kumquats . 
Lemons . 
Limes . 
Loganberries . 
Lychees . 
Mangoes . 
Melons--canang , casaba , Crenshaw , Christmas , musk , Spanish . 
Nectarines . 
Papayas . 
Peaches . 
Pears . 
Persimmons . 
Pineapples . 
Pomegranates . 
Prickly pears . 
Raisins . 
Raspberries . 
Star fruit . 
Watermelons . 
AVOID : 
Blackberries . 
Coconuts . 
Melon--cantaloupe , honeydew . 
Oranges . 
Plantains . 
Rhubarb . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Strawberries . 
Tangerines . 
--Juices and Other Fluids . --
BLOOD TYPE O . 
Food : All recommended juices . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 2-3x . 
Food : Water . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 4-7x . 
Vegetable juices are preferable to fruit juices for Type Os because of their
alkalinity . If you drink fruit juice , choose a low-sucrose variety . Avoid high-sugar juices
like apple juice or apple cider . Pineapple juice can be particularly helpful in avoiding
water retention and bloating , both factors which contribute to weight gain . Black cherry
juice is also a beneficial , highly alkaline juice .  ( You may need to make your own juices if
they can ' t be found in shops .  ) 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Black cherry juice . 
Pineapple juice . 
Prune juice . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apricot juice . 
Carrot juice . 
Celery juice . 
Cucumber juice . 
Cranberry juice . 
Grape juice . 
Grapefruit juice . 
Papaya juice . 
Tomato water ( with lemon )  . 
Other vegetable juices ( corresponding with highlighted vegetables on page 71 )  .  
[ See food lists under " --Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . -- " above .  ] 
AVOID : 
Apple cider . 
Apple juice . 
Cabbage juice . 
Orange juice . 
--Spices , Dried Herbs and Flavourings . --
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Your choice of flavourings can actually improve your digestive and immune
systems . For example kelp-based seasonings are very good for Type O because they are
rich sources of iodine , key to regulating the thyroid gland . Iodized salt is another good
source of iodine , but use it sparingly . 
The kelp bladderwrack tends to counter the hyper-acidity of the Type O digestive
tract , reducing the potential for ulcers . The abundant fucose in the kelp protects the
intestinal lining of the Type O stomach , preventing the adherence of ulcer-causing
bacteria . Keep in mind also that kelp is highly effective as a metabolic regulator for Type
Os , and is an important aid to weight loss . 
Parsley is soothing to the digestive tract , as are certain warming spices , such as
cayenne pepper . Note , however , that black and white peppers and vinegar are irritants to
the Type O stomach . 
Sugar products like corn syrup , honey and processed sugar will not harm Type Os . 
The same applies to chocolate . But , these should be strictly limited to occasional use as
condiments . 
Spices , dried herbs and flavourings can all be used liberally if acceptable for Type
Os . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Carob . 
Cayenne pepper . 
Curry powder . 
Seaweeds--dulse , kelp ( bladderwrack )  . 
Turmeric . 
NEUTRAL : 
Agar . 
Allspice . 
Almond essence . 
Anise . 
Arrowroot . 
Barley malt . 
Basil . 
Bay leaf . 
Bergamot . 
Brown rice syrup . 
Capers . 
Caraway . 
Cardamom . 
Chervil . 
Chive . 
Chocolate . 
Cloves . 
Coriander . 
Corn syrup . 
Cream of tartar . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Cumin . 
Dill . 
Garlic . 
Gelatine--plain . 
Honey . 
Horseradish . 
Maple syrup . 
Marjoram . 
Mint . 
Miso . 
Molasses . 
Mustard--dry . 
Paprika . 
Pepper--peppercorns , red pepper flakes . 
Peppermint . 
Pimento . 
Rapadura . 
Rice syrup . 
Rosemary . 
Saffron . 
Sage . 
Salt . 
Savory . 
Soy sauce . 
Spearmint . 
Sugar--brown , white . 
Tamari . 
Tamarind . 
Tarragon . 
Thyme . 
AVOID : 
Cinnamon . 
Cornflour . 
Nutmeg . 
Pepper--ground black and white . 
Vanilla--essence , pod . 
Vinegars--balsamic , cider , distilled white , herb , malt , red and white wine . 
--Condiments . --
There are no highly beneficial condiments for Type Os . If you must have mustard
or salad dressing on your foods , use them in moderation , and stick to the low-fat , lowsugar varieties . 
Although Type Os can have tomatoes occasionally , avoid ketchup ( and brown
sauce ) which also contains ingredients like vinegar . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
All pickled foods are indigestible for Type Os . They severely irritate the Type O
stomach lining . My recommendation is to wean yourself from condiments , or replace
them with healthier seasonings like olive oil , lemon juice and garlic . 
NEUTRAL : 
Jam ( from acceptable fruits on page 74 )  .  [ See lists under " --Fruits-- " above for
Type Os .  ] 
Jelly ( from acceptable fruits on page 74 )  .  [ See lists under " --Fruits-- " above for
Type Os .  ] 
Mustard . 
Salad dressing ( low fat , from acceptable ingredients )  . 
Worcestershire sauce . 
AVOID : 
Ketchup . 
Mayonnaise . 
Pickles--Branston , dill , kosher , sweet , sour . 
Relish . 
--Herbal Teas . --
The recommendations regarding herbal teas are based on our general
understanding of what makes Type Os sick . Think of herbal teas as a way to shore up
your strength against your natural weaknesses . For Type Os , the primary emphasis is on
soothing the digestive and immune systems . Herbs like peppermint , parsley , rose-hip and
sarsaparilla all have that effect . On the other hand , herbs like alfalfa , aloe , burdock and
cornsilk stimulate the immune system and cause blood thinning , a problem for Type Os .  
( You may have to infuse your own herbal teas if they are not located in health food
shops .  ) 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Cayenne . 
Chickweed . 
Dandelion . 
Fenugreek . 
Ginger . 
Hops . 
Linden . 
Lime leaf . 
Parsley . 
Peppermint . 
Rose-hip . 
Sarsaparilla . 
NEUTRAL : 
Catnip . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Camomile . 
Dong quai ( Chinese angelica )  . 
Elderflower . 
Ginseng . 
Green tea . 
Hawthorn . 
Horehound . 
Liquorice root . 
Mullein . 
Raspberry leaf . 
Sage . 
Scullcap . 
Spearmint . 
Thyme . 
Valerian . 
Vervain . 
Yarrow . 
AVOID : 
Alfalfa . 
Aloe . 
Burdock root . 
Coltsfoot . 
Cornsilk . 
Echinacea . 
Gentian . 
Golden seal . 
Red clover . 
Rhubarb . 
Senna . 
Shepherd ' s purse . 
St John ' s wort . 
Strawberry leaf . 
Yellow dock . 
--Miscellaneous Beverages . --
There are very few acceptable beverages for Type Os . You ' re pretty much limited
to the innocuous effects of seltzer , club soda and tea . Lager is okay in moderation , but be
aware that hops tend to increase stomach acid secretions . Modest quantities of wine are
allowed , but it shouldn ' t be a daily ritual . Green tea ( see NEUTRAL Herbal Teas ) is
allowed as an acceptable substitute for other caffeinated products , but it contains no
special curative properties for Type Os . The problem that coffee poses for Type Os is in
the increased levels of stomach acid it produces . Type Os have plenty of stomach acid all
their own ; they really don ' t need help . If you are a coffee drinker , begin to gradually cut
down on the amount consumed each day . The ultimate goal should be to eliminate
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
drinking coffee altogether . The common withdrawal symptoms , such as headache , fatigue
and irritability , won ' t occur if you wean yourself off it gradually . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Soda water . 
Seltzer water . 
NEUTRAL : 
Lager . 
Wine--red , rose , white . 
AVOID : 
Coffee--decaffeinated , regular . 
Distilled spirits . 
Soda--cola , diet , others . 
Tea--black , decaffeinated , regular . 
-MEAL PLANNING FOR TYPE O . -
The following sample menus and recipes will give you an idea of a typical diet
beneficial to Type Os . They were developed by Dina Khader , M . S .  , R . D .  , a nutritionist
who has used all the blood type diets successfully with her patients . 
These menus are moderate in calories and balanced for metabolic efficiency in all
Blood Types . The average person will be able to comfortably maintain weight and even
lose weight by following these suggestions . However , alternative food choices are
provided if you prefer lighter fare or wish to limit your calorie intake and still eat a
balanced , satisfying diet ( The WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVE food is listed
directly across from the food it replaces .  )  [ Here , whole list is re-stated .  ] 
Where herbal teas or fruits are included , check the ones you choose appear on the
acceptable lists . 
Occasionally you will see an ingredient in a recipe that appears on your AVOID
list . If it is a very small ingredient ( such as a dash of pepper )  , you may be able to tolerate
it , depending on your condition and whether you are strictly adhering to the diet . 
However , the meal selections and recipes are generally designed to work very well for
each Blood Type . 
As you become more familiar with the Type O diet recommendations , you ' ll
easily be able to create your own menu plans and adjust favourite recipes to make them
Type O-friendly . 
An asterisk (  *  ) indicates the recipe follows .  
*  *  * 
---Sample meal plan No . 1 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Breakfast . -
2 slices toasted Essene bread WITH butter or organic almond butter . 
175 ml / 6 fl oz vegetable juice . 
banana . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . - 
(  *  ) Organic Roast Beef ( 175 g / 6 oz )  .  
(  *  ) Spinach Salad . 
apple or pineapple slices . 
water or seltzer . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . - 
(  *  ) 1 slice Quinoa Apple Sauce
Cake . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Lamb and Asparagus Stew . 
steamed broccoli . 
boiled sweet potato . 
mixed fresh fruit--blueberries , 
kiwi , grapes , peaches . 
seltzer or herbal tea .  
( lager or wine allowed )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
1 slice toasted Essene bread WITH natural , low-sugar fruit spread . 
175 ml / 6 fl oz vegetable juice . 
banana . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . - 
(  *  ) Organic Roast Beef ( 60-115 g / 2-4 oz )  .  
(  *  ) Spinach Salad . 
apple or pineapple slices . 
water or seltzer . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
sliced carrot and celery sticks . 
sliced fruits . 
2 rice cakes WITH a drizzle of maple syrup . 
-Dinner . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH 
(  *  ) Lamb and Asparagus Stew . 
steamed broccoli . 
steamed artichoke WITH lemon juice . 
mixed fresh fruit--blueberries , 
kiwi , grapes , peaches . 
seltzer or herbal tea . 
AVOID LAGER AND WINE . 
---Sample meal plan No . 2 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
2 slices Essene bread WITH unsalted butter , jam or apple butter . 
2 poached eggs . 
175 mil / 6 fl oz pineapple juice . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . -
chicken salad--sliced chicken breast , mayonnaise , green grapes , walnuts . 
1 slice rye bread or salad greens . 
2 plums . 
water or seltzer . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
pumpkin seeds and walnuts , OR rice cakes with almond butter OR
figs , dates , prunes . 
seltzer , water or herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Arabian Fish Dish .  
(  *  ) Bean Salad . 
steamed collard greens tossed WITH lemon juice . 
green tea or herbal tea .  
( lager or wine allowed--but not every day )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
1 slice Essene bread WITH apple butter . 
1 poached egg . 
-Lunch . -
grilled chicken breast WITH endive and tomato salad . 
1 slice rye bread or salad greens . 
2 plums . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
water or seltzer . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
175 ml / 6 fl oz vegetable juice . 
2 rice cakes WITH natural , low-sugar fruit spread . 
seltzer , water or herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
 (  *  ) Baked Fish .  
(  *  ) Bean Salad . 
steamed collard greens tossed WITH lemon juice . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
AVOID BEER AND WINE . 
---Sample meal plan No . 3 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . - 
(  *  ) Maple Walnut Granola WITH soya milk . 
1 poached egg . 
pineapple or prune juice . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . -
115-175 g / 4-6 oz lean minced beef patty . 
2 slices Essene bread . 
mixed green salad--cos lettuce , parsley , red onion , carrots and cucumber . 
olive oil / lemon juice dressing . 
water or herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . - 
(  *  ) Carob Chip Cookies ( 2 )  . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Kifta WITH grilled vegetables . 
brown rice with dab of butter . 
herbal tea .  
( lager or wine allowed )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
puffed rice WITH soya milk . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
1 poached egg . 
pineapple or prune juice . 
green tea or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . -
115 g / 4 oz minced beef patty . 
NO BREAD . 
mixed green salad--cos lettuce , parsley , red onion , carrots and cucumber . 
olive oil / lemon juice dressing . 
water or herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
mixed fruit . 
-Dinner . -
endive salad . 
WITH grilled vegetables . 
brown rice with dab of butter . 
herbal tea . 
AVOID BEER AND WINE . 
RECIPES . 
---Organic Roast Beef . ---
1 ROAST BEEF ( ABOUT 1 . 35 KG / 3 LB )  . 
SALT , PEPPER AND GROUND ALLSPICE , TO TASTE . 
6 GARLIC CLOVES , SLICED . 
EXTRA-VIRGIN OLIVE OIL . 
BAY LEAVES . 
Preheat the oven to 180C ( 350F ) Mark 4 . Remove all the visible fat from the
roast and place in a roasting tin . Season and cut gashes inserting the garlic in the flesh . 
Brush the meat with extra-virgin olive oil . Insert the bay leaves . Roast , uncovered , for 90
minutes , or until meat is tender . Remove from the oven and allow to stand for 15 minutes
before carving . 
SERVES 6 . 
---Lamb and Asparagus Stew . ---
225 G / 8 OZ BONELESS FREE-RANGE LAMB , CUBED . 
1 MEDIUM ONION , CHOPPED . 
SALT , PEPPER AND GROUND ALLSPICE , TO TASTE . 
450 G / 1 LB FRESH ASPARAGUS SPEARS , WOODY ENDS DISCARDED , 
THEN STALKS CUT INTO 5 CM / 2 INCH LENGTHS . 
JUICE OF 1 LEMON . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Saute the meat and onion in a large frying pan until light brown , using just the fat
from the lamb . Add 225 ml / 8 fl oz water and salt and spices . Cover and simmer until
tender . Add asparagus and simmer for a further 15 minutes or until tender . Stir in the
lemon juice and adjust the seasoning if necessary . 
MAKES 2 SERVINGS . 
---Arabian Fish Dish . ---
1 LARGE HALIBUT OR COD ( 1 . 35-1 . 8 KG / 3-4 LB , RINSED AND DRIED )  . 
SALT AND PEPPER , TO TASTE . 
60 ML / 2 FL OZ LEMON JUICE . 
2 TBSP OLIVE OIL . 
2 LARGE ONIONS , CHOPPED AND SAUTEED IN OLIVE OIL . 
480-600 ML / 16-20 FL OZ TAHINI SAUCE ( SEE BELOW )  . 
PARSLEY SPRIGS AND LEMON WEDGES , TO GARNISH . 
-For the Tahini Sauce : -
250 G / 9 OZ ORGANIC TAHINI . 
2 GARLIC CLOVES , CRUSHED . 
JUICE OF 3 LEMONS . 
2 TBSP FINALLY [ sic ] CHOPPED FRESH PARSLEY . 
2-3 TSP SALT . 
First prepare the tahini sauce . Mix the tahini with the garlic , lemon juice , parsley
and salt . Stir in enough water to make a thick sauce . Set aside while the fish bakes . 
Sprinkle the fish with salt and lemon juice and let stand for 30 minutes . 
Meanwhile , preheat the oven to 200C ( 400F ) Mark 6 . 
Drain the fish well and brush with the oil . Place in a roasting tin . Bake for 30
minutes . 
Cover with the sauteed onions and tahini sauce . Sprinkle with salt and pepper . 
Return to oven and bake for 30-40 minutes until fish flakes easily when tested with a
fork . 
Serve the fish on a warmed platter , garnished with parsley and lemon wedges . 
SERVES 6-8 . 
---Baked Fish . ---
1 LARGE PIECE OF COD OR OTHER WHITE FISH , 900 G - 1 . 35 KG / 2-3
LBS RINSED AND DRIED . 
LEMON JUICE AND SALT , TO TASTE . 
50 ML / 2 FL OZ OLIVE OIL . 
1 TSP CAYENNE . 
1 TSP GROUND BLACK PEPPER . 
1 TSP GROUND CUMIN ( OPTIONAL )  . 
Sprinkle the fish with lemon juice and salt and let stand for 30 minutes . 
Meanwhile , preheat the oven to 180C ( 350F ) Mark 4 . 
Drain the fish well and coat with the oil . To prevent fish from drying , wrap it with
foil , lightly greased with oil . Season . 
Bake for 30-40 minutes , or until fish is tender and flakes easily when tested with
a fork . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
SERVES 4-5 . 
---With Stuffing ( Optional )  . ---
60 G / 2 OZ PINE NUTS OR FLAKED ALMONDS . 
2 TBSP UNSALTED BUTTER . 
60 G / 2 OZ FINELY CHOPPED FRESH PARSLEY . 
3 GARLIC CLOVES , CRUSHED . 
SALT , PEPPER AND GROUND ALLSPICE , TO TASTE . 
While fish is standing , saute the nuts in the butter until lightly brown . Add parsley
and seasonings and saute for a further minute . Drain then stuff raw fish with the mixture
before coating with oil . CONTINUE WITH THE MAIN RECIPE . 
---Kifta . ---
900 G / 2 LB FINELY MINCED LAMB . 
1 LARGE ONION , FINELY CHOPPED . 
60 G / 2 OZ FRESH PARSLEY , FINELY CHOPPED . 
2--2-1 / 2 TSP SALT . 
1-1 / 2 TSP each PEPPER AND GROUND ALLSPICE . 
LEMON JUICE AND PARSLEY , TO SERVE . 
Mix all of the ingredients thoroughly together , using a meat grinder , if you have
one . 
Using lightly wetted hands , shape the mixture into 7 . 5 cm / 3 inch rolls . Cover and
chill until required . 
Meanwhile , preheat the grill to high . 
Place the kiftas on the grill pan and grill until cooked through , turning them so
they brown easily . 
Serve hot , sprinkled with lemon juice and garnished with parsley . 
---Spinach Salad . ---
2 BUNCHES FRESH SPINACH , WELL RINSED , DRAINED AND CHOPPED . 
1 BUNCH SPRING ONIONS , CHOPPED . 
JUICE OF 1 LEMON . 
1 / 4 TBSP OLIVE OIL . 
SALT AND PEPPER , TO TASTE . 
Place the spinach in a bowl and sprinkle with salt . After a few minutes , squeeze
out all the excess water . Add the spring onions , lemon juice , oil , salt and pepper . Serve
immediately . 
MAKES 6 SERVINGS . 
---Bean Salad . ---
450 G / 1 LB GREEN BEANS , RINSED , WITH STRINGS REMOVED AND
CUT INTO 5 CM / 2 INCH LENGTHS . 
JUICE OF 1 LEMON . 
3 TBSP OLIVE OIL . 
2 GARLIC CLOVES , CRUSHED . 
2-3 TSP SALT . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Cook the beans until tender in plenty of boiling water . Drain . When cool , place in
a salad bowl . Dress to taste with lemon juice , olive oil , garlic and salt . Toss well so all the
beans are coated . 
SERVES 4 . 
---Carob Chip Cookies . ---
75 ML / 2-1 / 2 FL OZ ORGANIC CANOLA OIL . 
175 ML / 6 FL OZ PURE HONEY . 
1 TSP VANILLA ESSENCE . 
1 MEDIUM ORGANIC EGG , LIGHTLY BEATEN . 
215 G / 7-1 / 2 OZ OAT OR BROOM RICE FLOUR . 
1 TSP BICARBONATE OF SODA . 
90 G / 3 OZ UNSWEETENED CAROB CHIPS . 
DASH OF GROUND ALLSPICE ( OPTIONAL )  . 
Preheat the oven to 190C ( 375F ) Mark 5 . Lightly grease 2 baking sheets . 
Combine the oil , honey and vanilla . Stir in the egg , then stir in the flour , allspice
and bicarbonate of soda to form a stiff mixture . Fold in the carob chips . Drop the mixture
on to the baking sheets by the teaspoon . Bake for 10-15 minutes until each cookie is
lightly browned . Remove from oven and cool on a wire rack . 
MAKES ABOUT 40 COOKIES . 
---Quinoa Apple Sauce Cake . ---
215 G / 7-1 / 2 OZ QUINOA FLOUR . 
140 G / 5OZ CURRANTS ( OR OTHER DRIED FRUIT FROM ACCEPTABLE
LIST )  . 
50 G / 2 OZ PECANS , CHOPPED . 
1 / 2 TSP BICARBONATE OF SODA . 
1 / 2 TSP ALUMINIUM-FREE BAKING POWDER . 
1 / 4 TSP SALT . 
1 / 2 TSP GROUND CLOVES . 
115 G / 4 OZ UNSALTED BUTTER OR 125 ML / 4 FL OZ ORGANIC
CANOLA OIL . 
200 G / 7 OZ RAPADURA SUGAR OR MAPLE SUGAR . 
500 G / 18 OZ UNSWEETENED , ORGANIC APPLE SAUCE . 
1 LARGE ORGANIC EGG . 
Preheat the oven to 180C ( 350F ) Mark 4 . Lightly grease a 20 x 20 cm ( 8 x 8
inch ) cake tin . Sprinkle 60 g / 2 oz of the flour over the currants and nuts and set aside . 
Combine the bicarbonate of soda , baking powder , salt and cloves with the remaining
quinoa flour . Separately mix together butter or oil , sugar and egg . Add the fruit , nuts and
apple sauce to the dry ingredients . 
Spoon the mixture in to the prepared tin and level the surface . Bake for 40-45
minutes or until a skewer inserted in the centre comes out clean . Cool in the tin on a wire
rack , then turn out and slice . 
MAKES ABOUT 16 SLICES . 
---Maple Walnut Granola . ---
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
325 G / 11 OZ ROLLED OATS . 
1 CUP RICE BRAN . 
140 G / 5 OZ SESAME SEEDS . 
75 G / 2-3 / 4 OZ DRIED CRANBERRIES . 
75 G / 2-3 / 4 OZ DRIED CURRANTS . 
140 G / 5 OZ CHOPPED WALNUTS . 
GROUND ALLSPICE TO TASTE . 
50 ML / 2 FL OZ ORGANIC RAPESEED OIL . 
225 ML / 18 FL OZ MAPLE SYRUP . 
1 TSP VANILLA ESSENCE . 
Preheat the oven to 130C ( 250F ) Mark 1 / 2 . In a large mixing bowl , combine
the oats , rice bran , seeds , dried fruit , nuts and spices . Add the oil and stir evenly . 
Stir in the maple syrup and vanilla essence until evenly moistened , mixture should
be crumbly and sticky . 
Spread mixture on a baking tray and cook for 90 minutes , stirring every 15
minutes for even toasting , until the mixture is golden brown and dry . Cool well and store
in airtight container . 
SERVE AS REQUIRED . 
TYPE O SUPPLEMENT ADVISORY . 
The role of supplements--be they vitamins , minerals or herbs--is to add the
nutrients that are lacking in your diet and to provide extra protection where you need it . 
The supplement focus for Type Os is : 
__ Supercharging the metabolism . 
__ Increasing blood-clotting activity . 
__ Preventing inflammations . 
__ Stabilizing the thyroid . 
The following recommendations emphasize the supplements that help to meet
these goals ; and also warn against the supplements that can be counterproductive or
dangerous for Type Os . 
Certain common vitamins and minerals are so abundant in Type O foods that they
are normally not needed in supplement form . These include vitamin C and iron , although
it won ' t hurt to take a 500 mg vitamin C supplement every day . Vitamin D supplements
are not needed . Some foods are vitamin D fortified , and the best source is the natural light
of the sun . 
All of these recommendations are based on adherence to the Type O Diet . 
BENEFICIAL : 
-Vitamin B . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
My father discovered that Type Os do well on a high-potency vitamin B complex . 
There ' s good reason . Type Os tend to have sluggish metabolisms--a holdover from their
ancestors ' efforts to conserve energy during periods when food was not readily available . 
Since modern Type Os experience very different conditions , they don ' t need this
conserving effect , but it remains in the blood type memory . A vitamin B complex can
have the effect of supercharging the metabolic processes . 
Type Os on the correct diet almost never require special vitamin B12 or folic acid
supplementation . I have , however , successfully treated depression , hyperactivity and
attention deficit disorder ( ADD ) in many Type Os by using high doses of folic acid and
vitamin B12 , in conjunction with the Type O diet and exercise programme . Those
vitamins are responsible for the development of DNA . 
If you wish to experiment with a high-potency vitamin B complex , make sure it is
free of fillers and binders . Improper binding and compressing can make the pill difficult
to absorb in your system . Also avoid using a formula that contains yeast or wheatgerm . 
Finally , eat plenty of vitamin B-rich foods . 
-Best B-rich foods for Type Os ( SEE ACCEPTABLE LISTS ON PP . 58-81 )  : - [ See
lists each preceded by -- above , from " --Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game . -- " onwards .  ] 
meat . 
liver , kidney and muscle meats .  
[  *  ] eggs . 
fish . 
nuts . 
dark green , leafy vegetables . 
fruit .  
[  *  ] IN MODERATION . 
-Vitamin K . -
Type Os have lower levels of several blood-clotting factors , which leads to
bleeding disorders . Be sure you have plenty of vitamin K in your diet . Since it is
generally not recommended as a supplement , pay attention to the foods you eat and
choose those that are high in this essential Type O nutrient . 
-Best K-rich foods for Type Os : -
liver . 
egg yolks . 
broccoli . 
green leafy vegetables , such as kale and spinach . 
-Calcium . -
Type Os should continually supplement their diet with calcium , since the Type O
diet does not include dairy products which are the best source of this mineral . With the
Type O tendency to develop inflammatory joint problems and arthritis , the need for
consistent calcium supplementation becomes clear . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Calcium supplementation in high doses ( 600-1100mg elemental calcium ) is
probably desirable for all Type Os , but it is especially beneficial for Type O children
during their main growth periods ( 2-5 and 9-16 years )  , and for post-menopausal women . 
Although the non-dairy sources of calcium are not as beneficial , Type Os should
employ them as mainstays of their diets . 
-Best calcium-rich foods for Type Os : -
sardines--unboned . 
canned salmon--unboned . 
broccoli . 
collard greens . 
-Iodine . -
Type Os tend to have unstable thyroid metabolisms , due to a lack of iodine . This
causes many side effects , including weight gain , fluid retention and fatigue . Iodine is the
key element necessary for the production of thyroid hormone . Although iodine
supplements are not recommended , adequate amounts of iodine can be found in the Type
O diet . 
-Best Iodine-rich foods for Type Os : -
seafood , especially saltwater fish ,  ( SEE LIST ON P . 60 )  .  [ See list after " --
Seafood . -- " above .  ] 
kelp .  
[  *  ] iodized salt .  
[  *  ] IN MODERATION . 
-Manganese ( WITH CAUTION )  . -
It is difficult for Type Os to get manganese in their diet because manganese is
primarily found in whole grains and pulses . For the most part this isn ' t a problem , and
manganese supplementation is rarely recommended . However , a surprising amount of
chronic joint pain , especially in the lower back and knees , in Type O patients has been
helped with a short period of manganese supplementation . Never do this on your own ! 
Manganese toxicity can result from inappropriate administration , and it should only be
used under a GP ' s supervision . 
-Herbs / Phytochemicals recommended for Type Os . -
-Liquorice ( GLYCYRRHIZA GLABRA )  . -
The high stomach acid typical of Type Os can lead to gastric irritations and ulcers . 
A liquorice preparation called DGL ( de-glycyrrhizinated liquorice ) can reduce discomfort
and aid healing . DGL should be widely available in health food shops as a pleasanttasting powder . Unlike most ulcer medicines , DGL actually heals the stomach lining , in
addition to protecting it from stomach acids . 
-Bladderwrack ( FUCUS VESICULOSIS )  . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Bladderwrack , from kelp , is an excellent nutrient for Type Os . This seaweed has
some interesting components , including iodine and large amounts of the sugar , fucose . As
you may recall , fucose is the basic building sugar of the O antigen . The fucose found in
bladderwrack helps protect the intestinal lining of Type Os--especially from the ulcercausing bacteria , H . PYLORI , which attaches itself to the fucose lining the stomach of
Type Os . The fucose in bladderwrack acts on H . PYLORI much as dust would on a piece
of adhesive tape , clogging the suction cups on the bacteria , preventing it from attaching
to the stomach . 
I have also found that bladderwrack is very effective as an aid to weight control
for Type Os--especially those who suffer thyroid dysfunctions . The fucose in
bladderwrack seems to help normalize the sluggish metabolic rate and produce weight
loss .  ( Note , however , that although bladderwrack has a time-honoured reputation as an
aid to weight loss for Type Os , it does not work that way for the other blood types .  ) 
-Pancreatic enzymes . -
If you are a Type O who is not used to a high protein diet , I suggest you take a
pancreatic enzyme with large meals for a while , or at least until your system begins to
adjust to the more concentrated proteins . Pancreatic enzyme supplements can be found in
many health food shops , usually in the 4x strength . 
AVOID : 
-Vitamin A . -
Since the Type O ' s blood is prone to slower clotting , I would not recommend
vitamin A supplements without first checking with a GP . These supplements can enhance
blood thinning . Instead , take advantage of the rich sources of vitamin A or beta-carotene
in the diet . 
-A-rich foods acceptable for Type Os : -
yellow , orange and dark leafy green vegetables ( SEE LIST ON P . 71 )  .  [ See list
after " --Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . -- " above .  ] 
-Vitamin E . -
Likewise , I would not recommend vitamin E supplements for Type Os because
they also tend to complicate Type O tendencies towards slower blood clotting . Instead , 
derive vitamin E from foods in the diet . 
-E-rich foods acceptable for Type Os : -
vegetable oils . 
liver . 
nuts . 
leafy green vegetables . 
TYPE O STRESS-EXERCISE PROFILE . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
The ability to reverse the negative effects of stress lives in your blood type . As we
discussed in Chapter 3 , stress is not in itself the problem ; it ' s how you respond to stress . 
Each blood type has a distinct , genetically programmed instinct for overcoming stress . 
All Type Os have the immediate and physical response of their hunter ancestors : 
stress goes directly to the muscles . The blood type carries a patterned alarm response that
permits explosions of intense physical energy . 
When encountering stress , the body takes over . As the adrenal glands pump their
chemicals into the blood stream , a Type O becomes tremendously charged up . Given a
physical release at this time , any bad stress may be converted into a positive experience . 
Healthy Type Os are meant to release the built-up hormonal forces through
vigorous and intense physical exercise . Their systems are literally suited for it . Exercise is
particularly critical to the health of Type Os , because the impact of stress is direct and
physical . Not only does a regular intense exercise programme elevate spirits , it enables
the Type O to maintain weight control , emotional balance and a strong self-image . Type
Os respond well to heavy exercise--in nearly every way . 
Type Os who want to lose weight must partake in highly physical exercise . That is
because this type of exercise makes the muscle tissue more acidic and produces a higher
rate of fat-burning activity . Acidic muscle tissue is in the state of KETOSIS which , as we
have discussed , was the key to the success of our Type O ancestors--I ' d dare to say that
there wasn ' t an overweight Cro-Magnon on the planet ! 
Type Os who do not express their physical natures with appropriate activity in
response to stress , are eventually overwhelmed during the exhaustion stage of the stress
response . This exhaustion stage is characterized by a variety of psychological
manifestations caused by a slower rate of metabolism , such as depression , fatigue or
insomnia . If there is no change , you will leave yourself vulnerable to a number of
inflammatory and autoimmune disorders , such as arthritis and asthma , as well as to
consistent weight gain and eventual obesity .  
*  *  * 
The following exercises are recommended for Type Os . Pay special attention to
the length of the sessions . To achieve a consistent metabolic effect , you have to get your
heart rate up . Mix any of these exercises , but be sure to do one or several of them at least
four times a week for the best results . 
Exercise . Duration / frequency . 
AEROBICS . 40-60 ( minutes )  ; 3-4--times per week . 
SWIMMING . 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 3-4--times per week . 
JOGGING . 30 ( minutes )  ; 3-4--times per week . 
WEIGHT TRAINING . 30 ( minutes )  ; 3--times per week . 
TREADMILL . 30 ( minutes )  ; 3--times per week . 
STAIR CLIMBING . 20-30 ( minutes )  ; 3-4--times per week . 
MARTIAL ARTS . 60 ( minutes )  ; 2-3--times per week . 
CONTACT SPORTS . 60 ( minutes )  ; 2-3--times per week . 
CALISTHENICS . 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 3--times per week . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
CYCLING . 30 ( minutes )  ; 3--times per week . 
BRISK WALKING . 30-40 ( minutes )  ; 5--times per week . 
DANCING . 40-60 ( minutes )  ; 3--times per week . 
ROLLER BLADING OR SKATING . 30 ( minutes )  ; 3-4--times per week . 
-Type O Exercise Guidelines . -
The three components of a high-intensity exercise programme are the warm-up
period , the aerobic exercise period and a cool-down period . A warm-up is very important
to prevent injuries because it brings blood to the muscles , readying them for exercise , 
whether it is walking , running , biking , swimming or playing a sport . A warm-up should
include stretching and flexibility moves , to prevent tears in the muscles and tendons . 
The exercise can be divided into two basic types : ISOMETRIC exercises , in
which stress is created in stationary muscles ; and ISOTONIC exercises , such as
calisthenics , running or swimming , which produce muscle tension through a range of
movement . Isometric exercises can be used to tone up specific muscles which can then be
further strengthened by active isotonic exercises . Isometrics may be performed by
pushing or pulling an immovable object or by contracting or tightening opposing
muscles . 
To achieve maximum cardiovascular benefits from aerobic exercise , the heartbeat
must be elevated to approximately 70 per cent of its maximum rate . Once that elevated
heart rate is achieved during exercise , continue exercizing to maintain that rate for 30
minutes . This regimen should be repeated at least three times each week . 
To calculate maximum heart rate : 
1 . Subtract your age from 220 . 
2 . Multiply the remainder by 70 per cent (  . 70 )  . Anyone aged over 60 , or in poor
physical condition , should multiply the remainder by 60 per cent (  . 60 )  . 
3 . Multiply the remainder by 50 per cent (  . 50 )  . 
FOR EXAMPLE , a healthy 50-year-old woman would subtract 50 from 220 , for a
maximum heart rate of 170 . Multiplying 170 x . 70 gives her 119 beats per minute , which
is the top level she should strive for . Multiplying 170 x . 50 would give her 85 beats per
minute , the lowest number in her range . 
Active , healthy individuals under 40 and persons under 60 with a low
cardiovascular risk , can choose their own exercise programme from among the
recommendations listed . 
TYPE O : THE PERSONALITY QUESTION . 
Every person with Type O blood carries a genetic memory of strength , endurance , 
self-reliance , daring , intuition , and an innate optimism . The original Type Os were the
epitome of focus and drive , with a strong sense of self-preservation . They believed in
themselves . It ' s a good thing , too , or we might not be here . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
If you are a Type O , you may be able to appreciate this inheritance because the
things that make you healthy , inspire you and energize you are very similar to your
ancestors '  . You ' re hardy and strong , fuelled by a high-protein diet . You respond best to
heavy physical exercise--in fact , you become depressed , despondent and overweight
when you are deprived of it . 
Perhaps you have also inherited the drive to succeed and the leadership qualities
of Type Os--strong , certain and powerful--blushing with good health and optimism . 
Former American President Ronald Reagan is a Type O who fits the mould quite
well . His administration was characterized by surety , evenness and an unflagging
optimism about the future . You never felt that Reagan suffered much in the way of selfdoubt . He forged ahead , for good or ill . He was also a risk-taker , in the style of Type Os . 
People used to call him the ' Teflon president ' because he was never felled by the risks he
took . 
Of course , Reagan didn ' t exhibit ( at least publicly ) the sharp , uncompromising , 
almost brutish style of some leaders . For example , it ' s not terribly surprising that some
famous mafiosos have been Type Os . Al Capone was a Type O . Now there ' s an example
of leadership taken to the extreme . Former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev is also
Type O , and one of the greatest risk-takers of modern times . 
Queen Elizabeth II is a Type O , as is Prince Charles . I find it interesting that the
House of Windsor has a history of people with bleeding disorders . Perhaps there ' s a Type
O connection .  
= 5 . BLOOD TYPE A PLAN .  = 
TYPE A : THE CULTIVATOR . 
__ The first vegetarian . 
__ Reaps what he sows . 
__ Sensitive digestive tract . 
__ Tolerant immune system . 
__ Adapts well to settled dietary and environmental conditions . 
__ Responds best to stress with calming action . 
__ Requires agrarian diet to stay lean and productive .  
= CONTENTS .  = 
1 . The Type A Diet . 
2 . Meal Planning . 
3 . Supplement Advisory . 
4 . Stress-Exercise Profile . 
5 . The Personality Question . 
THE TYPE A DIET . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Type As flourish on vegetarian diets--the inheritance of their more settled and less
warlike farming ancestors . If you are an average Type A you might find it too big an
adjustment to move away from the typical meat and potato fare to soya proteins , grains
and vegetables . Likewise , you may find it difficult to eliminate overly processed and
refined foods , since our civilized diets are increasingly composed of convenient toxins in
brightly wrapped packages . But it is particularly important for sensitive Type As to get
their foods in as natural a state as possible : fresh , pure and organic . 
I can ' t emphasize enough how critical this dietary adjustment can be to the
sensitive immune system of Type A . As you will see in Chapter 9 , Type As are
biologically predisposed to heart disease , cancer and diabetes . In other words , these are
your risk factors . But they need not be your destiny . If you follow this diet , you can
supercharge your immune system and potentially short-circuit the development of lifethreatening diseases . A positive aspect of your genetic ancestry is your ability to utilize
the best that nature has to offer . It will be your challenge to re-learn what your blood
already knows . 
-The Weight Loss Factor . -
You will be naturally thinner on the Type A diet . If you are accustomed to eating
meat , you ' ll lose weight rather rapidly in the beginning as you eliminate the toxic foods
from your diet . 
In many ways , Type A is the exact opposite to Type O when it comes to
metabolism . While animal foods speed up the Type O metabolic rate and make it more
efficient , they have a very different effect on Type As . Perhaps you have already noted
that when you eat red meat , you feel sluggish and less energized than when you eat
vegetable proteins . Some Type As experience fluid retention as their digestive systems
slowly process the unwieldy foods . Type Os burn their meat as fuel ; Type As ultimately
store meat as fat . The reason for the difference is stomach acid . While Type Os have high
stomach acid content which promotes easy digestion of meat , Type As have low stomach
acid content--an adaptation of their ancestors who survived on an agrarian diet . 
Dairy foods are also poorly digested by Type As , and they provoke insulin
reactions--another factor in metabolic slowdowns . In addition , dairy foods are very high
in saturated fats , the kind that compromise the heart and lead to obesity and diabetes . 
Wheat is a mixed factor in the Type A diet . While Type As may eat wheat , you
have to be careful not to eat too much of it or your muscle tissue will become overly
acidic . Unlike Type Os who thrive on slightly acidic tissue , Type As can ' t utilize the
energy as quickly , and calorie metabolism is inhibited . This particular food reaction is a
good example of the way different foods react in different ways depending on your blood
type . Wheat is alkaline in Type Os and acidic in Type As . 
In addition to eating a wide variety of healthy , low-fat foods , and balancing
vegetables and grains , Type As need to highlight certain foods for their beneficial or
hindering effects . Here ' s a quick guide : 
-Foods That Encourage Weight Gain . -
--meat :  } poorly digested ;  
 } stored as fat . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
--dairy foods :  } provoke insulin 
} reaction ;  
} increases mucous 
} secretions . 
--kidney beans :  } provoke 
} insulin 
} reaction ;  
} slow 
} metabolic 
} rate . 
--lima beans :  } provoke insulin 
} reaction ; slow 
} metabolic rate . 
--wheat }  
( TOO MUCH )  :  } makes 
} muscle 
} tissue acidic ;  
} impairs 
} calorie 
} utilization . 
-Foods That Encourage Weight Loss . -
--vegetable oils :  } aid efficient 
} digestion ;  
} prevent 
} fluid 
} retention . 
--soya foods :  } aid efficient 
} digestion ;  
} metabolize 
} quickly ; optimize 
} immune function . 
--vegetables :  } aid efficient 
} metabolism . 
--pineapple :  } increases 
} intestinal 
} mobility ;  
} increases calorie 
} utilization . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Incorporate these guidelines into the total picture of the Type A Diet which
follows . 
--Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : Lean red meats , offal and game . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6 oz ( MEN )  ; 60-140g / 2-5 oz ( WOMEN & 
CHILDREN )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-1 x . 
Caucasian : 0x . 
Asian : 0-1x . 
Food : Poultry and feathered game . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6 oz ( MEN )  ; 60-140g / 2-5 oz ( WOMEN & 
CHILDREN )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-3 x . 
Caucasian : 0-3x . 
Asian : 1-4x .  
[  *  ] REMEMBER : THE PORTION RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ALL FOOD
GROUPS ARE MERELY GUIDELINES THAT CAN HELP YOU REFINE YOUR
DIET ACCORDING TO ANCESTRAL PROPENSITIES . 
To receive the greatest benefits , Type As should eliminate all meats from their
diet . There are no highly beneficial meats in this group ' s diet . Let ' s be realistic , however . 
The Western diet is still resolutely protein-driven . The trend in fast food restaurants
seems to be bigger , and with more fat and calories , than ever before . But , no matter the
current trend , I urge you to look at the Type A diet guidelines with an open mind . This
way you can begin reducing Type A risk factors for heart disease and cancer in your diet . 
Having said that , let me acknowledge that it will probably take time to totally
convert to a vegetarian diet . Begin by substituting fish for meat several times a week . 
When you do eat meat , choose the leanest cuts you can find , poultry is preferable to red
meat . Prepare meat by grilling or baking . 
Stay completely away from processed meat products like ham , frankfurters and
cold cuts . They contain nitrates which promote stomach cancer in people with low levels
of stomach acid--a Type A trait . 
NEUTRAL : 
Chicken . 
Poussin . 
Turkey . 
AVOID : 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Bacon . 
Lamb . 
Liver--calf , chicken , pig . 
Mutton . 
Partridge . 
Beef , including minced . 
Buffalo . 
Duck . 
Goose . 
Ham . 
Heart . 
Kidney . 
Oxtail . 
Pheasant . 
Pork . 
Quail . 
Rabbit . 
Sweetbreads . 
Tripe . 
Veal . 
Venison . 
--Seafood . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : All seafood . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African 0-3x . 
Caucasian 1-4x . 
Asian 1-4x . 
Type As can eat seafood in modest quantity three or four times a week , but should
avoid flat fish like sole and plaice . They contain a lectin that can irritate the Type A
digestive tract . 
If you are a Type A woman with a family history of breast cancer , consider
introducing snails into your diet . The edible snail , HELIX POMATIA , contains a
powerful lectin that specifically agglutinates and is drawn to mutated Type A cells for two
of the most common forms of breast cancer , as you will see in Chapter 10 . This is a
positive kind of agglutination ; this lectin gets rid of ' sick ' cells . 
Seafood should be baked , grilled or poached to achieve its full nutritional value . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Carp . 
Cod . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Grouper . 
Mackerel . 
Monkfish . 
Red snapper . 
Rainbow trout . 
Salmon . 
Sardine . 
Sea trout . 
Snails . 
NEUTRAL : 
Abalone . 
Albacore ( tuna )  . 
Crockers . 
Mahi Mahi . 
Pike . 
Porgy . 
Sailfish . 
Sea bass . 
Shark . 
Smelts . 
Snapper . 
Sturgeon . 
Swordfish . 
AVOID : 
Anchovy . 
Barracuda . 
Bluefish . 
Catfish . 
Caviar . 
Clams . 
Conch . 
Crab . 
Crayfish . 
Eels . 
Frogs ' legs . 
Haddock . 
Hake . 
Halibut . 
Herring--fresh , pickled . 
Lobster . 
Mussels . 
Octopus . 
Oysters . 
Plaice . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Scallops . 
Shad . 
Shrimp . 
Smoked Salmon . 
Sole . 
Squid ( calamari )  . 
Striped Bass . 
--Dairy Products and Eggs . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : Eggs . 
Portion : 1 egg . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-3x . 
Caucasian : 1-3x . 
Asian : 1-3x . 
Food : Cheeses . 
Portion : 60 g / 2 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-3x . 
Caucasian : 2-4x . 
Asian : 0 . 
Food : Yogurt . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0 . 
Caucasian : 1-3x . 
Asian : 0-3x . 
Food : Milk . 
Portion : 125-175 g / 4-6 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0 . 
Caucasian : 0-4x . 
Asian : 0 . 
Type As can tolerate small amounts of fermented dairy products , but should avoid
anything made with whole milk , and also limit egg consumption to occasional organically
produced eggs . This will take some planning , as the Western diet is egg-butter-cream
oriented with cakes , pies , biscuits and ice-cream being the big favourites . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Type A choices should be yogurt , kefir and cultured dairy products . Raw goat ' s
milk is a good substitute for whole milk . And , of course , soya milk and soya cheese are
excellent substitutes , and are very good for Type As . 
Most dairy products are not digestible for Type As--for the simple reason that
Type A blood creates antibodies to the primary sugar in whole milk--D-galactosamine . As
you ' ll remember from Chapter 2 , D-galactosamine is the essential sugar that , along with
fucose , forms the Type B antigen . Since the Type A immune system is designed to reject
anything B-like , the antibodies it creates to ward off B antigens will also reject whole
milk products . 
Type As who are allergy sufferers or experiencing respiratory problems , will be
aware that dairy products greatly increase the amount of mucus secreted . Type As
normally produce more mucus than the other blood types , probably because they need the
extra protection it provides their somewhat too-friendly immune systems . However , too
much mucus can be harmful , since various bacteria tend to live off it . An overabundance
of mucus inevitably leads to allergic responses , infections and respiratory problems . This
is another good reason to limit intake of dairy foods . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Soya cheese [  *  ]  . 
Soya milk [  *  ]  .  
[  *  ] GOOD DAIRY ALTERNATIVES . 
NEUTRAL : 
Eggs--hen ' s . 
Feta cheese . 
Goat ' s cheese . 
Goat ' s milk . 
Greek-style yogurt . 
Kefir . 
Mozzarella cheese--low-fat . 
Quark . 
Ricotta cheese--low-fat . 
Yogurt--frozen , natural , with fruit . 
AVOID : 
Blue Cheese . 
Brie . 
Butter . 
Buttermilk . 
Camembert . 
Cheddar cheese . 
Cottage cheese . 
Creme fraiche . 
Edam cheese . 
Emmenthal cheese . 
Fromage frais . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Gouda cheese . 
Gruyere cheese . 
High- low-fat soft cheese . 
Ice-cream . 
Jarlsburg cheese . 
Milk--semi-skimmed , skimmed , whole . 
Munster cheese . 
Parmesan cheese . 
Provolone cheese . 
Neufachatel cheese . 
Sherbet . 
--Oils and Fats . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : Oils / fats . 
Portion : 1 tbsp . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-8x . 
Caucasian : 2-6x . 
Asian : 2-6x . 
Type As need very little fat to function well , but a tablespoon of olive oil on
salads or steamed vegetables every day will aid in digestion and elimination . As a monounsaturated fat , olive oil also has a positive effect on the heart and may actually reduce
cholesterol . 
The lectins in oils , such as corn and safflower , cause problems in the Type A
digestive tract--quite the opposite effect of the beneficial oils . 
Of course , there are only two oils that are highly beneficial , and frankly , olive oil
is far tastier and better suited for cooking than linseed oil . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Linseed ( flaxseed ) oil . 
Olive oil . 
NEUTRAL : 
Rapeseed oil . 
Cod liver oil . 
AVOID : 
Corn oil . 
Cottonseed oil . 
Groundnut oil . 
Safflower oil . 
Sesame oil . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
--Nuts and Seeds . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : Nuts and seeds . 
Portion : Small handful . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 4-6x . 
Caucasian : 2-5x . 
Asian : 4-6x . 
Food : Nut butters . 
Portion : 15g --1 / 2 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-5x . 
Caucasian : 1-4x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Pumpkin , sunflower seeds , almonds and walnuts are all good for Type As . Since
Type As eat very little animal protein , nuts and seeds supply an important protein
component to the diet . Type As should eat peanuts often because they contain a cancerfighting lectin . Also eat the peanut skins ( the skins , NOT the shells )  . 
If you are Type A and have gall-bladder problems , limit yourself to small amounts
of nut butters instead of whole nuts . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Peanuts . 
Peanut butter . 
Pumpkin seeds . 
NEUTRAL : 
Almonds . 
Almond butter . 
Chestnuts . 
Hazelnuts . 
Hickory nuts . 
Macadamia nuts . 
Pine nuts . 
Poppy seeds . 
Sesame seeds . 
Sunflower margarine . 
Sunflower seeds . 
Tahini ( sesame seed paste )  . 
Walnuts . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
AVOID : 
Brazil nuts . 
Cashew nuts . 
Pistachio nuts . 
--Beans and Pulses . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : All recommended beans and pulses . 
Portion : 60-90 g / 2-3 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 4-7x . 
Caucasian : 3-6x . 
Asian : 2-5x . 
Type As thrive on the vegetable proteins found in beans and pulses . Along with
the soya bean , and all of its related products , many beans and pulses provide a nutritious
source of protein . Be aware , however , that not all beans and pulses are good for Type As . 
Some , like kidney , and navy beans and chick-peas , contain a lectin that can produce a
decrease in insulin production , often a factor in both obesity and diabetes . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Aduki beans . 
Black beans . 
Black-eyed beans . 
Lentils--brown , green , red . 
Pinto beans . 
Red soya beans . 
NEUTRAL : 
Broad beans . 
Cannellini beans . 
Green beans . 
Sugar-snap beans & peas . 
Peas--green . 
White beans . 
AVOID : 
Chick-peas . 
Kidney beans . 
Lima beans . 
Navy beans . 
Red beans . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
--Cereals . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : All recommended cereals . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 6-10x . 
Caucasian : 5-9x . 
Asian : 4-8x . 
Portion : 190g / 5 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-5x . 
Caucasian : 4-6x . 
Asian : 3-5x . 
Type As generally do well on cereals and grains , and can eat these foods one or
more times a day . Select the more concentrated whole grains instead of instant and
processed cereals . Introduce millet , soya wheat , cornmeal and whole oats into the diet . 
Type As with a pronounced mucus condition caused by asthma or frequent
infections should limit wheat consumption , as wheat causes mucus production . 
Experiment to determine how much wheat you can eat . 
Wheat-eating Type As must be sure to balance the intake of the acid-forming
wheat with alkaline foods ( see fruits )  . Here we ' re not talking about stomach acid , but the
acid / alkaline balance in muscle tissues . Type As do best when their tissues are slightly
alkaline--in direct contrast to Type Os . While the inner kernel of wheat grain is alkaline in
Type Os , it becomes acidic in Type As . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Amaranth . 
Buckwheat . 
NEUTRAL : 
Barley . 
Cornflakes . 
Cornmeal . 
Cream of rice . 
Kamut . 
Millet , puffed . 
Oat bran . 
Oatmeal . 
Rice--puffed . 
Spelt . 
AVOID : 
Cream of wheat . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Familia . 
Farina . 
Granola . 
Grape nuts . 
Wheat bran . 
Wheatgerm . 
Shredded wheat . 
--Breads , Crispbreads and Muffins . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : Breads , Crispbreads . 
Portion : 1 slice . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-5x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Food : Muffins . 
Portion : 1 muffin . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 1x . 
Caucasian : 1-2x . 
Asian : 1x . 
The Type A guidelines for eating breads , crispbreads and muffins are similar to
cereals and grains . They are generally favourable foods , but for anyone who produces
excessive mucus or is overweight , these conditions make whole wheat inadvisable . Soya
and rice flours are good substitutes . Note that in sprouted-wheat Essene bread ( found in
health food shops ) the gluten lectin is destroyed in the sprouting process . Be aware , 
however , that some commercial sprouted-wheat breads often contain small amounts of
sprouted wheat and are basically wholewheat breads . Read the ingredients label carefully . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Sprouted-wheat Essene bread . 
Rice cakes . 
Soya flour bread . 
NEUTRAL : 
Brown rice bread . 
Cornbread . 
Corn Muffins . 
Gluten-free bread . 
Millet bread . 
Oat bran muffins . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Polenta . 
100 per cent rye bread . 
Rye Crisps . 
Spelt bread . 
Ryvita crispbreads . 
Wasa bread . 
Fin Crisps . 
AVOID : 
Durum wheat bread . 
English muffins . 
Matzos . 
Multi-grain bread . 
Pumpernickel bread . 
Wheat bran muffins . 
Wholewheat bread . 
--Grains and Pastas . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : Grains . 
Portion : 200 g / 7 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 2-4x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Food : Pastas . 
Portion : 140-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 2-4x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Type As have a wonderful cornucopia of choices in grains and pastas . These foods
are excellent sources of vegetable protein . They can provide many of the nutrients that
the Type A is no longer receiving from animal proteins . Stay away from processed
products , however , such as frozen meals , prepared noodles with sauces or packaged rice
and vegetable combinations ; instead , gain the full nutritional benefits from whole-grain
products . Bake your own cakes , prepare your own pasta or steam your own rice , using
organic ingredients . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Buckwheat flour . 
Oat flour . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Rice flour . 
Rye flour . 
Soba ( buckwheat ) noodles . 
NEUTRAL : 
Couscous . 
Barley flour . 
Bulgar wheat flour . 
Durum wheat flour . 
Gluten flour . 
Graham flour . 
Spelt flour . 
Sprouted-wheat flour . 
Quinoa--flour or grain . 
Rice--basmati , brown , white . 
Tapioca . 
Wild rice . 
AVOID : 
Plain flour . 
Self-raising flour . 
Semolina flour . 
Spinach flour . 
Wholewheat flour . 
--Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : Raw . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-6x . 
Caucasian : 2-5x . 
Asian : 2-5x . 
Food : Cooked / steamed . 
Portion : 140-175g / 5-6oz . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-6x . 
Asian : 3-6x . 
Food : Soya Products . 
Portion : 175-225 g / 6-8 oz . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 4- 6x wk . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Caucasian : 4-6x wk . 
Asian : 5-7x wk . 
Vegetables are vital to the Type A diet , providing minerals , enzymes and
antioxidants . Eat vegetables raw or steamed to preserve their full benefits . 
Most vegetables are available to Type As , but there are a few caveats : peppers
aggravate the delicate Type A stomach , as do the moulds in fermented olives . Type As are
also very sensitive to the lectins in most potatoes , sweet potatoes , yams and cabbage . 
Avoid tomatoes , as their lectins have a strongly deleterious effect on the Type A digestive
tract . Tomatoes are a rare food called a PANHAEMAGLUTINAN . That means its lectins
agglutinate in every blood type . However , Type O doesn ' t produce antibodies to
tomatoes , and can eat them , as can Type AB . They ' re very bad for Type As and Type Bs , 
though . 
Broccoli is highly recommended for its antioxidant benefits . Antioxidants
strengthen the immune system and prevent abnormal cell division . Other vegetables that
are excellent for Type As are carrots , collard greens , kale , pumpkin and spinach . 
Use plenty of garlic . It ' s a natural antibiotic and immune system booster , and it ' s
good for the blood . Every blood type benefits from the use of garlic , but perhaps Type As
benefit most because their immune systems are vulnerable to a number of diseases which
garlic ameliorates . Yellow onions are very good immune boosters , too . They contain an
antioxidant called QUERCETIN . 
And , of course , tofu is the staple of the Type A diet . Tofu is a nutritionally
complete food that is both filling and inexpensive . Many people in Western societies have
an automatic aversion to tofu , however , because it doesn ' t look very appetizing . Try to
purchase tofu that is sold refrigerated , and especially from health food shops where it is
likely to be fresher than in supermarkets . Tofu IS tasteless ; it takes on the flavours of
vegetables and spices cooked with it . The best way to prepare it is in a stir-fry with
vegetables and flavourings such as garlic , ginger and soy sauce . 
Fresh herbs that are acceptable can be used in liberal quantities . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Alfalfa sprouts . 
Beetroot leaves . 
Broccoli . 
Collard greens . 
Cos lettuce . 
Dandelion greens . 
Endive . 
Escarole . 
Garlic . 
Globe artichokes . 
Horseradish . 
Jerusalem artichokes . 
Kale . 
Kohlrabi . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Leeks . 
Okra . 
Onions--red , Spanish , yellow . 
Parsley . 
Parsnips . 
Pumpkins . 
Spinach . 
Swiss chard . 
Tempe . 
Tofu . 
Turnips . 
NEUTRAL : 
Asparagus . 
Avocado . 
Bamboo shoots . 
Beetroots . 
Bok choy . 
Carrots . 
Cauliflower . 
Celery . 
Chervil . 
Chicory . 
Coriander . 
Courgettes . 
Cucumber . 
Daikons . 
Fennel . 
Jicama beans . 
Lettuce--butterheads , iceberg , Webb . 
Mesclun salad mixture . 
Mangetouts . 
Mung bean sprouts . 
Mushrooms--abalone , chantarelles , enoki , maitake porcini , Portobello , shiitake , 
tree oyster . 
Olives--green . 
Onions--spring . 
Radicchio . 
Radish sprouts . 
Radishes . 
Rappini . 
Rocket . 
Seaweeds . 
Squash--all types . 
Swedes . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Sweetcorn . 
Water chestnuts . 
Watercress . 
AVOID : 
Aubergines . 
Broad beans . 
Cabbage--Chinese , red , white . 
Chilli peppers , jalapeno . 
Mushrooms--cultivated . 
Olives--black , Greek , Spanish . 
Peppers--green , red , yellow . 
Potatoes--red , white . 
Sweet potatoes . 
Tomatoes . 
Yams . 
--Fruits . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : All recommended fruits . 
Portion : 1 fruit or 90-140g / 3-5 oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-4x . 
Type As should eat fruits three times a day . Most fruits are allowed , although try
to emphasize the more alkaline fruits , such as berries and plums , which can help to
balance the acid-forming grains that are in muscle tissues . Melons are also alkaline , but
their high mould counts make them difficult for Type As to digest . Cantaloupe and
honeydew melons should be avoided altogether , since they have the highest mould
counts . Other melons ( listed as neutral ) can be eaten occasionally . 
Type As don ' t do well on tropical fruits like mangoes and papaya . Although these
fruits contain a digestive enzyme that is good for the other blood types , it doesn ' t work in
the Type A digestive tract . Pineapple , on the other hand , is an excellent digestive for Type
As . 
Oranges should also be avoided , even though they may well be favourites . 
Oranges are a stomach irritant for Type As , and they also interfere with the absorption of
important minerals . To avoid confusion let me reiterate once again that the acid / alkaline
reaction happens two different ways--in the stomach and in the muscle tissues . When I
say that acidic oranges are a stomach irritant for Type As , I ' m talking about the stomach
irritation they can cause in the sensitive , alkaline Type A stomach . Although stomach acid
is generally low in Type As and could use a boost , oranges irritate the delicate stomach
lining . 
Grapefruit is closely related to oranges and is also an acidic fruit , but it has
positive effects on the Type A stomach , exhibiting alkaline tendencies after digestion . 
Lemons are also excellent for Type As , helping to aid digestion and clear mucus from the
system . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Since vitamin C is an important antioxidant , especially for stomach cancer
prevention , eat other vitamin C-rich fruits , such as grapefruit or kiwi . 
The banana lectin interferes with Type A digestion . I recommend substituting
other high-potassium fruits such as apricots , figs and certain melons . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Apricots . 
Cherries . 
Figs--dried , fresh . 
Grapefruit . 
Lemons . 
Pineapple . 
Plums--green , purple , red . 
Prunes . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apples . 
Blackberries . 
Blackcurrants . 
Blueberries . 
Boysenberries . 
Cranberries . 
Dates . 
Elderberries . 
Gooseberries . 
Grapes--black , green , purple , red . 
Grapes--Concord . 
Guava . 
Kiwi . 
Kumquats . 
Limes . 
Loganberries . 
Melons--canang , casaba , Crenshaw , Christmas , musk , Spanish . 
Nectarines . 
Peaches . 
Pears . 
Persimmons . 
Pomegranates . 
Prickly pears . 
Raisins . 
Raspberries . 
Redcurrants . 
Star fruit . 
Strawberries . 
Watermelons . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
AVOID : 
Bananas . 
Coconuts . 
Mangoes . 
Melons--cantaloupe , honeydew . 
Oranges . 
Papayas . 
Plantains . 
Rhubarb . 
Tangerines . 
--Juices and Other Fluids . --
BLOOD TYPE A . 
Food : All recommended juices . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 4-5x . 
Food : Lemon and Water . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 1x ( IN MORNING )  . 
Food : Water . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 1-3x . 
Type As should start every day with a small glass of warm water into which they
have squeezed the juice of half a lemon . This will help reduce the mucus that has
accumulated overnight in the more sluggish Type A digestive tract , and stimulate normal
elimination . Alkaline fruit juices , such as black cherry juice concentrate diluted with
water , should be consumed in preference to high sugar juices , which are more acidforming .  ( You may have to make your own juices ) 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Apricot juice . 
Black cherry juice . 
Carrot juice . 
Celery juice . 
Grapefruit juice . 
Pineapple juice . 
Prune juice . 
Water with lemon juice ( SEE ABOVE )  . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apple cider . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Apple juice . 
Cabbage juice . 
Cucumber juice . 
Cranberry juice . 
Grape juice . 
Other vegetable juices ( corresponding with highlighted vegetables on page 117 )  
[ see list of
highly beneficial vegetables under heading " --Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and
Fresh Herbs . -- " for Type As above .  ] 
AVOID : 
Orange juice . 
papaya juice . 
Tomato juice . 
--Spices , Dried Herbs and Flavourings . --
Type As should view these ingredients as more than just flavour enhancers . The
right combination of spices can be a powerful immune system booster . For example , 
soya-based flavourings , such as tamari , miso and soy sauce , are tremendously beneficial
for Type As . If you ' re concerned about sodium intake , all of these products are available
in low-sodium versions . 
Blackstrap molasses is a very good source of iron , a mineral that is lacking in the
Type A diet . Kelp is an excellent source of iodine and many other minerals . Vinegar , 
however , should be avoided because of its acidic properties . 
Sugar and chocolate are allowed on the Type A Diet , but only in very small
amounts . Use them as you would a condiment . Minimize your use of white processed
sugar . Recent studies have shown that the immune system is sluggish for several hours
after ingesting it . 
Spices , dried herbs and flavourings that are acceptable can be used liberally . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Barley malt . 
Blackstrap molasses . 
Garlic . 
Ginger . 
Miso . 
Soy sauce . 
Tamari . 
NEUTRAL : 
Agar . 
Allspice . 
Almond essence . 
Anise . 
Arrowroot . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Basil . 
Bay leaf . 
Bergamot . 
Brown rice syrup . 
Capers . 
Caraway seeds . 
Cardamom . 
Carob . 
Chervil . 
Chives . 
Chocolate . 
Cinnamon . 
Coriander . 
Cornflour . 
Corn Syrup . 
Cream of tartar . 
Cumin . 
Curry powder . 
Dill . 
Honey . 
Horseradish . 
Maple syrup . 
Marjoram . 
Mint . 
Mustard--dry . 
Nutmeg . 
Paprika . 
Parsley . 
Peppermint . 
Pimento . 
Rice syrup . 
Rosemary . 
Saffron . 
Sage . 
Salt . 
Savory . 
Seaweed--dulse , kelp . 
Spearmint . 
Sugar--brown , white . 
Tamarind . 
Tarragon . 
Thyme . 
Turmeric . 
Vanilla--essence , pod . 
AVOID : 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Gelatine--plain . 
Pepper--black and white ground , cayenne , peppercorns , red flakes . 
Vinegars--balsamic , cider , distilled white , herbs , red and white . 
wine . 
--Condiments . --
Condiments are not really recommended for any blood type . Type As in particular
should avoid products with pickles and vinegar because of their low levels of stomach
acid . 
Eliminate ketchup from your diet ; Type As can ' t digest the tomato or the vinegar . 
NEUTRAL : 
Jam ( from acceptable fruits )  . 
Jelly ( from acceptable fruits )  . 
Mustard--prepared . 
Salad Dressing ( low-fat , from acceptable ingredients )  . 
AVOID : 
Ketchup . 
Mayonnaise . 
Pickles--dill , kosher , sweet , sour . 
Relish . 
Worcestershire sauce . 
Herbal Teas . 
The Type A reaction to particular herbal teas is exactly the reverse of Type O . 
While Type Os need to soothe , Type As need to rev up their immune systems . 
Most of the health risk factors to a Type A are related to a sluggish immune
system , and certain herbs can have a powerful effect . For example , hawthorn is a
cardiovascular tonic ; aloe , alfalfa , burdock and echinacea are immune system boosters ; 
and green tea produces important antioxidant effects on the digestive tract , providing
protection against cancer . 
It is also important for Type As to increase stomach acid secretions since they
tend to have very low acid levels . Herbs like ginger and slippery elm do this ( the latter is
available in certain health food shops )  . 
Type As should avoid some of the very herbs that are most helpful to Type Os--
like the soothing red clover and cornsilk . 
Herbal relaxants , like camomile and valerian root , are perfect fixes for stress . The
next time you ' re feeling stressed , brew a pot of good tea . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Alfalfa . 
Aloe . 
Burdock root . 
Camomile . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Echinacea . 
Fenugreek . 
Ginseng . 
Ginger . 
Green tea . 
Hawthorn . 
Milk thistle . 
Rose-hip . 
St John ' s wort . 
Stone root . 
Valerian . 
NEUTRAL : 
Chickweed . 
Coltsfoot . 
Dandelion . 
Dong Quai . 
Elderflower . 
Gentian . 
Golden seal . 
Hops . 
Horehound . 
Liquorice root . 
Linden . 
Mullein . 
Parsley . 
Peppermint . 
Raspberry leaf . 
Sage . 
Sarsaparilla . 
Senna . 
Shepherd ' s purse . 
Scullcap . 
Spearmint . 
Strawberry leaf . 
Thyme . 
Vervain . 
Yarrow . 
AVOID : 
Catnip . 
Cayenne . 
Cornsilk . 
Red clover . 
Rhubarb . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Yellow dock . 
--Miscellaneous Beverages . --
Red wine is good for Type As because of its positive cardiovascular effects . A
glass of red wine every day is believed to lower the risk of heart disease for both men and
women . 
Coffee may actually be good for Type As . It increases stomach acid and also has
the same enzymes found in soya . Alternate coffee and green tea for the best combination
of benefits . 
All other beverages should be avoided . They don ' t suit the digestive system of
Type As , nor do they support the immune system . 
Pure fresh water , of course , should be consumed freely . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Coffee--decaffeinated , regular . 
Green tea . 
Red wine . 
NEUTRAL : 
White wine . 
AVOID : 
Lager . 
Distilled spirits . 
Tea--black , decaffeinated and regular . 
Soda--diet , Cola , others . 
Seltzer water . 
-MEAL PLANNING FOR TYPE A . -
The following sample menus and recipes provide an idea of a typical diet
beneficial to Type As . 
See pages 81-82 for the general introduction to meal planning .  [ See section above
headed " -MEAL PLANNING FOR TYPE O- "  .  ] 
As you become more familiar with the Type A diet recommendations , you ' ll be
able to easily create your own menu plans and adjust favourite recipes to make them Type
A-friendly . 
An asterisk (  *  ) indicates the recipe follows--recipes may occur in more than one
of the four diets ; if so there will be a page reference .  
*  *  * 
---Sample meal plan No . 1 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Breakfast . -
water with lemon juice ( on rising )  . 
oatmeal with soya milk and maple syrup or molasses . 
grapefruit juice . 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . -
Greek Salad--chopped lettuce , celery , spring onions and cucumber , WITH a
sprinkling of feta cheese , lemon and fresh mint . 
apple . 
1 slice sprouted-wheat bread . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
2-3 rice cakes with peanut butter . 
2 plums . 
green tea or water . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Tofu-Pesto Lasagne . 
steamed broccoli . 
frozen yogurt . 
coffee or herbal tea ( red wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
water with lemon juice ( on rising )  . 
cornflakes with soya milk and blueberries . 
grapefruit juice . 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . -
Greek Salad--chopped lettuce , celery , spring onions and cucumber , WITH a
sprinkling of feta cheese , lemon and fresh mint . 
apple . 
1 slice sprouted-wheat bread . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack2-3 rice cakes with honey . 
2 plums . 
green tea or water . 
-Dinner . -
tofu stir-fry with steamed green beans , leeks , mangetouts and alfalfa sprouts . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
coffee or herbal tea ( red wine if desired )  . 
---Sample meal plan No . 2 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
water with lemon juice ( on rising )  .  
(  *  ) Tofu Omelettes . 
grapefruit juice . 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . -
miso soup . 
mixed green salad . 
1 slice rye bread . 
water or herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
Carob Chip Cookies ( SEE RECIPE
P . 89 )  .  [ See " Carob Chip Cookies " recipe above .  ] 
OR yogurt with fruit . 
herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Turkey and Tofu Meatballs . 
steamed courgettes . 
Bean Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  
[ See " Bean Salad " recipe above .  ] 
low-fat frozen yogurt . 
coffee or herbal tea .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
water with lemon juice ( on rising )  . 
1 poached egg . 
115 g / 4 oz low-fat yogurt with sliced berries ( SEE P . 120 )  .  [ See list of highly
beneficial " --Fruits . -- " for Type As above .  ] 
-Lunch . -
miso soup . 
mixed green salad . 
1 slice rye bread . 
water or herbal tea . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Mid-afternoon snack . - 
(  *  ) Tofu Dip with raw vegetables ( from acceptable list )  . 
OR yogurt with fruit . 
herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Turkey and Tofu Meatballs . 
steamed courgettes . 
Bean Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  
[ See " Bean Salad " recipe above .  ] 
low-fat frozen yogurt . 
coffee or herbal tea .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
---Sample meal plan No . 3 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
lemon and water juice ( on rising )  . 
Maple Walnut Granola ( SEE RECIPE P . 90 )  [ see " Maple Walnut Granola " recipe
above ] WITH
soya milk . 
prune , carrot or vegetable juice . 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . - 
(  *  ) Black Bean Soup . 
mixed green salad . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . - 
(  *  ) Apricot Fruit Bread . 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Dinner . -
Arabian Fish Dish ( SEE RECIPE P . 86 )  .  [ see " Arabian Fish Dish " recipe above ]  . 
Spinach Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  
 [ see " Spinach Salad " recipe above ]  . 
mixed fresh fruit with yogurt . 
herbal tea .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
lemon and water juice ( on rising )  . 
puffed rice with soya milk . 
prune , carrot or vegetable juice . 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Lunch . -
cold salmon with a green salad and lemon juice and olive oil . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
115 g / 4 oz natural yogurt with a drizzle of honey . 
-Dinner . -
Baked Fish ( SEE RECIPE P . 87 )  
[ see " Baked Fish " recipe above ]  . 
Spinach Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  
 [ see " Spinach Salad " recipe above ]  . 
mixed fresh fruit with yogurt . 
herbal tea .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
RECIPES . 
---Tofu-Pesto Lasagne . ---
450 G / 1 LB SOFT TOFU , DRAINED AND MASHED WITH 2 TBSP OLIVE
OIL . 
140 G / 5 OZ LOW-FAT MOZZARELLA CHEESE , SHREDDED , OR RICOTTA
CHEESE . 
1 ORGANIC EGG ( OPTIONAL )  , LIGHTLY BEATEN . 
2 PACKAGES FROZEN , CHOPPED SPINACH OR FRESH , CUT UP
SPINACH . 
1 TSP SALT . 
1 TSP DRIED OREGANO . 
750 ML--1-1 / 2 PINTS READY-MADE PESTO SAUCE ( YOU MAY USE
LESS )  . 
9 RICE LASAGNE SHEETS , BOILED AND DRAINED . 
Preheat the oven to 180C ( 350F ) Mark 4 . Mix the tofu and cheese with the
egg , spinach and seasonings . Layer 225 ml / 8 fl oz of the pesto sauce in a 22 x 28 . 5 cm / 
9 x 13 inch ovenproof serving dish . Layer with the lasagne sheets then cheese mixture
and then more sauce . Repeat to finish with lasagne and sauce on top . 
Bake for 30-45 minutes until bubbling and golden brown . 
SERVES 4-6 . 
---Turkey and Tofu Meatballs . ---
450 G / 1LB GROUND TURKEY . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
450 G / 1 LB CONTAINER FIRM TOFU . 
60 G / 2 OZ CHESTNUT FLOUR . 
180 G / 6 OZ CUPS SPELT FLOUR . 
1 LARGE ONION , CHOPPED FINELY . 
2 TBSP FRESH PARSLEY , CHOPPED . 
2 TSP SEA SALT . 
4 TBSP FRESH GARLIC CRUSHED . 
ALLOWABLE SEASONINGS TO YOUR PREFERENCE . 
Mix all ingredients well . Refrigerate for one hour . Roll into small meatballs . You
can stir-fry in oil until brown and crisp , or bake in the oven at 180C ( 350F ) Mark 4
for approximately 1 hour . 
SERVES 4 . 
---Tofu Omelettes . ---
If you can ' t find fresh tree oyster mushrooms , soak dried ones in warm water for
25 minutes , then drain well . 
450 G / 1 LB SOFT TOFU , DRAINED AND MASHED . 
5-6 FRESH TREE OYSTER MUSHROOMS , SLICED . 
225 G / 8 OZ RED OR WHITE RADISHES , GRATED . 
I TSP MIRIN OR DRY SHERRY . 
1 TSP TAMARI SOY SAUCE . 
1 TBSP CHOPPED FRESH PARSLEY . 
1 TSP BROWN RICE FLOUR . 
4 ORGANIC EGGS , LIGHTLY BEATEN . 
1 TBSP EXTRA-VIRGIN OLIVE OIL . 
Combine all the ingredients , except the oil , in a bowl . Heat the oil in a large frying
pan . Pour in half the mixture and cover the pan . Cook over a low heat for about
approximately 15 minutes until egg is set and cooked through . Remove from pan and
keep warm . Repeat the process and use the remainder of the mixture to make another
omelette . 
SERVES 3-4 . 
---Black Bean Soup . ---
450 G / 1 LB DRIED BLACK BEANS , SOAKED OVERNIGHT . 
2 TBSP VEGETABLE STOCK . 
30 G / 1 OZ GARLIC , CRUSHED . 
50 G / 2 OZ ONION , DICED . 
115 G / 4 OZ CELERY , DICED . 
50 G / 2 OZ LEEKS , CHOPPED AND WELL RINSED . 
1 / 2 TBSP SALT . 
2 TBSP CUMIN . 
50 G / 2 OZ DRIED PARSLEY . 
50 G / 2 OZ SPRING ONIONS , CHOPPED . 
1 BUNCH OF FRESH TARRAGON , CHOPPED . 
1 BUNCH OF FRESH BASIL , CHOPPED . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Drain the beans and rinse well . Place them in a large , heavy-based saucepan with
3 litres -- 5-1 / 4 pints water and bring to the boil , skimming the surface as necessary . 
Drain the liquid from the beans then add the vegetable stock to the beans and
simmer . 
Saute the garlic , onion , celery , leeks and seasonings together . Add this mixture to
the beans and continue cooking . Puree 25 g / 1 oz of this soup for consistency . Garnish
with the spring onions , tarragon and basil . 
MAKES APPROXIMATELY 8 SERVINGS . 
---Tofu Dip . ---
225 G / 8 OZ SOFT TOFU , DRAINED AND MASHED . 
225 G / 8 OZ VIRTUALLY FAT-FREE YOGURT . 
JUICE OF 1 LEMON . 
2 TBSP SNIPPED FRESH CHIVES , OR 140 G / 5 OZ SPRING ONIONS , 
CHOPPED . 
CRUSHED GARLIC AND SALT , TO SEASON . 
1 TBSP OLIVE OIL . 
SELECTION OF ACCEPTABLE VEGETABLES FROM LIST ON P . 117 TO
SERVE .  [ See highly beneficial list under " --Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and
Fresh Herbs-- " above .  ] 
Combine the tofu , yogurt and lemon juice in a blender or food processor at high
speed until smooth . If the mixture is too thick to blend well , add a few drops of water . 
Transfer to a bowl , stir in the chives , garlic and olive oil . Cover and refrigerate . 
Serve dip in a glass bowl on a platter of fresh vegetables . 
SERVES 4-6 . 
---Apricot Fruit Bread . ---
300 G / 10 OZ VIRTUALLY FAT-FREE YOGURT . 
1 ORGANIC EGG . 
140 G / 5 OZ APRICOT JAM ( FRUIT JUICE SWEETENED )  . 
250 G / 9 OZ BROWN RICE FLOUR . 
1 TSP GROUND CINNAMON . 
1 TSP GROUND ALLSPICE . 
1 TSP GRATED NUTMEG . 
1-1 / 4 TSP BICARBONATE OF SODA . 
140 G / 5 OZ DRIED , UNSULPHURED APRICOTS , FINELY CHOPPED 140 G 
/ 5 OZ CURRANTS . 
Preheat the oven to 180 C ( 350 F ) Mark 4 . Grease a 22 x 12 . 5 x 5 cm / 9 x 5 x
2 inch loaf tin . Combine the yogurt , egg and jam . Add 115 g / 4 oz of the flour and half of
the spices plus the bicarbonate of soda . Stir until the mixture is evenly moist . 
Stir in the remaining flour and spices . If consistency feels too thick , you can add a
few drops of cold water or soya milk to make a thick dropping consistency . Fold in
apricots and currants . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Pour the mixture into the prepared tin and level the surface . Bake for 40-45
minutes until a skewer inserted in the centre comes out clean . Remove the bread from the
loaf tin and cool on a wire rack . 
CUT INTO SLICES AS REQUIRED . 
TYPE A SUPPLEMENT ADVISORY . 
The role of supplements--be they vitamins , minerals or herbs--is to add the
nutrients that are lacking in your diet or to provide extra protection where you need it . 
The supplement focus for Type As is : 
__ Supercharging the immune system . 
__ Supplying cancer-fighting antioxidants . 
__ Preventing infections . 
__ Strengthening the heart . 
The following recommendations emphasize the supplements that help to meet
these goals , and also warn against the supplements that can be counterproductive or
dangerous for Type As : 
BENEFICIAL : 
-Vitamin B . -
Type As should be alert to vitamin B12 deficiency . Not only is the Type A diet
lacking in this nutrient , which is mostly found in animal proteins , but Type As tend to
have a difficult time absorbing the B12 they do eat because they lack INTRINSIC
FACTOR in their stomachs ( Intrinsic Factor is a substance produced by the lining of the
stomach which helps to absorb B12 into the blood )  . In elderly Type As , vitamin B12
deficiency can cause senile dementia and other neurological impairments . 
Most other B vitamins are adequately contained in the Type A diet . If , however , 
anyone suffers from anaemia , they should take a small folic acid supplement . Type A
heart patients should ask their GP about low-dose niacin supplements , as niacin has
cholesterol-lowering properties . 
Best B-rich foods for Type As ( SEE ACCEPTABLE LISTS ON PP 104-127 )  
[ See " --Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game-- " to " --Miscellaneous Beverages-- " above in this
section on Type A ]  : 
whole grains ( niacin )  . 
soy sauce ( B12 )  . 
miso ( B12 )  . 
tempe ( B12 )  . 
fish . 
eggs . 
-Vitamin C . -
Type As , who have higher rates of stomach cancer because of low stomach acid , 
can benefit from taking additional supplements of vitamin C . For example , nitrate , a
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
compound that results from the smoking and curing of meats , could be a particular
problem with Type As because its cancer-causing potential is greater in people with lower
levels of stomach acid . As an antioxidant , vitamin C is known to block this reaction 
( although smoked and cured foods should be avoided )  . However , this does not mean
massive amounts of vitamin C are required . I have found that Type As do not do as well
on high doses ( 1 , 000 mg ) of vitamin C because it tends to upset their stomachs . Taken
over the course of a day , two to four capsules of a 250 mg supplement , preferably derived
from rose-hips , should cause no digestive problems . 
Best C-rich foods for Type As : 
berries . 
grapefruit . 
pineapple . 
cherries . 
lemon . 
broccoli . 
-Vitamin E . -
There is some evidence that vitamin E serves as a protectant against both cancer
and heart disease--two Type A susceptibilities . Take a daily supplement , but of no more
than 400 IU ( international units )  . 
Best E-rich foods for Type As : 
vegetable oil . 
whole grains . 
peanuts . 
leafy green vegetables ( SEE ACCEPTABLE LIST ON P . 117 )  
[ See " --Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs-- " highly beneficial list for
Type As above .  ] 
-Calcium . -
As the Type A diet includes some dairy products , the need for calcium
supplementation is not as acute as in Type Os , yet a small amount of additional calcium 
( 300-600 mg elemental calcium ) from middle age onwards is advisable . 
In my experience , Type As do better on PARTICULAR calcium products . The
worst source of calcium for Type As is the simplest and most readily available : calcium
carbonate ( often found in anti-acids )  . This form requires the highest amount of stomach
acid for absorption . In general , Type As tolerate calcium gluconate , do well on calcium
citrate and do best of all on calcium lactate . 
Best calcium-rich foods for type As : 
yogurt . 
soya milk . 
eggs . 
goat ' s milk . 
canned salmon--unboned . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
sardines--unboned . 
broccoli . 
spinach . 
-Iron . -
The Type A diet is naturally low in iron , which is found in the greatest abundance
in red meats . Type A women , especially those with heavy menstrual periods , should be
especially careful about keeping sufficient iron stores . However , only take iron
supplements under a GP ' s supervision , so blood tests can monitor your progress . 
In general , use as low a dose as possible , and avoid extended periods of
supplementation . Try to avoid crude iron preparations such as ferrous sulphate , which can
irritate the stomach . Milder forms of supplementation , such as iron citrate or blackstrap
molasses , may be used instead . FLORADIX , a liquid iron and herb supplement , can be
found at health food shops and is highly assimilable by Type As . 
Best Iron-rich foods for Type As : 
whole grains . 
beans--dried or fresh ( SEE ACCEPTABLE LIST ON P . 111 )  .  [ See " --Beans and
Pulses-- " for Type As above .  ] 
figs . 
blackstrap molasses . 
-Zinc ( WITH CAUTION )  . -
I have found that a small amount of zinc supplementation ( as little as 3 mg per
day ) often makes a big difference in protecting children against infections , especially
those of the ear . Zinc supplementation is a double-edged sword , however . While small , 
periodic doses enhance immunity , long-term , higher doses depress it and can interfere
with the absorption of other minerals . Be careful with zinc ! It ' s completely unregulated
and is widely available as a supplement , but shouldn ' t be used without a GP ' s advice . 
Best Zinc-rich foods for Type As : 
eggs . 
beans and pulses ( SEE ACCEPTABLE LIST ON P . 111 )  .  
[ See " --Beans and Pulses-- " for Type As above .  ] 
Selenium ( WITH CAUTION )  . 
Selenium , which seems to act as a component of the body ' s own antioxidant
defences , may be of value to cancer-prone Type As . However , cases of selenium toxicity
have been reported in people who have taken excessive supplements . Check with a GP
before taking selenium supplements . 
-Chromium ( WITH CAUTION )  . -
Because of a susceptibility to diabetes , Type As with a family history of diabetes
may be interested in the fact that chromium enhances the effectiveness of the body ' s
glucose-tolerant factor , which increases the efficiency of insulin . However , we know very
little about the long-term effects of chromium supplementation , and I would not advise
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
unsupervised use . Type As can best protect themselves from diabetic complications by
following the Blood Type Diet . 
-Herbs / Phytochemicals recommended for Type As : 
Hawthorn ( CRATAEGUS OXYACANTHA )  . 
Hawthorn is a great cardiovascular tonic . Type As should definitely add it to their
diet regimen if they or members of their family have a history of heart disease . This
phytochemical , with exceptional preventive capacities , is found in the hawthorn tree . It
has a number of impressive cardiovascular effects . Hawthorn increases the elasticity of
the arteries and strengthens the heart , while also lowering blood pressure and exerting a
mild solvent-like effect upon the plaques in the arteries . 
Officially approved for pharmaceutical use in Germany , the actions of hawthorn
are virtually unknown elsewhere . Extracts and tinctures are readily available through
homeopathic physicians , health food shops and pharmacies . I cannot praise this herb too
highly . Official German government monographs show the plant to be completely free of
any side-effects . If I had my way , extracts of hawthorn would be used to fortify breakfast
cereals , just like vitamins . 
-Immune-enhancing herbs . -
Because the immune systems of Type As tend to be open to immunecompromising infections , gentle immune-enhancing herbs , such as purple coneflower 
( ECHINACEA PURPUREA )  , can help to ward off colds or flus and may help optimize
the immune system ' s anti-cancer surveillance . Many people take ECHINACEA in liquid
or tablet form . It is widely available . The Chinese herb huangki ( ASTRAGALUS
MEMBRANACEOUS ) is also taken as an immune tonic , but is difficult to find . In both
herbs the active principles are sugars that act as mitogens that stimulate proliferation of
white blood cells which act in defence of the immune systems . 
-Calming herbs . -
Type As can use mild herbal relaxants , such as camomile and valerian root , as an
anti-stress factor . These herbs are available as teas and should be drunk frequently . 
Valerian has a bit of a pungent odour , which actually becomes pleasing once you get used
to it . 
-Quercetin . -
Quercetin is a bioflavonoid found abundantly in vegetables , particularly yellow
onions . Quercetin supplements are widely available in health food shops , usually in
capsules of 100-500 mg . Quercetin is a very powerful antioxidant , many hundreds of
times more powerful than vitamin E . It can make a powerful addition to Type A cancerprevention strategies . 
-Milk thistle ( SILYBUM MARIANUM )  . -
Like quercetin , milk thistle is an effective antioxidant with the additional special
property of reaching very high concentrations in the liver and bile ducts . Type As can
suffer from disorders of the liver and gall-bladder . Anyone with a family history of liver , 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
pancreas or gall-bladder problems should consider taking a milk thistle supplement 
( easily found in most health food shops )  . Cancer patients who are receiving
chemotherapy should consult their GP about taking a milk thistle supplement to help
protect their livers from damage . 
-Bromelain . -
If you are Type A and suffer from bloating or other signs of poor absorption of
protein , take a bromelain supplement , which comes from the enzymes in pineapple . This
enzyme has a moderate ability to break down dietary proteins , helping the Type A
digestive tract more effectively assimilate proteins . 
-Pro-biotic supplements . -
If the Type A diet is new , adjusting to a vegetarian diet may be uncomfortable and
produce excessive gas or bloating . A pro-biotic supplement can counter this effect by
supplying the ' good ' bacteria usually found in the digestive tract . Look for pro-biotic
supplements high in BIFIDUS FACTOR , as this strain of bacteria is best suited to the
Type A system . 
-Vitamin A ( beta-carotene )  . -
My father always avoided giving beta-carotene to his Type A patients , saying it
irritated their blood vessels . I questioned his observation , as that effect had never been
documented . Quite to the contrary , the evidence suggested that beta-carotene may prevent
artery disease . Yet , recently studies have suggested that beta-carotene in high doses may
act as a pro-oxidant , speeding up damage to the tissues , rather than stopping it . Perhaps
my father ' s observations were correct , at least in the case of Type As . If this is so , Type
As may wish to forgo beta-carotene supplements and consume high levels of carotenoids
in their diet instead . 
One caveat : as we age , our ability to assimilate the fat-soluble vitamins may
diminish . Elderly Type As might benefit from small supplemental doses of vitamin A 
( 10 , 000 IU daily ) to help counteract the effects of ageing on the immune system . 
Carotene-rich foods acceptable for Type As : 
eggs . 
yellow squash . 
carrots . 
spinach . 
broccoli . 
TYPE A STRESS-EXERCISE PROFILE . 
The ability to reverse the negative effects of stress lives in your blood type . As
discussed in Chapter 3 , stress is not in itself a problem ; it ' s how you respond to stress . 
Each blood type has a distinct , genetically programmed instinct for overcoming stress . 
Type As react to the first stage of stress--the alarm stage--intellectually . Adrenergically
charged bulbs flash in their brain , producing anxiety , irritability and hyperactivity . As the
stress signals throb in the immune system , they grow weaker . The heightened sensitivity
of the nervous system gradually frays the person ' s delicate protective antibodies . They are
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
too weary to fight the infections and bacteria that are waiting to jump in , like muggers
trailing an intoxicated prey . 
If , however , a Type A person adopts ' quieting ' techniques , such as yoga or
meditation , they can achieve great benefits by countering negative stresses with focus and
relaxation . Type As do not respond well to continuous confrontation , and need to consider
and practise the art of stillness as a calming charm . 
If Type As remain in their naturally tense state , stress can produce heart disease
and various forms of cancer . Exercises that provide calm and focus are the remedy that
pull the Type A from the grip of stress . 
TAI CHI CH ' UAN ( or T ' AI CHI )  , the slow motion , ritualistic pattern of Chinese
boxing , and HATHA YOGA , the timeless Indian stretching system , are two examples of
calming , centring experiences . Moderate isotonic exercises , such as hiking , swimming
and bicycling , are favoured for Type As . When I advise calming exercises , it doesn ' t
mean you can ' t break into a sweat . The key is really mental engagement in the physical
activity . 
For example , heavily competitive sports and exercises will ONLY exhaust a Type
A ' s nervous energy and make them tense all over again , leaving the immune system open
to illness or disease . 
The following exercises are recommended for Type As . Pay special attention to
the length of the sessions . To achieve a consistent release of tension and revival of energy
it is necessary to perform one or more of these exercises three or four times a week . 
Exercise : Duration / frequency . 
T ' AI CHI 30-45 ( minutes ) 3-5 times per week . 
HATHA YOGA 30 ( minutes ) 3-5 times per week . 
MARTIAL ARTS 60 ( minutes ) 2-3 times per week . 
GOLF 60 ( minutes ) 2-3 times per week . 
CYCLING 60 ( minutes ) 2-3 times per week . 
BRISK WALKING 20-40 ( minutes ) 2-3 times per week . 
HIKING 40-60 ( minutes ) 2-3 times per week . 
SWIMMING 30 ( minutes ) 3-4 times per week . 
DANCING 30-45 ( minutes ) 2-3 times per week . 
AEROBICS ( low impact ) 30-45 ( minutes ) 2-3 times per week . 
STRETCHING 15 ( minutes ) 3-5 times per week . 
-Type A Exercise Guidelines . -
-T ' ai Chi . -
TAT CHI CH ' UAN ( or T ' AI CHI )  , is an exercise that enhances the flexibility of
body movement . The slow , graceful , elegant gestures of the routines mask the full-speed
hand and foot blows , blocks and parries they represent . In China , T ' AI CHI is practised
daily by groups who gather in parks and public squares to perform the movements in
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
unison . T ' AI CHI can be a very effective relaxation technique , although it takes
concentration and patience to master . 
-Yoga . -
Yoga is also good for the Type A stress pattern . It combines inner rectitude with
breath control and postures designed to allow complete concentration without distraction
by worldly concerns . HATHA YOGA is the most common form of yoga practised in the
West . 
After learning basic yoga postures , one can create a routine best suited for an
individual lifestyle . Many Type As who have adopted yoga relaxation tell me they will
not leave the house until they have done their yoga . 
However , some patients have told me that they are concerned that adopting yoga
practices may conflict with their religious beliefs . They fear it implies they have adopted
Eastern mysticism . I respond ,  ' If you eat Italian food , does that make you Italian ?  ' 
Meditation and yoga are what you make them . Visualize and meditate on those subjects
which are relevant to you . The postures are neutral--they are just timeless and proven
movements . 
-Simple yoga relaxation techniques . -
Yoga begins and ends with relaxation . We contract our muscles constantly , but
rarely do we think of doing the opposite--letting go and relaxing . We can feel better and
be healthier if we regularly release the tensions left behind within the muscles by the
stresses and strains of life . 
The best position for relaxation is lying on your back . Arrange your arms and legs
so you are comfortable in your hips , shoulders and back . The goal of deep relaxation is to
let your body and mind settle down to soothing calmness , in the same way that an
agitated pool of water eventually calms down to stillness . 
Begin with abdominal breathing . As a baby breathes , its abdomen moves , not its
chest . However , many of us grow to unconsciously adopt the unnatural and inefficient
habit of restrained chest breathing . One of the aims of yoga is to make you aware of the
true centre of breathing . 
Observe the pattern of your breathing . Is your breathing fast , shallow , irregular , or
do you tend to hold your breath ? Allow your breathing to revert to a more natural
pattern--full , deep , regular and with no constriction . Try to isolate just your lower
breathing muscles ; see if you can breathe without moving your chest . Breathing exercises
are always done smoothly and without any strain . Place one hand on your navel and feel
the movement of your breathing . Relax your shoulders . 
Start the exercise by breathing out completely . When you inhale , pretend that a
heavy weight , such as a large book , is resting on your navel , and that by your inhalation , 
you are trying to raise this imaginary weight up towards the ceiling . 
Then when you exhale , simply let this imaginary weight press down against your
abdomen , helping you to exhale . Exhale more air than you normally would , as if to 
 ' squeeze ' more air out of your lungs . This will act as a yoga stretch for the diaphragm and
help to release tension in this muscle . 
Bring your abdominal muscles into play here to assist . When you inhale , direct
your breath down so deeply that you are lifting the imaginary heavy weight back up
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
towards the ceiling . Try to completely co-ordinate and isolate the abdominal breath with
no chest or rib movement . 
Even if you perform exercises that are more aerobic during the week , try to
integrate with the relaxing , soothing routines that will help you best manage your Type A
stress patterns . 
TYPE A : THE PERSONALITY QUESTION . 
Blood Type A was originally adapted to deal with dense population concentrations
and the stresses of a more sedentary but intense urban lifestyle . Certain psychological
traits would develop in people who must tolerate the demands of a crowded environment . 
Probably the most important quality a person must have in that setting is a cooperative nature . The original Type As had to be decent , orderly , law-abiding and exhibit
self-control . Communities can ' t exist without respect for others and their property . Loners
do poorly in group settings . If the characteristics of Type Os had not evolved to suit an
agrarian society , the result would have been chaos--and ultimately doom . Again , it ' s
thanks to our Type A ancestors that humans survived . 
The early Type As had to be clever , sensitive , passionate and very smart to meet
the challenges of a more complex life . But all of these qualities had to exist within a
framework . That may be the reason why Type As , even today , tend to have more tightly
wired systems . They bottle up their anxiety--because that ' s what you do when you ' re
trying to get along with others--but when they explode , watch out ! The antidote to this
tremendous inner stress is , as I have discussed , the more soothing and contemplative
relaxation exercises of yoga and T ' AI CHI . 
It would seem that Type As are poorly suited for the intense , highly-pressured
leadership positions at which Type Os excel . 
That ' s not to say they can ' t be leaders . But they instinctively reject the dog-eatdog manner of contemporary leadership . When Type As get into these positions , they
tend to unravel . Former American presidents Lyndon Johnson , Richard Nixon and Jimmy
Carter were all Type A . While each man brought an unquestioned brilliance and passion
to the job , all of them possessed fatal flaws . When the stress got too great , they became
anxious and paranoid , taking everything personally . In the end , it was these Type A
responses that forced each of them out of office . 
Perhaps the most well-known Type A was Adolf Hitler . While most people might
associate him with the sheer drive and brutal surety of the Type O leader , Hitler ' s
overriding trait was really an extraordinary hypersensitivity that led him ultimately to
madness . Hitler was an anomalous being . His obsession with a genetically ordered
society was that of a mutated Type A personality with a nightmarish vision .  
= BLOOD TYPE B PLAN .  =  
= TYPE B : THE NOMAD .  = 
__ Balanced . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
__ Strong immune system . 
__ Tolerant digestive system . 
__ Most flexible dietary choices . 
__ Dairy eater . 
__ Responds best to stress with creativity . 
__ Requires a balance between physical and mental activity to stay lean and
sharp .  
= CONTENTS = 
1 . The Type B Diet . 
2 . Meal Planning . 
3 . Supplement Advisory . 
4 . Stress-Exercise Profile . 
5 . The Personality Question . 
-THE TYPE B DIETType O and Type A seem to be polar opposites in many respects . But Type B can
best be described as idiosyncratic--with utterly unique and sometimes chameleon-like
characteristics . In many respects , Type B resembles Type O so much that the two seem
related . Then , suddenly , Type B will take on a totally unfamiliar shape--one that is
peculiarly its own . You might say Type B represents a sophisticated refinement in the
evolutionary journey , an effort to join together divergent peoples and cultures . 
On the whole , the sturdy and alert Type Bs are usually able to resist many of the
most severe diseases common to modern life , such as heart disease and cancer . Even
when they do contract these diseases , they are more likely to survive them . Yet , because
Type B is somewhat offbeat , its system seems more prone to less common immune
system disorders , such as Chronic Fatigue Syndrome ( ME )  , Multiple Sclerosis , and lupus 
( see Chapter 9 )  . 
In my experience , a Type B who carefully follows the recommended diet can
often bypass severe disease and live a long and healthy life . 
The Type B diet is balanced and wholesome , including a wide variety of foods . In
the words of my father , it represents ' the best of the animal and vegetable kingdoms '  . 
Think of B as standing for balance--the balancing forces of A and O . 
-The Weight Loss Factor . -
For Type Bs , the biggest factors in weight gain are corn , buckwheat , lentils , 
peanuts and sesame seeds . Each of these foods has a different lectin , but all of them affect
insulin production , resulting in fatigue , fluid retention and hypoglycaemia--a severe drop
in blood sugar after eating a meal . 
Type Bs are similar to Type Os in their reaction to the gluten found in wheatgerm
and wholewheat products . The gluten lectin adds to the problems caused by the other
metabolism-slowing foods . When food is not efficiently digested and burned as fuel for
the body , it gets stored as fat . In itself , the wheat gluten doesn ' t attack Type Bs as severely
as it does Type Os . However , when you add wheat to the mix of corn , lentils , buckwheat
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
and peanuts , the end result is just as damaging . Type Bs who want to lose weight should
definitely avoid wheat . 
When these foods are avoided , along with others that contain toxic lectins , it has
been my experience that Type Bs are very successful in controlling their weight . They
don ' t have any natural physiological barriers to weight loss , such as the thyroid problems
that can hamper Type Os . Nor do they suffer from digestive disorders . All that ' s necessary
to lose weight is to stay on the diet . 
Some people are surprised that Type Bs aren ' t more likely to have problems with
weight control , since dairy foods are encouraged on the diet . Of course , if you overeat
high-calorie foods , you ' re going to gain weight ! But a moderate consumption of dairy
foods actually helps Type Bs achieve a metabolic balance . The real culprits are the
particular foods that inhibit the efficient use of energy and promote the storage of calories
as fat . 
These are the highlights for Type B weight loss : 
-Foods That Encourage Weight Gain . -
--sweetcorn :  } inhibits insulin 
} production ;  
} hampers 
} metabolic rate . 
--lentils :  } cause 
} hypoglycaemia ;  
} inhibit proper 
} nutrient uptake ;  
} hamper 
} metabolic 
} efficiency . 
--peanuts :  } hamper 
} metabolic 
} efficiency ; cause 
} hypoglycaemia ;  
} inhibit liver 
} function . 
--sesame seeds :  } hamper 
} metabolic 
} efficiency ;  
} cause 
} hypo- 
} glycaemia . 
--buckwheat :  } inhibits digestion ;  
} hampers 
} metabolic
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH 
} efficiency ;  
} causes 
} hypoglycaemia . 
--wheat :  } slows the 
} digestive and 
} metabolic 
} processes ; causes 
} food to be stored 
} as fat , not 
} burned as 
} energy . 
-Foods That Encourage Weight Loss . -
--green } aid
vegetables :  } efficient
--meat :  } metabolism . 
--liver :  } 
--eggs :  } 
--liquorice tea :  [  +  ] counters hypoglycaemia .  
(  [  +  ] Note : NEVER TAKE LIQUORICE SUPPLEMENTS WITHOUT A GP ' S
SUPERVISION ; LIQUORICE TEA IS OK .  ) 
Incorporate these guidelines into the total picture of the Type B Diet that follows . 
--Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : Lean red meats , offal and game . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6 oz ( MEN )  ; 60-140g / 2-5 oz ( WOMEN AND
CHILDREN )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-4x . 
Caucasian : 2-3x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
Food : Poultry and feathered game . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz ( MEN )  ; 60-140 g / 2-5 oz ( WOMEN AND
CHILDREN )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-2x . 
Caucasian : 0-3x . 
Asian : 0-2x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH 
[  *  ] REMEMBER : THE PORTION RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ALL FOOD
GROUPS ARE MERELY GUIDELINES THAT CAN HELP YOU REFINE YOUR
DIET ACCORDING TO ANCESTRAL PROPENSITIES . 
There appears to be a direct connection between stress , autoimmune disorders and
red meat in the Type B system . That ' s because Type B ancestors adapted better to other
kinds of meats . Any Type B who is fatigued or suffering from immune deficiencies
should eat lamb , mutton or rabbit several times a week , in preference to beef or turkey . 
In my experience , one of the most difficult adjustments Type Bs must make is to
give up chicken . Chicken contains a Blood Type B agglutinating lectin in its muscle
tissue . Anyone accustomed to eating more poultry than red meat can eat other poultry or
game , such as turkey or pheasant . Although they are similar to chicken in many respects , 
neither contains the dangerous lectin . 
The news about chicken is troubling to many people because chicken has become
a fundamental part of many ethnic diets . In addition , people have been told to eat chicken
instead of beef because it is ' healthier '  . But here is another case where one dietary
guideline does not fit all . Chicken may be leaner ( although not always ) than other meat , 
but that isn ' t the issue . The issue is the power of an agglutinating lectin to attack the
bloodstream and potentially lead to strokes and immune disorders . So , even though
chicken may be a beloved food , I urge you to wean yourself away from it . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Lamb . 
Mutton . 
Rabbit . 
Venison . 
NEUTRAL : 
Beef , including minced . 
Liver--calf , chicken , pig . 
Pheasant . 
Turkey . 
Veal . 
AVOID : 
Bacon . 
Chicken . 
Duck . 
Goose . 
Ham . 
Heart . 
Partridge . 
Pork . 
Poussin . 
Quail . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
--Seafood . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : All seafood . 
Portion : 115-175g / 4-6 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 4-6x 
Caucasian : 3-5x . 
Asian : 3-5x . 
Type Bs thrive on seafood , especially the deep-sea fish like cod and salmon , 
which are rich in nutritious oils . White fish , such as cod , halibut and sole , are excellent
sources of high-quality protein for Type Bs . Avoid all shellfish--crab , lobster , prawns , 
mussels , etc . They contain lectins that are disruptive to the Type B system . It is
interesting to note that many of the original Type Bs were Jewish tribes that forbade the
consumption of shellfish . Perhaps this dietary law was an acknowledgement that shellfish
are poorly digested by Type Bs . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Cod . 
Grouper . 
Haddock . 
Hake . 
Halibut . 
Mackerel . 
Mahi mahi . 
Monkfish . 
Pike . 
Porgy . 
Red Fish . 
Sardines . 
Sea trout . 
Shad . 
Sturgeon . 
NEUTRAL : 
Abalone . 
Albacore ( tuna )  . 
Bluefish . 
Carp . 
Catfish . 
Caviar . 
Crockers . 
Herring--fresh , pickled . 
Mussels . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Red snapper . 
Rainbow trout . 
Sailfish . 
Salmon . 
Scallop . 
Shark . 
Smelts . 
Snapper . 
Sole . 
Squid . 
Swordfish . 
AVOID : 
Anchovy . 
Barracuda . 
Clams . 
Conch . 
Crab . 
Crayfish . 
Eels . 
Frogs ' legs . 
Lobster . 
Octopus . 
Oysters . 
Prawns . 
Sea Bass . 
Smoked salmon . 
Snails . 
Striped bass . 
--Dairy Products and Eggs . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : Eggs . 
Portion : 1 egg . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 5-6x . 
Food : Cheeses . 
Portion : 60g / 2 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-5x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Food : Yogurt . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-4x . 
Caucasian : 2-4x . 
Asian : 1-3x . 
Food : Milk . 
Portion : 125-175 g / 4-6 fl oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-3x . 
Caucasian : 4-5x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
Type B is the only blood type that can fully enjoy a variety of dairy foods . That ' s
because the primary sugar in the Type B antigen is D-galactosamine , the same sugar
present in milk . Dairy foods were first introduced to the human diet during the height of
the Type B development , along with the domestication of animals .  ( By the way , eggs do
not contain the lectin that is found in the muscle tissues of chicken .  ) 
However , there are ancestral idiosyncracies that blur the picture . Any Type A of
Asian descent may initially have a problem adapting to dairy foods--not because your
system is resistant to them , but because your culture has typically been resistant . Dairy
products were first introduced into Asian societies with the invasion of the Mongolian
hordes . To the Asian mind , dairy products were the food of the barbarian , and thus not fit
to eat . The stigma remains to this day , although there are large numbers of Type Bs in
Asia whose soya-based diet is damaging to their systems . 
Type Bs of African descent might also have trouble adapting to dairy foods . Type
Bs are barely represented in Africa , and many Africans are lactose intolerant . 
These intolerances should not be confused with allergies . Allergies are immune
responses that cause blood to produce an antibody to a food . Intolerances are digestive
problems with certain foods . Intolerances are caused by migration , cultural assimilation
and other factors--for example , when Type Bs moved into Africa where dairy foods were
not prominent . 
What can you do ? If you are lactose intolerant , begin using a lactose enzyme
preparation , which will make digestion of dairy foods possible . Then , after following the
Type B diet for several weeks , slowly introduce dairy foods--beginning with cultured or
soured dairy products , such as buttermilk , yogurt and kefir , which may be better tolerated
than fresh milk products , such as ice-cream , whole milk and high-fat soft cheese . I ' ve
found that lactose intolerant Type Bs are often able to incorporate dairy foods after they
have corrected the overall problems in their diets . 
Soya foods are often recommended as dairy substitutes , although they ' re mostly
benign for Type Bs . They don ' t have the many health benefits for Type Bs that they have
for Type As . Part of my concern about recommending soya for Type Bs is the danger that
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
people will substitute them too often as main courses , instead of eating the meat , fish and
dairy products that Type Bs really need for optimum health . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Cottage cheese . 
Feta cheese . 
Goat ' s cheese . 
Goat ' s milk . 
Kefir . 
Milk--skimmed , semi-skimmed . 
Mozzarella cheese . 
Ricotta cheese . 
Yogurt--frozen , Greek-style , with fruit . 
NEUTRAL : 
Brie . 
Butter . 
Buttermilk . 
Camembert . 
Cheddar cheese . 
Creme fraiche . 
Edam cheese . 
Emmenthal cheese . 
Fromage frais . 
Gouda cheese . 
Gruyere cheese . 
High- / low-fat soft cheese . 
Jarlsburg cheese . 
Milk--whole . 
Munster cheese . 
Neufachatel cheese . 
Quark . 
Parmesan cheese . 
Provolone cheese . 
Sherbet . 
Soya milk . 
Whey . 
AVOID : 
Blue cheese . 
Ice-cream . 
--Oils and Fats . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : Oils / fats . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Portion : 1 tbsp . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-5x . 
Caucasian : 4-6x . 
Asian : 5-7x . 
Introduce olive oil into your diet to encourage proper digestion and healthy
elimination . Use at least one tablespoon every other day . Ghee , an Indian preparation
similar to clarified butter , can also be used in cooking . Avoid sesame , sunflower and corn
oils , which contain lectins that are damaging to the Type B digestive tract . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Olive oil . 
NEUTRAL : 
Cod liver oil . 
Ghee . 
Linseed ( flaxseed ) oil . 
AVOID : 
Rapeseed oil . 
Corn oil . 
Cottonseed oil . 
Groundnut oil . 
Safflower oil . 
Sunflower oil . 
Sesame oil . 
--Nuts and Seeds . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : Nuts and seeds . 
Portion : Small handful . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-5x . 
Caucasian : 2-5x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
Food : Nut butters . 
Portion : 15g -- 1 / 2 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 2-3x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Most nuts and seeds are not advised for Type Bs , so there is no highly beneficial
category . Peanuts , sesame seeds and sunflower seeds , among others , contain lectins that
interfere with Type B insulin production . It might be difficult for Type B Asians to give
up sesame seeds and sesame-based products , but in this case , your blood type speaks
more definitively than your culture . 
NEUTRAL : 
Almonds . 
Almond butter . 
Brazil nuts . 
Chestnuts . 
Hickory nuts . 
Macadamia nuts . 
Walnuts . 
AVOID : 
Cashew nuts . 
Hazelnuts . 
Peanuts . 
Peanut butter . 
Pistachio nuts . 
Pine nuts . 
Poppy seeds . 
Sesame seeds . 
Sunflower margarine . 
Sunflower seeds . 
Tahini ( sesame seed paste )  . 
--Beans and Pulses . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : All recommended beans and pulses . 
Portion : 60-90g / 2-3 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-4x . 
Caucasian 2-3x . 
Asian 4-5x . 
Type Bs can eat some beans and pulses , but many beans , such as lentils , chickpeas , pinto beans and black-eye beans , contain lectins that interfere with the production
of insulin . 
Generally , Type B Asians tolerate beans and pulses better than other Type Bs
because they are culturally accustomed to them . But even Asians should limit their
selection of these foods to those that are highly beneficial , and eat them sparingly . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Kidney beans . 
Lima beans . 
Navy beans . 
NEUTRAL : 
Broad beans . 
Cannellini beans . 
Green beans . 
Mangetouts . 
Peas--green , sugar-snap . 
Red soya beans . 
AVOID : 
Aduki beans . 
Black beans . 
Black-eyed beans . 
Chick-peas . 
Lentils--brown , green , red . 
--Cereals . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : All recommended cereals . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 2-4x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
When Type B is in good balance--that is , following the fundamental tenets of the
diet--wheat may not be a problem . However , wheat is not tolerated well by most Type Bs . 
The wheat gluten contains a lectin that deposits in the muscle tissues , making them less
efficient in burning calories and also depressing the metabolic rate . Foods that are not
quickly metabolized are stored as fat , so wheat can be a factor in Type B weight gain . 
Type Bs should also avoid rye , which contains a lectin that settles in the vascular system , 
causing blood disorders and the potential for strokes .  ( It is interesting to note that the
main victims of vascular disease , sometimes called St . Anthony ' s Fire , are the largely
Type B population of Eastern European Jews . Rye bread is a popular part of their cultural
tradition .  ) 
Corn and buckwheat are also major factors in Type B weight gain . More than any
other food , they contribute to a sluggish metabolism , insulin irregularity , fluid retention
and fatigue . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Again , for Type Bs the key is balance . Eat a variety of grains and cereals . Rice
and oats are excellent choices . I also urge you to try SPELT , which is highly beneficial
for Type Bs . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Millet . 
Oat bran . 
Oatmeal . 
Rice bran . 
Rice--puffed . 
Spelt . 
NEUTRAL : 
Cream of rice . 
Familia . 
Farina . 
Granola . 
Grape nuts . 
AVOID : 
Amaranth . 
Barley . 
Buckwheat . 
Cornflakes . 
Cornmeal . 
Cream of wheat . 
Kamut . 
Rye . 
Shredded wheat . 
Wheat bran . 
Wheatgerm . 
--Breads , Crispbreads and Muffins . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : Breads , crispbreads . 
Portion : 1 slice . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-1x . 
Caucasian : 0-1x . 
Asian : 0-1x . 
Food : Muffins . 
Portion : 1 muffin . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-1x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Caucasian : 0-1x . 
Asian : 0-1x . 
The recommendations here are similar to those for cereals . Avoid wheat , all corn
products , buckwheat and rye . That still leaves a wide variety of breads to choose from . 
Try Essene bread , found in health food shops . These ' live ' breads are highly nutritious . 
Although they are sprouted-wheat breads , the ' problem ' kernel is destroyed in the
sprouting process , and they are perfectly healthy . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Brown rice bread . 
Fin crisps . 
Millet bread . 
Rice cakes . 
Sprouted-wheat Essen [ c ] e bread . 
Wasa bread . 
NEUTRAL : 
Gluten-free bread . 
Ideal flat bread . 
Oat bran muffins . 
Pumpernickel bread . 
Hi-protein bread . 
Spelt bread . 
Soya flour bread . 
AVOID : 
Bagels . 
Cornbread . 
Corn muffins . 
Durum wheat bread . 
Multi-grain bread . 
Polenta . 
100 per cent rye bread . 
Rye crisps . 
Ryvita crispbreads . 
Wheat bran muffins . 
Wholewheat bread . 
--Grains and Pastas . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : Grains . 
Portion : 200g / 7 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
African : 3-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
Food : Pastas . 
Portion : 140-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-4x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
The Type B grain and pasta choices are absolutely consistent with the cereal and
bread recommendations . I would , however , advise a moderated intake of pasta and rice . 
You won ' t need much of these nutrients if you ' re consuming the meat , seafood and dairy
products advised . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Oat flour . 
Rice flour . 
NEUTRAL : 
Graham flour . 
Plain flour . 
Quinoa--flour or grain . 
Rice--basmati , brown , white . 
Self-raising flour . 
Semolina pasta . 
Spelt flour . 
Spinach pasta . 
AVOID : 
Barley flour . 
Buckwheat flour . 
Bulgar wheat flour . 
Couscous . 
Durum wheat flour . 
Gluten flour . 
Rye flour . 
Soba ( buckwheat ) noodles . 
Tapioca . 
Wholewheat flour . 
Wild rice . 
--Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . --
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : Raw . 
Portion : 140-175 g / 4-6 oz . 
Daily portion all ancestral types : 3-5x . 
Food : Cooked or steamed . 
Portion : 140 g / 5oz . 
Daily portion all ancestral types : 3-5x . 
There are many high-quality , nutritious , Type B-friendly vegetables--so take full
advantage with three to five servings a day . There is only a handful of vegetables that
Type Bs should avoid , but take these guidelines to heart . 
Eliminate tomatoes completely from your diet . The tomato is classified as a rare
vegetable called a PANHAEMAGLUTINAN . That means it contains lectin that can
agglutinate every blood type . However , the tomato lectin has little effect on Type O or
Type AB , while both Type B and Type A suffer strong reactions , usually in the form of
irritations of the stomach lining . 
Sweetcorn is also off the list as it contains those insulin and metabolism-upsetting
lectins mentioned before . Also avoid olives , since their moulds can trigger allergic
reactions . 
Since Type Bs tend to be more vulnerable to viruses and autoimmune diseases , eat
plenty of leafy green vegetables , which contain magnesium , an important anti-viral agent . 
Magnesium is also helpful for Type B children who have eczema . 
For the most part , the vegetable world is your kingdom . Unlike other blood types , 
you can fully enjoy potatoes and yams , cabbages and mushrooms--and many other
delicious foods from nature ' s bounty . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Aubergines . 
Beetroots . 
Beetroot leaves . 
Broad beans . 
Brussels sprouts . 
Cabbage--Chinese , red , white . 
Carrots . 
Cauliflower . 
Collard greens . 
Kale . 
Mushrooms--shiitake . 
Mustard greens . 
Parsley . 
Parsnips . 
Peppers--green , red , yellow . 
Sweet potatoes . 
Yams . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
NEUTRAL : 
Alfalfa sprouts . 
Asparagus . 
Bamboo shoots . 
Bok choy . 
Celery . 
Chervil . 
Chicory . 
Chilli peppers , jalapeno . 
Coriander . 
Courgettes . 
Cucumbers . 
Daikons . 
Dandelion greens . 
Dill . 
Endive . 
Escarole . 
Fennel . 
Garlic . 
Ginger . 
Horseradish . 
Jicama beans . 
Kohlrabi . 
Leeks . 
Lettuce--butterhead , Cos , iceberg , Webb . 
Mangetouts . 
Mesclun salad mixture . 
Mushrooms--abalone , chantarelles , cultivated , enoki , porcini , Portobello , tree
oyster . 
Okra . 
Onions--green , red , Spanish , spring , yellow . 
Potatoes--red , white . 
Radicchio . 
Rappini . 
Rocket . 
Seaweeds . 
Shallots . 
Swedes . 
Spinach . 
Squash--all types . 
Swiss chard . 
Turnips . 
Water chestnuts . 
Watercress . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
AVOID : 
Avocado . 
Jerusalem artichokes . 
Globe artichokes . 
Mung bean sprouts . 
Olives--black , green , Greek , Spanish . 
Pumpkin . 
Radishes . 
Radish sprouts . 
Sweetcorn . 
Tempe . 
Tofu . 
Tomatoes . 
--Fruits . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : All recommended fruits . 
Portion : 1 fruit or 90-140 g / 3-5 oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-4x . 
There are very few fruits a Type B must avoid--and they ' re pretty uncommon in
any case . Most Type Bs won ' t sorely miss persimmons , pomegranates or prickly pears in
their diets . 
Pineapple can be especially good for Type Bs who are susceptible to bloating--
especially if they are not used to eating the dairy foods and meats on this diet . 
BROMELAIN , an enzyme in the pineapple , helps to digest food . 
On the whole , choose fruits liberally from the following lists . Type Bs tend to
have very balanced digestive systems , with a healthy acid-alkaline level , so they can
enjoy fruits that are too acidic for other blood types . 
Try to incorporate at least one or two fruits from the highly beneficial list every
day to take advantage of their pro-B medicinal qualities . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Bananas . 
Cranberries . 
Grapes--black , green , purple , red . 
Papaya . 
Pineapple . 
Plums--green , purple , red . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apples . 
Apricots . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Blackberries . 
Blackcurrants . 
Blueberries . 
Boysenberries . 
Cherries . 
Dates . 
Elderberries . 
Figs--dried , fresh . 
Gooseberries . 
Grapefruit . 
Guava . 
Kiwi . 
Kumquats . 
Lemons . 
Limes . 
Loganberries . 
Lychees . 
Mangoes . 
Melons--canang , cantaloupe , casaba , Crenshaw , Christmas , honeydew , musk , 
Spanish . 
Nectarines . 
Oranges . 
Peaches . 
Pears . 
Plantains . 
Prunes . 
Raspberries . 
Redcurrants . 
Strawberries . 
Tangerines . 
Watermelons . 
AVOID : 
Coconuts . 
Persimmons . 
Pomegranates . 
Prickly pears . 
Rhubarb . 
Star fruit . 
--Juices and Other Fluids . --
BLOOD TYPE B . 
Food : All recommended juices . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 2-3x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Food : Water . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 4-7x . 
Most fruit and vegetable juices are okay for Type Bs . For a daily juice with builtin immune and nervous system boosters designed for Type Bs , try a Membrane Fluidizer
Cocktail ( I assure you that it ' s much more alluring than its name implies )  . Combine 1
tbsp flaxseed oil , 1 tbsp high-quality lecithin granules and 175-225 ml / 6-8 fl oz fruit
juice . Shake and drink . 
Lecithin is a lipid , found in animals and plants , that contains metabolism- and
immune system-enhancing properties . You can find lecithin granules in health food
shops . 
The Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail provides high levels of choline , serine and
ethanolamine ( the phospholipids )  , which are of great value to Type Bs . I find it tasty , 
because the lecithin emulsifies the oil , allowing it to mix with the juice . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Cabbage juice . 
Cranberry juice . 
Grape juice . 
Papaya juice . 
Pineapple juice . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apple cider . 
Apple juice . 
Apricot juice . 
Black cherry juice . 
Carrot juice . 
Celery juice . 
Cucumber juice . 
Grapefruit juice . 
Orange juice . 
Other vegetable juices ( CORRESPONDING WITH HIGHLIGHTED
VEGETABLES ON P . 163 .  )  [ See lists of highly beneficial and neutral " --Vegetables , 
Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs-- " for Type Bs above .  ] 
Prune juice . 
Water ( with lemon juice )  . 
AVOID : 
Tomato juice . 
--Spices , Dried Herbs and Flavourings . --
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Type Bs do best with warming spices , such as ginger , horseradish , curry powder
and cayenne pepper . The exceptions are white and black pepper , which contain problem
lectins . Avoid barley malt sweeteners , cornflour and cinnamon , as they tend to be
stomach irritants . White and brown sugars , honey and molasses are sweet flavourings
which respond in a neutral way to the Type B digestive system . Eat these sugars in
moderation . Type Bs can also eat small quantities of chocolate , but consider it a
condiment , not a main course ! 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Curry powder . 
Horseradish . 
Parsley . 
NEUTRAL : 
Agar . 
Anise . 
Arrowroot . 
Basil . 
Bay leaf . 
Bergamot . 
Brown rice syrup . 
Capers . 
Caraway seeds . 
Cardamom . 
Carob . 
Cayenne pepper . 
Chervil . 
Chives . 
Chocolate . 
Coriander . 
Cream of tartar . 
Cumin . 
Dill . 
Garlic . 
Honey . 
Maple syrup . 
Marjoram . 
Mint . 
Miso . 
Molasses . 
Mustard--dry . 
Nutmeg . 
Paprika . 
Pepper--red flakes . 
Peppermint . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Pimento . 
Rice syrup . 
Rosemary . 
Saffron . 
Sage . 
Salt . 
Savory . 
Seaweeds--dulse , kelp . 
Spearmint . 
Soy sauce . 
Sugar--brown , white . 
Tamarind . 
Tarragon . 
Thyme . 
Vanilla--essence , pod . 
Vinegars--balsamic , cider , herb , red and white wine , white . 
AVOID : 
Allspice . 
Almond essence . 
Barley malt . 
Cinnamon . 
Cornflour . 
Corn syrup . 
Gelatine--plain . 
Pepper--ground black and white , peppercorns . 
--Condiments . --
Condiments are basically either neutral or bad for all types . Type Bs can handle
just about every common condiment , except ketchup with its dangerous tomato lectins , 
but nutritional common sense would suggest to limit your intake of foods that provide no
real benefit . 
NEUTRAL : 
Jam ( FROM ACCEPTABLE FRUITS ON P . 165 )  .  [ See highly beneficial and
neutral from " -Fruits- " for Type Bs above .  ] 
Jelly ( FROM ACCEPTABLE FRUITS ON P . 165 )  .  [ See highly beneficial and
neutral from " -Fruits- " for Type Bs above .  ] 
Mayonnaise . 
Mustard . 
Pickles--dill , kosher , sweet , sour . 
Relish . 
Salad dressing ( low-fat , from acceptable ingredients )  . 
Worcestershire sauce . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
AVOID : 
Ketchup . 
--Herbal Teas . --
Type Bs don ' t reap overwhelming benefits from most herbal teas , and only a few
are harmful . Overall , Type Bs stay in balance with , for example , common sense teas--
ginger to warm , peppermint to soothe the digestive tract and so on . 
Ginseng is highly recommended for Type Bs because it seems to have a positive
effect on the nervous system . Be aware , though , that it can act as a stimulant , so drink it
early in the day . 
Liquorice is particularly good for Type Bs . It has anti-viral properties that work to
reduce susceptibility to autoimmune diseases . Also , many Type Bs experience a drop in
blood sugar after meals ( hypoglycaemia )  , and liquorice helps to regulate blood-sugar
levels . 
More recently , I ' ve discovered that liquorice is a fairly powerful elixir for people
suffering from ME / Chronic Fatigue Syndrome ( See Chapter 9 )  . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Ginger . 
Ginseng . 
Liquorice . 
Liquorice root ( with doctor ' s permission )  . 
Parsley . 
Peppermint . 
Raspberry leaf . 
Rose-hip . 
Sage . 
NEUTRAL : 
Alfalfa . 
Burdock root . 
Catnip . 
Cayenne . 
Camomile . 
Chickweed . 
Dandelion . 
Dong quai ( Chinese angelica )  . 
Echinacea . 
Elderflower . 
Green tea . 
Hawthorn . 
Horehound . 
Sarsaparilla . 
Spearmint . 
St John ' s wort . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Strawberry leaf . 
Thyme . 
Valerian . 
Vervain . 
Yarrow . 
Yellow dock . 
AVOID : 
Aloe . 
Coltsfoot . 
Cornsilk . 
Fenugreek . 
Gentian . 
Golden seal . 
Hops . 
Linden . 
Mullein . 
Red clover . 
Rhubarb . 
Senna . 
Shepherd ' s purse . 
Scullcap . 
--Miscellaneous Beverages--
Type Bs do best when they limit their beverages to herbal and green teas , water
and juice . Although beverages like coffee , black tea and wine do no real harm , the goal of
the blood type diet is to maximize your performance , not to keep it in neutral . Caffeinated
coffee or tea drinkers should replace these beverages with green tea , which has caffeine
but also provides some antioxidant benefits . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Green tea . 
NEUTRAL : 
Coffee--decaffeinated , regular . 
Lager . 
Tea--decaffeinated , regular . 
Wine--red , white . 
AVOID : 
Distilled spirits . 
Soda--Cola , diet , others . 
Seltzer water . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-MEAL PLANNING FOR TYPE B . -
The following sample menus and recipes will give you an idea of a typical diet
beneficial to Type Bs . 
See pages 81-82 for the general introduction to meal planning .  [ See section above
headed " -MEAL PLANNING FOR TYPE O- "  .  ] 
As you become more familiar with the Type B Diet recommendations , you ' ll be
able to easily create your own menu plans and adjust favourite recipes to make them Type
B-friendly . 
An asterisk (  *  ) denotes the recipe follows--recipes may occur in more than one of
the four diets ; if so there will be a page reference .  
*  *  * 
--- Sample meal plan No . 1 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail ( OPTIONAL--SEE P . 167 )  .  [ See " --Juices and other
Fluids-- " for Type Bs above ]  . 
2 slices Essene bread WITH 
(  *  ) Yogurt-Herb Cheese . 
poached egg . 
green tea . 
-Lunch . -
Greek Salad--chopped lettuce , cucumber , spring onions , celery , with a sprinkling
feta cheese , oil and lemon . 
Banana . 
iced herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
Quinoa Apple Sauce Cake ( SEE RECIPE P . 90 )  .  [ See recipe " Quinoa Apple Sauce
Cake " above ]  . 
herbal tea . 
-Dinner . -
Lamb and Asparagus Stew ( SEE RECIPE P . 86 )  .  [ See recipe " Lamb and
Asparagus Stew " above ]  .  
(  *  ) Saffron Brown Rice . 
steamed vegetables ( broccoli , Chinese cabbage , etc .  )  . 
frozen yogurt .  
( wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail ( OPTIONAL--SEE P . 167 )  .  [ See " --Juices and other
Fluids-- " for Type Bs above ]  . 
1 slice Essene bread . 
poached egg . 
green tea . 
-Lunch . -
Greek Salad--chopped lettuce , cucumber , spring onions , celery with a sprinkling
feta cheese , oil and lemon . 
Banana . 
iced herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
1 scoop of low-fat cottage cheese with pear slices . 
herbal tea . 
-Dinner . -
grilled lamb chop . 
steamed asparagus . 
steamed vegetables ( broccoli , Chinese cabbage , etc .  )  . 
frozen yogurt .  
( wine if desired )  . 
---Sample meal plan No . 2 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail ( OPTIONAL--SEE P . 167 )  .  [ See " --Juices and
other Fluids-- " for Type Bs above ]  . 
rice bran cereal with banana and skimmed milk . 
grape juice . 
coffee . 
-Lunch . -
thin slice of cheese ( Swiss or munster ) WITH 
1 thin slice of turkey breast ; 
2 slices spelt bread with mustard or mayonnaise . 
green tea . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
fruit-juice-sweetened yogurt . 
herbal tea . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Grilled Fish . 
steamed vegetables ( from acceptable list )  .  
(  *  ) Roasted Yams with Rosemary . 
mixed fresh fruit ( from acceptable list )  . 
herbal tea or coffee .  
( red or white wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail ( OPTIONAL--SEE P . 167 )  .  [ See " --Juices and other
Fluids-- " for Type Bs above ]  . 
rice bran cereal with banana and skimmed milk . 
grape juice . 
coffee . 
-Lunchthin slice of cheese ( Swiss or munster ) WITH 
2 slices turkey breast . 
1 slice spelt bread with mustard only . 
green tea . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snackfruit-juice-sweetened yogurt . 
herbal tea . 
-Dinner- 
(  *  ) Grilled Fish . 
steamed vegetables ( from acceptable list )  .  
(  *  ) Roasted Yams with Rosemary . 
mixed fresh fruit ( from acceptable list )  . 
herbal tea or coffee .  
( red or white wine if desired )  . 
---Sample meal plan No . 3 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail ( OPTIONAL--SEE P . 167 )  .  [ See " --Juices and other
Fluids-- " for Type Bs above ]  . 
Maple Walnut Granola ( SEE RECIPE P . 90 )  [ See recipe above for " Maple Walnut
Granola "  ] with goat ' s milk . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
1 soft-boiled egg . 
grapefruit juice . 
green tea . 
-Lunch . -
Spinach Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  
[ See recipe above for " Spinach Salad "  ]  . 
tuna with mayonnaise . 
rice cakes ( no limit )  . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
Apricot Fruit Bread ( SEE RECIPE P . 133 )  .  [ See recipe above for " Apricot Fruit
Bread "  .  ] 
Apple . 
coffee or tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Scrumptious Fettucine Alfredo . 
green salad . 
frozen yogurt . 
herbal tea .  
( red or white wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail ( OPTIONAL--SEE P . 167 )  .  [ See " --Juices and other
Fluids-- " for Type Bs above ]  . 
puffed rice with goat ' s milk . 
1 soft-boiled egg . 
grapefruit juice . 
green tea . 
-Lunch . -
Spinach Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  
[ See recipe above for " Spinach Salad "  ]  . 
plain tuna . 
Essene bread . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
low-fat yogurt with raisins . 
Apple . 
coffee or tea . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Scrumptious Fettucine Alfredo . 
green salad . 
frozen yogurt . 
herbal tea .  
( red or white wine if desired )  . 
RECIPES . 
---Grilled Fish [  *  ] ---
90G / 3 OZ UNSALTED BUTTER , GHEE OR OIL . 
1 TSP TABASCO SAUCE . 
1 TBSP CHOPPED GARLIC . 
4 SLICES OF YOUR FAVOURITE THICK FISH FILLET , SUCH AS COD OR
HALIBUT . 
140 G / 5 OZ PUFFED RICE CEREAL , CRUSHED . 
2 TBSP CHOPPED FRESH PARSLEY . 
Preheat the grill to high . Melt the butter . Add the Tabasco sauce and garlic and fry
until the garlic browns . Pour 4 teaspoons into an ovenproof dish . Arrange the fish in a
single layer . Sprinkle the crushed cereal and parsley over the fish . Add rest of the butter
mixture on top of the fish . 
Grill for 10-15 minutes until the fish flakes easily when tested with the tip of a
knife . Serve immediately . 
SERVES 4 .  
[  *  ] My patient and friend , Cheryl Miller , is a wonderful cook . She supplied this
recipe , and it ' s just delicious . 
---Scrumptious Fettuccine Alfredo . ---
225 G / 8 OZ RICE OR SPELT FETTUCINE OR LINGUINE . 
1 TBSP EXTRA VIRGIN OLIVE OIL . 
75 ML / 6 FL OZ BUTTERMILK . 
25 G / 1 OZ PARMESAN CHEESE , GRATED . 
75 G / 2-3 / 4 OZ SPRING ONIONS SLICED . 
2 TBSP CHOPPED FRESH BASIL . 
1 / 4 TSP FINELY GRATED LEMON RIND . 
1 / 4 TSP GARLIC POWDER OR FRESHLY PRESSED GARLIC . 
EXTRA PARMESAN CHEESE AND FRESH BASIL , TO GARNISH . 
LEMON WEDGES , TO SERVE . 
Cook pasta in a pan of boiling salted water until AL DENTE . Drain and
immediately return to pan . Add the olive oil and toss to coat the pasta . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
In same pan as pasta , combine buttermilk , Parmesan cheese , spring onions , basil , 
lemon rind and garlic . Cook everything together over a medium-high heat until bubbly , 
stirring constantly . 
Garnish with extra Parmesan cheese and fresh basil . Serve with lemon . 
MAKES 4 SIDE DISHES . 
---Roasted Yams With Rosemary . ---
This is a wonderful dish to have with a green salad or other toasted vegetables . 
50 ML / 2 FL OZ EXTRA VIRGIN OLIVE OIL . 
1 TBSP CHOPPED FRESH ROSEMARY , OR 2 TSP DRIED . 
DASH OF CAYENNE PEPPER OR CAJUN SPICE . 
5-6 MEDIUM YAMS , QUARTERED . 
Preheat the oven to 180-190 C / 350-375 F / Mark 4-5 . Blend the olive oil , 
rosemary and spice together and place in an ovenproof dish . Add the yams and bake for 1
hour . 
SERVES 4 . 
---Saffron Brown Rice . ---
400 G / 14 OZ BROWN BASMATI RICE . 
3 TBSP EXTRA-VIRGIN OLIVE OIL . 
1 LARGE SPANISH ONION OR RED ONION , FINELY CHOPPED . 
1 TSP GROUND CORIANDER . 
1 TSP GRATED NUTMEG . 
SEEDS FROM 2 CARDAMOM PODS . 
1 TSP SAFFRON THREADS . 
2 TBSP ROSEWATER . 
4 CUPS FILTERED WATER , BOILING . 
Rinse the rice in a sieve under running water until the water runs clear . Then place
the rice in a bowl , cover with cold water and leave to soak for 30 minutes . Drain well . 
Heat the oil and saute onion with all spices for 10 minutes over a low heat . In a
small dish , beat the saffron and add rosewater . 
To the onion mixture , add 1 tablespoon of the rosewater mixture . Simmer for
another 15 minutes and then add the rice with the filtered boiling water . Return to the
boil , then lower the heat , cover and simmer for 35-40 minutes until tender . Just before
serving add the rest of the rosewater . 
SERVES 4 . 
---Yogurt-Herb Cheese . ---
1 . 8 KG / 4 LB VIRTUALLY FAT-FREE NATURAL YOGURT . 
2 GARLIC CLOVES , VERY FINELY CHOPPED . 
1 TBSP OLIVE OIL . 
1 TSP FRESH THYME . 
1 TSP CHOPPED FRESH BASIL . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
1 TSP FRESH OREGANO . 
SALT AND PEPPER , TO TASTE . 
RAW VEGETABLES FROM ACCEPTABLE LIST , TO SERVE . 
Spoon the yogurt into a piece of muslin , then tie the cloth into a ball with string
and allow the yogurt to drip over the kitchen sink or a bathtub for 4-1 / 2 -- 5 hours . 
Remove yogurt from muslin and transfer to a bowl . Stir in the remaining
ingredients . Cover and chill for 1-2 hours before serving . 
SERVES 4-6 . 
TYPE B SUPPLEMENT ADVISORY . 
The role of supplements--be they vitamins , minerals or herbs--is to add the
nutrients that are lacking in your diet , and to provide extra protection where you need it . 
The supplement focus for Type Bs is : 
__ Fine-tuning an already balanced diet . 
__ Improving insulin production . 
__ Strengthening viral immunity . 
__ Improving brain clarity and focus . 
Type Bs are a special ( you might say lucky ) case . For the most part , they can
avoid major diseases by following this blood type diet . Because the diet is so rich in
vitamins A , B , C and E , plus minerals , calcium and iron , there is no need for
supplementation of these . Enjoy your unique status--but follow the diet ! 
The following are the few supplements that can benefit Type Bs . 
BENEFICIAL : 
-Magnesium . -
While the other blood types risk calcium deficiency , Type Bs risk magnesium
deficiency . That ' s because Type Bs are so efficient in assimilating calcium that they risk
creating an imbalance between the levels of calcium and magnesium . If this occurs , they
become more at risk from viruses ( or otherwise lowered immunity )  , fatigue , depression
and , potentially , nervous disorders . In these instances , a trial of magnesium
supplementation ( 3-500 mg ) should be considered . Also , many Type-B children are
plagued with eczema , and magnesium supplementation can often be beneficial . Any form
of magnesium is fine , although more patients report a laxative effect with magnesium
citrate than with the other forms . An excessive amount of magnesium could , at least
theoretically , upset the body ' s calcium levels , so be sure that you also consume highcalcium foods , such as cultured dairy products . The key is balance ! 
Best magnesium-rich foods for Type Bs ( SEE ACCEPTABLE LISTS ON PP . 
150-172 )  [ See " --Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game-- " to " --Miscellaneous Beverages-- " 
above in this section on Type B ]  : 
--all recommended green vegetables . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
--grains . 
--beans and pulses . 
-Herbs / Phytochemicals recommended for Type Bs . -
-Liquorice ( GLYCYRRHIZA GLABRA )  . -
Liquorice is a plant widely used by herbalists around the world . It contains at least
four benefits--as a treatment for stomach ulcers , as an anti-viral agent against the herpes
virus , to treat chronic fatigue syndrome and to combat hypoglycaemia . 
Liquorice is a plant to be respected : large doses in the wrong person can cause
sodium retention and elevated blood pressure . Anyone who suffers from hypoglycaemia , 
a condition where the blood sugar drops after a meal , should drink a cup or two of
liquorice tea after meals . For Chronic Fatigue Syndrome , I recommend liquorice
preparations , other than DGL and liquorice tea , but only under the guidance of a GP . 
Liquorice freely used in its supplemental form can be toxic . 
-Digestive enzymes . -
Any Type B who is not used to eating meat or dairy foods may experience some
initial difficulty adapting to the diet . Take a digestive enzyme with main meals for a
while , and you ' ll adjust more readily to concentrated proteins . BROMELAIN , an enzyme
found in pineapples , is available in supplemental form at health food shops , usually in the
4x strength . 
-Adaptogenic herbs . -
Adaptogenic herbs increase concentration and memory retention , sometimes a
problem for Type Bs with nervous or viral disorders . The best are Siberian ginseng 
( ELEUTHEROCOCCUS SENTICOSUS ) and GINGKO BILOBA , both widely available
from herbalists and health food shops . Siberian ginseng has been shown in Russian
studies to increase the speed and accuracy of teletype operators . 
GINGKO BILOBA is currently the most frequently prescribed drug of any kind in
Germany , where more than 5 million people take it daily . It increases the microcirculation to the brain , which is why it is often prescribed to the elderly . It is currently
being promoted as a brain stimulant , a pick-me-up for the mind . 
-Lecithin . -
Lecithin , a blood enhancer found principally in soya beans , allows the cell surface
B antigens to move around more easily and better protect the immune system . Type Bs
should seek this benefit from lecithin granules , not soya itself , as soya doesn ' t have the
concentrated effect . Drinking the Membrane Fluidizer Cocktail ( SEE PAGE 167 )  [ See " --
Juices and other Fluids-- " for Type Bs above ] is a good habit to develop , as it is a rather
pleasant means of really stimulating your immune system . 
TYPE B STRESS-EXERCISE PROFILE . 
The Type B response to stress represents a balance of the nervous mental activity
of Type A and the more physically aggressive reactions of Type O . Type Bs temper each
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
of these qualities and therefore respond with harmony and balance--harnessing the best
qualities of the other blood types . 
The Type B response to stress is an evolutionary sophistication demanded by a
multidimensional environment . Human beings needed both the physical endurance
required to conquer new lands , as well as the skills and patience to develop those lands . 
Remember , early Type Bs were represented by both barbarians and agrarians . 
Type Bs confront stress very well for the most part , because they blend easily into
unfamiliar situations . They are less confrontational than Type Os , but more physically
charged than Type As . 
Type Bs do well with exercises that are neither too aerobically intense nor
completely aimed at mental relaxation . The ideal balance for many Type Bs is moderate
activities that involve other people--like group hiking , biking excursions , the less
aggressive martial arts , tennis and aerobics classes . You don ' t do as well when the sport is
fiercely competitive--such as squash , football or basketball .  
*  *  * 
The most effective exercise schedule for Type Bs should be three days a week of
intense physical activity , and two days a week of relaxation exercises . 
Exercise : Duration / frequency . 
AEROBICS 45-60 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
TENNIS 45-60 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
MARTIAL ARTS 30-60 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
CALISTHENICS 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
HIKING 30-60 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
CYCLING 45-60 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
SWIMMING 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
BRISK WALKING 30-60 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
JOGGING 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
WEIGHT TRAINING 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 3 times per week . 
GOLF 60 ( minutes )  ; 2 times per week . 
T ' AI CHI 45 ( minutes )  ; 2 times per week . 
HATHA YOGA 45 ( minutes )  ; 2 times per week . 
-Type B Exercise Guidelines . -
FOR PHYSICAL EXERCISE : 
The Guidelines here are exactly the same as for Type O--please refer to pp . 97-98 .  
[ See " TYPE O STRESS-EXERCISE PROFILE " above .  ] 
FOR RELAXATION EXERCISE : 
T ' AI CHI and yoga are the perfect way to balance the more physical activities of
your week . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-T ' ai Chi . -
TAI CHI CH ' UAN ( or T ' AI CHI ) is an exercise that enhances the flexibility of
body movement . The slow , graceful , elegant gestures of the routines hardly resemble the
original full-speed hand and foot blows , blocks and parries they represent . In China , T ' AI
CHI is practised daily by groups who gather in parks and public squares to perform the
movements in unison . T ' AI CHI can be a very effective relaxation technique , although it
takes concentration and patience to master . 
-Yoga . -
The guidelines and simple relaxation techniques are the same as those for Type
A--please refer to pp . 143-145 .  [ See " Type A Exercise Guidelines " above .  ] 
TYPE B : THE PERSONALITY QUESTION . 
Early Type Bs , confronted with new lands , unfamiliar climates and the
intermingling of races , had to be flexible and creative in order to survive . Type Bs
required less ordered and harmonious conformity than the settled Type As , as well as less
of the hunter ' s purposefulness that characterized Type Os . 
These same characteristics exist in the very cells of Type Bs . Biologically , Type
Bs are more flexible than Type Os , Type As or Type ABs--less vulnerable to many
diseases common to the others . The Type B who lives in harmony--working , exercising
and eating in a balanced way--is the essence of a survivor . 
In many ways , Type Bs have the best of all possible worlds . They have elements
of the mental , more sensitively agitated activity of the Type A , with the sheer physical
reactions and aggression of the Type O . Perhaps Type Bs relate more easily to different
personality types because they are genetically more in harmony and thus feel less
inclined to challenge and confront . They can see others ' points of view ; they are
empathic . 
The Chinese , Japanese and many other Asian societies are composed of a high
number of Type Bs . Chinese medicine--ancient , natural and complex--places a great
emphasis on balancing the physiological and emotional states . Unbridled joy ( a desirable
state for most Westerners ) is viewed by Chinese physicians as being dangerous to the
balance of the heart . Balance and harmony is a very Type B kind of medicine . 
Traditional Jewish populations are primarily Type B , regardless of their
geographic locations . Jewish religion and culture represent the blending of mind , soul and
matter . In Jewish tradition , intelligence , peace and spirituality live side-by-side with a
forceful physicality and readiness for battle . To many people , this seems like a
contradiction . It is really the harmonious energies of the Type B in action .  
= 7 . BLOOD TYPE AB PLAN .  = 
TYPE AB : THE ENIGMA . 
__ Modern merging of A and B . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
__ Chameleon ' s response to changing environmental and dietary conditions . 
__ Sensitive digestive tract . 
__ Overly tolerant immune system . 
__ Responds best to stress spiritually , with physical verve and creative energy . 
__ An evolutionary mystery .  
= CONTENTS .  = 
1 . The Type AB Diet . 
2 . Meal Planning . 
3 . Supplement Advisory . 
4 . Stress-Exercise Profile . 
5 . The Personality Question .  
= THE TYPE AB DIET .  = 
Blood Type AB is less than a thousand years old , rare ( 2-5 per cent of the world ' s
population )  , and biologically complex . It doesn ' t fit comfortably into any of the other
categories . Multiple antigens make Type ABs sometimes A-like , sometimes B-like and
sometimes a fusion of both--kind of a blood type centaur . This multiplicity of qualities
can be positive or negative , depending on the circumstances , so the Type AB diet requires
careful reading of foods lists , and familiarization with both the Type A and Type B diets
to better understand the parameters of this diet . 
Essentially , most foods which are not recommended for either Type A or Type B
are probably bad for Type AB , although there are some exceptions . 
PANHAEMAGLUTINANS , which are lectins capable of agglutinating all of the blood
types , seem to be better tolerated by Type ABs , perhaps because the lectin ' s reaction is
diminished by the double A and B antibodies . Tomatoes are an excellent example : Type A
and Type B cannot tolerate the lectins , while Type AB eats tomatoes with no discernible
effect . 
Type ABs are often stronger and more active than the more sedentary Type As . 
This extra dollop of ELAN VITAL may be because their genetic memories still contain
remnants of their steppe-dwelling Type B ancestors . 
-The Weight Loss Factor . -
When it comes to gaining weight , Type ABs reflect the mixed inheritance of their
A and B genes . Sometimes that means special problems . For example , Type ABs have
Type A ' s low stomach acid , along with Type B ' s adaptation to meats . So , although they
are genetically programmed for the consumption of meats , they lack enough stomach
acid to metabolize them efficiently , and the meat that is eaten gets stored as fat . For
weight loss , consumption of meats should be restricted , only eating small amounts that
are supplemented with vegetables and tofu . 
Type B propensities cause the same insulin reaction when dried kidney or lima
beans , corn , buckwheat or sesame seeds are eaten , although the Type A side makes an AB
friendly to lentils and peanuts . Inhibited insulin production causes hypoglycaemia , a
lowering of blood sugar after meals , and leads to less efficient metabolism of foods . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Type ABs lack the severe reaction of Type Os and Type Bs to wheat gluten . But
again , for weight loss purposes , they should avoid wheat , which tends to make muscle
tissue more acidic . Type ABs utilize calories most efficiently when the tissue is somewhat
alkaline . 
-Foods That Encourage Weight Gain . -
--red meat :  } poorly digested ;  
} stored as fat . 
--kidney beans :  } inhibit insulin
--lima beans :  } production ; 
--seeds :  } cause
--sweetcorn :  } hypoglycaemia . 
--buckwheat :  } 
--wheat :  } decreases 
} metabolism ;  
} inefficient use of 
} calories . 
-Foods That Encourage Weight Loss . -
--tofu :  } promote
--seafood :  } metabolic efficiency . 
--green veg- } 
--etables :  } 
--kelp :  } improve
--dairy } insulin
products :  } production . 
--alkaline fruits :  } increase 
} muscle 
} alkalinity . 
Pineapple :  } aids digestion .  
} stimulates 
} intestinal 
} mobility . 
Incorporate these guidelines into the total picture of the Type AB diet that follows . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
--Meat , Offal , Poultry and Game . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : Lean red meats , offal and game . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz ( MEN )  ; 60-140 g / 2-5 oz ( WOMEN AND
CHILDREN )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-3x . 
Caucasian : 1-3x . 
Asian : 1-3x . 
Food : Poultry and feathered game . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz ( MEN )  ; 50-140 g / 2-5 oz ( WOMEN AND
CHILDREN )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-2x . 
Caucasian : 0-2x . 
Asian : 0-2x .  
[  *  ] REMEMBER : THE PORTION RECOMMENDATIONS OF ALL FOOD
GROUPS ARE MERELY GUIDELINES THAT CAN HELP YOU REFINE YOUR
DIET ACCORDING TO ANCESTRAL PROPENSITIES . 
When it comes to eating meat , offal , poultry and game , Type ABs borrow
characteristics from both Type A and Type B . Similar to Type A , they do not produce
enough stomach acid to effectively digest too much animal protein . Yet , the key is portion
size and frequency . Type ABs need some animal protein , especially the kinds of meat that
represent their B-like heritage--lamb , mutton , rabbit and turkey , instead of beef . The
lectin that irritates the blood and digestive tracts of Type Bs has the same effect on Type
ABs who should avoid eating chicken . 
Also avoid all smoked or cured meats . These foods can cause stomach cancer in
people with low levels of stomach acid , a trait ABs have in common with Type As . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Lamb . 
Mutton . 
Rabbit . 
Turkey . 
NEUTRAL : 
Liver--calf , chicken , pig . 
Pheasant . 
AVOID : 
Bacon . 
Beef , including minced . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Buffalo . 
Chicken . 
Duck . 
Goose . 
Ham . 
Heart . 
Partridge . 
Pork . 
Poussin . 
Veal . 
Venison . 
Quail . 
--Seafood--
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : All seafood . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-5x . 
Caucasian : 3-5x . 
Asian : 4-6x . 
There are a wide variety of seafoods for Type ABs and it is an excellent source of
protein . Like Type As , ABs find it difficult to digest the lectins found in sole and plaice . 
Type ABs also share the Type A susceptibility to breast cancer . Anyone with Type AB
blood with a family history of breast cancer should eat snails . The edible snail , HELIX
POMATIA , contains a powerful lectin that specifically agglutinates mutated A-like cells
for two of the most common forms of breast cancer .  ( See Chapter 10 .  ) This is a positive
kind of agglutination , the snail lectin gets rid of ' sick ' cells . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Albacore ( tuna )  . 
Cod . 
Grouper . 
Hake . 
Mackerel . 
Mahi mahi . 
Monkfish . 
Pike . 
Porgy . 
Red Fish . 
Red Snapper . 
Rainbow trout . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Sailfish . 
Sardines . 
Sea trout . 
Shad . 
Snails . 
Sturgeon . 
NEUTRAL : 
Abalone . 
Bluefish . 
Carp . 
Catfish . 
Caviar . 
Crockers . 
Herring--fresh . 
Mussels . 
Salmon . 
Scallops . 
Shark . 
Smelts . 
Snapper . 
Squid . 
Swordfish . 
AVOID : 
Anchovy . 
Barracuda . 
Clams . 
Conch . 
Crab . 
Crayfish . 
Eels . 
Frogs ' legs . 
Haddock . 
Halibut . 
Herring--pickled . 
Lobster . 
Octopus . 
Oysters . 
Plaice . 
Sea Bass . 
Shrimp . 
Smoked salmon . 
Sole . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Striped bass . 
--Dairy Products and Eggs . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : Eggs . 
Portion : 1 egg . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-5x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
Food : Cheeses . 
Portion : 60 g / 2 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 3-4x . 
Food : Yogurt . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 1-3x . 
Food : Milk . 
Portion : 125-175 g / 4-6 fl oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-6x . 
Caucasian : 3-6x . 
Asian : 2-5x . 
For dairy foods , Type ABs can put on the ' B ' hat . Dairy products are beneficial , 
especially cultured and soured products--buttermilk , yogurt , kefir and reduced-fat sour
cream--all of which are more easily digested . 
The primary factor to watch out for is excessive mucus production . Like Type As , 
Type ABs already produce a lot of mucus , and don ' t need more . They should watch for
signs of respiratory problems , sinus attacks or ear infections , that might indicate a need to
cut back on the dairy foods . 
Eggs are a very good source of protein for Type ABs . Although they ' re very high
in cholesterol and Type ABs ( like Type As ) have some susceptibility to heart conditions , 
research indicates cholesterol-containing foods are not the real culprits , but , rather , 
saturated fats . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
However , when eating eggs , increase the protein and lower the cholesterol intake
by using two egg whites for every one egg yolk .  ( Note that the lectin found in the chicken
muscle is not present in eggs .  ) 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Cottage cheese . 
Farmer ' s cheese . 
Goat ' s cheese . 
Goat ' s milk . 
Kefir . 
Mozzarella cheese . 
Ricotta cheese . 
NEUTRAL : 
Cheddar cheese . 
Creme fraiche . 
Edam cheese . 
Emmenthal cheese . 
Fromage frais . 
Gouda cheese . 
Gruyere cheese . 
High- / low-fat soft cheese . 
Jarlsburg cheese . 
Milk--skimmed , semi-skimmed . 
Munster cheese . 
Neufachatel cheese . 
Quark . 
Soya cheese [  *  ]  . 
Soya milk [  *  ]  . 
Whey . 
Yogurt--frozen , Greek-style , with fruit .  
[  *  ] GOOD DAIRY ALTERNATIVES . 
AVOID : 
Blue cheese . 
Brie . 
Butter . 
Buttermilk . 
Camembert . 
Ice-cream . 
Parmesan cheese . 
Provolone cheese . 
Sherbet . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
--Oils and Fats . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : Oils . 
Portion : 1 tbsp . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 1-5x . 
Caucasian : 4-8x . 
Asian : 3-7x . 
Type ABs should use olive oil rather than animal fats ( butter , lard )  , hydrogenated
vegetable fats ( margarine ) or other vegetable oils . Olive oil is a mono-unsaturated fat
which is believed to contribute to lowering blood cholesterol . They may also use small
amounts of ghee , which is similar to clarified butter and used in Indian cooking . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Olive oil . 
NEUTRAL : 
Rapeseed oil . 
Cod liver oil . 
Linseed ( flaxseed ) oil . 
Groundnut oil . 
AVOID : 
Corn oil . 
Cottonseed oil . 
Safflower oil . 
Sunflower oil . 
Sesame oil . 
--Nuts and Seeds . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : Nuts and seeds . 
Portion : Small handful . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-5x . 
Caucasian : 2-5x . 
Asian : 2-3x . 
Food : Nut butters . 
Portion : 15 g / 1 / 2 oz . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
African : 3-7x . 
Caucasian : 3-7x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Nuts and seeds present a mixed picture for Type ABs . They should be eaten in
small amounts and with caution . Although nuts and seeds , and products made from them , 
can be a good supplementary protein source , all seeds contain the insulin-inhibiting
lectins that make them a problem for Type Bs . On the other hand , ABs share the Type A
preference for peanuts , which are powerful immune boosters . 
Type ABs also tend to suffer from gall-bladder problems , so nut butters are
preferable to whole nuts . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Chestnuts . 
Peanuts . 
Peanut butter . 
Walnuts . 
NEUTRAL : 
Almonds . 
Almond butter . 
Brazil nuts . 
Cashew nuts . 
Hickory nuts . 
Macadamia nuts . 
Pine nuts . 
Pistachio nuts . 
AVOID : 
Hazelnuts . 
Poppy seeds . 
Pumpkin seeds . 
Sesame seeds . 
Sunflower margarine . 
Sunflower seeds . 
Tahini ( sesame seed paste )  . 
--Beans and Pulses--
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : All beans and pulses . 
Portion : 60-90 g / 2-3 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 3-5x . 
Caucasian : 2-3x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Asian : 4-6x . 
Beans and pulses are another mixed bag for Type ABs . Lentils , navy and pinto
beans are high-quality foods for Type ABs , although they are not advised for Type Bs . In
particular , lentils are known to contain cancer-fighting antioxidants . On the other hand , 
dried kidney and lima beans , which slow insulin production in Type As , have the same
effect in Type ABs . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Lentils--green . 
Navy beans . 
Pinto beans . 
Red beans . 
Soya beans . 
NEUTRAL : 
Broad beans . 
Cannellini beans . 
Green beans . 
Green peas . 
Tamarind beans . 
Lentils--brown , red . 
AVOID : 
Aduki beans . 
Black beans . 
Black-eyed beans . 
Chick-peas . 
Kidney beans . 
Lima beans . 
--Cereals . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : All recommended cereals . 
Portion : 115-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 2-3x . 
Asian : 2-4x . 
Guidelines for Type ABs favour both Type A and Type B recommendations . 
Generally , ABs do well on grains , even wheat , but must limit their wheat consumption
because the inner kernel of the wheat grain is highly acid-forming for Type ABs . Wheat is
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
also not advised if you are trying to lose weight . Type ABs with a pronounced mucus
condition caused by asthma or frequent infections should also limit wheat consumption , 
as wheat causes mucus production . Experiment for yourself to determine how much
wheat you can eat . Type ABs do best when their tissues are slightly alkaline . While the
inner kernel of wheat grain is alkaline in Type Os and Type Bs , it becomes acidic in Type
As and Type ABs . 
Limit the intake of wheatgerm and bran to once a week . Oatmeal , soya flakes , 
millet , farina , ground rice and soya chunks and mince are good Type AB cereals , but ABs
must avoid buckwheat and cornmeal . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Millet . 
Oat bran . 
Oatmeal . 
Rice bran . 
Rice--puffed . 
Ryeberry . 
Spelt . 
NEUTRAL : 
Amaranth . 
Barley . 
Cream of rice . 
Cream of wheat . 
Familia . 
Farina . 
Granola . 
Wheatgerm . 
Shredded wheat . 
Wheat bran . 
AVOID : 
Buckwheat . 
Corn flakes . 
Cornmeal . 
Kamut . 
--Breads , Crispbreads and Muffins . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : Breads , crispbreads . 
Portion : 1 slice . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-1x . 
Caucasian : 0-1x . 
Asian : 0-1x . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Food : Muffins . 
Portion : 1 muffin . 
Daily portion by ancestry : 
African : 0-1x . 
Caucasian : 0-1x . 
Asian : 0-1x . 
The Type AB guidelines for eating breads and muffins are similar to cereals and
grains . They are generally favourable foods , but are inadvisable for anyone who produces
excessive mucus or is overweight . Soya and rice flour are good substitutes . Note that
although Essene bread ( found in health food shops ) is sprouted-wheat bread , the gluten
lectin is destroyed in the sprouting process . However , be aware that sprouted breads sold
commercially often only contain a small proportion of sprouted wheat and are basically
wholewheat breads . Read the ingredient labels . Avoid corn muffins and cornbread . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Brown rice bread . 
Millet bread . 
Rice cakes . 
100 per cent rye bread . 
Rye crisps . 
Soya flour bread . 
Sprouted-wheat Essene bread . 
Ryvita crispbreads . 
Fin crisps . 
Wasa bread . 
NEUTRAL : 
Bagels . 
Durum wheat bread . 
Gluten-free bread . 
Ideal flat bread . 
Matzos . 
Multi-grain bread . 
Oat bran muffins . 
Pumpernickel bread . 
Hi-protein bread . 
Spelt bread . 
Wheat bran muffins . 
Whole-wheat bread . 
AVOID : 
Corn muffins . 
Cornbread . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Polenta . 
---Grains and Pastas---
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : Grains . 
Portion200 g / 7 oz ( dry )  . 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 3-4x . 
Food : Pasta . 
Portion : 140-175 g / 4-6 oz ( dry ) 
Weekly portion by ancestry : 
African : 2-3x . 
Caucasian : 3-4x . 
Asian : 3-4x . 
Type ABs benefit from a diet rich in rice rather than pasta , although semolina or
spinach pasta once or twice a week is fine . Again , avoid corn and buckwheat in favour of
oats and rye . Limit eating bran and wheatgerm to once a week . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Oat flour . 
Rye flour . 
Rice flour . 
Sprouted-wheat flour . 
Rice--basmati , brown , white . 
Wild rice . 
NEUTRAL : 
Couscous . 
Bulgar wheat flour . 
Durum wheat flour . 
Gluten flour . 
Graham flour . 
Plain flour . 
Quinoa--flour or grain . 
Self-raising flour . 
Semolina pasta . 
Spelt flour . 
White flour . 
Wholewheat flour . 
AVOID : 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Barley flour . 
Buckwheat flour . 
Soba ( buckwheat ) noodles . 
Tapioca . 
--Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : Raw . 
Portion : 140-175 g / 4-6 oz ( prepared )  . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-5x . 
Food : Cooked or steamed . 
Portion : 140 g / 5 oz ( prepared )  . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-5x . 
Fresh vegetables are an important source of phytochemicals , the natural
substances in foods that have a tonic effect in cancer and heart disease prevention--
diseases that afflict Type As and Type ABs more often as a result of weaker immune
systems . These should be eaten several times a day . Type ABs have a wide selection--
nearly all the vegetables that are good for either Type A or Type B are good for them as
well . 
The one exception is the PANHAEMAGLUTINAN in tomatoes which affects all
blood types . Since Type ABs have so much blood type material and the lectin isn ' t
specific , they seem able to avoid the ill effects . I ' ve tested Type ABs who were eating a
lot of tomatoes , and their Indican Scales were clear . 
Type ABs should make tofu a regular part of their diet , in combination with small
amounts of meat and dairy products . Tofu also has well-acknowledged cancer-fighting
benefits . 
Like Type Bs , ABs must avoid fresh sweetcorn and all corn-based products . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Alfalfa sprouts . 
Aubergines . 
Beetroots . 
Beetroot leaves . 
Broccoli . 
Cauliflower . 
Celery . 
Collard greens . 
Cucumbers . 
Dandelion greens . 
Garlic . 
Kale . 
Mushrooms--maitake . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Mustard greens . 
Parsley . 
Parsnips . 
Sweet potatoes . 
Tempe . 
Tofu . 
Yams . 
NEUTRAL : 
Asparagus . 
Bamboo shoots . 
Bok choy . 
Brussels sprouts . 
Cabbage--Chinese , red , white . 
Carrots . 
Chervil . 
Chicory . 
Coriander . 
Courgettes . 
Daikons . 
Endive . 
Escarole . 
Fennel . 
Ginger . 
Horseradish . 
Jicama beans . 
Kohlrabi . 
Leeks . 
Lettuce--butterhead , Cos , iceberg , Webb . 
Mangetouts . 
Mesclun salad mixture . 
Mushrooms--abalone , chantarelles , cultivated , enoki , porcini , Portobello , shiitake , 
tree oysters . 
Okra . 
Olives--Greek , green , Spanish . 
Onions--Spanish , spring , red , yellow . 
Potatoes--red , white . 
Pumpkins . 
Radicchio . 
Rappini . 
Seaweeds . 
Shallots . 
Spinach . 
Squash--all types . 
Swedes . 
Swiss chard . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Tomatoes . 
Turnips . 
Water chestnuts . 
Watercress . 
AVOID : 
Avocado . 
Broad beans . 
Chilli peppers , jalapeno . 
Globe artichokes . 
Jerusalem artichokes . 
Mung bean sprouts . 
Olives--black . 
Radishes . 
Peppers--green , red , yellow . 
Sweetcorn . 
--Fruits . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : All recommended fruits . 
Portion : 1 fruit or 90-140 g / 3-5 oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 3-4x . 
Type ABs inherit mostly Type A intolerances and preferences for certain fruits . 
Focus on the more alkaline fruits , such as grapes , plums and berries , which can help to
balance the grains that are acid-forming in muscle tissues . 
Like Type As , Type ABs don ' t do well on certain tropical fruits , such as mangoes
and guavas . But pineapple is an excellent digestive for Type ABs . 
Oranges should also be avoided , even though they may well be favourites . 
Oranges are a stomach irritant for Type ABs , and they also interfere with the absorption
of important minerals . To avoid confusion , let me reiterate once again that the
acid / alkaline reaction happens two different ways--in the stomach and in the muscle
tissues . Acidic oranges cause irritation in the sensitive , alkaline Type AB stomach . 
Although stomach acid is generally low in Type ABs , the acid contained in oranges
irritates the delicate stomach lining . Grapefruit is closely related to oranges and is also an
acidic fruit , but it has positive effects on the Type AB stomach , exhibiting alkaline
tendencies after digestion , Lemons are also excellent for Type ABs , helping to aid
digestion and clear mucus from the system . 
Since vitamin C is an important antioxidant , especially for stomach-cancer
prevention , eat other vitamin C-rich fruits , such as grapefruit or kiwi . 
The banana lectin interferes with Type AB digestion . I recommend substituting
other high-potassium fruits such as apricots , figs and certain melons . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Cherries . 
Cranberries . 
Figs--dried , fresh . 
Gooseberries . 
Grapes--black , green , purple , red . 
Loganberries . 
Plums--green , purple , red . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apples . 
Apricots . 
Blackberries . 
Blackcurrants . 
Blueberries . 
Boysenberries . 
Dates . 
Elderberries . 
Grapefruit . 
Kiwi . 
Kumquats . 
Lemons . 
Limes . 
Lychees . 
Melons--canang , cantaloupe , casaba , Crenshaw , Christmas , honeydew , musk , 
Spanish . 
Nectarines . 
Oranges . 
Papayas . 
Peaches . 
Pears . 
Pineapples . 
Plantains . 
Prunes . 
Raisins . 
Raspberries . 
Redcurrants . 
Strawberries . 
Tangerines . 
Watermelons . 
AVOID : 
Bananas . 
Coconuts . 
Guavas . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Mangoes . 
Persimmons . 
Pomegranates . 
Prickly pears . 
Rhubarb . 
Star fruit . 
--Juices and Other Fluids . --
BLOOD TYPE AB . 
Food : All recommended juices . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 2-3x . 
Food : Water . 
Portion : 225 ml / 8 fl oz . 
Daily portion--all ancestral types : 4-7x . 
Type AB should begin each day by drinking a glass of warm water with the
freshly squeezed juice of 1 / 2 lemon to cleanse the system of mucus accumulated during
sleep . The lemon water also aids elimination . Follow with a diluted glass of grapefruit or
papaya juice .  ( As with other fruits , you may have to juice it yourself .  ) 
Stress high-alkaline fruit juices like black cherry , cranberry or grape . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Black cherry juice . 
Cabbage juice . 
Carrot juice . 
Celery juice . 
Cranberry juice . 
Grape juice . 
Papaya juice . 
NEUTRAL : 
Apple cider . 
Apple juice . 
Apricot juice . 
Cucumber juice . 
Grapefruit juice . 
Orange juice . 
Other vegetable juices ( corresponding with highlighted vegetables on pp . 200-
202 )  .  [ See " --Vegetables , Sprouts , Soya Products and Fresh Herbs . -- " for Type ABs
immediately above .  ] 
Pineapple juice . 
Prune juice . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Water ( with lemon juice )  . 
AVOID : 
Orange juice . 
--Spices , Dried Herbs and Flavourings . --
Sea salt and kelp should be used in place of processed table salt . Their sodium
content is comparatively low--a necessity for Type AB--and kelp has immensely positive
heart and immune system benefits . It is also useful for weight control . Miso , made from
soya beans , is very good for Type ABs , and makes a delicious soup or sauce . 
Avoid all pepper and vinegar because they are acidic . Instead of vinegar , use
lemon juice with oil and herbs to dress vegetables or salads . And don ' t be afraid to use
generous amounts of garlic . It ' s a potent tonic and natural antibiotic , especially for Type
ABs . 
Sugar and chocolate are allowed in small amounts . Use them as you would
condiments . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Curry powder . 
Horseradish . 
Miso . 
Parsley . 
NEUTRAL : 
Agar . 
Arrowroot . 
Basil . 
Bay leaf . 
Bergamot . 
Brown rice syrup . 
Caraway seeds . 
Cardamom . 
Carob . 
Chervil . 
Chives . 
Chocolate . 
Cinnamon . 
Coriander . 
Cream of tartar . 
Cumin . 
Dill . 
Garlic . 
Honey . 
Maple syrup . 
Marjoram . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Mint . 
Molasses . 
Mustard--dry . 
Nutmeg . 
Paprika . 
Peppermint . 
Pimento . 
Rice syrup . 
Rosemary . 
Saffron . 
Sage . 
Salt . 
Savory . 
Seaweeds--dulse , kelp . 
Soy sauce . 
Spearmint . 
Sugar--brown , white . 
Tamari . 
Tamarind . 
Tarragon . 
Thyme . 
Turmeric . 
Vanilla . 
Vinegars--balsamic , cider , red wine . 
AVOID : 
Allspice . 
Almond essence . 
Anise . 
Barley malt . 
Capers . 
Cayenne pepper . 
Cornflour . 
Corn syrup . 
Gelatine . 
Pepper--black or white peppercorns , ground , red pepper flakes . 
Tapioca . 
Vinegar , white . 
--Condiments . --
Avoid all pickled condiments , due to a Type AB susceptibility to stomach cancer . 
Also avoid ketchup , which contains vinegar . 
NEUTRAL : 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Jam ( from acceptable fruits on pp . 203-204 )  .  [ See lists under " --Fruits-- " for Type
ABs above .  ] 
Jelly ( from acceptable fruits on pp . 203-204 )  .  [ See lists under " --Fruits-- " for Type
ABs above .  ] 
Mayonnaise . 
Mustard . 
Salad dressing ( low-fat , from acceptable ingredients )  . 
AVOID : 
Ketchup . 
Pickles--dill , kosher , sweet , sour . 
Relish . 
Worcestershire sauce . 
--Herbal Teas . --
Herbal tea should be drunk by Type ABs to rev up the immune system and build
protections against cardiovascular disease and cancer . Alfalfa , aloe , burdock root , 
camomile and echinacea are immune-system boosters . Hawthorn and liquorice root are
highly recommended for cardiovascular health . Green tea is very beneficial for the
immune system . Dandelion , burdock root and strawberry leaf teas will aid absorption of
iron and prevent anaemia .  ( You may need to infuse your own herbal teas .  ) 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Alfalfa . 
Burdock root . 
Echinacea . 
Ginseng . 
Ginger . 
Green tea . 
Hawthorn . 
Liquorice Root ( with doctor ' s permission )  . 
Rose-hip . 
NEUTRAL : 
Catnip . 
Cayenne . 
Camomile . 
Chickweed . 
Dandelion . 
Dong quai ( Chinese angelica )  . 
Elderflower . 
Golden seal . 
Horehound . 
Parsley . 
Peppermint . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Raspberry leaf . 
Sage . 
Sarsaparilla . 
Spearmint . 
St John ' s wort . 
Strawberry leaf . 
Thyme . 
Valerian . 
Vervain . 
Yarrow . 
Yellow dock . 
AVOID : 
Aloe . 
Coltsfoot . 
Corn silk . 
Fenugreek . 
Gentian . 
Hops . 
Linden . 
Mullein . 
Red clover . 
Rhubarb . 
Senna . 
Shepherd ' s purse . 
Scullcap . 
--Miscellaneous Beverages . --
Red wine is good for Type ABs because of its positive cardiovascular effects . A
glass of red wine every day is believed to lower the risk of heart disease for both men and
women . A cup or two a day of regular or decaffeinated coffee increases stomach acid and
also has the same enzymes found in soya beans . Alternate coffee and green tea for the
best combination of benefits . 
HIGHLY BENEFICIAL : 
Coffee--decaffeinated , regular . 
Green tea . 
NEUTRAL : 
Soda water . 
Lager . 
Seltzer water . 
Wine--red , white . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
AVOID : 
Distilled spirits . 
Tea--black , decaffeinated , regular . 
Soda--Cola , diet , others . 
-MEAL PLANNING FOR TYPE AB . -
The following sample menus and recipes will give you an idea of a typical diet
beneficial to Type ABs . 
See pages 81-82 for the general introduction to meal planning .  [ See section above
headed " MEAL PLANNING FOR TYPE O- .  "  ] 
As you become more familiar with the Type AB Diet recommendations , you ' ll be
able to easily create your own menu plans and adjust favourite recipes to make them Type
AB-friendly . 
An asterisk (  *  ) indicates the recipe follows--recipes may occur in more than one
of the four diets ; if so there will be a page reference .  
*  *  * 
---Sample meal plan No . 1 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
water with juice 1 / 2 lemon ( on rising )  . 
diluted grapefruit juice . 
2 slices Essene bread . 
Yogurt-Herb Cheese ( SEE RECIPE P . 178 )  .  [ See recipe above ,  " Yogurt-Herb
Cheese "  .  ] 
decaffeinated coffee . 
-Lunch . -
115 g / 4 oz sliced turkey breast . 
2 slices rye bread . 
Caesar salad . 
2 plums . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . - 
(  *  ) Baked Tofu Cheesecake . 
iced herbal tea . 
-Dinner . -
Tofu Omelettes ( SEE RECIPE P . 132 )  .  [ See recipe above ,  " Tofu Omelettes "  .  ] 
stir-fry vegetables ( from acceptable list )  . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
mixed fruit salad ( from acceptable list )  . 
decaffeinated coffee .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
water with juice 1 / 2 lemon ( on rising )  . 
diluted grapefruit juice . 
1 slice Essene bread . 
1 poached egg . 
decaffeinated coffee . 
-Lunch . -
115 g / 4 oz sliced turkey breast . 
1 slice rye bread or 2 rye crispbreads . 
Caesar salad . 
2 plums . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
115 g / 4 oz low-fat yogurt with fruit . 
iced herbal tea . 
-Dinner . -
Tofu Omelettes ( SEE RECIPE P . 132 )  .  [ See recipe above ,  " Tofu Omelettes "  .  ] 
stir-fry vegetables ( from acceptable list )  . 
mixed fruit salad ( from acceptable list )  . 
decaffeinated coffee .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
---Sample meal plan No . 2 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
water with juice 1 / 2 lemon ( on rising )  . 
diluted grapefruit juice . 
Maple Walnut Granola ( SEE RECIPE P . 90 )  [ see " Maple Walnut Granola " recipe
above ] with soya milk . 
decaffeinated coffee . 
-Lunch . - 
(  *  ) Tabbouleh . 
bunch of grapes or apple . 
iced herbal tea . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
Carob Chip Cookies ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  [ See " Carob Chip Cookies " recipe
above .  ] 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Roasted Rabbit . 
Bean Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  [ See " Bean Salad " recipe above .  ] 
boiled basmati rice . 
frozen yogurt . 
decaffeinated coffee .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
water with juice 1 / 2 lemon ( on rising )  . 
diluted grapefruit juice . 
Maple Walnut Granola ( SEE RECIPE P . 90 )  [ see " Maple Walnut Granola " recipe
above ] with soya milk . 
decaffeinated coffee . 
-Lunch . - 
(  *  ) Tabbouleh . 
bunch of grapes or apple . 
iced herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
honeydew melon with 1 scoop cottage cheese . 
coffee or herbal tea . 
-Dinner . - 
(  *  ) Roasted Rabbit . 
Bean Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  [ See " Bean Salad " recipe above .  ] 
steamed broccoli and cauliflower . 
frozen yogurt . 
decaffeinated coffee .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
---Sample meal plan No . 3 . ---
STANDARD MENU . 
-Breakfast . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
water with juice 1 / 2 lemon ( on rising )  . 
diluted grapefruit juice . 
1 poached egg . 
2 slices essene bread WITH organic almond butter . 
decaffeinated coffee . 
-Lunch . -
Tofu-Pesto Lasagne ( SEE RECIPE P . 131 )  [ see recipe " Tofu-Pesto Lasagne " 
above ]  ; OR 
(  *  ) Tofu-Sardine Fritters . 
mixed green salad . 
2 plums . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
fruit-juice-sweetened yogurt . 
-Dinner . -
grilled salmon with fresh dill and lemon . 
Saffron Brown Rice ( SEE RECIPE P . 177 )  .  [ see recipe " Saffron Brown Rice " 
above ] 
Spinach Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  [ see recipe " Spinach Salad " above ]  . 
decaffeinated coffee .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
WEIGHT CONTROL ALTERNATIVES . 
-Breakfast . -
water with juice 1 / 2 lemon ( on rising )  . 
diluted grapefruit juice . 
1 poached egg . 
1 slice Essene bread WITH reduced-sugar jam . 
decaffeinated coffee . 
-Lunch . -
tofu and vegetable stir-fry ( from acceptable list )  ; OR 
(  *  ) Tofu-Sardine Fritters . 
mixed green salad . 
2 plums . 
herbal tea . 
-Mid-afternoon snack . -
fruit-juice-sweetened yogurt . 
-Dinner . -
grilled salmon with fresh dill and lemon . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
steamed asparagus . 
Spinach Salad ( SEE RECIPE P . 89 )  .  [ see recipe " Spinach Salad " above ]  . 
decaffeinated coffee .  
( red wine if desired )  . 
RECIPES . 
---Baked Tofu Cheesecake [  *  ] ---
700 G / 1-1 / 2 LB FIRM TOFU , DRAINED . 
150 ML / 5 FL OZ SOYA MILK . 
1 / 4 TSP SALT ( OPTIONAL )  . 
2 TSP LEMON JUICE . 
FINELY GRATED RIND OF 1 LEMON . 
1 TSP VANILLA ESSENCE . 
For the pastry : 
90 G / 3 OZ WHOLEMEAL OR RYE FLOUR . 
40 G / 1-1 / 2 OZ ROLLED OATS . 
1 / 2 TSP SALT . 
125 MIL / 4 FL OZ OIL . 
To make the pastry , combine all the ingredients in a bowl with 2 tablespoons
water and mix until the mixture holds together . Press over the base and side of a 20 cm / 8
in loose-bottomed tin . Prick several times with a fork . 
Meanwhile , preheat the oven to 150C ( 300F ) Mark 2 . 
To make the filling , stir together the tofu , soya milk , salt , lemon juice and rind
and vanilla . Pour into the prepared tin and level the surface . Bake for 35-40 minutes . 
MAKES APPROXIMATELY 8 SLICES .  
[  *  ] This recipe was given to me by Yvonne Chapman . 
---Roasted Rabbit . ---
2 RABBITS , CLEANED , DRESSED AND CUT INTO SERVING PIECES . 
225 ML / 8 FL OZ CIDER VINEGAR . 
1 SMALL ONION , CHOPPED . 
115 G / 4 OZ RICE FLOUR OR CRUSHED WHEAT-FREE BREADCRUMBS . 
2 TSP SALT . 
1 / 4 TSP PEPPER . 
DASH OF GROUND CINNAMON . 
75 G / 2-3 / 4 OZ MARGARINE . 
Marinate the rabbit pieces in a non-metallic bowl in the vinegar , onion , and half
the salt for a few hours before cooking . 
Meanwhile , preheat the oven to 190 C ( 375 F ) Mark 5 . 
Combine the flour , remaining salt and spices in a plate . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Drain the rabbit pieces and pat dry . Dip rabbit in the melted margarine , then in
flour or crushed breadcrumb mixture until well coated . 
Place on a baking sheet and roast for 30-40 minutes . 
SERVES 4-6 . 
---Tofu-Sardine Fritters .  [  *  ] ---
1 CAN SARDINE FILLETS ( DEBONED )  . 
2 PIECES , EACH 2 . 5 CM / 1 INCH , MEDIUM OR FIRM TOFU , DRAINED . 
1 / 4 TSP HORSERADISH POWDER . 
DASH OF CIDER VINEGAR . 
OLIVE OIL . 
Mash the sardines with a fork until fluffy . Mash the tofu into the sardines . 
Sprinkle in the horseradish powder , add a dash of vinegar and continue mixing
ingredients until well blended . 
Form the mixture into small patties . Heat a small amount of olive oil in a heavybased frying pan . Brown both sides of patties , then drain well on kitchen paper . 
Alternatively , brown under a grill . Serve with a salad . 
SERVES 2 .  
[  *  ] Another recipe given to me by Yvonne Chapman . 
---Tabbouleh . ---
This makes a refreshing first course or picnic salad . 
175 G / 6 OZ MILLET , COOKED . 
1 BUNCH SPRING ONIONS , CHOPPED . 
1 LARGE CUCUMBER , PEELED AND CHOPPED ( OPTIONAL )  . 
4 BUNCHES FRESH PARSLEY , CHOPPED . 
1 BUNCH FRESH MINT , CHOPPED . 
65 ML / 2-1 / 2 FL OZ OLIVE OIL . 
JUICE OF THREE LEMONS . 
1 TBSP SALT . 
LETTUCE LEAVES , TO SERVE . 
Place the millet in a large bowl . Add all chopped vegetables and herbs and mix
well . Add oil , lemon juice and salt . Serve on a bed of lettuce leaves . Makes a refreshing
appetizer or a picnic salad . 
SERVES 4 . 
TYPE AB SUPPLEMENT ADVISORY . 
The role of supplements--be they vitamins , minerals or herbs--is to add the
nutrients that are lacking in your diet , and to provide extra protection where you need it . 
The supplement focus for Type ABs is : 
__ Supercharging the immune system . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
__ Supplying cancer-fighting antioxidants . 
__ Strengthening the heart . 
Type ABs present a somewhat mixed picture when it comes to supplements . 
Although ABs share the vulnerable immune system and disease susceptibilities of Type
As , the Type AB diet provides a rich variety of nutrients with which to fight back . 
For example , Type ABs get plenty of vitamin A , vitamin B12 , niacin and vitamin
E in their diets , supplying a dietary protection against cancer and heart disease . I would
only suggest further supplementation if for some reason a Type AB isn ' t adhering to the
diet . Even iron , which is seriously lacking in the Type A vegetarian diet , is readily
available in Type AB foods . There are , however , some supplements that can be of benefit
to Type ABs . 
BENEFICIAL : 
-Vitamin C . -
Type ABs--who have higher rates of stomach cancer because of low stomach
acid--can benefit from taking additional supplements of vitamin C . For example , nitrate , 
a compound that results from the smoking and curing of meats , could be a particular
problem with Type ABs , because its cancer-causing potential is greater in people with
lower levels of stomach acid . 
As an antioxidant , vitamin C is known to block this reaction ( although you should
still avoid smoked and cured foods )  . 
However , don ' t take this to mean that massive amounts should be consumed . I
have found that Type ABs do not do as well on high doses ( 1 , 000 mg +  ) of vitamin C
because it tends to upset their stomachs . Taken over the course of a day , two to four
capsules of a 250 mg supplement , preferably derived from rose-hips , should cause no
digestive problems . 
-Best C-rich foods for Type ABs : -
berries . 
Broccoli . 
Cherries . 
Grapefruit . 
Lemon . 
Pineapple . 
-Zinc ( WITH CAUTION )  . -
I have found that a small amount of zinc supplementation ( as little as 3 mg per
day ) often makes a big difference in protecting Type AB children against infections , 
especially ear infections . Zinc supplementation is a double-edged sword , however . While
small , periodic doses enhance immunity , long-term , higher doses depress it and can
interfere with the absorption of other minerals . Be careful with zinc ! It ' s completely
unregulated and is widely available as a supplement , but you really shouldn ' t use it
without a GP ' s advice . 
-Best zinc-rich foods for Type ABs : -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
recommended meats ( especially dark turkey meat )  . 
eggs . 
beans and pulses . 
-Selenium ( WITH CAUTION )  . -
Selenium may be of value to Type ABs , as it seems to act as a component of the
body ' s own antioxidant defences . However , cases of selenium toxicity have been reported
in people who have taken excessive supplements . Check with your GP before taking this
mineral . 
--Herbs / Phytochemicals recommended for Type ABs . --
-Hawthorn ( CRATAEGUS OXYACANTHA )  . -
With a tendency towards heart disease , Type ABs will want to be serious about
protecting their cardiovascular system . Following the Type AB diet will have this effect , 
but anyone with a family history of heart disease or hardening of the arteries may want to
take the preventive programme a step further . A phytochemical with exceptional
preventive capacities is found in the hawthorn tree . 
Hawthorn has a number of impressive antioxidant effects : it increases the
elasticity of the arteries and strengthens the heart , while also lowering blood pressure and
exerting a mild solvent-like effect upon the plaques in arteries . Officially approved for
pharmaceutical use in Germany , the actions of hawthorn are virtually unknown
elsewhere . Extracts and tinctures should be readily available through homeopathic GPs , 
health food shops and pharmacies . I cannot praise this herb too highly . Official German
government monographs show the plant to be completely free of any side-effects . If I had
my way , extracts of hawthorn would be used to fortify breakfast cereals , just like
vitamins . 
-Immune-enhancing herbs . -
Because the immune systems of Type AB tend to be vulnerable to viruses and
infections , gentle immune-enhancing herbs such as purple coneflower ( ECHINACEA
PURPUREA )  , can help to ward off colds or flus and may help optimize the immune
system ' s anti-cancer surveillance . The Chinese herb huangki ( ASTRAGALUS
MEMBRANACEOUS ) is also taken as an immune tonic . In both herbs the active
ingredients are sugars that act as mitogens to stimulate white blood cell proliferation . The
white blood cells , you will remember , defend the immune system . 
-Calming herbs . -
Type ABs can use mild herbal relaxants , such as camomile and valerian root . 
These herbs are available as teas and should be drunk frequently . Valerian has a bit of a
pungent odour , which actually becomes pleasing once you get used to it . 
-Quercetin . -
Quercetin is a bioflavonoid found abundantly in vegetables , particularly yellow
onions . Quercetin supplements are available in health food shops . It is a very powerful
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
antioxidant , many hundreds of times more powerful than vitamin E . Quercetin makes a
powerful addition to your cancer-prevention strategies . 
-Milk Thistle ( SILYBUM MARIANUM )  . -
Like quercetin , milk thistle is an effective antioxidant with the additional special
property of reaching very high concentrations in the liver and bile ducts . Type ABs tend
to suffer from digestive disorders , particularly of the liver and gall-bladder . If there is any
family history of liver , pancreas or gall-bladder problems , a milk thistle supplement
should be taken . Cancer patients who are receiving chemotherapy should consult their GP
about taking a milk thistle supplement to help protect their livers from damage . It is
found in most health food shops . 
-Bromelain ( PINEAPPLE ENZYMES )  . -
Type ABs suffering from bloating or other signs of poor absorption of protein
should take a bromelain supplement . This enzyme , found in pineapples , has a moderate
ability to break down dietary proteins , helping the Type AB digestive tracts more
effectively assimilate proteins . 
TYPE AB STRESS-EXERCISE PROFILE . 
The ability to reverse the negative effects of stress lives in your blood type . As
discussed in Chapter 3 , stress is not in itself a problem ; it ' s how you respond to stress . 
Type ABs have inherited the exact stress pattern of Type As , and are not at all B-like . 
Refer to pp . 141-142 as the stress / exercise profile is exactly the same as for Type A .  [ See
above " Type A Stress-Exercise Profile "  ]  .  
*  *  * 
The following exercises are recommended for Type ABs . Pay special attention to
the length of the sessions . To achieve a consistent release of tension and revival of energy
it is necessary to perform one or more of these exercises three or four times a week . 
Exercise : Duration / frequency . 
T ' AI CHI 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 3-5 times per week . 
HATHA YOGA 30 ( minutes )  ; 3-5 times per week . 
AIKIDO 60 ( minutes )  ; 2-3 times per week . 
GOLF 60 ( minutes )  ; 2-3 times per week . 
CYCLING 60 ( minutes )  ; 2-3 times per week . 
BRISK WALKING 20-40 ( minutes )  ; 2-3 times per week . 
SWIMMING 30 ( minutes )  ; 3-4 times per week . 
DANCE 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 2-3 times per week . 
AEROBICS ( low impact ) 30-45 ( minutes )  ; 2-3 times per week . 
HIKING 45-60 ( minutes )  ; 2-3 times per week . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
STRETCHING 15 ( minutes )  ; Every time you exercise . 
-Type AB Exercise Guidelines . -
Follow the TAI CHI CH ' UAN ( or T ' AI CHI ) and yoga guidelines on pp . 143-145 .  
[ See " Type A Exercise Guidelines " above .  ] 
TYPE AB : THE PERSONALITY QUESTION . 
Type AB followers of blood type-personality analysis love to boast that Jesus
Christ was Type AB . Their evidence comes from blood tests conducted on the Shroud of
Turin . It ' s a provocative idea , although I have my doubts since Jesus was supposed to
have lived a good one thousand years before the emergence of Type AB . 
But that ' s Type AB for you . They don ' t sweat about the details . Type AB is a
merging of the edgy , sensitive Type A with the more balanced and centred Type B . The
result is a spiritual , somewhat flaky nature that embraces all aspects of life without being
particularly aware of the consequences . These characteristics are clearly evident in Type
AB blood . The Type AB immune system is the best friend to nearly every virus and
disease on the planet . If Type O has high-tech security gates on its immune system , Type
AB doesn ' t even have a lock on its door . 
Naturally , these qualities make Type ABs very appealing and popular . It ' s easy to
like someone who welcomes you with open arms , doesn ' t hold grudges when you
disappoint them and always says the most diplomatic thing in every situation . Not
surprisingly , there are many healers and spiritual teachers who are Type AB . 
The problem is , since Type ABs ' immune systems are so indiscriminate , you begin
to suspect that they have no loyalty to any one group . 
On the positive side , Type ABs are considered to be members of one of the most
captivating and interesting of the blood types . But their natural charisma can often lead to
heartache . John F . Kennedy and Marilyn Monroe were both Type ABs , whose charisma
exacted a heavy toll , but who both remain hauntingly prominent in public memory .  
= PART THREE .  = 
YOUR BLOOD TYPE HEALTH .  
= 8 MEDICAL STRATEGIES : THE BLOOD TYPE CONNECTION .  = 
BY NOW YOU are aware of the strong link between your blood type and your
health . I hope you are also beginning to see that you can exert meaningful control , even
when you have a susceptibility to a certain condition . Your Blood Type Plan is the
cornerstone of a lifetime of good health . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
In the next three Chapters , I will talk in more detail about the specific medical
issues that concern everyone , and how you can use your blood type information to make
the best choices for your health . We begin with the drugs and treatments that are
commonplace in modern life . 
Drugs have been used as medicine for thousands of years . When a shaman , or
witch doctor , brewed a potion , that potion had not only medical authority , but spiritual
power . Although the infusion was often malodorous and vile , it contained magic , and the
patient would gladly drink the bitter brew in hope of a cure . 
Not that much has changed . 
Today GPs over-prescribe medications , and we overuse them . It ' s a serious
problem . Yet , unlike other naturopaths who reject the entire modern pharmacopoeia , I
believe we must take a more reasoned and flexible point of view . Most medical
preparations are designed to be effective on a broad range of the population , and should
be used to treat the most severe and potentially dangerous conditions . 
But let us also keep medication in perspective : all drugs are poisons . The good
drugs that man has discovered over the centuries are selective poisons . Many others are
broader , less-selective poisons . An excellent example of the latter is the diffuse arsenal of
drugs used by oncologists for chemotherapy . In the process of destroying cancerous cells , 
many of these drugs indiscriminately attack healthy cells as well . The good news is that
chemotherapy sometimes works , but the bad is that the patient sometimes dies of
complications related to the treatment . It ' s a terrible conundrum . 
Modern science has presented the medical community with a bewildering array of
medications that are being prescribed worldwide by well-meaning doctors . But have we
been careful enough in our use of antibiotics and vaccines ? How do you know which
medications are best for you , for your family , for your children ? 
Again , blood type holds the answer . 
OVER-THE-COUNTER MEDICATIONS . 
There is a wide range of over-the-counter ( OTC ) medications designed for every
common ailment--from headaches to aching joints to congestion to indigestion . On the
face of it , these seem to be inexpensive , convenient , and effective remedies . 
As a naturopathic physician , I try to avoid prescribing OTC medications
whenever I can . In most cases , there are natural alternatives that work just as well or
better . In addition , there are dangers inherent in using many OTC preparations , including : 
__ Aspirin ' s blood-thinning properties can be trouble for Type Os , who already
have thin blood . Furthermore , they can mask the symptoms of a serious infection or
illness . 
__ Antihistamines can raise blood pressure--a particular danger for Types A and
AB . They can also cause sleeplessness and exacerbate prostate problems . 
__ Habitual use of laxatives actually can cause constipation , disrupting the
natural process of elimination . They also can be harmful for people with Crohn ' s
disease--primarily a Type O problem . 
__ Cough , throat , and chest remedies often have side effects , including high blood
pressure , drowsiness , and dizziness . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Before you take an OTC remedy to treat a headache , cramps , or any other malady , 
investigate the possible causes of your problem . Often , it relates to your diet or stress . For
example , you might ask : 
__ Is my headache a result of stress ? 
__ Is my stomach discomfort caused by eating foods that are indigestible for my
blood type ? 
__ Are my sinus problems the result of mucus caused by eating too many mucusgenerating foods ? Or by eating histamine-releasing foods ( such as wheat for Type O )  ? 
__ Is my flu virus the result of immune-system weaknesses ? 
__ Is my congestion or bronchitis caused by an overproduction of mucus in my
respiratory passages ? 
__ Is my toothache caused by an infection that requires immediate medical
treatment ? 
__ Is my over-reliance on commercial laxatives interfering with natural
elimination and causing diarrhoea ? 
I urge you to seek medical attention if your symptoms are chronic or particularly
severe . Pain , weakness , coughs , fever , congestion , and diarrhoea all can be signs of
deeper problems . You might cover them up with medications , but you won ' t be
addressing the root cause . 
For occasional aches , pains and irregularities , the following remedies are
excellent natural replacements for OTC drugs . They ' re available in many forms from
your local health food shop or natural nutrition centre--including teas , compresses , liquid
tinctures , extracts , powders , and capsules . 
To make your own herbal tea , boil water and steep the natural herbs for about five
minutes . 
Please note the key indicating special considerations for each blood type . 
KEY :  
# TYPE O AVOID 
[  ] TYPE A AVOID 
{  } TYPE B AVOID
~ TYPE AB AVOID 
[  *  ] SPECIAL NOTE FOR ALL BLOOD TYPES . 
Headache . --
camomile . 
damiana .  # 
feverfew . 
valerian . 
white willow bark ( SALIX )  . 
Sinusitus . --
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
fenugreek .  {  } ~
thyme . 
Arthritis . --
alfalfa .  # 
boswella . 
calcium . 
epsom salt bath . 
rosemary tea soak . 
Earache . --
garlic-mullein-olive oil ear drops . 
Toothache . --
crushed garlic gum massage . 
oil of cloves gum massage . 
Indigestion , Heartburn . --
bladderwrack . 
bromelain ( from pineapple )  . 
gentian .  # ~
ginger . 
golden seal . 
peppermint . 
Cramps , Gas . --
camomile tea . 
fennel tea . 
ginger . 
peppermint tea . 
probiotic supplement with bifidus factor . 
Nausea . --
Cayenne .  [  ] 
Ginger . 
liquorice root tea . 
Flu . --
arabino galacton . 
echinacea . 
garlic . 
golden seal . 
rose-hip tea . 
Fever . --
Catnip .  [  ] 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
feverfew . 
vervain . 
white willow bark . 
Cough . --
Coltsfoot .  #  {  } 
Horehound . 
linden .  {  } 
Sore throat . --
fenugreek tea gargle .  {  } 
golden seal root and sage tea gargle . 
stone root . 
Congestion . --
liquorice tea . 
mullein .  {  } 
nettle . 
vervain . 
Constipation . --
aloe vera juice .  #  {  } ~
fibre .  [  *  *  ] 
larch tree bark ( ARA-6 )  .  [  *  ] 
psyllium . 
slippery elm . 
Diarrhoea . --
blueberries . 
elderberries . 
L . ACIDOPHILUS ( yogurt culture )  . 
raspberry leaf . 
Menstrual cramps . --
Jamaican dogwood .  
[  *  ] Currently under patent , substance of larch tree bark in a powdered form is
available from my office under the name ARA-6 . It has been tested to be an excellent
natural immune system booster . Furthermore , a substance in larch tree bark , called
butyrate , is a safe and effective natural source of fibre for all blood types . For more
information and orders , see Appendix D .  
[  *  *  ] Natural fibre is available in many fruits , vegetables , and grains . Be sure to
check your blood type food list before you choose a fibre source .  
*  *  * 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
VACCINES : THE BLOOD TYPE SENSITIVITIES . 
Vaccination is an emotionally charged issue in both the conventional and
alternative medical communities . From the more orthodox viewpoint , vaccination
represents the first line of defence in preventive medicine . What are the consequences of
placing increased emphasis on mandatory vaccination ? 
Vaccines have been of unquestioned benefit to mankind , saving hundreds of
thousands of lives and preventing needless suffering . In the rare circumstances where
there have been problems , the vaccines have sometimes reacted badly with a particularly
hyper-sensitive individual . Our knowledge of the immune system does not yet reveal if
vaccines have more profound resonances , possibly lowering some of our innate
immunities to cancer . Yet , many public health officials and medical scientists behave as
though it is somehow unpatriotic to question whether every new vaccine must be injected
into the collective national bloodstream . Meanwhile , the public remains confused . 
Parents want to know which vaccines , if any , their children should be exposed to . The
elderly , the hypersensitive , and the pregnant worry about the effects of vaccinations . It
shouldn ' t surprise you that there is no single answer for everyone . Your reaction to
vaccines has a lot to do with your blood type . 
-Type O vaccine sensitivities . -
With all vaccines , parents of Type O children should be alert to any sign of
inflammation , such as fever or joint pain , since the Type O immune system is prone to
these reactions . 
Avoid the injectable form of polio vaccine for Type O children , and opt instead
for the oral preparation . Since Type Os have hyperactive immune systems , they do best
with a less potent form of the vaccine . 
Recently vaccinated Type O children should be carefully watched for a couple of
days to insure that there are no complications . Don ' t give them acetominophen , the most
commonly prescribed OTC medication for vaccination-related problems . In my
experience , Type O children seem to react poorly to this drug . Feverfew ( TANACETUM
PARTHENIUM )  , a herb which will work for Type Os , is available at most health food
shops . Derived from the common chrysanthemum flower , in liquid tincture form , it can
be given to a child every few hours . Four to eight drops of the tincture in a glass of juice
is sufficient to achieve a positive effect . 
If you are a pregnant woman with Type O blood , the flu vaccine holds special
dangers , especially if the father of your baby is a Type A or Type AB . The flu vaccine
could boost the presence of anti-A antibodies in your system , which could attack and
damage your foetus . 
-Type A and Type AB vaccine sensitivities . -
Type A and Type AB children respond well to vaccines . A full vaccination
programme--including the whooping cough vaccine--should produce few side-effects . 
In contrast to Type O , Type A and Type AB children should take the injectable
form of the polio vaccine because their digestive mucus does not react well to the oral
polio vaccine . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Type B vaccine sensitivities . -
Type B children sometimes have severe neurological reactions to vaccinations . 
Parents should be acutely aware of any signal indicating complication , be it an alteration
in your child ' s walking or crawling gait , or a personality change of some kind . If you
intend to vaccinate your Type B child , it is imperative that you make sure he or she is first
completely healthy--free of colds , flu or ear infections . Like Type Os , Type B children
should use the oral form of polio vaccine . 
Why do Type Bs tend to react so badly to vaccines ? Type Bs produce an
enormous number of B antigens in their nervous systems . I believe a cross-relation occurs
in the Type B immune system when a vaccine is introduced that causes the body to turn
and attack its own tissues . It may be the vaccine itself which causes this cross-reaction . 
Or perhaps it ' s one of the chemicals used to enhance the vaccine ' s effectiveness . It might
even be the culture medium used to grow the vaccine . We just don ' t know yet . 
Pregnant Type B women should also avoid the flu vaccine , especially if the father
has Type A or Type AB blood . The flu vaccine could increase the production of anti-A
antibodies , which could interfere with the healthy development of the foetus . 
THE PROS AND CONS OF ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY . 
If your GP often prescribes antibiotics for simple colds and flu , I have one piece
of advice : find another doctor . 
The constant misuse of antibiotics is a leading factor in our growing inability to
eradicate disease . The overuse of such wonder drugs promotes the development of
progressively more resistant pathogens , which require ever stronger antibiotics for
treatment . Far more powerful than any of the antibiotics currently being manufactured is
the natural prescription of proper diet , proper rest and stress reduction . 
Typically , there is a lag between the time you develop an infection and the time
your body ' s immune system responds . It ' s like dialing 999 ; you know they aren ' t going to
be at your door the second they answer your call . Antibiotics may get to an infection
faster , but they hang up the phone on your body ' s own 999 emergency number--the
immune system . Antibiotics basically cut off immune response ; the body ' s responsibility
for fighting an infection has been taken over by medication . 
We race to treat fever with antibiotics , yet fever is generally a good sign . It
indicates that the body ' s metabolic rate has kicked into overdrive , burning out invaders by
making the environment as inhospitable to infectious organisms as it possibly can . 
In my own practice I have discovered that the majority of people can eliminate an
infection without the use of an antibiotic . Did you know that antibiotics only reduce the
level of infection ? Your body ' s immune system is still required to finish the battle . When
you allow your body to go to war on its own terms , without antibiotic intervention , it
develops not only a memory of specific antibodies to the current infection and any similar
to it , but also the ability to fight more effectively the next time it is challenged or
attacked . 
A number of people are allergic to various antibiotics , but as a rule they produce
few serious medical conditions . Very often , however , continued and heavy use of
antibiotics destroys not only the infection , but all of the ' good ' bacteria in the digestive
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
tract . Many people experience diarrhoea , and quite often women become subject to
recurring and persistent yeast infections , such as thrush . Supplements of a friendly
digestive bacteria , L . ACIDOPHILUS , may be taken in either tablet form or yogurt to
restore the proper balance of bacteria in the digestive tract .  ( Both forms are available
from health food shops .  ) 
There are , of course , times when an appropriate antibiotic is needed and should be
used . If you are given an antibiotic , take a supplement of bromelain to insure that your
antibiotic spreads rapidly and penetrates tissue more readily . Pineapples contain this
enzyme , so you may drink pineapple juice or take bromelain tablets when you ' re on a
course of antibiotics . 
Parents of sick children on antibiotics should set the alarm clock for 3 or 4 a . m . to
administer an extra dose during the child ' s sleep cycle . This ensures a more rapid
concentration of the drug to fight the infection . 
Once more : if you need antibiotics , take them . If an infection becomes protracted , 
you certainly should consider using an antibiotic . I just think the body ' s immune system
should be allowed to do what it ' s been created for--to resist . 
-Type O Antibiotic Sensitivities . -
Type Os should avoid penicillin-class antibiotics . The Type O immune system is
more allergically sensitive to this class of drugs . 
Also avoid sulpha-class drugs such as co-trimoxazole . They can cause skin rashes
in Type Os . 
Try to avoid macrolide-class antibiotics . Erythromycin and the newer macrolides
such as azithromycin , can aggravate bleeding tendencies in Type Os . Be especially wary
of this problem if you are currently taking blood-thinning medications such as warfarin . 
-Type AAntibiotic Sensitivities . -
Carbecephem-class antibiotics seem to work well for Type As . There are very few
side-effects . Most Type As also respond well to penicillin-class and sulpha-class
antibiotics . These are preferable to tetracycline or the newer macrolide-class antibiotics . 
If a macrolide-class antibiotic is prescribed for a Type A , erythromycin is
preferred over azithromycin . Both of these antibiotics can cause digestive problems and
interfere with iron metabolism in the Type A system . 
-Type AB and Type B Antibiotic Sensitivities . -
Avoid quinolone-class antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin , if you can . If you must
use them , take them in smaller doses than prescribed . Be aware of any sign of a nervous
system disorder when taking a course of antibiotics , such as blurred vision , confusion , 
dizziness , or insomnia . Type AB and Type B should immediately discontinue the use of
such medication and contact their GP . 
ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY AT THE DENTIST . 
It is standard practice for dentists to use antibiotics as a preventive measure
against infection . Patients with mitral valve prolapse , a heart condition , are always given
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
a course of antibiotics to guard against any possibility of bacterial infection and
subsequent valve damage . 
However , a recent study in the LANCET found no benefit to a course of
antibiotics for the majority of patients prior to invasive dental procedures . However , if
you are a non-secretor , you run a much greater risk of infections following dental surgery
than a secretor . There are many more instances of streptococcal bacteria causing
endocarditis ( an inflammation of the lining of the heart muscle ) and rheumatic fever in
non-secretors , because they produce much lower levels of protective antibodies in the
mucous membranes of the mouth and throat . Secretors , on the other hand , have higher
levels of these IgA antibodies which trap bacteria and destroy them before they can gain
access to the bloodstream . 
Non-secretors should always undertake preventive antibiotic therapy prior to any
invasive dental procedure--from deep cleaning to oral surgery . 
If you are Type O you may wish to opt out of antibiotic therapy , unless there is
deep-rooted infection or the probability of heavy bleeding . Instead , try herbal
medications with anti-strep activity , such as golden seal ( HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS )  . 
Type A , Type B and Type AB may wish to discuss alternative therapies with their
dentist or GP if they respond poorly to antibiotics . 
Many dentists will refuse to treat a patient who declines the prophylactic use of
antibiotics . If you are a healthy individual with no prior history of infections , consider
going elsewhere for your dental work . 
SURGERY : BETTER RECOVERY . 
Any invasive procedure is a shock to your system . Never take it lightly , even if it
is a minor type of surgery . Boost your immune system in advance , no matter what your
blood type . 
Vitamins A and C have a profound effect on wound healing and minimize the
formation of scar tissue . Every blood type can benefit from supplementation before
surgery . Start taking vitamins A and C at least four days prior to surgery , and continue for
at least a week afterwards . Every patient of mine who has followed this recommendation
reports that both they and their surgeons were astonished at the rapidity of their recovery . 
RECOMMENDED SURGICAL SUPPLEMENTATION PROTOCOL . 
Blood Type : Daily vitamin C and Daily vitamin A amounts : 
Type O : 2 , 000 mg vitamin C ; 30 , 000 IU vitamin A . 
Type A : 500 mg vitamin C ; 10 , 000 IU vitamin A . 
Type B and
Type AB : 1 , 000 mg vitamin C ; 20 , 000 IU vitamin A . 
-Type O Surgical Cautions . -
Type Os often experience greater blood loss than other blood types during and
after surgery because they have lower levels of serum-clotting factors . Make sure that
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
you have plenty of vitamin K in your system before surgery ; it is essential to clot
formation . Kale , spinach and collard greens contain ample amounts of this vitamin , 
although you might want to supplement your diet with liquid chlorophyll . Chlorophyll
supplements are available at health food shops . 
Type Os with a history of phlebitis , or who are on a course of blood thinners , 
should consult their GP about supplementation recommendations .  ( It ' s worth noting that
the thinner blood of Type Os does not necessarily protect against blood clots . Phlebitis
often starts as an inflammatory condition of the veins that affects blood flow .  ) 
Type Os can also boost their immune systems and metabolism with strong
physical activity . If it is realistic for you to pursue this prior to surgery , exercise will
allow your body to deal with the stress of surgery much more effectively , and also heal
more rapidly . 
-Type B Surgical Cautions . -
Type Bs are fortunate in that they are less likely to experience post-surgical
complications but the above vitamin protocol should be followed . 
Type Bs who are suffering from a weakened condition may also want to use a
couple of immune-boosting herbal teas prior to surgery . Burdock root ( ARCTIUM
LAPPA ) and purple coneflower ( ECHINACEA PURPUREA ) are excellent immune
boosters . A few cups of tea taken every day over a number of weeks can be a positive
stimulant for your immune system . 
-Type A and Type AB Surgical Cautions . -
Type A and Type AB are both more prone to post-surgical bacterial infections . 
These infections can become a major stumbling block to recovery and can exacerbate an
already difficult situation . I strongly suggest that Type A and Type AB adopt a bloodbuilding , immune system-enhancing protocol of additional vitamin supplementation a
week or two prior to surgery . Vitamin B12 , folic acid and supplemental iron should all be
taken daily along with the already suggested levels of vitamins A and C . The
concentration of vitamins needed here is difficult to squeeze out of the Type A and Type
AB diets , so supplementation is best . 
Floradix is a liquid source of iron and herbs that is both gentle on the digestive
tract and highly assimilable . I highly recommend its use for iron supplementation since
iron is usually an irritant to the digestive tracts of Type As and Type ABs . Floradix is
found in most health food shops . 
Avail yourselves of the two excellent immune-enhancing herbal teas , burdock root
and echinacea . Begin to drink a few cups daily of these herbal teas at least a couple of
weeks prior to surgery . 
More than the other blood types , Type As and Type ABs often experience
profound physical , mental and emotional stress because of the trauma of surgery . 
Relaxation techniques , such as meditation and visualization , can be of tremendous benefit
to the more highly strung Type A and Type AB patient . By practising these techniques , 
you can have a profound influence upon your own healing process . Some
anaesthesiologists will work with patients on visualizations while the patient is under
anaesthesia . I urge you to ask your consultant about this . It ' s a perfect method for Type
As . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
AFTER THE SURGERY . 
CALENDULA SUCCUS ( marigold ) is used to help the wound heal and keep it
clean . A solution of this homeopathic herb , a form of the marigold flower , is a wonderful
healer for all cuts and scrapes in general . The juice has mild antibiotic properties and can
be left on after application . Be sure you buy the juice ( or SUCCUS ) and not the
CALENDULA tincture , which has a high alcohol content . The tincture will really sting if
you try to clean a wound with it . 
As your incision heals and the stitches or staples are removed , a topical vitamin E
preparation will minimize scar tissue formation and skin tightening . Many people just
snip open a vitamin E capsule and smear it on , but oral supplements aren ' t formulated for
use in skin healing . Use a topical cream or lotion blended specifically for this purpose . 
LISTEN TO YOUR BLOOD TYPE . 
There are many vitamins and herbal supplements that aid the body in both
defending and healing itself . The recommended surgical supplementation is just the
minimum you should do to protect and strengthen yourself . 
Each of the blood type diets contain pertinent information that allows you to make
reasoned choices about what you should and should not allow yourself to eat and drink . 
All of these choices can have a profound effect on your health and the quality of your
life . 
By making knowledgeable choices about what is best for your body , you will be
able to dramatically affect the course of both your treatment and recovery from surgery . 
This not only grants you greater control over your present circumstances , but enables you
to ensure your future health . 
Everyone can achieve benefits from an awareness of the blood type connection . It
makes sense . It also solves the puzzle of why some people do very well with
conventional treatments , while others suffer complications and pain . I urge you to make
sure you are someone who does well .  
= 9 BLOOD TYPE : A POWER OVER DISEASE .  = 
EVERYONE WHO GETS sick wants to know ' Why me ?  ' Despite our enormous
technological advances , we often have no certain answer to that question . 
It has become clear , however , that there are individuals who are more prone to
certain diseases because of their blood type . Perhaps this is the missing link--the way we
can understand the cellular causes of disease , and devise more effective ways to combat
and eliminate it . 
-Why Some People are Susceptible and Some are Not . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Can you remember being young and having a close friend who wanted you to do
something that you were reluctant to do ? Take a puff of a forbidden cigarette ? Sneak a
drink of whisky from your father ' s drinks cabinet ? Did you take that puff ? Drink that
whisky ? 
If you did , you demonstrated your susceptibility--your lack of resistance--to the
suggestion of a friend . 
Susceptibility , or lack of resistance , is the basic issue with most disease . Many
microbes have the ability to mimic the antigens which are considered friendly by the
security force of a particular blood type . These clever mimics bypass the security guards
and gain entry . Once in the system , they quickly overwhelm it and take control . 
Don ' t you ever wonder why one person stays perfectly healthy while everyone
else is falling prey to the latest cold or flu ? It is because the healthy person ' s blood type is
not susceptible to those particular invaders . 
-The Blood Type Connection . -
There are many causal factors for disease that are clearly influenced by blood
type . For instance , Type As with a family history of cardiovascular disease should
examine their diets very carefully . Red meats and saturated fats of all kinds are poor
choices for a digestive tract ill-suited to processing them , and which produces higher
levels of both triglycerides and cholesterol in Type As . The friendly Type A immune
system is also more prone to cancer , since it has a hard time recognizing foes . 
Type Os , as I ' ve said , are very sensitive to the agglutinating lectin found in whole
wheat . This lectin interacts with the lining of the Type O intestinal tract and produces
additional inflammation . If you ' re Type O and suffer from Crohn ' s disease , colitis , or
irritable bowel syndrome , wheat acts like a poison in your system . Although the Type O
immune system is generally hardy , it is also limited . Original Type Os had fewer
microbes to conquer , and the blood type does not adapt easily to the complex viruses
prevalent today . 
The disease profiles of Type Bs are independent of Type O and Type A by virtue
of the idiosyncratic B antigens . They tend to be susceptible to slow-moving , sometimes
bizarre , viral diseases that don ' t manifest themselves for many years--like multiple
sclerosis and rare neurological ailments--sometimes triggered by the lectins in foods such
as chicken and corn . 
Type ABs have the most complex disease profile , since they possess both A-like
and B-like antigens . Most of their disease susceptibilities are A-like , so if you had to
categorize them you would say they are more A than B . 
The blood type connection between good health and disease is a potent tool in our
search for the best way to treat the body as it is MEANT to be treated . 
Still , I must add a caveat , for fear you think that I am proposing a magic formula . 
There are many factors in every individual life that contribute to disease . It would be
overly simplistic and certainly foolish to suggest that blood type is the sole determining
factor . If a Type O , a Type A , a Type B and a Type AB each drank a cup of arsenic , each
of them would die . By the same token , if four people of different blood types were all
heavy smokers , they would all be susceptible to lung cancer . The blood type information
is not a panacea , but a meaningful refinement that will enable you to function at your
peak . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH 
*  *  * 
Let ' s turn to the most common and troubling diseases and conditions for which we
can identify a blood type relationship . Some blood type-disease relationships are more
clearly defined than others . We are still learning . But every day blood type is revealed as
a dominating factor--the previously missing link in our quest for health . 
Categories : 
__ Ageing diseases . 
__ Allergies . 
__ Autoimmune disorders . 
__ Blood disorders . 
__ Cardiovascular disease . 
__ Childhood illnesses . 
__ Diabetes . 
__ Digestive illnesses . 
__ Infections . 
__ Liver disease . 
__ Skin disorders . 
__ Women / reproduction .  
( Note : Cancer is such a complex topic that I have devoted an entire Chapter to it , 
beginning on p . 295 )  .  [ See start of Chapter 10 .  ] 
AGEING DISEASES . 
All people age , no matter what their blood type . But why do we age--and can we
slow down the process ? These questions have fascinated humans for as long as we can
remember . The promise " a Fountain of Eternal Youth has appeared in every century . 
today , with our sophisticated medical technology and our increased knowledge of the
factors that contribute to ageing , we are closer to an answer . 
But there ' s another question : why do individual ageing patterns differ so greatly ? 
Why does the 50-year-old runner , lean and seemingly fit , drop dead of a heart attack , 
while the 89-year old woman , who has never broken into a sweat in her life , remains hale
and hearty ? Why do some people develop Alzheimer ' s disease , or dementia , while others
do not ? At what age does physical deterioration become inevitable ? 
We understand some pieces of the puzzle . Genetics play a role--unique variations
in chromosomes contribute to susceptibilities that cause deterioration more rapidly in one
person than in another . But these studies are incomplete . 
I have discovered , however , a critical link between blood type and ageing--
specifically , a correlation between the agglutinating action of lectins and the two biggest
physiological associations of ageing--kidney failure and brain deterioration . 
As we age we experience a gradual drop in kidney function so that by the time the
average person reaches 72 , his or her kidneys are operating at only 25 per cent of their
capacity . Your kidney function is a reflection of the volume of blood that gets cleaned and
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
re-circulated into your bloodstream . This filtering system is very delicate--large enough
for the various fluid elements of blood to go through , but small enough to prevent whole
cells from passing through . 
Consider the way the agglutinating actions of lectins gum up the works . Because
the kidneys play a central role in the filtration of blood , the actions of many lectins can , 
over time , upset the delicate process . Those lectins that find their way into the
bloodstream end up agglutinating and lodging in the kidneys . The process is similar to
having a clogging drain . Over time , the filtration system ceases to function . As more and
more agglutination occurs , less and less blood is able to be cleaned . It is a slow process , 
but ultimately deadly . Kidney failure is one of the leading causes of physical deterioration
in the elderly . 
The second large physiological association of ageing occurs in the brain . Here
lectins play an equally destructive role . Scientists have observed that the difference
between an old brain and a young brain is that in an old brain many elements of neurones
get tangled up . This tangling , which leads to dementia and overall deterioration ( and
might even be a factor in Alzheimer ' s disease )  , occurs very gradually over the decades of
adult life . 
How do lectins reach the brain ? Remember , lectins come in all shapes and sizes ; 
some are small enough to pass the blood-brain barrier . Once they reach the brain they
begin to agglutinate the blood cells , gradually interfering with neurone activity . The
process occurs over many decades , but eventually the neurones get tangled enough to
have an effect on brain function . 
It is clear to me that by reducing or eliminating the most harmful lectins from
your diet , you can maintain healthier kidneys and brain function for a longer period of
time . That is why some very old people remain mentally sharp and physically active . 
A third way that lectins contribute to ageing is their effect on our hormonal
functions . It is well documented that as people age they have greater trouble absorbing
and metabolizing nutrients . That ' s one reason why elderly people often become
malnourished , even when they are eating their normal diets . Dietary guidelines normally
call for added supplementation for the elderly . But if agglutinating lectins are not
overwhelming the system and interfering with hormonal activity , it is likely that elderly
people can absorb nutrients just as effectively as when they were younger . 
I am not proposing that the blood type connection is a formula for reversing the
effects of ageing that have already occurred . But you can reduce cellular damage by
reducing your lectin intake at ANY age . Most of all , your Blood Type Plan is designed to
slow down the process of ageing during your entire adult life . 
ALLERGIES . 
-Food Allergies . -
In my opinion , no area of alternative medicine is as shot full of humbug as the
concept of food allergy . Complex and expensive tests are conducted on practically every
patient , resulting in a list of foods to which that person is ' allergic '  . My own patients
habitually term any reaction to something they ' ve eaten a ' food allergy '  , although most of
the time it is not an allergy they are describing , but rather a food intolerance . If you have
a problem with lactose in milk , for example , you are not allergic to it ; you lack an
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
enzyme to break it down . You are lactose intolerant , not lactose allergic . This intolerance
does not necessarily mean you ' ll get sick if you drink milk . Type Bs who are lactose
intolerant , for example , are often able to gradually introduce milk products into their
diets . There are also products that add the lactose enzyme to milk products , making them
more palatable for the intolerant . 
A food allergy is a very different type of reaction that occurs , not in the digestive
tract , but in the immune system . Your immune system literally creates an antibody to a
food . The reaction is swift and severe--rashes , swelling , cramps or other specific
symptoms that indicate your body is struggling to rid itself of the poisonous food . 
Not everything in nature is perfectly cut and dried . Occasionally I ' ll come across a
person who is allergic to a food that is on his blood type diet . The solution : simply
remove the offending food . The main point is that you have more to fear from the hidden
lectins entering your system than you do from food allergies . You may not feel sick when
you eat the food , but it is nonetheless affecting your system . Type As should also be
aware that if they produce excessive mucus , it may appear to be an allergy when they
should actually be avoiding mucus-producing foods . 
-Asthma and Hay Fever . -
Type Os win the allergy sweepstakes hands down ! They are more likely to be
asthma sufferers , and even hay fever , the bane of so many lives , appears to be specific to
Type O blood . A wide range of pollens contain lectins which stimulate the release of the
powerful histamines , and then boom ! --itching , sneezing , runny nose , wheezing , 
coughing , red , watery eyes--all the allergy symptoms . 
Many food lectins , especially wheat , interact with immunoglobin-E ( IgE ) 
antibodies found in the blood . These antibodies stimulate white blood cells called
basophiles to release not only histamines , but other powerful chemical allergens called
kinins . These can cause severe allergic reactions such as the swelling of throat tissues and
constricting of the lungs . 
Asthma and hay fever sufferers do best when they follow the diet recommended
for their blood type . For example , Type Os who eliminate wheat often relieve many of
their symptomatic behaviours , such as sneezing , respiratory problems , snoring or
persistent digestive disorders . 
Type As have a different problem . Instead of environmental reactions , they often
develop stress-related asthma as a result of their intense stress profiles ( see the Type A
Plan )  . When Type As suffer from excessive production of mucus caused by poor dietary
choices , it makes the stress-related asthma worse . Type As , as you will remember , 
naturally produce copious amounts of mucus , and when they eat foods that are mucusproducing ( like dairy products )  , they suffer from over-production of mucus which
exacerbates respiratory problems . In this case , when Type As are careful to avoid the
problematic foods , and when the causes of the stress are addressed positively , their
asthmatic condition always improves or is eliminated . 
By design , Type Bs are not prone to developing allergies . They have a high
allergy threshold , unless they eat the wrong foods . For example , the Type B-poisoning
chicken and corn lectins will trigger allergies in even the most resistant of this blood
group . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Type ABs seem to have the least problem with allergies , probably because their
immune systems are the most environmentally friendly . The combination of A-like and
B-like antigens give Type ABs a double dose of antigens with which to fight
environmental intrusion . 
AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS . 
Autoimmune disorders are immune system breakdowns . Immune defences
develop what amounts to severe amnesia ; they no longer recognize themselves . The result
is that they run amok , making auto-antibodies that attack their own tissues . These warlike
auto-antibodies think they are protecting their turf , but in reality they are destroying their
own organs and inciting inflammatory responses . Examples of autoimmune disease
include rheumatoid arthritis , lupus nephritis , ME ( Chronic Fatigue Syndrome / EpsteinBarr )  , multiple sclerosis , and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS / Lou Gehrig ' s Disease )  . 
-Arthritis . -
Type Os are the predominant sufferers of arthritis , an autoimmune disorder . Type
O immune systems are environmentally intolerant , and there are many foods--grains and
potatoes among them--whose lectins produce inflammatory reactions in their joints . 
My father observed many years ago that Type Os tended to develop a ' gritty ' sort
of arthritis , a chronic deterioration of the bone cartilage . This is the kind of arthritic
condition called osteoarthritis , typically found in the elderly . Type As tend to develop a 
 ' puffy ' arthritis , which is the more acute rheumatoid form of the disease--a painful and
debilitating breakdown of multiple joints . 
In my own experience , most people who suffer from rheumatoid arthritis are Type
As . The anomaly of Type As , with their immunologically tolerant systems , the
development of this form of arthritis may be related to A-specific lectins . Laboratory
animals injected with A-specific lectins developed inflammation and joint destruction that
was indistinguishable from rheumatoid arthritis . 
There is also the probable stress connection . Some studies show that people with
rheumatoid arthritis tend to be more highly strung and less emotionally resilient . When
they have poor coping-mechanisms for life stress the disease progresses more rapidly . 
This makes sense in view of what we know about the stress factor , and about Type As
who are inherently highly strung . Type As with rheumatoid arthritis should certainly
incorporate daily relaxation techniques , as well as calming exercises . 
-ME ( Chronic Fatigue Syndrome )  . -
In recent years , I have treated many people who suffered from the baffling disease
called ME or Chronic Fatigue Syndrome . The primary symptom is great tiredness . Other
more advanced symptoms include painful muscles and joints , persistent sore throats , 
digestive problems , allergies and chemical sensitivities . 
The most important thing I ' ve learned from my research and clinical work is that
ME may not be an autoimmune disease at all , but rather a liver disease .  ( I place it in this
section because that ' s where people are accustomed to looking for it .  ) 
Although ME masquerades as a virus or autoimmune disease , the root cause is
more likely a problem of poor metabolism in the liver . In other words , the liver is unable
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
to detoxify chemicals . To my reasoning , only this sort of liver problem could produce
immunologic effects as well as effects characteristic of other systems , such as digestive
or musculo-skeletal . 
I ' ve found that Type O ME patients , in particular , do very well on liquorice and
potassium supplements , in addition to the Type O diet . Liquorice has many effects in the
body , but in the liver it really shines . The bile ducts ( where detoxification occurs ) become
more efficient , with greater protection against chemical damage . This preliminary
removal of stress to the liver seems to positively influence the adrenals and blood sugar , 
increasing energy and a feeling of well-being . The blood type-specific exercise activities
seem to also serve as a valuable guide to help return to appropriate forms of physical
activity .  ( Note : do not use liquorice other than under a GP ' s supervision .  )  
*  *  * 
Case History : ME .  
( FROM DR . JOHN PRENTICE , EVERETT , WASHINGTON , USA )  . 
Karen , 44 : Type B . 
My colleague , Dr . John Prentice , tried the Blood Type Plan for the first time on a
patient with severe ME ( Chronic Fatigue Syndrome )  . He wasn ' t totally convinced it
would work , but all efforts to help his very sick patient had failed , and he contacted me
when he heard of the work I was doing with ME patients . Karen was a tough case . She
had suffered terrible fatigue for her entire adult life , and had needed 12 hours of sleep
every night since she was a teenager . She would steal naps when she could . For the last
seven years her exhaustion prevented her from holding a job . In addition , her neck , 
shoulders and back were constantly in pain , and she suffered debilitating headaches . 
Recently , Karen had started experiencing terrible anxiety attacks , with heart palpitations
so severe she would call for an ambulance . She felt her circulation , or even her whole
body , was shutting down . 
Karen was a wealthy woman , but most of her inheritance was spent on making the
rounds of doctors . She had been to more than 50 doctors , both conventional and
alternative , before she came to Dr . Prentice . 
Dr . Prentice started Karen on a programme of strict adherence to the Type B diet , 
supplements and exercise regimen . Both he and Karen were astonished to see that within
only a week she had a tremendous increase in energy . Within a few weeks , most of her
symptoms were resolved . 
Dr . Prentice tells me that today Karen is a new person .  ' It ' s like clockwork ,  ' he
says .  ' When she eats " off " her diet , her body reminds her with severe symptoms , so she
sticks with it closely .  ' He shared a letter she had written him :  ' I have a whole new life . All
my symptoms are practically gone and I hold two jobs , having great energy 14 hours a
day consistently . I believe the diet is key to this tremendous change . I am extremely
active and feel like nothing can stop me . Thank you so very much !  '  
*  *  * 
-Multiple Sclerosis and ALS ( Lou Gehrig ' s Disease )  . -
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Both Multiple Sclerosis and ALS ( amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ) occur in blood
Type B with very high frequency . It ' s an example of the Type B ' s tendency to contract
unusual slow-growing viral and neurological disorders . The Type B association may
explain why Jews , a high number of which are Type B blood , suffer these diseases more
than others . Some researchers believe that Multiple Sclerosis and ALS are caused by a
virus , contracted in youth , that has a B-like appearance . The virus cannot be combated by
the Type B immune system since it is unable to produce anti-B antibodies . The virus
grows slowly and without symptoms for twenty or more years after entering the system . 
Type ABs are also at risk from these B-like diseases , since their bodies do not produce
anti-B antibodies . Type O and Type A seem to be relatively immune by virtue of their
strong anti-B antibodies .  
*  *  * 
-Case history : Autoimmune disorder . -
Joan , 55 : Type O . 
Joan , a middle-aged dentist ' s wife , was a classic example of the ravages of
autoimmune disorders . She suffered from severe symptoms of chronic fatigue / EBV , 
arthritis , and tremendous discomfort caused by gas and bloating . Joan ' s digestive system
was so disrupted that practically everything she ate caused bouts of diarrhoea . By the
time she arrived in my office , she had been struggling with these conditions for more than
a year . Needless to say , she was terrible [ sic ] weakened and in great pain . She was also
very discouraged . Since autoimmune disorders can be difficult to pin down , many people 
( even some doctors ) don ' t believe chronic fatigue sufferers are really sick . Imagine the
humiliation and frustration of feeling deathly ill but having people tell you it ' s all in your
head ! 
Worse still , Joan ' s doctors had experimented with a number of drug therapies , 
including steroids , which made her even sicker and contributed to her bloating . She had
also been told to adopt a diet high in grains and vegetables , and to limit or eliminate red
meat--exactly the opposite of what this Type O should have been doing . 
Even though Joan ' s symptoms were severe , the treatment was fairly simple--a
detoxification programme , the Type O Diet and a regimen of nutritional supplements . 
Within two weeks , Joan experienced significant improvement . By the six-month mark , 
she was feeling ' normal ' again . To this day , Joan ' s energy level is good , her digestion is
healthy and her arthritis only flares up when she indulges in the rare sandwich or icecream . 
-Case History : Lupus . - 
( FROM DR . THOMAS KRUZEL , ND , GRESHAM , OREGON , USA )  . 
Marcia , 30 : Type A . 
My colleague , Dr . Kruzel , was interested in trying the blood type treatments , but
he was initially sceptical . It was a case of lupus nephritis which showed him the true
value of serotyping ( blood testing ) for the treatment of disease . 
Marcia , a frail young woman suffering from lupus , was carried into Dr . Kruzel ' s
office by her brother , after being discharged from the hospital intensive care unit . She had
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
suffered kidney failure from circulating complexes related to her disease . Marcia had
been on shunt dialysis for several weeks and was scheduled for renal transplantation
within the next six months . 
Dr Kruzel took her medical notes and learned that Marcia ' s diet was very high in
dairy , wheat and red meat--all dangerous foods for a Type A person in her condition . He
placed her on a strict vegetarian diet along with hydrotherapy and homeopathic
preparations . Within two weeks , Marcia ' s condition had improved and her need for
dialysis had decreased . Remarkably , within a two-month period , Marcia was taken
completely off dialysis and her previously scheduled kidney transplant was cancelled . 
Three years later , she is still doing well .  
*  *  * 
BLOOD DISORDERS . 
It should come as no surprise that blood-related illnesses , like anaemia and
clotting disorders , are blood type specific . 
-Pernicious Anaemia . -
Type As constitute the greatest number of pernicious anaemia sufferers , but the
condition has nothing to do with the vegetarian Type A diet . Pernicious anaemia is the
result of vitamin B12 deficiency , and Type As have the most difficulty absorbing B12
from the foods they eat . Type ABs also have a tendency towards pernicious anaemia , 
although not as great as Type As . 
The reason for the deficiency is that the body ' s use of B12 requires high levels of
stomach acid and the presence of intrinsic factor , a chemical produced by the lining of the
stomach and responsible for B12 ' s assimilation . Type As and Type ABs have lower levels
of intrinsic factor than the other blood types , and they don ' t produce very much stomach
acid . For this reason , most Type As and Type ABs who suffer from pernicious anaemia
respond best when vitamin B12 is administered by injection . By eliminating the need for
the digestive process to assimilate this vital and potent nutrient , it is made available to the
body in a more highly concentrated way . This is a case where dietary solutions ALONE
don ' t work , although Type As and Type ABs are able to absorb Floradix , a liquid iron and
herb supplement . 
Type Os and Type Bs tend not to suffer from anaemia ; they have high stomachacid levels and sufficient levels of intrinsic factor .  
*  *  * 
-Case History : Anaemia . - 
( FROM DR . JONATHAN V . WRIGHT , MD , KENT , WASHINGTON , USA )  . 
Carol , 35 : Type O . 
The blood type diets have begun to make their way into conventional medicine as
I have shared them with my colleagues . Dr . Wright was one who successfully used the
diet to treat a woman with chronically low levels of iron in her blood . Carol had tried
every available form of iron supplement with no success . Dr . Wright tried a number of
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
other treatments without success . The only thing that worked at all was injectable iron , 
but it was only a temporary solution . Her iron levels would inevitably drop again . I had
spoken to Dr . Wright on an earlier occasion about my work with lectins and blood types , 
and he called me for more details . He decided to try the Type O diet for Carol . After
eliminating the incompatible lectins , which may have been damaging her red blood cells , 
and adhering to a high animal protein diet , the levels of iron in Carol ' s blood started to
rise , and previously ineffective supplementation started to help . Dr . Wright and I agreed
that it was the agglutination of the intestinal tract by the incompatible food lectins that
prevented the iron from assimilating .  
*  *  * 
-Clotting Disorders . -
Type Os face the biggest problems when it comes to blood clotting . Most often , 
Type Os lack sufficient quantities of the various blood-clotting factors . This can have
severe consequences , especially during surgery , or in situations where there is blood loss . 
Type O women , for example , tend to lose significantly more blood after childbirth than
women of other blood types . 
Type Os with a history of bleeding disorders and strokes should emphasize foods
containing chloroyphyll to help modify their clotting factors . Chlorophyll is found in
almost all green vegetables , and is available as a supplement . 
Type As and Type ABs don ' t suffer clotting disorders , but their thicker blood can
work to their disadvantage in other ways . Thicker blood is more likely to deposit plaque
in the arteries--one reason why Type A and Type AB are more prone to cardiovascular
disease . Type A and Type AB women might have problems with heavy clotting during
their menstrual periods if they don ' t keep their diets under control . 
Type Bs tend not to suffer from clotting disorders or thick blood . As long as they
follow the Type B diet , their balanced systems work efficiently . 
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE . 
Cardiovascular disease is epidemic in Western societies , with many factors to
blame , including diet , lack of exercise , smoking and stress . 
Is there a connection between your blood type and your susceptibility to
cardiovascular disease ? 
When in the late 1960s the Framingham ( Massachusetts ) Heart Study examined
the connection between blood type and heart disease , it found no clear-cut blood type
distinction as to who gets heart disease . It did , however , discover a strong connection
between blood type and who survives heart disease . 
The study found that Type O heart patients , between the ages of 39 and 72 , had a
much higher rate of survival than Type A heart patients in the same age group . This was
especially true for men between the ages of 50 and 59 . 
Although the Framingham Heart Study did not explore this subject in depth , it
does appear that the same factors involved in surviving heart disease also offer some
protection against getting it in the first place . Given these factors , clearly there is a
greater risk for Type As and Type ABs . Let ' s examine them . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
The most significant factor is cholesterol , the primary causal factor in coronary
artery disease . Most of the cholesterol in our bodies is produced in our livers , but there is
an enzyme called phosphatase manufactured in the small intestine that is responsible for
the absorption of dietary fats . High-alkaline phosphatase levels , which speed the
absorption and metabolism of fats , lead to low cholesterol levels in the blood . Type O
blood normally has the highest natural levels of this enzyme . In Type B , Type AB , and
Type A , the alkaline phosphatase enzyme is seen in ever declining levels , with Type B
having the highest level after Type O . 
Another element to Type Os ' high survival rate is blood-clotting factors . As we
discussed earlier , Type Os have fewer clotting factors in their blood . This defect in Type
O blood may actually work to their advantage , as this essentially thinner blood is less
likely to deposit the plaque that will clog the arterial flow . On the other hand , Type As , 
and to a slightly lesser extent , Type ABs , have a consistently higher level of serum
cholesterol and triglycerides than do Type O and Type B blood .  
*  *  * 
-Case history : Heart disease . -
Wilma , 52 : Type O . 
Wilma was a 52-year-old Lebanese woman with advanced cardiovascular disease . 
When I first examined her , she had recently come out of the hospital after receiving a
balloon angioplasty , a procedure used to treat clogged coronary arteries . She told me that
her cholesterol had been over 350 at the time of the original diagnosis ( normal is 200-
220 )  , and three of her arteries had blockages of over 80 per cent . 
Since Wilma was Type O , her illness was a bit of a surprise considering that Type
Os normally have a lower-than-average incidence of heart disease . She was also quite a
bit younger than most women with such severe blockages ; women tend not to develop
heart disease until long after the menopause . 
Wilma had always eaten the traditional Lebanese diet , including lots of olive oil , 
fish and grains , which most doctors feel is beneficial to the circulatory system . However , 
five years earlier , at the age of 47 , she began to experience pain in her neck and arms . 
Heart disease didn ' t even occur to her ! She assumed the pain was arthritis , and was
stunned when her doctor diagnosed her problem as angina pectoris , pain caused from an
inadequate blood and oxygen supply to the heart muscle . 
After her angioplasty , Wilma ' s cardiologist advised her to begin taking a
cholesterol-lowering drug . A well-read health consumer , Wilma worried about long-term
problems with drug therapy , and she wanted to try a natural approach before opting for
the drug . That ' s when she came to me . 
Since Wilma was Type O , I suggested that she add lean red meat to her diet . In
light of her condition , she was understandably nervous about eating foods which are
usually restricted in people with high cholesterol or heart disease . She immediately
consulted her cardiologist who was--no surprise--appalled at the idea . Again , he urged her
to take the drug . But Wilma was serious about avoiding drug therapy , so she decided to
follow the Type O diet for three months , and then have a cholesterol check . 
Wilma confirmed many of my theories about susceptibility to high cholesterol . 
Through heredity or by other mechanisms , people often have high levels of cholesterol in
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
their blood in spite of a severely restricted diet . Usually they have some defect in the
manipulation of the internal cholesterol metabolism . My suspicion is that when Type Os
eat a lot of certain carbohydrates ( usually wheat products ) it modifies the effectiveness of
their insulin , resulting in it becoming more potent and longer lasting . From the increased
insulin activity , the body stores more fat in the tissues and elevates the triglyceride ( blood
fat ) stores . In addition to advising Wilma to increase the percentage of red meats in her
diet , I also helped her find substitutes for the large amounts of wheat she was consuming , 
and prescribed an extract of hawthorn ( a herb used as a tonic for the heart and arteries ) 
and low dose of niacin , a B vitamin , which helps reduce cholesterol levels . 
Wilma was an executive secretary with a stressful job and she did very little
exercise . She was intrigued when I described the relationship between stress and physical
activity in people with Type O blood , as well as the relationship between stress and heart
disease . She had never been a regular exerciser , so hardly knew where to begin . I started
her on a walking programme to gradually increase her aerobic fitness . After a couple of
weeks , Wilma reported that walking was a godsend ; she ' d never felt better . 
Within six months Wilma ' s cholesterol plummeted , without medication , to 187 , 
where it stabilized . She was elated to have cholesterol in the normal range . It had seemed
impossible . The naturopath intern working in my office was astounded and perplexed . All
conventional evidence indicates that people with high cholesterol should avoid red meats , 
yet Wilma flourished . Blood type was the missing link . 
-Case history : Dangerously high cholesterol . -
John , 23 : Type O . 
John , a recent college graduate , had a rocketing cholesterol level , high
triglycerides and high blood sugar . These were very unusual symptoms in a young man , 
especially since he was Type O . As there was a strong history of heart disease , his parents
were naturally alarmed . After extensive check-ups by consulting cardiologists , John was
told that his genetic predisposition was so overwhelming that even cholesterol-reducing
medication would be useless . In effect , John was told that he was destined to develop
coronary artery disease--sooner , rather than later . In the office , John seemed depressed
and lethargic . He complained of severe fatigue .  ' I used to love to work out ,  ' he said ' but
now I just don ' t have the energy .  ' John also suffered from frequent sore throats and
swollen glands . His past history revealed mononucleosis and two separate incidences of
Lyme disease ( a tick-borne infection endemic in the eastern US )  . 
John had been following a vegetarian diet which had been for some time
prescribed by his cardiologist . He admitted , however that he was feeling worse on this
diet , not better . 
After only a few weeks on the Type O diet , however , the results were amazing . 
Within five months , John ' s serum cholesterol , triglycerides and blood sugar all dropped to
normal levels . A repeat blood profile after three months revealed similar results . 
If John continued to follow the Type O diet , exercise regularly and take nutritional
supplements there was a good chance that he would beat the odds of his genetic
inheritance .  
*  *  * 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-High Blood Pressure . -
Constantly at work within us is the dynamic force of our beating hearts , 
rhythmically pumping through our bodies . The process is normally so smooth that we
rarely think much about it . That ' s why high blood pressure ( or hypertension ) is called the
silent killer . It ' s possible to have dangerously high blood pressure and be entirely unaware
of it . 
When blood pressure is taken , two numbers are read . The systolic reading ( the
number on top ) measures the pressure within the arteries as your heart beats out blood . 
The diastolic reading ( the number on the bottom ) measures the pressure present within
the arteries as your heart rests between beats . Normal systolic pressure is 120 , and normal
diastolic pressure is 80--or an overall reading of 120 over 80 ( 120 / 80 )  . High blood
pressure ( or hypertension ) is 140 / 90 under age 40 , and 160 / 95 over age 40 . 
Depending on the severity and duration , untreated high blood pressure opens the
door to a host of problems , including heart attacks and strokes . 
Little is known about the blood type-related risk factors for hypertension . 
However , hypertension often occurs in conjunction with heart disease , so Type As and
Type ABs should be particularly vigilant . 
Hypertension carries the same risk factors as cardiovascular disease . Smokers , 
diabetics , post-menopausal women , the obese , the sedentary and people in stressful
positions , should pay extra attention to the details of their blood type programme--
especially to the diet and exercise recommendations .  
*  *  * 
-Case History : Hypertension . -
Bill , 54 : Type A . 
Bill was a middle-aged bond trader with high blood pressure . When I first saw
him in my office in March 1991 , his blood pressure was an almost explosive 150 / 105 to
135 / 95 . It didn ' t take long to find clues to these numbers in his incredibly stressful life , 
which included a partnership in a high-powered firm and a host of domestic problems . 
Against his doctor ' s urging , Bill had discontinued his blood pressure medication because
it made him dizzy and constipated . He wanted to try a more natural therapy , but it had to
be done immediately . 
I placed Bill on a Type A diet--a huge adjustment for this burly Italian . And I
immediately began to address Bill ' s stress with the exercise regimen designed for Type
As . He was initially embarrassed about doing yoga and relaxation exercises , but was soon
converted when he realized how much calmer and more positive he felt . 
At his first visit , Bill also confided that he had a special problem of a different
nature . He and his partners were in the process of negotiating their office health plan , and
if his hypertension was detected at his insurance physical , his firm would have to pay a
much higher premium . Using the stress reduction techniques , the Type A diet and several
botanicals , Bill was able to sail through his insurance physical .  
*  *  * 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
CHILDHOOD ILLNESSES . 
A large number of the patients who come through my office are children
suffering from a host of ailments--from chronic diarrhoea to repeated ear infections . 
Their mothers are usually on the verge of becoming frantic . Some of my most satisfying
results have come with children . 
-Conjunctivitis . -
Conjunctivitis , commonly called ' pink eye '  , is usually caused by the transmission
of the STAPHYLOCOCCUS bacteria from one child to another . Type A and Type AB
children are more susceptible to conjunctivitis than are Type O or Type B , probably
because of their naturally weaker immune systems . 
Antibiotic creams or eye drops are conventionally used to treat the condition , but
a soothing and surprising alternative is a freshly-cut slice of tomato .  ( Don ' t try this with
tomato juice !  ) The freshly-cut tomato water contains a lectin which can agglutinate and
destroy the STAPHYLOCOCCUS bacteria . The slight acidity of the tomato appears to
closely resemble the acidity of the eye ' s own secretions . Squeezing the watery juice of a
fresh tomato on a gauze pad and applying it to the affected eye is also very soothing . 
This is one example of how the same lectins in a food that make it dangerous to
eat , can be highly beneficial to treat an illness . Later , we ' ll discuss other examples of the
ways in which lectins play a dual role in our systems--especially in the war against
cancer . 
-Diarrhoea . -
Diarrhoea can be a disturbing and dangerous condition for children . Not only is it
debilitating and terribly uncomfortable , but it can lead to severe dehydration , causing
weakness and fever . 
Most childhood diarrhoea is diet-related , and here the blood type diets offer very
specific guidelines about which foods trigger digestive problems for each blood type . 
Type O children often experience mild to moderate diarrhoea in reaction to eating
dairy products . 
Type A and Type AB children are prone to GIARDIASIS LAMBLIA , commonly
known as Montezuma ' s Revenge , because the parasite mimics A qualities . 
Type B children will contract diarrhoea if they overindulge in wheat products , or
in reaction to eating chicken and corn . 
If the diarrhoea is caused by food-related intolerance or allergy , a child will often
exhibit other symptoms , ranging from dark , puffy circles under the eyes to eczema , 
psoriasis or asthma . Unless diarrhoea is the result of a more serious condition , such as a
parasitic infection , partial intestinal blockage or inflammation , it usually corrects itself
with time . If a child ' s stool contains blood or mucus , however , seek immediate medical
attention . Acute diarrhoea might also be infectious ; it is best to institute scrupulous
standards of cleanliness to protect the rest of the family from contagion . 
To restore a child ' s proper balance of fluids during bouts of diarrhoea , restrict fruit
juice . Instead , feed the child vegetable or meat stocks in soups . Yogurt with active L . 
ACIDOPHILUS cultures helps to maintain the good bacteria in the intestinal tract . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Ear Infections . -
Perhaps as many as four out of every ten children under the age of six have
chronic ear infections . By chronic , I mean five , ten , fifteen , even twenty infections every
winter season , one after the other . Most of these children have allergies to both
environmental and food-based particles . The best solution is the blood type diet . 
The conventional protocol for ear infections is antibiotic therapy . But it obviously
fails when there is a chronic infection . If we attack the underlying causes of the problem
first instead of trotting out the most currently fashionable nostrum--and by this I mean the
ever more sophisticated and newest classes of antibiotics--we have an opportunity to
allow the body to mount its own powerful response . For starters , it is helpful to know the
blood type susceptibilities . 
Children who are Type A and Type AB have greater problems with mucus
secretions from improper diet--a factor in ear infections . In Type A children , dairy
products are usually the culprit , whereas Type AB may experience sensitivities to
sweetcorn in addition to milk . In general , these kids are also more likely to have throat
and respiratory problems , which can often move into the ears . Because the immune
systems of Type A and Type AB children are tolerant of a wider range of bacteria , some
of their problems stem from the lack of an aggressive response to the infectious organism . 
Several studies have shown that ear fluids of children with a history of chronic ear
infections lack specific chemicals called complement [ sic ] which are needed to attack and
destroy the bacteria . Another study shows that a serum lectin called mannose binding
protein is missing in the ear fluids of children with chronic infections . This lectin
apparently binds to mannose sugars on the surface of the bacteria and agglutinates them , 
allowing for their faster removal . Both of these important immune factors eventually do
develop in their proper amounts , which may help explain why the frequency of ear
infections gradually lessens as the child ages . 
In addition to diet , treating Type A and Type AB children with ear infections
almost always involves enhancing their immunity . The simplest way to enhance the
immunity of any child is to cut down on their intake of sugar . Numerous studies have
shown that sugar depresses the immune system , making the body ' s white blood cells
sluggish and disinclined to attack invading organisms . 
Naturopaths have for many years made use of a mild herbal immune stimulant , 
echinacea ( ECHINACEA PURPUREA )  . Originally used by Native Americans , echinacea
has the extraordinary properties of being both safe and effective in boosting the body ' s
immunity against bacteria and viruses . Since many of the immune functions which
echinacea enhances are dependent on adequate levels of vitamin C , I often prescribe an
extract of vitamin-C rich rose-hips . In the last three years I have been using an extract of
Western larch tree as a sort of super-echinacea . This product was originally developed out
of the paper-pulping industry and contains much more concentrated active components
than echinacea . In my opinion , this product is an exciting new development which has
revolutionized my treatment of a variety of immune deficiencies , including ear infections . 
I ' m sure you ' ll be hearing much more about it in the very near future . 
Ear infections are terribly painful for a child , and not too pleasant for the parents , 
either . Most of these infections are a build-up of noxious fluids and gases into the middle
ear because of an obstructed connecting pipe , the Eustachian tube . This tube become
swollen because of allergic reactions , weakness in the tissues surrounding it or infections . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Many parents have grown frustrated by the increasing inability of antibiotics to
work on ear infections . There is a reason why this happens . A baby ' s first ear infection is
typically treated with a mild antibiotic such as Amoxicillin . With the child ' s next ear
infection , Amoxicillin is given again . Eventually , the ever more resistant infection
returns , and AMOXICILLIN is no longer effective . The escalation phenomenon--the
process of using stronger and stronger drugs and ever more invasive treatments--has
begun . 
When antibiotics no longer work , and the painful infections continue , a
myringotomy is performed . This is a process in which tiny tubes called grommets are
surgically implanted through the eardrum to increase the drainage of fluid from the
middle ear into the throat . 
When I treat chronic ear infections , I focus on ways to prevent recurrences . It is
useless to try and resolve one episode with a quick dose of antibiotics when you know
another ear infection is warming up within . Almost always , I find a solution in the diet . 
I see many children in my practice , representing all blood types . I ' ve found that
any child can contract chronic ear infections if he eats foods that react poorly in his
system . I have never seen a case where there wasn ' t an obvious connection to a child ' s
favourite food . 
Type O and Type B children seem to develop ear infections less frequently , and
when they do occur , they are usually easy to treat . More often than not , a change in diet is
sufficient to eliminate the problem . 
In Type B children , the culprit is usually a viral infection which then leads to
infection with a bacteria called HEMOPHILUS , to which Type Bs are usually
susceptible . The dietary remedy involves restricting tomatoes , sweetcorn and chicken . 
The lectins in these foods react with the surface of the digestive tract , causing swelling
and mucus secretion , which usually carries over to the ears and throat . 
My personal feeling is that ear infections can be prevented in Type O children
simply by breast-feeding instead of bottle feeding . Breast-feeding for at least a year
allows a child ' s immune system and digestive tract time to develop . Type O children will
also avoid ear infections if they are taken off wheat and dairy products . They ' re unusually
sensitive to these foods at an early age , but their immunity is easily augmented by the use
of high-value proteins such as fish and lean red meats . 
Dietary changes are often difficult in households with children who suffer
repeated ear infections . Their misery often tempts the anxious parent to let them eat
whatever they wish , thinking that it will comfort the child . Many of these kids wind up
being picky eaters , eating only a very narrow range of foods , and often the very foods
that are provoking the child ' s illness !  
*  *  * 
-Case history : Ear infection . -
Tony , 7 : Type B . 
Tony was a seven-year-old boy who suffered from repeated ear infections . When
his mother first brought him to my office in January 1993 , she was frantic . Tony would
develop a new ear infection immediately after he stopped the antibiotic used to treat his
previous infection--at the rate of 10-15 per winter season . He had had grommet treatment
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
twice , but to no avail . This was a perfect example of a child on the antibiotic treadmill--
escalating levels of antibiotics with fewer results . 
My initial questions to Tony ' s mother were about his diet . She was a bit defensive .  
 ' Oh , I don ' t think that ' s the problem ,  ' she told me ,  ' we eat very well--lots of chicken and
fish , fruits and vegetables .  ' Tony told me his favourite foods were chicken nuggets and
corn-on-the-cob . I realized that the problem was that he was allergic to chicken and
sweetcorn as he was a Type B . I explained the blood type connection and , although
Tony ' s mother was unconvinced , I suggested she feed Tony the Type B diet for two or
three months to see what would happen . 
The rest , as they say , is history . Over the next two years Tony did very well , 
usually developing a single ear infection per season as opposed to his previous rate of 10-
15 . These isolated infections were easy to treat either with naturopathic methods , or a
gentle low-strength antibiotic .  
*  *  * 
-Hyperactivity and Learning Disabilities . -
There are a variety of different causes for attention deficit disorders ( ADD )  , and
we still need much more information before we can make a conclusive blood type
connection . We can , however , gain some insight from our knowledge of how different
blood types respond to their environments . For example , my father has observed over 35
years of practice that Type O children are happier , healthier and more alert when they ' re
given the opportunity to exercise to their maximum potential . A Type O child with ADD
should be encouraged to exercise as much as possible . This might include additional gym
classes , team sports or gymnastics . Type A and Type AB children , on the other hand , 
seem to benefit from activities which encourage the development of sensory and tactile
skills , such as sculpting or artwork , and from basic relaxation techniques , such as deep
breathing . Type B children do well with swimming and calisthenics . 
There is some speculation among researchers that ADD is the result of sugar
metabolism being out of sync , or allergies to dyes or other chemicals . There is no real
conclusion that can be drawn at this point , although I ' ve noticed that ADD children tend
to be incredibly fussy eaters--which suggests a dietary connection . 
I recently discovered an interesting connection that might more strongly tie Type
O children to ADD . A Type O child was brought to me who suffered from both ADD and
mild anaemia . I placed him on a high-protein diet and gave him supplements of vitamins
B12 and folic acid , and the anaemia cleared up . But his mother also noticed a decided
improvement in her child ' s attention span . I ' ve subsequently treated several Type O ADD
children with low doses of these vitamins and have seen improvements ranging from the
slight to the dramatic . 
If your child has ADD , talk to a nutrition professional about adding supplements
of vitamin B12 and folic acid , in addition to the blood type diet . 
-Strep Throat , Mononucleosis and Mumps . -
Because the early symptoms of mononucleosis and the symptoms of strep throat
are similar , it is often difficult for parents to differentiate between the two . A child with
either illness may exhibit one or more of the following symptoms : sore throat , malaise , 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
fever , chills , headache , swollen glands or swollen tonsils . A blood test and throat culture
will be needed to determine which illness is causing the problem . 
Strep throat , caused by the STREPTOCOCCAL organism , is a bacterial infection . 
It often has the additional symptoms of nasal discharge , cough , earaches , white or yellow
patches on the back of the throat and a rash which starts on the neck and chest and
spreads to the abdomen and extremities . Diagnosis of strep throat is based on clinical
symptoms and a throat culture . The standard treatment includes antibiotics , bed rest and
aspirin and fluids for aches and fever . 
Once again , the focus is on treating the immediate infection , not on solving the
larger and more long-term health issues . The standard therapy is ineffective , especially
when your child suffers repeat infections . 
In general , Type O and Type B children contract strep throat more often than Type
A and Type AB because of their increased vulnerability to bacterial infections . However , 
Type O and Type B also recover more easily and completely . Once the strep organism
gets into the bloodstream of Type A and Type AB , it settles in and doesn ' t want to leave . 
Thus , Type A and Type AB children will have repeated infections . 
There are naturopathic therapies that can help prevent recurrences . I have found
that using a mouth rinse made from the herbs sage and golden seal is very effective in
keeping the throat and tonsils free from strep . Golden seal contains a component called
berberine which has been well-documented for its anti-strep activity . The problem with
golden seal is that it has a distinctly bitter , weedy taste which children don ' t exactly
relish . It is sometimes easier to purchase an inexpensive atomizer or spray pump bottle
and just spray the back of your child ' s throat a couple of times a day . In addition to the
blood type diets , I often use nutritional supplements for immune support , in the form of
additional beta-carotene , vitamin C , zinc and echinacea to help develop the child ' s
resistance . 
With the viral infection mononucleosis , Type O seems to be more susceptible than
Type A , Type B or Type AB . Antibiotics are ineffective in the treatment of mononucleosis
because it is caused by a virus , not a bacteria . Bed rest while the fever lasts and frequent
rest intervals during the one-to-three week recovery period are recommended . Aspirin
and adequate fluid intake is encouraged to decrease fever . 
Type B children seem to be more at risk for developing severe mumps , a viral
infection of the salivary glands under the chin and ears . Like many B-prone illnesses , this
one has a neurological connection . If your child is Type B and / or Rh- and has the mumps , 
be alert for signs of neurological damage , particularly manifested in hearing problems . 
DIABETES . 
The blood type diets can be effective in the treatment of Type I ( childhood ) 
diabetes , and in both the treatment and prevention of Type II ( adult ) diabetes . 
Blood Type A and Type B are more prone to Type I diabetes , caused by a lack of
insulin , the hormone manufactured by the pancreas which is responsible for allowing
glucose to enter the cells of the body . The cause of insulin deprivation is the destruction
of the beta cells of the pancreas , which are the only cells capable of producing insulin . 
Although there is currently no effective natural treatment alternative for injectable
insulin replacement therapy in Type I diabetics , one important natural remedy to consider
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
using is Quercetin , an antioxidant derived from plants . Quercetin has been shown to help
prevent many of the complications stemming from lifelong diabetes , such as cataracts , 
neuropathy and cardiovascular problems . Talk with a nutritionist who is skilled in the use
of phytochemicals before using any natural medicine for diabetes ; it may be necessary to
readjust the insulin dosage . 
Type II diabetics typically have high levels of insulin in their bloodstreams , but
their tissues lack sensitivity to insulin . This condition develops over time and is usually
the result of poor diet . Type II diabetes is often observed in Type Os who have eaten
dairy , wheat and sweetcorn products for many years ; and in Type As who eat a lot of
meat and dairy foods . Type II diabetics are usually overweight and often have high
cholesterol and elevated blood pressure--signs of a lifetime of poor food choices and lack
of exercise . In this respect , any blood type can develop Type II diabetes . 
The only real treatment for Type II diabetes is diet and exercise . The relevant
blood type diet and exercise regimen will achieve results if you stick to the guidelines . A
high-potency vitamin B complex can also help to counter insulin intolerance . Again , 
check with a GP and nutritionist before using any substance to treat diabetes . 
DIGESTIVE ILLNESSES . 
-Constipation . -
Constipation occurs when the stools are unusually hard or a person ' s bowel
patterns have changed and become less frequent . Most chronic constipation is caused by
poor bowel habits and irregular meals , with a diet low in fibre and water content . Some
other causes are a habitual use of laxatives , a rushed and stressful daily schedule and
travel that requires abrupt adjustments of eating and sleeping patterns . Lack of physical
exercise , acute illness , painful rectal conditions and some medications may also cause
constipation . 
Every blood type is susceptible to constipation given the circumstances . 
Constipation is not so much a disease as a warning light that something is not right with a
digestive system . Most of the clues will be in a person ' s diet . Are you eating enough
foods on your diet that are high in fibre content ? Are you drinking enough fluids--in
particular , water and juices ? Are you exercising regularly ? 
Many people simply take a laxative when they ' re constipated . But that doesn ' t
solve the natural systemic causes of constipation . The long-term solution is in the diet . 
However , Type A , Type B and Type AB can supplement their diets with fibrous
unprocessed bran . Type Os , in addition to eating plenty of the fibrous fruits and
vegetables in their diets , can take a supplement of butyrate , a natural bulk-forming agent
as a substitute for bran which is not advised for them . 
-Crohn ' s Disease and Colitis . -
Crohn ' s disease and colitis are both inflammatory diseases of the bowel ; the
former of the small intestine and the latter of the lower colon and rectum . They are
depleting , enervating diseases which add the elements of uncertainty , pain , blood loss and
suffering to the process of elimination . Many food lectins can cause digestive irritation by
attaching to the mucous membranes of the digestive tract . As many of the food lectins are
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
blood type specific , it is possible for each blood type to develop the same problem from
different foods . 
In Type As and Type ABs , Crohn ' s disease and colitis often involve a major stress
component . Anyone with Type A or Type AB blood suffering from inflammatory bowel
disease should pay careful attention to their stress patterns .  ( Refer to the discussion of
stress in the relevant blood type plan .  ) 
Type Os tend to develop the more ulcerative form of colitis that causes bleeding
with elimination . This is probably due to the lack of adequate clotting factors in their
blood . Type As , Type ABs and Type Bs tend to develop more of a mucous colitis , which
is not as bloody . In either case , follow the diet for your blood type . You will be able to
avoid many of the food lectins which can aggravate the condition , and you may find your
symptoms easing .  
*  *  * 
-Case History : Irritable Bowel Syndrome ( IBS )  . -
Virginia , 26 : Type O . 
I first examined Virginia , a 26-year-old woman with chronic bowel trouble , three
years ago , after she had received extensive treatment from a variety of conventional
gastroenterologists . Her problems included chronic irritable bowel syndrome with painful
constipation , alternating with an unpredictable , almost explosive diarrhoea which made it
difficult for her to leave the house . She also suffered from fatigue and low-grade chronic
anaemia . Her previous doctors conducted an enormous amount of testing ( to the tune of
$27 , 000 !  ) and could only suggest anti-spasmodic drugs and a daily dose of fibre . Food
allergy testing was inconclusive . Virginia was a vegetarian , who followed a strict
macrobiotic diet , and I immediately detected the foods in her diet that were causing her
suffering . The absence of meat in her diet was a primary factor . She was also unable to
properly digest the grains and pasta she was eating as a main course . 
Since Virginia was Type O , I suggested a high-protein diet , including lean red
meats , fish and poultry , and fresh fruits and vegetables . As the digestive tract of Type O
does not tolerate most grains very well , I suggested that she avoid whole wheat altogether
and severely limit her consumption of other grains . 
Initially , Virginia was resistant to the idea of making these dietary changes . She
was a vegetarian and truly believed that her current diet was healthier . But I urged her to
look again .  ' How has this diet helped you , Virginia ?  ' I asked .  ' You seem to be pretty sick .  ' 
Eventually , I convinced her to try it my way for a limited period of time . In eight
weeks Virginia returned looking hale and hearty , with a ruddy complexion . She boasted
that her bowel problems were 90 per cent better . Blood tests showed a complete
resolution of her anaemia , and she said her energy levels were almost back to normal . A
second follow-up visit one month later resulted in Virginia being discharged from my
care , completely free of bowel problems . 
-Case history : Crohn ' s Disease . -
Yehuda , 50 : Type O . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
I first saw Yehuda , a middle-aged Jewish man , in July , 1992 , for active Crohn ' s
Disease . By that point he had already had several bowel surgeries to remove sections
which were obstructing his small intestine . I put Yehuda on a wheat-free diet , with an
emphasis on lean meats and boiled vegetables . I also give him a high-powered extract of
liquorice and the fatty acid butyrate . 
Yehuda ' s compliance was exemplary , a testament to the concerns both he and the
family had for his health . For example , his wife , the daughter of a baker , baked him a
special wheat-free bread . Yehuda took his diet and supplements all very seriously , 
including the liquorice . 
Yehuda consistently improved from the start . To this day he continues to be
asymptomatic , although he must still be careful about using certain grains and dairy
products , as they bother his digestion . He never required the additional surgery that his
gastroenterologist had said was inevitable . 
-Case History : Crohn ' s Disease . -
Sarah , 35 : Type B . 
Sarah was a 35-year-old woman of Eastern European ancestry . She first came to
my office in June 1993 , for treatment of Crohn ' s Disease . She had already had several
surgeries to remove scarred tissue from the bowel , was anaemic and suffered from
chronic diarrhoea . 
I prescribed a basic Type B diet , instructing that Sarah remove chicken and other
lectin-containing foods specific to Type B . I also used supplemental liquorice and fatty
acids as part of her protocol . 
Sarah was very co-operative . Within four months , most of her digestive
symptoms , including the diarrhoea , were eliminated . As she wanted to have more
children , Sarah recently had surgery to remove scar tissue from her bowel which had
attached to her uterus . Her surgeon told her that there were no signs of active Crohn ' s
Disease anywhere in her abdominal cavity .  
*  *  * 
-Food Poisoning . -
Anyone can get food poisoning . But certain blood types are naturally more
susceptible because of their tendency towards a weakened immune system . In particular , 
Type A and Type AB are more likely to fall prey to salmonella food poisoning , which is
usually the result of leaving food uncovered and unrefrigerated for long periods of time . 
Furthermore , the bacteria will be more difficult for Type A and Type AB to get rid of once
they ' ve found a home in their systems . 
Type Bs , who are generally more susceptible to inflammatory diseases , are more
likely to be severely affected when they eat food that is contaminated with the
SHIGELLA organism , a bacteria found on plants that causes dysentery . 
-Gastritis . -
Many people confuse gastritis with ulcers , but it is exactly the opposite . Ulcers
are produced by hyperacidity--more common in Type O and Type B . Gastritis is caused
by very low stomach acid content--common for Type A and Type AB . Gastritis occurs
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
when the stomach acid gets so low it no longer functions as a microbial barrier . Without
adequate levels of acid , microbes will live in the stomach and cause serious
inflammation . 
The best course of action that Type A and Type AB can take is to stress the more
acidic food choices in their blood type diets . 
-Stomach and Duodenal Ulcers . -
It has been known since the early 1950s that peptic ulcer of the stomach is more
common in Blood Type O , with the highest occurrence in Type O non-secretors . Type Os
also have a higher rate of bleeding and perforation , which was not shown to be different
between secretors and non-secretors . One reason is that Type Os have higher stomach
acid levels and an ulcer-producing enzyme called pepsinogen . 
More recent research has uncovered another reason why Type Os are prone to
ulcers . In December 1993 , researchers at Washington University School of Medicine in
St . Louis reported in the JOURNAL OF SCIENCE that people with Type O blood are a
favourite target for the bacteria now known to cause ulcers . This bacteria , H . PYLORI , 
was found to be able to attach itself to the Type O antigen lining the stomach , and then
work its way into the lining . As we ' ve seen , the Type O antigen is the fucose sugar . The
researchers found an inhibitor in breast milk which apparently blocked the attachment of
the bacteria to the stomach surface . No doubt this is one of the many fucose sugars found
in human breast milk . 
The common seaweed bladderwrack is an inhibitor of H . PYLORI . The content of
fucose in bladderwrack is so great that it factors into its Latin name--FUCUS
VESICULOSIS . Any Type O who suffers from ulcers , or wants to prevent them , should
use bladderwrack because it will make the ulcer-causing bacteria , H . PYLORI , slide off
the stomach lining .  
*  *  * 
-Case history : Chronic stomach ulcers . -
Peter , 34 : Type O . 
I first met Peter in April 1992 . He had suffered from stomach ulcers since he was
a child , and had used every conventional ulcer medication available , with little result . I
began by prescribing the basic high-protein Type O diet , stressing that he avoid the
wholewheat products that had always been a major part of his diet . I also prescribed a
supplement of bladderwrack , and a combination medicine of liquorice and bismuth . 
Within six weeks Peter had made considerable progress . On a follow-up visit to
his gastroenterologist , he had a colonoscopy and heard the encouraging news that 60 per
cent of his stomach lining now appeared normal . A second examination in June 1993
showed complete resolution of Peter ' s stomach ulcers . 
INFECTIONS . 
Many bacteria prefer specific blood types . In fact , one study showed that over 50
per cent of 282 bacteria carried antigens of one blood type or another . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
It has been observed that viral infections in general seem to be more frequent in
Type Os because they do not possess any antigens . These infections are less frequent and
milder in Type A , Type B and Type AB . 
-Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome ( AIDS )  . -
I have treated many people who were HIV-positive or had full-blown AIDS , and I
have yet to find a clear-cut connection between blood type and susceptibility to HIV . 
Having said that , let ' s look at how the information in this book can be used to help people
hold their own against the virus . 
While all the blood types appear to be equally susceptible to AIDS , given the
exposure , there are variations in their susceptibility to the opportunistic infections ( such
as pneumonia and tuberculosis ) that their weakened immune systems are prey to . 
If you are HIV-positive or have AIDS , modify your diet to encompass the
suggestions that are specific to your blood type . For example , if you are Type O , begin to
increase the amount of animal proteins in your diet and develop a physical training
programme . Following the blood type programme will help to fully mobilize and
optimize your immune functions by stressing the highest value foods for your particular
needs . Be careful to limit your fat intake , choosing lean cuts of meat , because bowel
parasites , common in people with AIDS , interfere with fat digestion and lead to
diarrhoea . Also , avoid foods such as wheat which contain lectins that could further
compromise your immune system and bloodstream . 
Since many of the opportunistic infections cause nausea , diarroea and mouth
sores , AIDS is often a wasting disease . Type As will need to work a little harder to be
sure that their calorie intake is high , since many Type A foods are calorifically low . 
Rigorously eliminate any foods , like meat or dairy , that can cause digestive problems . 
Your immune system is already naturally sensitive ; don ' t give the lectins a chance to get
in and weaken you further . Meanwhile , increase your portions of ' good ' Type A foods , 
such as tofu and seafood . 
Type Bs should avoid the obvious problem foods , like chicken , sweetcorn and
buckwheat . But you should also eliminate nuts , which are hard to digest , and reduce the
amount of wheat products in your diet . If you are lactose intolerant , avoid dairy foods ; 
even if you ' re not , dairy can be a digestive irritant for immune-compromised Type Bs . 
This is a case where the disease is contra-indicative of the favoured food . 
Type ABs should limit their intake of lectin-rich beans and pulses and eliminate
nuts from their diets . Your primary protein source should be fish , and there is a wide
variety available to Type ABs . Occasional servings of meat and dairy are OK , but watch
the fat . And limit your wheat consumption . 
In general , whatever your blood type , you want to avoid lectins that could damage
the cells of your immune system and bloodstream . These cells cannot be as easily
replaced as they can in a healthy body . This cell-sparing aspect of the blood type diets
makes them invaluable to the person with AIDS who has anaemia or low T-helper cells . 
The blood type diets help to preserve your precious immune cells from
unnecessary damage . This can be a critical difference , especially as there are still no
successful treatments for HIV infection .  
*  *  * 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Case History : AIDS . -
Arnold , 46 : Type AB . 
Arnold was a middle-aged businessman with AIDS . He was married and believed
he had been infected with HIV 12 years earlier . When I first saw him , Arnold ' s T-cell
count , the barometer of the virus ' s destruction , was 6 , with normal being 650 to 1700 . He
had a skin condition called molluscum which is often seen in the final stage of AIDS , and
he was painfully thin from months of diarroea and nausea . 
Arnold decided to come to a naturopath as a desperate , last-ditch effort to stay
alive . I could see in his face that he didn ' t really believe this would work either , and I
couldn ' t promise him dramatic results because I didn ' t really know what to expect . 
My first goal was to prevent any lectins that were toxic to the Type AB immune
system from entering his body . Along with that , it was urgent that I halt Arnold ' s wasting
so he would be strong enough to fight the infection . 
I began by tailoring the Type AB diet to the special needs raised by AIDS . This
included : the elimination of all poultry except turkey , the introduction of low-fat organic
meats , seafood several times a week , rice , lots of vegetables and fruit . I reduced most of
the beans and pulses , and eliminated butter , cream , processed cheese , corn and
buckwheat . In addition , I prescribed immune-boosting herbs , in tablet and tea form , 
including alfalfa , burdock root , echinacea , ginseng and ginger . 
Within three months , Arnold ' s molluscum had cleared up and he was back in the
gym . To this day he continues to be asymptomatic , even though his T-cells have not
increased . He works and leads a fairly active life . The doctors at the infectious disease
centre of his hospital are amazed . This is a man without an immune system ! 
-Case History : AIDS . -
Susan , 27 : Type O . 
After learning that her husband was HIV-positive , Susan was tested . She was
frantic when she learned that she also had HIV . Lab tests revealed a very low T-cell
count . Susan begged me to help her ; she didn ' t want to die , and she was afraid to take
AZT or any other drug specified for HIV . 
We began with a Type O diet , along with nutritional supplements and regular
exercise , and I instructed Susan to follow the programme closely . A few months later , 
Susan called to report that her T-cell count was in the 800s ( normal is 500-1700 )  . She has
been symptom-free ever since . 
Since there is at present no cure for HIV or AIDS , we can ' t gauge how long Susan
will continue to do well . I believe that the more we discover about the mysteries of the
immune system , the closer we ' ll come to making AIDS a disease to live with , rather than
a disease to die from . 
-Bronchitis and pneumonia . -
In general , Type A and Type AB have more bronchial infections than Type O and
Type B . This may result from improper diets which produce excessive mucus in their
respiratory passages . This mucus facilitates the growth of blood-type mimicking bacteria , 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
such as the A-like PNEUMOCOCCUS bacteria in Type A and Type AB , and the B-like
HEMOPHILUS bacteria in Type B and Type AB .  ( Since Type AB has both A-like and Blike characteristics , the risk is double .  ) 
The blood type diets seem to substantially reduce the incidence of bronchitis and
pneumonia for all blood types . However , we are just beginning to discover some other
blood type connections that are not so easily remedied . For example , it appears that Type
A children born to Type A fathers and Type O mothers die more frequently of
bronchopneumonia in early life . It is thought that some form of SEN [ S ] ITIZATION [ sic ] 
occurs at birth between the Type A infant and the mother ' s anti-A antibodies which
inhibits the infant ' s ability to fight the PNEUMOCOCCUS bacteria . There is no solid
data yet to confirm the reason this occurs , but information of this kind can spark research
interest in a potential vaccine . We ' ll have to gather much more data before we can make a
valid scientific conclusion . 
-Candidiasis ( common yeast infection )  . -
Although the candidiasis organism shows no preference for blood type , I have
noticed that Type A and Type AB have a tougher time eradicating a severe yeast
overgrowth once the organism finds a home in their tolerant systems . Candidiasis
becomes like the unwanted guest who won ' t leave . Type A and Type AB also develop
more yeast infections after antibiotic usage , which makes sense because antibiotics
destroy their already weakened defence systems . 
Type Os , on the other hand , develop more of an allergic-type hypersensitivity to
the candidiasis organism , especially if they eat too many grains . This has been the basis
of a theory called the yeast syndrome and a variety of Candida diets . These diets stress
nigh protein and the avoidance of grains , but they tend to be generalized across blood
types , when it is only Type Os who appear to have this yeast sensitivity . If you ' re Type A
or Type AB , yeast avoidance won ' t do anything to prevent yeast infections , and you ' ll
only further compromise your immune system . 
In general , Type Bs are less prone to this organism , as long as they follow the
Type B diet . If you are a Type B who has a history of candidiasis , cut down on your
wheat consumption . 
-Cholera . -
A report from Peru recently published in the LANCET attributed the severity of a
recent epidemic of cholera--an infection characterized by extreme diarrhoea with severe
fluid and mineral depletion--to the high incidence of Type Os in the Peruvian population . 
Historically , the susceptibility of Type Os to cholera probably decimated the population
of many of the ancient cities , leaving as survivors the more cholera-resistant Type As . 
-Common cold and flu . -
There are hundreds of different strains of cold virus , and it would be impossible to
see blood type specificity in all of them . However , studies of British military recruits
showed a slightly lower overall incidence of cold viruses in recruits who were Type A , 
which is consistent with our findings that Blood Type A was developed to be resistant to
these common viruses . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Viruses also have less impact on Type AB . The A antigen , carried by both Type A
and Type AB , blocks the attachment of various strains of flu to the membranes of the
throat and respiratory passages . 
Influenza , a more serious virus , also strikes Type O and Type B in preference to
Type A and Type AB . In its early stages , influenza may share many of the symptoms of a
common cold . However , the flu causes dehydration , muscle pains , and serious weakness . 
The symptoms of a common cold or flu are miserable , but they are actually a sign
that your immune system is trying to fight off the offending virus . While your immune
system is doing its job , there are measures you can take that will make co-existence on
the battlefield more comfortable : 
1 . Maintain general good health with adequate rest and exercise , along with
learning to cope with the stresses of life . Stress is a major factor in the depletion of
immune system resources . This may protect you from frequent infections and may even
shorten the duration of the colds and flus you do get . 
2 . Follow the basic dietary protocol for your blood type . It will optimize your
immune response and help shorten the course of your cold or flu . 
3 . Take extra vitamin C ( 250-500 mg )  , or increase the sources of vitamin C in
your diet . Many people feel that taking small doses of the herb echinacea helps prevent
colds , or at least helps to shorten their duration . 
4 . Increase the humidity in your room with a vaporizer or humidifier to prevent
dryness in the throat and nasal tissue . 
5 . If your throat is sore , gargle with salt water . Half a teaspoon of ordinary table
salt and a tall glass of warm water provides a soothing and cleansing rinse . Another good
gargle , especially if you are prone to tonsillitis , is a tea of equal parts golden seal root 
( HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS ) and sage . Gargle with this mixture every few hours . 
6 . If your nose is runny or stuffy , use an antihistamine to reduce the reaction of
tissues to the infecting virus and relieve nasal congestion . Be especially careful with
antihistamines containing ephedrine , such as those found in health food shops and in
some OTC decongestants . These can raise the blood pressure , keep you awake at night , 
and complicate prostate problems in men . 
7 . Antibiotics are not effective against viruses . If someone offers you their
leftover antibiotics , or if you have some around the house , don ' t take them . 
-Plague , typhoid , smallpox and malaria . -
Known from the Middle Ages as The Black Death , plague is a bacterial infection
largely carried by rodents . Blood Type O people are more susceptible to plague . Although
plague is rare in industrialized societies , it continues to be a problem in Third World
countries . A recent report by the World Health Organization warned that we may be
facing a crisis in the reappearance of plague and other infectious diseases as a result of
overuse of antibiotics and other medicines , human settlement of previously uninhabited
areas , international travel , and poverty . The fact that Western societies rarely encounter
these diseases should not make us feel immune to their social , economic , cultural and
human cost . Occasionally an outbreak occurs in the West , for example in Seattle in the
early 1980s , when people ate tainted tofu which had not been pasteurized . Commercial
tofu in sealed packaging should not be a cause for concern . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Smallpox has been officially eradicated through extensive worldwide
immunization , although its course has probably influenced world history to a largely
unappreciated degree . Blood Type O is especially susceptible to smallpox , which
probably explains why the Native American population was decimated by the disease
when it first came into contact with the Type A and B European settlers who carried it . 
Native Americans are almost 100 per cent Type O . 
Typhoid , a common infection in areas of diminished hygiene or times of war , 
usually infects the blood and digestive tract . Type O is most susceptible to typhoid
infection . Typhoid also shows a connection to the Rh blood groups , being found more
frequently in Rh- individuals . 
It is claimed that the ANOPHELES mosquito , which carries malaria , tends to bite
Type B and Type O in preference to Type A and Type AB , although the common
mosquito seems to prefer Type A and Type AB . Malaria is , again , an unfamiliar disease to
the Western world , yet its global impact is tremendous . 
According to the World Health Organization , more than 2 . 1 million people
contract malaria every year . 
-Polio and viral meningitis . -
Polio , a viral infection of the nervous system , shows a higher frequency in Type
B , which is more susceptible to virally-sparked nervous system disorders . Polio was
epidemic and caused most cases of juvenile paralysis before the discovery of the Salk and
Sabin vaccines . 
Viral meningitis , an increasingly frequent and serious infection of the nervous
system , is significantly more common in Type O than in other blood types , probably due
to the Type O weakness against aggressive infections . Be alert to symptoms of fatigue , 
high fever , and a characteristic of meningitis called nuchal rigidity , a stiffness in the
muscles of the neck . 
-Sinus infections . -
Type O and Type B are also typically more prone to chronic sinus infections . Very
often , their doctors will prescribe an almost continuous supply of antibiotics , which
banish the problem temporarily . But the sinus infections inevitably return , prompting the
use of more antibiotics and , finally , surgery . 
I have found that the herb collinsonia ( stone root )  , which is used to treat swelling
problems , like varicose veins , also helps sinusitis--perhaps because chronic sinusitis is a
sort of haemorrhoid or varicose vein of the head . When I prescribe this herb to my
patients with chronic sinusitis , the results are often astounding . Many of these patients no
longer need antibiotics to treat their infections because the collinsonia removed the cause
of the problem--swelling of the sinus tissue . If you have sinus problems , you may wish to
try this herb . Collinsonia is not easy to find , but many of the larger health food shops
carry it in a liquid tincture form . A typical dose is 20-25 drops in warm water taken orally
2-3 times daily . Do not worry about toxicity ; this is a safe herb . 
Occasionally a Type A or Type AB will develop sinusitis , although this is almost
always the result of a high mucus-forming diet . Sinusitis in Type As usually responds
well to diet changes alone . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Parasites ( amoebic dysentery , GIARDIA , tapeworm and ascaris )  . -
Given enough of a head start , parasites can live fairly well in anyone ' s digestive
tract . Generally , however , they seem to have a special preference for Type A and Type AB
digestive tracts , usually mimicking the Type A blood antigen to avoid detection . For
example , the common amoeba parasite shows a preference for Type A and Type AB . In
addition , it appears that Type A and Type AB are more prone to complications if amoebic
cysts lodge in the liver . Type A and Type AB with amoebic dysentery should adopt strong
measures to deal with the infection before it has a chance to migrate deeper into their
bodies . 
Blood Type A and Type AB are also sitting ducks for a common water
contaminant , the parasite GIARDIA LAMBLIA , more famously known as Montezuma ' s
Revenge . This clever parasite mimics the appearance of Type A , which allows it entry
into the Type A and Type AB immune systems , then quickly into the intestines . Type A
and Type AB travellers should equip themselves with the herb golden seal to help stave
off infection . Type As and Type ABs who drink from a water well should also be on the
alert for the GIARDIA LAMBLIA parasite . 
Many of the parasitic worms , such as the tapeworm and the ascaris parasite , have
a resemblance to Type A and Type B , and are found in greater frequency in people with
these blood types . Because Type AB carries both A-like and B-like characteristics , they
are particularly susceptible . 
-Tuberculosis and sarcoidosis . -
Tuberculosis was once considered almost completely eradicated from Western
industrialized society , although it has now become more common . This is largely due to
the high incidence of the disease in people with AIDS , and the homeless . An
opportunistic infection , tuberculosis thrives in immune systems that have been weakened
by poor hygiene and chronic disease . Tuberculosis of the lungs ( pulmonary tuberculosis ) 
is more common in Type O , whereas tuberculosis in other parts of the body shows a
higher frequency in Type A . 
Sarcoidosis , or sarcoid , is an inflammatory condition of the lungs and connective
tissue which may actually be a form of immune reaction to tuberculosis . It was once
thought to be much more common in African Americans compared with the general
population , but in recent times it is being diagnosed more frequently in Caucasians , 
especially women . It shows a higher frequency of Type A over Type O . 
Rh- individuals seem to be more susceptible to both tuberculosis and sarcoidosis . 
-Syphilis and urinary tract infections . -
Blood Type As seem to be more susceptible to venereal disease and syphilis , and
often contract a more virulent strain . This is yet another reason to practise safe sex , 
especially if you are Type A . 
There is good evidence that if you are Type B or Type AB , you are more
susceptible to recurrent bladder infections ( cystisis )  . That ' s because the most common
bacteria-producing infections , such as E . COLI , PSEUDOMONAS and KLEBSIELLA , 
possess a B-like appearance , and Type B and Type AB produce no anti-B antibodies . 
Type Bs also have higher rates of kidney infections , called pyelonephritis . This is
especially true of Type B non-secretors . If you are Type B and suffer from recurrent
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
urinary problems , try to drink one or two glasses of a mixture of cranberry and pineapple
juice every day . 
LIVER DISEASE . 
-Alcoholism-related liver disease . -
Alcoholism affects many bodily systems , but perhaps its most dramatic impact is
on the liver . The 20 per cent of the population who are non-secretors ( see Appendix E ) 
seem to be the most prone to alcoholism , but their susceptibility has little to do with their
secretor status . In an unfortunate and possibly random cellular twist , the gene which
determines whether you ' re a non-secretor is located on the same part of the DNA as the
gene for alcoholism . My patients who type as non-secretors always have an extensive
family history of alcoholism . 
Oddly enough , it is also non-secretors who seem to derive the most benefit to
their hearts from a moderate intake of alcohol . A Danish study showing non-secretors to
be a higher risk for ischaemic heart disease ( a lack of blood flow into the arteries ) 
theorized that a moderate consumption of alcohol altered the rate of insulin flow , slowing
the accumulation of fats in the blood vessels . This conflicting message is hard to
decipher . 
The answer is probably that decisions about the role of alcohol should be made on
an individual basis and with consideration for your blood type . From the standpoint of the
effects of alcohol on the digestive and immune systems , none of the blood type diets
allow spirits . 
It is also clear that alcoholism has a major stress component . A Japanese research
team discovered that a greater number of blood Type As received treatment for
alcoholism than Type O or Type B . It is thought that Type As may have a predilection for
seeking relaxation from stress by the ingestion of inhibition-releasing chemicals . It is
certainly well documented that man has a long history of using intoxicants for pleasure , 
for pain , for transport to other realms , and for medicine . 
Only about 3 per cent of the alcohol you consume passes through your body and
is excreted . The rest is metabolized by the liver and processed in the stomach and small
intestines . Over time , with heavy and regular consumption , the liver begins to deteriorate . 
The end result can be cirrhosis of the liver , severe malnutrition from mal-absorption of
foods , and ultimately death . 
-Gallstones , cirrhosis and jaundice . -
Of course , not all liver disease is linked to alcohol . Infections , allergies , and
metabolic disorders can all cause liver damage . For example , jaundice , or yellowing of
the skin , is often seen in people with hepatitis , and gallstones have been linked to obesity . 
Cirrhosis can be caused by infections , diseases of the bile ducts , or other illnesses that
affect the liver . 
For reasons we do not fully understand , Type As , Type Bs and Type ABs tend to
have higher levels of gallstones , diseases of the bile ducts , jaundice and cirrhosis of the
liver than Type Os . Type As have the highest levels and are also reported to be the most
susceptible to pancreatic tumours . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Liver flukes and other tropical infections . -
Common tropical infections of the liver causing fibrosis or scarring appear to a
marked degree more frequently in Type As--and to a lesser extent in Type B and Type
AB . Type O , which may have developed anti-A and anti-B antibodies as an early
protection against these parasites , is relatively immune to them . My office has
successfully treated many cases of liver disease using many of the herbal compounds
discussed in Chapter 10 . In most cases , the patients who develop liver disease are Type A
and Type B , non-secretors .  
*  *  * 
-Case history : Liver disease . -
Gerard , 38 : Type B . 
Gerard was a 38-year-old man with a history of sclerosing cholangitis , an
inflammatory condition of the liver ' s bile ducts , causing scarring . Usually this condition
leads to the necessity of a liver transplant . When I first saw Gerard in July 1994 , he was
jaundiced and had horrible pruritus ( itching ) from deposits of bilirubin , an orange-yellow
bile pigment , in his skin . Because of this condition , his cholesterol was also elevated to
325 . Gerard ' s serum bile acids were over 2 , 000 ( normal is under 100 )  , he had a bilirubin
level of 4 . 1 ( normal is under 1 ) and all his liver enzymes were sharply elevated , 
indicating extensive damage to his liver tissue . Gerard was a pretty shrewd man , who
knew what his chances were , and frankly , he was preparing to die . 
I started Gerard on the basic Type B diet and a botanical protocol of liver-specific
antioxidants . These are antioxidants that preferentially deposit in the liver instead of in
other organs . Gerard did very well in the intervening year , having only one flare-up of
itching and jaundice . 
Recently Gerard underwent surgery to remove his gallbladder . When the surgeon
examined his liver and major bile ducts , she later told him that they looked normal , 
although the tissue around his bile ducts was a little thinner than usual . 
-Case History : Cirrhosis . -
Estel , 67 : Type A . 
Estel was a 67-year-old woman who first came to my office in October 1991 for
an inflammatory condition of the liver called primary biliary cirrhosis which results in
destruction of the liver . Most cases eventually go on to have a liver transplant . 
Estel admitted that she was once a heavy drinker , but no longer . Her condition
was probably linked to a lifetime of alcohol consumption , even though she may not have
even been an alcoholic , in the strictest sense . Three or four drinks a day , every day , for 40
years can lead to cirrhosis . 
Estel ' s liver enzymes were markedly elevated : the alkaline phosphatase , for
example , was in the high 800s ( normal is under 60 )  . Since she was a Type A non-secretor , 
I immediately put her on the Type A diet and a protocol of liver-specific antioxidants . 
Estel began to show results almost immediately , and her condition continued to improve . 
By September 1992 , almost a year after her first visit , Estel ' s alkaline phosphatase
had dropped to 500 . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Although her liver has shown no signs of further deterioration since that time , 
Estel developed swelling of the veins around her oesophagus , a common condition in
people with liver disease , and this was treated successfully . She continues to do well and
shows no sign of requiring liver transplantion [ sic ]  . 
-Case History : Liver deterioration . -
Sandra , 70 : Type A . 
Sandra arrived in my office in January 1993 , suffering from a liver condition that
was difficult to determine . All of her liver enzymes were elevated , and she also had a
condition called ascites which meant swelling and an extensive amount of fluid being
retained in her abdomen . Ascites is common in many cases of advanced liver failure . 
Sandra ' s specialist was not treating her liver deterioration , probably expecting her to
eventually require a transplant . He was prescribing diuretics to help remove the fluid
from her abdomen , but the diuretics were causing her to lose large amounts of potassium , 
which probably accounted for her overwhelming fatigue . 
I prescribed the Type A diet with liver-specific botanicals . Within four months , all
evidence of Sandra ' s fluid retention disappeared , and the liver enzymes returned to
normal . Sandra was initially quite anaemic--with a haematocrit of 27 . 1 where normal for
a woman is over 38 . By February 1994 her haematocrit had risen to 40 . 8 . She continues
to be asymptomatic .  
*  *  * 
SKIN DISORDERS . 
To date , there is little blood type-specific information available on skin disorders . 
We do know , however , that conditions like dermatisis and psoriasis usually result from
allergic chemicals acting within the blood . It is worth noting again that many of the
common food lectins specific for one blood type or another can interact with the blood
and digestive tissues , causing the liberation of histamine and other inflammatory
chemicals . 
Allergic skin reactions to chemicals or abrasives show the highest incidences in
Type A and Type AB . Psoriasis is found more frequently in Type Os . My own experience
is that many Type Os who develop psoriasis have diets that are too high in grains or dairy
products .  
*  *  * 
-Case History : Psoriasis . - 
( FROM DR ANNE MARIE LAMBERT ND , HONOLULU , HAWAII ) Mariel , 
66 : Type O . 
My colleague , Dr . Lambert , used my blood type protocol to treat a complicated
case of psoriasis in an older woman . 
Mariel went to see Dr . Lambert in March 1994 . Her symptoms included : severe
shortness of breath , difficulty walking ( with limited range of motion in all joints )  , 
psoriasis lesions covering 70 per cent of her skin surface , and burning pain throughout
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
her body , especially in her muscles and joints . Her medical history was a catalogue of
constant medical problems : vaginal / bowel repairs ( 1944-5 )  , appendectomy ( 1949 )  , 
hysterectomy ( 1974 )  , history of ovarian cysts , psoriasis ( 1978 )  , hospitalization for
pneumonia ( 1987 )  , psoriatic arthritis ( 1991 )  , and osteoporosis ( 1992 )  . 
Mariel told Dr . Lambert that her typical diet was high in dairy , wheat , corn , nuts
and processed foods , with a high sugar and fat content . She said that she craved sweets , 
nuts and bananas . This was a terrible diet for almost anyone , but it was anathema to
someone of Muriel ' s blood type . 
Dr Lambert immediately started Mariel on a moderated Type O diet , which
initially excluded red meat and nuts , and with additional vitamins and minerals . Within
two months , there was a marked decrease in the swelling of Mariel ' s joints , improved
breathing , and her psoriatic lesions were healing . By June , Mariel ' s psoriasis covered
only 20 per cent of her body , and the lesions were nearly healed . There was a marked
improvement in her breathing , her pain had lessened by half , and the range of motion in
her joints continued to improve . By July , Mariel ' s psoriasis was no longer evident , there
was only slight swelling in the joint spaces , and her breathing was no longer laboured . 
At a follow-up visit to Dr . Lambert on 10 October 1994 , Mariel ' s breathing had
improved , and she had no new lesions on her skin . 
Mariel had been to numerous medical professionals since she became ill . She had
tried all types of conventional as well as alternative therapies , including food plans
specifically designed for psoriatic arthritis and asthma . Although these diets were well
intended , none of them were specifically tailored to ensure compatibility with Mariel ' s
blood . The Type O diet was able to provide nutrition without causing health problems
from foods that were incompatible with Mariel ' s blood . With the exception of some
minor pain relief from Chinese herbs , none of the other treatments had been successful . 
Mariel considered her progress a miracle !  
*  *  * 
WOMEN / REPRODUCTION . 
-Pregnancy and infertility . -
Many of the disorders related to pregnancy result from some form of blood type
incompatibility--either between the mother and the foetus , or between the mother and the
father . Unfortunately , we only have initial studies on this phenomenon , and have little
idea about its ultimate implications . I suggest that you read this section in the spirit of
information-gathering , not hysteria . Sometimes a little bit of knowledge can be dangerous
unless you keep it in perspective . 
-Toxaemia of pregnancy . -
As early as 1905 it was proposed that some form of blood type sensitization
resulted in pregnancy toxaemia--a poisoning of the blood that can occur in late pregnancy
and cause grave illness and even death . In a later study , an excess of Type O women were
found to suffer from toxaemia , possibly resulting from a reaction to a Type A or Type B
foetus . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Birth defects . -
Blood type incompatibility , which may occur between a Type O mother and a
Type A father , has been implicated in several common birth defects , including hydatiform
mole , choriocarcinoma , spina bifida and anencephaly . Several studies imply that these
disorders appear to be maternal ABO incompatibility with foetal nervous and blood
tissue . 
-Haemolytic disease of the newborn . -
Haemolytic ( blood destroying ) disease of the newborn is the primary condition
related to the positive / negative aspect of your blood . It is a condition that only afflicts the
offspring of Rh- women , so if you are O , A , B , or AB positive , it doesn ' t concern you . 
Some 50 years ago , researchers discovered that Rh- women who were missing an
antigen and were carrying Rh + babies had a unique situation . The Rh + babies carried the
Rh antigen on their blood cells . Unlike the major blood type system where the antibodies
to other blood types develop from birth , Rh- people do not make an antibody to the Rh
antigen unless they are first sensitized . This sensitization usually occurs when blood is
exchanged between the mother and infant during birth , so the mother ' s immune system
does not have enough time to react to the first baby , and that baby suffers no
consequences . However , should a subsequent conception result in another Rh + baby , the
mother , now sensitized , will produce antibodies to the baby ' s blood type , potentially
causing birth defects and even infant death . Fortunately , there is a vaccine for this
condition which is given to Rh- women after the birth of their first child , and after every
subsequent birth . This problem shouldn ' t arise , but it ' s best to know your Rh status so you
can be certain that the vaccine is administered . 
-Infertility and habitual miscarriage . -
For 40 years , scientists have been studying the reasons why childlessness seems
to be more common among Type A , Type B , and Type AB women than Type O women . 
Many researchers have suggested that infertility and habitual abortion may be the result
of antibodies in a woman ' s vaginal secretions reacting with blood type antigens on her
husband ' s sperm . A 1975 study of 288 miscarried foetuses showed that there were a
predominance of Type A , Type B and Type AB foetuses , which may have been the result
of incompatibility with Type O mothers and their anti-A and anti-B antibodies . 
A large sample of families showed that the rate of miscarriages were highest when
the mother and father were ABO incompatible , such as a Type O mother and Type A
father . In Caucasian and African mothers , Type B foetuses that were incompatible with
the mother ' s Type O or Type A blood , were more frequently involved in miscarriages . 
This link to infertility is not yet fully established . In my own practice , I find that
there are many reasons for fertility problems , including food allergies , poor diet , obesity , 
and stress . 
-Case History : Repeated miscarriage . -
Lana , 42 : Type A . 
Lana came to my office in September 1993 after a long history of repeated
miscarriages . She told me she ' d heard about me from someone she had been talking to in
the waiting room of her fertility doctor . Lana was desperate . In the previous 10 years
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
she ' d had over 20 miscarriages , and she was just about to give up on trying to start a
family . I suggested that she try the Type A diet . For the next year , Lana followed the
blood type diet assiduously , also taking several botanical preparations to strengthen the
muscular tone of her uterus . At the end of the year , she became pregnant . She was
thrilled , but also very nervous . Now , in addition to her previous miscarriages , Lana was
worried about her age and the possibility of the foetus having Down ' s syndrome . Her
obstetrician recommended amniocentesis , which is common for women over 40 , but I
advised against it because the procedure carries a risk of miscarriage . After talking with
her husband , Lana decided to forgo the amniocentesis , accepting the possibility of a birth
defect . In January 1995 , she delivered a perfectly healthy baby boy . 
-Case History : Infertility . -
Nieves , 44 : Type B . 
Nieves , a 44-year-old South American massage therapist , first came to see me in
1991 for a variety of digestive problems . Most of her digestive complaints were resolved
within one year of following the Type B diet . 
One day Nieves shyly announced that she was pregnant . Although she had not
told me before , she now said that she and her husband had tried for many years to
conceive a child , but had finally given up hope . She believed that the Type B diet was
responsible for restoring her fertility . Approximately nine months later , Nieves delivered
a healthy baby girl . They named her Nasha , meaning ' gift from God .  ' 
NOTE SEX RATIOS . 
In both European and non-European populations , the rate of male offspring is
higher in Type O babies born to Type O mothers . This is also true if the baby and mother
are both Type B . The opposite is true of Type A babies to Type A mothers , where female
offspring are more frequent . 
-Menopause and menstrual problems . -
Menopause affects every mid-life woman regardless of her blood type . A decrease
in oestrogen and progesterone , the two basic female hormones , causes profound mental
and physical problems for many women , including hot flushes , loss of libido , depression , 
hair loss and skin changes . 
The decline in female hormones also creates a risk of cardiovascular disease , as it
appears that oestrogen provides protection to the heart and lowers cholesterol levels . 
Osteoporosis , a thinning of the bones that leads to frailty and even death , is another
outcome of oestrogen deficiency . 
With our new-found understanding of the risks associated with hormone
depletion , many doctors prescribe hormone replacement therapy , involving high doses of
oestrogen and sometimes progesterone . Many woman [ sic ] are concerned about
conventional oestrogen replacement therapy because some studies show a greater risk of
breast cancer in women who use these hormones--primarily when there is a family [ sic--
sc .  : history ] of breast cancer . The question of whether or not to take these synthetic
hormones is a confusing dilemma . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Knowing your blood type can begin to resolve the conflict and help you decide
which approach is best for your own personal needs . 
If you are Type O or Type B and entering the menopause , begin to exercise in a
manner recommended for your blood type , and in a way appropriate to your current state
of fitness and lifestyle . Eat a high protein diet . Conventional oestrogen replacement
generally works reasonably well for Type O and Type B women , unless you have highrisk factors for breast cancer . 
If you are Type A or Type AB , you should avoid using conventional oestrogen
replacement , because of your unusually high susceptibility to breast cancer ( See Chapter
10 )  . Instead , use the newly available phyto-oestrogens , which are oestrogen- and
progesterone-like preparations derived from plants , principally soya beans , alfalfa and
yams . Many of these preparations are available as a cream which can be applied to the
skin several times a day . Plant phyto-oestrogens are typically high in the oestrogen
fraction called oestriol , whereas chemical oestrogens are based on oestradiol . The
medical literature conclusively shows that supplementation with oestriol inhibits the
occurrence of breast cancer . 
Phyto-oestrogens lack the potency of the chemical oestrogens , but they are
definitely effective against many of the troubling symptoms of menopause , including hot
flushes and vaginal dryness . Because they are only weak oestrogens , they will not
suppress any oestrogen production by the body , unlike the chemical oestrogen . For the
woman who is not taking any oestrogen supplementation because of a family history of
breast cancer , the phyto-oestrogens are a godsend . 
Talk to your gynaecologist about using these preparations . If you have none of the
risk factors for breast cancer , the stronger chemical oestrogen is more effective for
reducing heart disease and osteoporosis , in addition to the symptoms of menopause . 
It is interesting that in Japan , where the typical diet is high in phyto-oestrogens , 
there is no concise word for menopause . Undoubtedly the widespread use of soya
products , which contain the phyto-oestrogens genestein and diaziden , serves to modulate
the severe symptoms of the menopause .  
*  *  * 
-Case History : Menstrual problems . -
Patty , 45 : Type O . 
Patty was a 45-year-old African American woman with a variety of problems
including arthritis , high blood pressure and severe pre-mentrual syndrome ( PMS / PMT ) 
with heavy bleeding . I first met Patty in December 1994 when she came to my office
accompanied by her husband . At the time , she was being treated by one drug or another
for her ailments . I learned that Patty had been consuming a basically vegetarian diet , so it
was no surprise that she was also anaemic . I recommended that she begin exercising , 
adopt the Type O high-protein diet , and I prescribed a course of botanical medicines . 
Within two months , Patty made an astounding turn-about . Her arthritis was cured , 
the hypertension under control and the last two months had been free of PMS . Her
menstrual flow was now normal .  
*  *  * 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
I wish it were possible to supply you with a more detailed and complete list of
diseases . Perhaps then we could more fully estimate their link to blood type . 
The cause and effect of disease often crosses all boundaries . Cancer , for instance , 
seems to snatch at both the young and old thoughtlessly and without regard to
circumstance or exposure . 
It is clear , however , that there are many diseases that show a strong propensity for
a specific blood type . I hope the evidence I ' ve offered in this discussion of blood type and
disease has proved this relationship . 
If nothing else , knowing your chances , assessing your risk factors , and
understanding the situation gives you another way to take positive action against the
forces that may often leave you feeling you have no control .  
= 10 . BLOOD TYPE AND CANCER : THE FIGHT TO HEAL .  = 
I EXPERIENCE A PARTICULAR SURGE of passion whenever I examine the
healing connection between blood type and cancer . My mother died of breast cancer 10
years ago , after an agonizing experience . 
My mother was a wonderful woman , whose simple Spanish values guarded us all
against any pretence or pomp . She was an anomaly in our family--a Type A who ate what
she chose to eat . She had the notorious Corsican strong will . In her house ( my parents
were divorced )  , she served a basic Mediterranean diet of meats and salads and some
processed foods . In spite of my father ' s blood type work , there wasn ' t a soya bean in sight
when we stayed with Mother . 
Anyone who has seen a family member or friend engage in a valiant but
ultimately fruitless struggle against cancer , knows that there is nothing quite so
heartbreaking . Watching my mother as she went from mastectomy to chemotherapy , from
a brief remission to recurrence , I could almost visualize the armies of invisible invaders , 
stealing their way into her healthy cells and gaining a strong foothold before sweeping
through her immune system like barbarians waging a surprise attack . In the end , nothing
could be done to stop them . They won . 
In the years since my mother ' s death , I have found myself returning again and
again to the mysteries of cancer . I have often wondered if my mother might have been
spared had she adhered to a Type A diet , or if she was somehow genetically
predetermined to fight and lose this battle . I have dedicated myself to finding those
answers on her behalf . You might say I have a Corsican-style vendetta against breast
cancer above all other cancers . 
Does cancer find an inherently more fertile ground to grow and develop in the
body of one blood type than in another ? The answer is a certain ' yes '  . 
There is undeniable evidence that persons with Type A or Type AB blood have an
overall higher rate of cancer and poorer odds of survival than Type O and Type B . 
Actually , as early as the 1940s , the American Medical Association stated that Type AB
had the greatest rate of cancer of all the blood types , but the news didn ' t make headlines , 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
probably because Type ABs constitute such a low percentage of the population . 
Statistically , their high cancer rate didn ' t cause the same kind of alarm as the information
about the more common Type A . But from a personal standpoint , that ' s surely of little
comfort to the individuals with Type AB blood . Researchers may treat cancer like a
numbers game ; I prefer to treat it as a personal crisis in the life of a single individual . 
Type O and Type B show a much lower incidence of cancer , but we don ' t yet have
enough information to say exactly why that is . There are important clues we can explore , 
however , in the antigen and antibody activity of the different blood types . 
Having said that , the blood type-cancer connection is highly complex and in many
ways mysterious . Be clear that being Type AB or Type A doesn ' t mean that it ' s certain or
even likely that you personally are going to get cancer , any more than being Type O or
Type B means you ' ll be absolutely spared . There are many causes of cancer , and we are
still haunted by the mystery of why people with no evident risk factors contract the
disease . 
Increasingly , blood type has emerged as a vital factor , but it is only one piece of
the puzzle . There are many causes of cancer--chemical carcinogens , radiation and
genetics , to name a few . These factors are largely independent of blood type , and as such
would not produce enough of a difference in the population to be able to be predicted on
the basis of blood type . For example , cigarette smoking could easily mask or weaken a
blood type association because it is a powerful enough carcinogen to cause cancer all by
itself--regardless of your inherent susceptibility or lack of it . 
There is an enormous amount of scientific research on the molecular relationship
between blood type and cancer . But the research has practically ignored the question of
whether a person with one blood type or another has a better chance of surviving
particular cancers . 
Who lives and who dies ? Who survives and who doesn ' t ? This , in my opinion , is
the great missing link in the research on cancer and blood type . The real blood typecancer connection resides in the rates of resolution rather than in the rates of occurrence
among the different blood types . And that connection may be the glue of lectins . 
-The cancer-lectin connection . -
Shakespeare once wrote that ' There is some soul of goodness in things evil .  ' In
some instances , like chemotherapy treatments to fight cancer , it is expedient and even
beneficial to use a poison . In relationship to cancer , lectins serve two purposes : They can
be used to agglutinate cancerous cells , and thus act as a catalyst for the immune system--a
wake-up call to get busy and protect the good cells . 
How does this happen ? Under normal circumstances , the production of surface
sugars by a cell is highly specific and controlled . Not in a cancer cell . Because the genetic
material is scrambled , cancer cells lose control over the production of their surface
sugars , and usually manufacture them in greater amounts than a normal cell would . 
Cancer cells are more liable to tangle up if they come in contact with the appropriate
lectin . 
Malignant cancerous cells are as much as 100 times more sensitive to the
agglutinating effects of lectins than normal cells . If two slides are prepared , one
containing normal cells and the other malignant , an equal dose of the appropriate lectin
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
will convert the slide with malignant cells into a huge entangled clump , whereas the slide
of normal cells will show little , if any , change . 
When malignant cells become agglutinated into huge tangles of hundreds , 
thousands or millions of cancer cells , the immune system becomes reactivated . Now the
antibodies can target the clumps of cancer cells , identifying them for destruction . This
search-and-destroy mission is usually carried out by powerful scavenger cells found in
the liver .  
[ IMAGE 7 :  " The Lectin-Cancer Connection " --WHY LECTINS AGGLUTINATE
CANCER CELLS . THE CELLS DEPICTED ON THE LEFT SIDE OF THE DRAWING
REPRESENT NON-MALIGNANT CELLS . BECAUSE THE PRODUCTION OF
SURFACE SUGARS IS CONTROLLED BY INTACT GENETIC MATERIAL , 
NORMAL CELL WALLS HAVE SURFACE SUGARS ARRANGED IN AN ORDERLY
PATTERN . BUT MALIGNANT CELLS HAVE MANY MORE SURFACE SUGARS
BECAUSE THEIR GENETIC MATERIAL IS FLAWED , RESULTING IN THE
MALIGNANT CELL PRODUCING UNCONTROLLED AMOUNTS OF THESE
SUGARS . IF A BLOOD TYPE-SPECIFIC FOOD LECTIN IS ADDED TO A
SUSPENSION OF NORMAL AND MALIGNANT CELLS , IT WILL INTERACT
MORE AGGRESSIVELY WITH THE " FUZZIER " MALIGNANT CELLS THAN
WITH THE " SMOOTHER " NORMAL CELLS .  ]  [ EATRITE7 . JPG ] 
If you were to go into a medical database and key in ' lectins ' and ' cancer '  , the
printer would be working overtime for days . Lectins are extensively used to study the
molecular biology of cancer because they make excellent probes , helping to identify
unique antigens called markers on the surface of the cancer cells . Beyond this , their use is
limited , which is unfortunate because they are so ubiquitous in common foods . By
identifying the blood type of a person with a particular cancer , and using the appropriate
lectins derived from the Blood Type Plan , a powerful new tool can be utilized by any
cancer patient to improve their odds of survival . 
-Enter the blood type . -
An enormous amount of cell division occurs in the course of one ' s lifetime . Given
these odds , it is amazing that cancer doesn ' t occur more often . This is probably because
the immune system has a special ability to detect and eliminate the vast majority of
mutations that take place on a day-to-day basis . Cancer probably results from a
breakdown in this surveillance , the successful cancer cell tricking the immune system
into impotency by mimicking normal cells . As we have already seen , the blood types
possess unique powers of surveillance , depending on the shape and form of the intruder . 
This gives you a rough idea of how blood types , agglutinating lectins , and cancer
interact together . The obvious next question is : what does it mean ? And if you are
personally worried about cancer , what does this mean for you ? 
To date , the only cancer for which we have substantial information about the
blood type connection is breast cancer . I will talk about it in some detail . The other
cancers are less well defined regarding blood types , but we do have limited information
that I will share . We also know that there are many food-related links that undoubtedly
apply to all , or most cancers , and we ' ll study these carefully in view of our knowledge
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
about nutrition and blood types . There are also some innovative naturopathic therapies
that are held in high regard and are gaining wider favour . 
The research goes on , but it is an agonizingly slow process . Even now , as I write
this , I am beginning the eighth year of a ten-year trial on reproductive cancers , using the
blood type diets . My results are encouraging . So far , the women in my trial have double
the survival rate published by the American Cancer Society . By the time I release the
results in another two years , I expect to make it scientifically demonstrable that the Blood
Type Plan plays a role in cancer remission . 
BREAST CANCER . 
A number of years ago , while taking histories on new patients , I began to notice
that many women who had suffered from breast cancer at some time in their distant pasts , 
and had fully recovered , were Type Os or Type Bs . Their rate of recovery was especially
impressive since most of them told me that their treatment had not been very aggressive--
usually no more than surgical excision , only rarely including radiation or chemography . 
How could this be ? The statistics on breast cancer show that , even with the most
aggressive treatment , only 19-25 per cent of women survive 5-10 years after the
diagnosis . Yet these women had survived for a much longer time with only minimal
therapy . Was it possible that being Type O or Type B helped to protect them against the
spread of the disease or a recurrence ? 
Over the years , I also began to notice a distinct tendency in Type A women with
breast cancer--and also in Type AB women , although I haven ' t seen many with that rare
blood type --to suffer from a more aggressive malignancy and a lower survival rate , even
when biopsies taken from the lymph nodes showed that they were free of cancer . Through
my own clinical experience and study of scientific literature , I concluded that there is a
major connection between surviving breast cancer and your blood type . 
In 1991 , a study appeared in the LANCET , an English medical journal , which
may have provided part of the answer . Researchers reported that it appeared possible to
predict whether or not a breast cancer would spread to the lymph nodes by virtue of its
characteristics when treated with a stain containing a lectin from the edible snail , HELIX
POMATIA . They reported a strong association between the uptake of the snail lectin and
the subsequent development of metastasis ( transfer of cancer ) to the lymph nodes . In
other words , antigens on the surface of the primary breast cancer cells were changing , 
and this change was allowing the cancer to spread into the lymph nodes . The key is that
the lectin of HELIX POMATIA is highly specific--to Blood Type A . 
The researchers studying breast cancer discovered that as the cancer cells
changed , they made themselves more A-like . This allowed them to bypass all of the
body ' s defences and rage unimpeded into the defenceless lymph . 
Did my Type O patients survive because they were Type O ? Did my Type B
patients survive because they were Type B ? It certainly looked that way . 
There is a confirmation in our scientific understanding of cancer . Many tumour
cells have unique antigens , or markers , on their surfaces . For instance , breast cancer
patients often show high levels of Cancer Antigen 15-3 ( CA15-3 )  , a marker for breast
cancer . Ovarian cancer patients often have high levels of Cancer Antigen 125 ( CA125 )  , 
while prostate cancer patients can have an elevated Prostate Specific Antigen ( PSA ) and
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
so on . These antigens are often used to track the progress of the disease and effectiveness
of treatment , and are called tumour markers . Many tumour markers possess blood type
activity . Sometimes the tumour markers are incomplete or corrupted blood type antigens , 
which in a normal cell would have gone on to form a part of the person ' s blood type
system . 
Not surprisingly , many of these tumour markers have A-like qualities , which
allow them easy access to the Type A and Type AB systems . There they are welcomed as 
 ' self ' --the ultimate molecular Trojan Horse . Obviously , the A-like intruders would be
more easily detected and eliminated if they were to slip into a Type O or Type B system . 
Breast cancer markers are overwhelmingly A-like . This answers my question
about the differing rates of recurrence in my patients . Although my Type O and Type B
patients had developed breast cancer , their anti-A antigens were better able to fight it off , 
rounding up the early cancer cells and destroying them . On the other hand , my Type A
and Type AB patients couldn ' t fight as well because they couldn ' t see their opponents . 
Everywhere they turned , the cells looked just like them--and they were unable to detect
the mutated cancer cells beneath their clever masks .  
*  *  * 
-History : Preventing breast cancer . -
Anne , 47 : Type A . 
Four years ago Anne came to the office for a general check-up , Without any real
physical complaints . But while I was doing her medical history , I learned that Anne ' s
family had a high incidence of breast cancer on both her mother ' s and father ' s sides--and
the mortality rate among those who had the disease was very high . 
Anne knew about her genetic risk factors , but she was surprised to learn that her
Type A blood presented an additional risk factor .  ' I don ' t suppose it makes any difference , 
though ,  ' she said .  ' Either I ' m going to get breast cancer or I ' m not . There ' s nothing I can
really do about it .  ' 
I advised Anne that there were several measures she could take . First , because of
her family history , she needed to be extra vigilant about suspicious breast lumps , perform
frequent breast self-examinations , and have routine mammograms .  
 ' When was your last mammogram ?  ' I asked . Anne sheepishly told me that her last
mammogram had been seven years ago . It turned out that Anne was strongly disinclined
to avail herself of any conventional medical techniques . She had educated herself about
herbs and vitamins , and often used them effectively to treat herself . But when it came to
more intrusive medical treatments , she shied away . However , she did promise to schedule
a mammogram . 
Anne ' s mammogram was clean , and she began a concentrated program of cancer
avoidance . The Type A diet was an easy transition for Anne because she already ate a
primarily vegetarian diet . I fine-tuned the diet with anti-cancer foods--especially
increasing the amount of soya , and adding specific naturopathic herbs . Anne began to
study yoga . She told me that for the first time in her adult life , she wasn ' t constantly
worrying about cancer . 
A year later , Anne had a second mammogram . This time a suspicious mark was
detected in her left breast . A biopsy showed it to be a precancerous condition known as
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
neoplasia . Essentially , neoplasia is the presence of mutated cells . It ' s not cancer , but it can
become cancer if the cells continue to deteriorate and multiply . During the biopsy , Anne ' s
doctor completely removed the pre-cancerous mark . 
Three years later , there have been no new growths detected , although we are
watching Anne very carefully . She continues to follow the Type A diet religiously , and
says she has never felt healthier . 
Of all the functions a physician can perform , none is more elegant and valuable
than successful prediction and intervention . I was glad Anne came to me when she did , 
and that she took all the right steps .  
*  *  * 
THE ANTIGEN VACCINE . 
Breast cancer continues to be baffling and too often deadly . But there are some
signs that blood type may represent a key to the cure . 
Dr George Springer , a research scientist with the Bligh Cancer Center at the
University of Chicago School of Medicine , has been investigating the effects of a vaccine
whose basis is a molecule called the T antigen . Since the 1950s , Springer has been one of
the most important investigators in the role of blood type in disease . His contributions to
the field are phenomenal . His work on the T antigen has been most promising . 
The T antigen is a common tumour marker found in many cancers , especially
breast cancer . Healthy , cancer-free people carry antibodies against the T antigen , so it is
never seen in them . 
Springer believes that a vaccine composed of the T antigen and the tumour marker
CA 15-3 can help jolt and then reawaken the suppressed immune systems of cancer
patients , helping them to attack and destroy the cancerous cells . For the past 20 years , 
Springer and his colleagues have been using a vaccine derived from the T antigen as a
long-term treatment against the recurrence of advanced breast cancer . 
Although the study group is small--less than 25 women--the results are
impressive . All of the 11 breast cancer patients with severely advanced disease ( Stage III
and Stage IV )  , survived for longer than five years--remarkable in what is considered endstage cancer ; while six of them ( three Stage III and three Stage IV ) survived for between
10-18 years . These results are nothing short of miraculous . 
Springer ' s continued work on blood type systems and cancer convinces me that
the natural evolution of our understanding of blood types will eventually provide not just
information on risk factors , but also a cure for every manifestation of the disease . 
OTHER FORMS OF CANCER . 
The pathology of this disease is fundamentally the same in all cancers . Yet there
are variations related both to cause and to blood type . The A-like or B-like tumour
markers exert remarkable control over the way the body ' s immune system reacts to the
cancer ' s invasion and growth . 
Again , almost all cancers show a preference for Type A and Type AB , although
there are occasional forms that are B-like--such as female reproductive and bladder
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
cancers . Type Os seem to be far more resistant to developing almost any cancer . 
Intolerant and hostile , I believe that the more simple fucose sugars of Type Os dispose
them to tossing off the A-like--or in some cases B-like--cancer cells , and developing antiA or anti-B antibodies . 
Again , we unfortunately know little about the full implications of the blood type
link in cancers other than breast cancer . However , it most likely follows a similar course . 
Let ' s examine some of the most common forms of cancer . 
-Brain tumours . -
Most cancers of the brain and nervous system , such as glioma multiforma and
astrocytoma , show a preference for Type A and Type AB . Their tumour markers are Alike . 
-Female reproductive cancers . -
Cancers of the female reproductive system ( uterine , cervical , ovarian , and labial ) 
show a preference for Type A and Type AB women . However , there are also a high
number of Type B women who suffer from these cancers . This implies that there are
different tumour markers created , depending upon the circumstances . Ovarian cysts and
uterine fibroids , which are usually benign but may be a sign of susceptibility to cancer , 
generate copious amounts of Type A and Type B antigens . 
As I mentioned earlier , I am currently in the eighth year of a ten year clinical trial
of women with reproductive cancer . Most of my patients are Type A , and a few are Type
B . Only occasionally do I treat a Type AB woman , but that is also because there aren ' t
very many of them . 
-Colon cancer . -
Blood type is not the strongest determinant for the various forms of colon cancer . 
The real risk factors for the conditions that lead to colon cancer are related to diet , 
lifestyle and temperament . Ulcerative colitis , Crohn ' s Disease , and irritable bowel
syndrome left unmitigated eventually leave the system depleted and open to cancer . A
high-fat diet , combined with smoking and alcohol consumption , create the ideal
environment for digestive cancers . The risk is greater if you have a family history of
colon cancer . 
-Mouth and upper digestive cancers . -
Cancers of the lip , tongue , gums and cheek ; tumours of the salivary gland ; 
oesophageal cancer--are all strongly linked to Type A and Type AB . Most of these cancers
are self-generated , in that the risks can be minimized if you abstain from tobacco , 
moderate your alcoholic consumption , and watch your diet . 
-Stomach and oesophageal cancer . -
Stomach cancer is attracted to low levels of stomach acid , a Type A and Type AB
trait . In well over 63 , 000 cases of stomach cancer studied , Type A and Type AB were
predominant . 
Stomach cancer is epidemic in China , Japan , and Korea because the typical diet is
rich in smoked , pickled , and fermented foods . These Asian dietary staples seem to
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
counter any of the good that soya beans might do , perhaps because they are packed with
carcinogenic nitrates . Asian Type Bs , who have higher levels of stomach acid , aren ' t as
prone to stomach cancer , even if they eat some of the same foods . 
-Pancreatic , liver , gall-bladder and bile duct cancers . -
These cancers are rare in Type Os , with their hardy digestive systems . Type A and
Type AB are at most risk , with Type Bs having some susceptibility--especially if they
consume many ' harsh ' foods like nuts and seeds . Several of the earlier therapies for these
cancers included large portions of fresh liver from sheep , horse , and buffalo . They
seemed to help , but no one knew why . It was later discovered that the livers contained
lectins that slowed the growth and spread of pancreative , gall-bladder , and bile duct
cancers .  
*  *  * 
-Case History : Liver cancer . -
Cathy , 49 : Type A . 
Cathy first sought medical attention in the late 1980s for a suspicious growth in
her abdomen which turned out to be an aggressive form of liver cancer . She was treated
at Harvard ' s Deaconess Hospital in Boston , Massachusetts , and eventually received a
liver transplant . She was referred to me in 1990 . 
In the subsequent two years , most of my focus was on using naturopathic
techniques to replace the immuno-suppressing anti-rejection drugs needed to help her
keep her transplanted liver . Cathy ' s condition improved to the point where she was able to
stop her drug therapy . 
However , in 1992 , Cathy noticed some shortness of breath , and at her check-up at
Harvard , doctors noticed suspicious lesions on her chest X-ray . These turned out to be
cancer . 
Cathy and her doctors were on the horns of a dilemma . Her lungs were so heavily
laced with cancer , surgery was out of the question (  ' It would be like picking cherries ' said
her surgeon )  , and her liver transplant ruled out chemotherapy . 
We went to work , using the basic type A-lectin cancer diet and other immuneenhancing botanicals . I also recommended a preparation made from shark cartilage for
Cathy to take orally and use as an enema . 
In an amazing series of correspondences , Cathy ' s surgical team at Harvard kept
me up to date on her progress . In a letter dated 3 September 1992 , I was informed that the
lesions in Cathy ' s lung had shrunk and looked more like scar tissue . Subsequent letters
confirmed these findings . By 1993 , even the scar tissue had begun to disappear . 
Cathy was stunned and overjoyed .  ' When they told me that the cancer seemed to
be going into remission , I felt as if I had won the lottery ,  ' she said happily . Cathy went on
to live three symptom-free years . Unfortunately , her cancer returned at that point , and she
later died . 
The case is especially interesting for two reasons . First , throughout this time
Cathy received no treatment other than naturopathic . Second , her team at Harvard was
open-minded and supportive of her using a naturopathic doctor . Perhaps what we have
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
seen here is a tiny glimpse of the future--all medical systems working together for the
betterment of the patient . 
Also , the total cost of Cathy ' s naturopathic therapy was less than $1500 , as
opposed to the tens of thousands she might have spent on conventional treatment .  
*  *  * 
-Lung cancer . -
Lung cancer is truly non-specific . It is one of the few cancers which has no
particular blood type connection . Lung cancer is most commonly caused by cigarette
smoking . 
Lung cancer IS caused by many other things as well . There are people who have
never smoked who will die of lung cancer as you are reading this sentence . But we all
know that smoking is the overwhelming cause of lung cancer . Tobacco is such a powerful
carcinogen in its own right that it bypasses anything so obvious , so ordered , as
predilection . 
-Lymphomas , leukaemias , and Hodgkin ' s Disease . -
This is a form of cancer to which Type Os are predisposed--maybe . Although
these cancers of the blood and lymph preferentially afflict Type Os , they may not be true
cancers at all , but rather viral infections that have run amok . This would make some sense
in light of what we know about Type Os ; they ' re actually pretty good at fighting most
cancers , but the Type O antigen is not well designed for fighting viruses . 
-Prostate cancer . -
There appears to be a higher level of prostate cancer in secretors ( see Appendix
E )  . My own experience has been that a greater number of Type A and Type AB men
suffer from prostate cancer than do Type O or Type B men . A type A or Type AB secretor
is at the highest risk . 
-Skin and bone cancers . -
Skin cancers are unique in that there are a greater number of Type Os who suffer
from them . Perhaps the lighter skins of northern Europeans--who are predominantly Type
Os--are reacting to the increasing levels of ultraviolet radiation caused by environmental
pollution . 
Malignant melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer . Type A and Type AB
are at greatest risk for this condition , although Type O and Type B are not immune . 
Bone cancers seem to show a consistent preference for Type B , although there is
some risk for Type A and Type AB . 
-Urinary tract cancer . -
Bladder cancer in both men and women occurs most often in Type A and Type B . 
Type ABs , who have the double measure of both A and B characteristics , are probably at
the greatest risk of all . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Far more than Type As , Type Bs who suffer from recurrent bladder and kidney
infection should be especially careful with the management of this problem , as it
inevitably leads to more serious disease . 
One puzzling connection that is yet to be unravelled : wheatgerm agglutinin , the
lectin that can act favourably against both lobular and intraductal breast cancers , 
paradoxically accelerates the growth of bladder cancer cells . 
FIGHTING BACK . 
Cancer always seems to present a discouraging picture . I imagine that if you are
Type A or Type AB , you may be thinking grim thoughts . Remember though that
susceptibility is a single factor among many . I believe that knowing your predilection for
cancer , and understanding the workings of your specific blood type , gives you more
opportunity to fight back . The following strategies can give you a way to make a
difference for yourself , especially if you are Type A or Type AB . In particular , many of
the foods suggested are tailored for these blood types . Current research has primarily
focused on the A-like markers for breast cancer , and little investigation has been
conducted regarding the B-like cancers . Unfortunately , this means that while the cancerfighting foods suggested here may be very effective for Type As and Type ABs , they
won ' t necessarily help Type Bs or Type Os . In fact , most of these foods ( peanuts , lentils , 
and wheatgerm ) cause other problems for these two blood types . 
The clinical trials I am currently conducting , along with the work of other
scientists and researchers , will one day give us a deeper understanding of the cancer-diet
connection for all the blood types . In the meantime , Type Bs and Type Os can reduce the
chance of the cell mutations that can lead to cancer by adhering to their blood type diet . If
you already have a cancerous condition , take special note of the other therapies in this
section , especially the pneumococcus vaccine . Further research will offer a more
complete picture . 
YOU LIVE AS YOU EAT . 
People with Type A blood have digestive tracts which find it difficult to break
down animal fats and proteins . Type As and Type ABs should adhere to a diet high in
fibre and low in animal products . 
There are specific foods which must be given extra consideration as cancer
preventives . 
-Soya beans . -
Five per cent of every cake of tofu is composed of soya-bean agglutinins . Soya
bean agglutinins are able to selectively identify early mutated cells producing the Type A
antigen and sweep them from the system--while leaving normal Type A cells alone . The
soya bean agglutinin especially discriminates when it comes to breast cancer cells ; it is so
specific that it ' s been used to remove cancerous cells from harvested bone marrow . In
experimental work with breast cancer patients , their bone marrow was removed . They
were then bombarded with high levels of chemotherapy and radiation . These oncology
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
tools would normally destroy the bone marrow . Instead , the harvested marrow--cleansed
by the soya bean lectin--was then reintroduced into the patients . 
These treatments have shown some very good results . The soya bean lectin also
contains the oestrogen-related compounds genestein and diziden . These compounds not
only help to balance the effect of a woman ' s oestrogen levels , but also contain other
properties which can help reduce the blood supply to tumour cells . 
Soya beans in all forms are beneficial to Type As and Type ABs as a general
cancer preventative . The vegetable proteins in soya are easier for these blood types to
utilize , and so it is strongly suggested that these blood types re-examine any aversion
they may have to tofu and tofu products . Think of tofu not only as a food , but as a
powerful medicine . Although Type Bs can eat soya foods , it is not certain whether they
have the same action in the Type B bloodstream . 
Japanese women have such a low incidence of breast cancer because the use of
tofu and other soya products is still high in the overall Japanese diet . As the diet becomes
more Westernized , it is possible that we will see a proportionate rise in certain forms of
cancer . One study of Japanese immigrant women living in San Francisco showed that
they had twice the rate of breast cancer as their cousins living in Japan--no doubt due to
change in dietary habits . 
-Peanuts . -
The peanut agglutinin has also been found to contain a specific lectin to breast
cancer cells , particularly the medullary form . The peanut lectin shows activity to a lesser
degree against all other forms , including intraductal lobular , and scirrhous breast cancers . 
This connection is probably true of other A-like cancers . 
Eat fresh peanuts with the skins still on them ( the skins , not the shells )  . Peanut
butter is probably not a good source of the lectin , as the majority of brands are just too
processed and homogenized . 
-Lentils . -
The LENS CULINARIS lectin found in common domestic brown or green lentils
shows a strong specific attraction to lobular , medullary , intraductal , and stromal forms of
breast cancer , and is likely to affect other A-like cancers . 
-Lima beans . -
Lima bean lectin is one of the most potent agglutinants of all Type A cells , 
cancerous or not . When you ' re healthy , lima beans will have a damaging effect so they
shouldn ' t be part of a prevention strategy . However , if you are suffering from an A-like
cancer , eat the lima beans . The lectin will agglutinate untold numbers of cancer cells . It
will also destroy some perfectly innocent and upstanding Type A cells , but the exchange
is worth it . 
-Wheatgerm . -
Wheatgerm agglutinin shows a great affinity for Type A cancers . The wheatgerm
agglutinin is concentrated in the seed coating , the outer husk that is usually discarded . 
Unprocessed wheat bran will provide the most significant quantity of the lectin , although
you can also use commercial wheatgerm preparations . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
-Snails . -
If you ' re Type A or Type AB , order ESCARGOTS the next time you dine at a
French restaurant . Consider it medicine packaged in a glamorous , delicious form . 
The edible snail HELIX POMATIA is a powerful breast cancer agglutinin capable
of determining whether the cancerous cells will metastasize ( spread ) to the lymph nodes . 
Unless the thought of eating snails disgusts you ( and really , they ' re quite
delicious )  , what harm can it do ? 
OTHER STRATEGIES . 
-Take care of your liver and colon . -
Women should be aware that the liver and colon are two major sites where
oestrogens can be degraded--if their functions are disturbed the levels of oestrogen
throughout the body can rise . Elevated oestrogen activity can stimulate growth of
cancerous cells . 
Adopt a high fibre diet to increase the levels of butyrate in the colon wall cells . 
Butyrates , as you may recall , promote the normalization of tissue . 
The grain amaranth also contains a lectin which has a specific affinity to colon
cancer cells and will destroy them . 
-The pneumococcus vaccine . -
The pneumococcus vaccine elevates anti-Type A antibodies . Type Os and Type Bs
produce higher levels of anti-A antibodies when given this vaccine , which may make
them better able to fight A-like cancers . In effect , it can strengthen your defences against
A-like cancerous mutations , which may mean you are better prepared to fight specific
cancers like breast , stomach , liver , and pancreatic cancers . 
Type As will obviously not produce anti-A antibodies , but the pneumococcus
vaccine may give a boost to their immune systems , helping them to recognize cancerous
cells normally incognito . Since most cancers have A-like tendencies , this vaccine may , by
elevating anti-Type A antibodies , mobilize the immune systems of all the blood types . 
This vaccine can generate isohemmaglutinins which are much more powerful
antibodies than those the body manufactures against a virus or a bacteria . 
Isohemmaglutinins are ' Terminators '  . They agglutinate and kill their prey unaided , 
requiring no assistance from the other normal killer cells of the immune system . 
Blood Type O and Type B may be able to increase their anti-A antibodies with a
pneumococcus vaccine every 8-10 years . Blood Type A and Type AB should revaccinate
more often--every 5 years . 
-Antioxidants . -
There has been so much conflicting information about antioxidants , their alleged
benefits or lack of them , that it ' s difficult to recommend the best combinations . 
Vitamin antioxidants have been studied for breast cancer , and have been shown to
be not very effective in preventing the disease . Vitamin E and beta-carotenes don ' t
deposit high enough concentrations in breast tissue to effect positive change . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
The plant-based antioxidants do seem to make some difference , but must be
combined with supplemental sources of vitamin C to synergize for greatest effect . Yellow
onions contain very high levels of quercetin , an especially potent antioxidant . It has none
of the oestrogenizing activity of vitamin E , and is hundreds of times stronger than
vitamin antioxidants . Quercetin is available as a supplement in many health food shops . 
Women with a risk factor for breast cancer who are considering , or are on
oestrogen replacement therapy , should use phyto-oestrogens derived from natural
products instead of synthetic oestrogens . Plant-based oestrogens contain high levels of
oestriol , a weaker form of the oestrogen hormone than oestradiol , which is manufactured
synthetically . Oestriol seems to lower your chances of developing breast cancer , whereas
the synthetics increase the risk . 
Tamoxifen , an oestrogen-blocking drug prescribed to breast cancer patients with
oestrogen-sensitive breast tumours , is itself a weaker form of oestrogen . Genestein is an
oestrogen-related compound found in the soya bean lectin . The phyto-oestrogen inhibits
angiogenesis , interfering with the production of new blood vessels needed to feed the
growth of cancerous tumours . 
-General advice . -
Exercise frequently , and get adequate rest . Avoid known pollutants and pesticides . 
Eat plenty of fruit and vegetables . Type As and Type ABs should eat plenty of tofu . Don ' t
use antibiotics indiscriminately . If you get sick , allow your immune system to fight off
the illness . You ' ll be much healthier if you do , rather than relying on flu or antibiotics . 
They suppress your immune system ' s potential for powerful natural responses .  
*  *  * 
-Case History : Advanced breast cancer . -
Jane , 50 : Type AB . 
I first saw Jane in my office in April 1993 . She had already had a mastectomy and
several rounds of chemotherapy for an infiltrating ductal breast cancer which had
extensively seeded into the lymph nodes . At the time of her initial diagnosis , Jane had
two separate tumours on her left breast--one 4 cm and the other 1 . 5 cm . No one was
holding out any great hope for her long-term survival . 
I put Jane on the modified cancer diet for Type AB , with an emphasis on soya ,  
( high in A lectins )  , had her Pneumovaxed and put her on the botanical protocol I use for
Type As with breast cancer . Her tumour marker , the CA15-3 , which was 166 when she
came in ( normal is less than 10 )  , dropped almost immediately to 87 in June , to 34 in
August . I recommended that she go and see George Springer in Chicago to see if she
could get into his vaccine study , which she did . 
To this day all signs , including bone scans , look promising , although as a Type
AB , I would be wary to pronounce Jane cured at this point . Only time will tell .  
*  *  * 
Cancer prevention and natural immune system enhancement offer the brightest
hope for the future . Genetic research is bringing us ever closer to being able to
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
understand--perhaps one day even control--the cellular workings of this astounding
machine that we call our body . 
Scientists at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease in Bethesda , 
Maryland , USA , announced on 9 May 1996 , that they had found a protein used to allow
the AIDS virus entry into the immune system . This discovery could be used one day to
test new drugs and vaccines targeted at the AIDS virus and many cancers . This exciting
breakthrough also helps to explain why some people infected with the AIDS virus remain
healthy and disease-free for years , while others quickly succumb to its ravages . Wouldn ' t
it be remarkable if the tragic scourge of AIDS led us to a cure for cancer ? 
Cancer has long been among the most dreaded diseases of mankind . We seem
powerless to protect ourselves and those we love from its clinging and relentless grip . 
Blood type analysis allows us a deeper understanding of our susceptibilities . By
consciously examining our exposure to both environmental and dietary carcinogens , and
by changing some of our lifestyle and food choices , we can minimize the effects of cell
damage . 
Blood type analysis also provides a way to enhance the ability of the immune
system to search out and destroy cancerous and mutated cells while they are few in
number . Cancer patients can use their knowledge of blood type to fully develop the
capabilities of their immune system to fight the disease . They can also gain a greater
understanding of the mechanisms involved in the growth and spread of cancer . 
The treatments for cancer are still far from perfect , although many people have
been saved by the latest advances in therapy and scientific medical knowledge . For those
of you with cancer , and for those of you who have a family history of cancer , the advice
is clear : change your diet , change your attitudes , and start using antioxidant supplements . 
If you follow these suggestions you will be able to gain more control and a greater peace
of mind . We all dread this horrible disease , but we can take positive action against it .  
= Epilogue .  = 
A WRINKLE OF EARTH . 
THE HUMAN JOURNEY began as one people of one blood-Type O , the blood of
our first ancestors . It is an ineffable mystery as to precisely when the first Type A
appeared , or the mother and father of Type B , or even when the very recent Type AB was
first created . We just don ' t know ; we can only see the broad brushstrokes of history , not
its fine details . 
But we are always learning . Today , the Human Genome Project employs the most
sophisticated technologies in its quest to map the entire genetic structure of the human
body--to name , gene by gene , chromosome by chromosome , the purpose of each living
cell in the grand scheme of some Master Builder . Thus far , many breakthroughs have
come in our understanding of the vast cellular networks of which we are composed--
among them , the discovery of a gene for breast cancer . In late May of 1996 the Project
announced that they had just isolated and identified the gene responsible for arthritis . 
Soon , we will be able to control our genetic fates as never before . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Or will we ? 
Evolution can be defined as an unfolding over time . In the waning days of the
twentieth century , what is there left for us to unfold ? The Hubble Telescope peers into the
farthest reaches of a seemingly endless universe aswhirl in uncharted galaxies ; scientists
then announce that 400 or 500 billion more galaxies exist than they had previously
calculated . They also announce that the observable universe extends at least 15 billion
light-years--in every direction . 
The Worldwide Web beckons . Communications have become almost
instantaneous . There has been an explosion of knowledge in all fields , with much more to
come . We are a sophisticated , increasingly urbane people . We are at our genetic peak ! 
Well , so were the Neanderthals once . And for many thousands of years , CroMagnon dominated this planet . When the barbarian hordes came rampaging through
Europe in wave after wave of invasion , it must have seemed to those invaded as if it
would never end . But our lives and our memories are short . We are without substance in
the flame of endless time , gossamer shredding in the wind . The revolution is not over . It
is still taking place . 
Evolution is very subtle . Our genetic makeups and those of our children , and
those of our children ' s children , continue to alter in infinitesimal and unknown ways of
which we are completely unaware . Some may believe that the evolution revolution is
over . I am convinced that it is an ongoing , kinetic process . 
-The Revolution Continues . -
Where does the power of life come from ? What propels us and compels us to
survive ? 
Our blood . Our life force . 
There have been recent outbreaks of rare viruses and infectious diseases as we
have pushed into the remaining untouched jungles of this planet . These diseases defy
medical intervention . Will our bodies produce answers to the challenges posed by the
unknown ? 
This is what we face : 
__ Increasing ultraviolet radiation caused by the depletion of the ozone layer . 
__ The increased pollution of our air and water . 
__ Increasing food contamination . 
__ Overpopulation and famine . 
__ Infectious diseases beyond our power to control . 
__ Unknown plagues emerging from all of the above . 
We will survive . We have always survived . What form that survival will take , and
what the world and its stresses will be like for the survivors , we do not know . 
Perhaps a new blood type will emerge--call it Type C . This new blood type will be
able to create antibodies to fend off every antigen that exists today , and any future
permutation of antigens that develops . In an overcrowded , polluted world with few
natural resources left , the new Type Cs will come to dominate their societies . The
antiquated blood types will begin to die off in an increasingly hostile environment for
which they are no longer suited . Finally , Type C will rule . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Or maybe a different scenario will be played out , one in which our scientific
knowledge finally allows us to gain dominion over the worst impulses of humanity , and
civilization is able to rouse itself from the suicidal impulses that seem to impel it to
doom . 
Our knowledge is truly vast , and there is every reason to hope that the finest and
most altruistic minds and spirits of our age might focus on a way to deal with the realities
of our world--violence , war , crime , ignorance , intolerance , hatred , and disease--and thus
pull us out of this toxic spiral . 
Nothing is complete . This world and our purpose in it is an ever-changing
equation of which each of us is momentarily an integral part . The revolution continues
with us or without us . Time sees us only as a blink of the eye , and it is this impermanence
that makes our lives so precious . 
By sharing my father ' s fascination with and my scientific knowledge of the Blood
Type diets , I hope to make a positive impact on the life of everyone who examines this
book . 
Like my father before me , I am a practising naturopathic doctor . I have dedicated
myself to the pursuit of naturopathic knowledge and research , and this work has been my
passion for many years . It began as a gift from my father and became , for me , a gift to my
father . This is the Blood Type Plan , the revolutionary breakthrough that will change the
way you eat and live .  
= Afterword .  = 
MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGH FOR THE AGES . 
BY DR JOSEPH PIZZORNO , PRESIDENT , BASTYR UNIVERSITY . 
THIS IS AN incredibly exciting time for natural medicine . Finally , modern
medical science has developed the analytical tools and information base to understand the
mechanisms of centuries-old healing wisdom . While many theories on health prevail
worldwide , only a small number have been subjected to scientific scrutiny , as few natural
healers have either the technical skills or the emotional inclination to study the research
literature . For natural medicine to become established as an integral part of today ' s
healthcare systems , it must fulfil the expectations of the modern world for reliability and
credibility . 
Bastyr University in Seattle , Washington , USA , has shown how to do this . 
Founded in 1978 , Bastyr ' s mission has been to bring to the world the benefits of credible , 
science-based natural medicine . Bastyr provides accredited cutting-edge education , 
insightful research and effective clinical services in naturopathic medicine . Its graduates
are leaders in their fields . 
Dr Peter D ' Adamo , a graduate of our first class of naturopathic doctors in 1982 , is
an outstanding example of the best Bastyr has to offer . His exciting pioneering work
could change the practice of medicine for centuries to come . Inspired by his father ' s
preliminary theories about the importance of blood type in predicting a person ' s
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
biochemistry , Peter worked with students at Bastyr for over a decade culling over 1 , 000
papers from the scientific research literature . This exhaustive study of the medical and
anthropological research , combined with clinical observation and scientific inquiry , 
matured into a cohesive theory with a credible foundation . The rational guidelines Peter
developed will fundamentally enhance people ' s health and afford a deeper understanding
of how an individual ' s genetic background determines his biochemistry and dictates his
susceptibility to disease and environmental factors , including diet . This work will surely
provide valuable insights for doctors responsible for the treatment of many of today ' s
most challenging diseases . 
I was first exposed to the unique concept of using blood types to better understand
an individual ' s unique dietary and biochemical needs when Peter was a student at Bastyr . 
One of the courses I taught in the naturopathic medicine programme required students to
carefully research a topic of interest to them and then present it , in both written and oral
form , to the rest of the class . During a particularly memorable class in 1981 , Peter
stimulated considerable excitement and intense discussion when he presented the
unexpected concept his father had intuitively developed--that blood type could be a
determining factor in health . As might be expected , many more questions were asked
than Peter could answer . The high level of interest and large number of insightful
questions appeared to especially engage Peter ' s own intellectual curiosity , stimulating
him to commence his important quest . 
Over the next few years , Peter engaged in a considerable amount of study and
research . I remember many fascinating conversations with him resulting in my recruiting
several of our better graduate students at Bastyr to help him comb the medical and
anthropological research journals . As the years progressed , Peter called often to share his
excitement as he uncovered the surprising amount of relevant research that had been
performed in a wide range of disciplines . But until Peter , no one had put it all together or
thought through the implications of what different researchers were discovering . 
His studies culminated in his landmark presentation at the 1989 Annual
Convention of the American Association of Naturopathic Physicians in Rippling River , 
Oregon . The audience was extremely excited by the clinical applicability and a lively
discussion followed . Since then many leading clinicians have adopted Peter ' s blood typebased protocols . 
Hippocrates is said to have stated :  ' Let your medicines be your foods and your
foods your medicine .  ' But how to do this ? One of the most significant challenges facing
the dedicated physician is how to determine the best diet to recommend to his or her
patients . While it is relatively easy to tell everyone to eat a balanced diet of organically
grown whole foods in as natural a form as possible , this ignores the biochemical
uniqueness of each individual . Genetic and environmental factors dramatically alter a
person ' s metabolism and without ways of objectively assessing these changes , all a
physician can do is guess or blindly apply the latest theory . Over the centuries , many
theories about how to optimize one ' s diet have come and gone , but none have survived
the test of time , for none have been based on scientific research . Thanks to the pioneering
work of Dr . Peter D ' Adamo , and his father , Dr . James D ' Adamo , this has now changed . 
Here is testimony to the fact that original ideas combined with a rigorous scientific
perspective can change the course of medicine . 
Joseph Pizzorno , N . D . 
WEIGHT LOSS RESEARCH
Seattle , Washington . 
June 1996 . 
DR PIZZORNO , PRESIDENT OF BASTYR UNIVERSITY IN SEATTLE , 
WASHINGTON , THE FIRST ACCREDITED , MULTIDISCIPLINARY COLLEGE OF
NATURAL MEDICINE IN THE UNITED STATES , IS A LEADING FIGURE IN THE
FIELD OF NATURAL MEDICINE . AS SENIOR EDITOR AND CO-AUTHOR OF
THE INTERNATIONALLY ACCLAIMED A Textbook of Natural Medicine , AND THE
BESTSELLER , Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine , HE HELPED DEFINE THE
STANDARD OF CARE FOR NATUROPATHIC MEDICINE , DOCUMENTED THE
SCIENTIFIC VALIDITY OF NATURAL MEDICINE , AND PUSHED FORWARD
THE FRONTIERS OF NATURAL HEALING . 
IN 1993 , DR PIZZORNO WAS INVITED TO MAKE A PRESENTATION ON
THE ROLE OF NATUROPATHIC MEDICINE IN HEALTHCARE TO FIRST LADY
HILLARY CLINTON ' S HEALTH CARE REFORM TASK FORCE . HE WAS
APPOINTED TO THE US CONGRESS ' S OFFICE OF TECHNOLOGY
ASSESSMENTS ADVISORY PANEL ON THE SAFETY AND EFFICACY OF
DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS , AND BECAME A CONSULTANT TO THE US
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION . 