 " Every dish must look like art "  : the Japanese-Peruvian culinary sensation of ' Nikkei '  
 
 " Every dish must look like art "  : the Japanese-Peruvian culinary sensation of ' Nikkei ' 
Copyright euronews - Credit : Dubai
By Evan Bourke • Updated : 15 / 02 / 2022
The unlikely combination of Japanese cooking skills and Peruvian cuisine creates a recipe for a truly unique taste , otherwise known as ‘ Nikkei ’  .  
 
 ' Sushi ' is a word recognised worldwide due to Japanese cuisine having been adopted by many cultures across the globe . Based around rice and noodles with a variety of ingredients added to complete each dish , the popularity of Japanese food has grown partly due to its health benefits which are linked to the traditional food products of green tea , soy , seaweed , raw fish , matcha and fermented foods like miso . 

Japanese Chefs are known to spend years perfecting individual cooking techniques . It can take up to ten years to become a sushi chef , also known as an ' itamae '  . Their renowned masterful knife skills allow them to create delicate plates . 


The arrival of ' Nikkei ' 
Japanese immigrants started arriving in Peru in the late 1800s . Remaining loyal to their heritage , they brought aspects of their culture with them , including their cooking skills . 

After travelling 15 , 000 km from home , the Japanese chefs found it challenging to source ingredients traditionally found in their recipes . Locally sourced ingredients such as chipanga , aji mirasol and aji amarillo were commonly found in ceviches . However , using these ingredients with Japanese cooking techniques resulted in the birth of a new cuisine known as ‘ Nikkei ’  . The word ' Nikkei ' derives from ' Nikkeijin '  , which means Japanese people who emigrated from Japan and their descendants . The popularity of this cuisine quickly grew , and ‘ Nikkei ’ can be found in the neighbouring countries of Peru . 

Today , foodies in Dubai can taste the unique fusion of Japanese and Peruvian cuisines in Clay restaurant . In this episode of Taste , we meet Head chef at Clay , Jolbi Huacho , a Peruvian native , who creates masterful examples of Nikkei in every dish . He told Euronews ,  " Every dish must look like art "  . 

_Click the video player above to watch the episode_