Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all of the Readers who have shared their
healthy weight loss stories with me. Without you, this book—which
I hope will inspire others—would not have been possible.
Additionally, I want to thank others who have helped me to translate my inspiration for telling this story into this book which you
are now reading:
Buck Levin, Ph.D,, R.D., Nutrition and Food Expert, who works as
a senior research consultant. His efforts have allowed us to bring
you science-based information that connects healthy eating to
weight loss.
Tenji Cowen, who worked as an editor and proofreader and who
was instrumental in giving shape to the Healthy Weight Loss Eating
Plan.
Stephanie Gailing, M.S., C.N., who worked as an editor and coordinator of this book.
Lara Pizzorno, M.A. (Lit), L.M.T., M.A. (Div.), for lending her astute writing and editing skills.
Patricia Stemmle, whose attention to detail and design style helped
shape the look and feel of the book.
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
How to Benefit Most from This Book
The book shares with you how an approach to eating that emphasizes
nutrient-rich foods, such as the World’s Healthiest Foods, can help
you on your journey to Healthy Weight Loss, without dieting and
deprivation.
In Section 1, I’ll reveal that the key feature of foods that help promote
weight loss and health is nutrient-richness. I explain what this term
means, provide you with examples of nutrient-rich foods, and discuss
the benefits of the key nutrients in which the World’s Healthiest
Foods are concentrated.
In Section 2, I describe important ways that nutrient-rich foods
support healthy weight loss. Here you can discover how they can
help you manage adverse food reactions, promote energy production
and optimal metabolism, support digestive and liver health, maintain
balanced blood sugar levels, and curb inflammation.
In Section 3, you’ll find the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan,
menus that you can use for 4 weeks that take the guesswork out of
designing meals for health and healthy weight. Included here you’ll
find all the recipes that you’ll prepare for these 4 weeks plus practical tips that can help you in your continued healthy weight loss. 
I’ve also compiled a section of Q&As that address various topics
associated with Healthy Weight Loss. These include the role of
calorie intake in weight management, the difference between nutrientrich and energy-rich foods, and so much more. You can find these in
Section 4.
9
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
10
INTRODUCTION
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Have you had those extra pounds seemingly creep up on you with
no apparently obvious reason? It’s not as if you feel like you've
been eating more than usual, and certainly not enough to show up
so strikingly on the scale. 
Most all of us have experienced this at least once in our lifetime. It
takes us by surprise and leaves us in a slight state of shock because
it doesn't seem as though we have done anything to deserve this
extra poundage.
I am no exception. Like millions of others, I have personally experienced the rollercoaster ride of losing and regaining a large amount
of weight (50 pounds to be exact). Because it is such a widespread
problem, there doesn't seem to be any area of health in which there
is more time, effort, and money spent than in the area of weight loss. 
So even though those of us who are trying to lose weight decrease
food intake and exercise more, long-term weight loss still seems to
elude many of us. The common scenario is to initially lose weight
but soon gain it back. In fact, in about 90% of cases people regain
all the weight they lost, and oftentimes end up heavier than when
they started!
Preventing this weight loss roller coaster and helping you to find a
way to enjoy weight-loss foods that can help you get and stay slim
and healthy is what this book is all about. Very few people can sustain
a starvation-type diet or diets that are nutritionally imbalanced and
deprive the body of the important nutrients it needs to function
optimally. It has been increasingly acknowledged that long-term
weight loss does not result from dieting but through a change in
lifestyle to eating nutrient-rich food, like the World’s Healthiest Foods.
Scientific studies continue to demonstrate that among all lifestyle
11
factors, no single factor is more important to our health than the
food we eat. Because the concept of practicing a healthier way of
eating is so amazingly simple, healthy eating can easily be overlooked as a means to resolving our problem of being overweight.
Yet, promoting the intake of nutrient-rich, health-promoting, and
satisfying foods—like the World’s Healthiest Foods--can prove to be
one of the most powerful ways to affect better health and healthy
weight loss. 
The effective one-two punch toward better health and healthy weight
loss comes from increasing our intake of nutrient-rich foods, such
as the World’s Healthiest Foods, and reducing our intake of nutrientpoor foods. This is what I focus upon in this book, Healthy Weight
Loss – Without Dieting. In addition to describing why nutrient-rich
World’s Healthiest Food can help you lose weight and gain better
health, I’ve also included a Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan that
takes the guesswork out of preparing 4 weeks’ worth of meals that
will set you on your way to your weight loss and wellness-fulfilling
goals.
In the beginning, when you start on the Plan, you may feel deprived
when you can't eat your favorite refined, nutrient-poor foods. But
after two weeks of eating more nutrient-rich foods, you will find
that your "craving" for refined, nutrient-poor foods will decrease,
as they will begin to taste too sugary, too salty, and too fatty; you
will then begin to enjoy the more delicate flavors of fresh, whole,
nutrient-rich foods, like the crispiness of fresh salads, the delicate
sweetness of blueberries, the robust flavors of high-energy vegetables,
and the creamy richness of almonds. 
Increasing awareness of the World’s Healthiest Foods can be our
key to change. As we become increasingly conscious of what is
contained in processed refined, nutrient-poor foods, we can start
looking at them in a different way. We will then be less drawn in by
their image of convenience and fun and stimulation, rather seeing
them for what they really are —foods that are associated with our
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
12
epidemic proportions of obesity as well as reduced immune function,
increased risk of heart disease as well as elevated blood sugar levels,
which increases our proclivity for diabetes. Enjoying the World's
Healthiest Foods is a great way to overcome your desire for nutrientpoor foods. 
An abundance of nutrient-rich foods is available to us if we choose
to select them while gyms and playgrounds can keep us active and
help burn off of those extra calories. When I realized what nutrientpoor foods were actually doing to my health and changed to eating
properly prepared nutrient-rich World's Healthiest Foods, my health
improved, I lost 50 pounds without dieting, and I have kept it off for
over ten years. So can you!
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
13
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
SECTION 1
Nutrient Richness Is at the
Cornerstone of Healthy 
Weight Loss
CHAPTER 1
Healthy Weight 
Loss Stories
I started the George Mateljan Foundation ten years ago with one
aim in mind—to help people discover the World’s Healthiest Foods,
so they could enjoy better health. This goal guided the creation of
our World’s Healthiest Foods website (www.WHFoods.org) and The
World’s Healthiest Foods book. 
During the past 10 years, I have been delighted to receive thousands
of letters of gratitude from Readers, who have taken the time to
share with me how eating the World’s Healthiest Foods has changed
their lives. They have written to tell me that they have experienced
greater energy, better sleep, more lustrous hair, clearer skin, enhanced
concentration and memory, and many other signs of overall vitality.
Others have also shared that eating the World’s Healthiest Foods has
helped their cholesterol to drop, their blood pressure to normalize,
their blood sugar levels to stabilize, and their headaches to dissipate.
Over the years, Readers have shared with me how much they have
learned from the WHFoods website and The World’s Healthiest
Foods book. Yet, this learning is definitely a two-way street: as
Readers have learned from us, we have also learned so much from
them. One of the discoveries that I find most exciting has been the
recognition of yet another incredibly positive benefit of the World’s
Healthiest Foods:
Enjoying the World's Healthiest Foods is the perfect way to
lose excess weight and maintain a healthful weight without
dieting.
14
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
15
Here are just a few of the inspiring stories I’ve received from
Readers telling me about their experiences: 
One benefit I've discovered from eating high-fiber, nutrient-rich
World's Healthiest Foods is that I'm losing about 2 pounds per week
without any change in my exercise habits. I don't feel deprived
because I don't consider myself to be "on a diet." Thank you again
for your outstanding website. Eating the right foods has changed
my entire outlook on life. - Mike
The two weeks we have been on your program has proved not only
to be nutritious but extremely tasty. Members of my household are
for the first time eating fish and not complaining. My partner has
lost half a stone in two weeks so would just like to say a very big
thank you. - Lara
The World’s Healthiest Foods are possibly the cure to the American
problem of obesity. From my own experience, I decided to change
my way of eating in the New Year. I was obese—at 5’8.” I was 240
pounds. Now six months later, I have lost 32 pounds and am still
losing. I feel and look a lot better. - Astrida 
Because of your great website, WHFoods, you have helped change
my health for the better. I went from 24% body fat to 13% body fat.
Thanks again for your generous knowledge. - GVU 
Through diet and exercise I lost 170 pounds. I have your list of the
World's Healthiest Foods on my refrigerator. - Mark 
For more testimonials see page 216.
Readers found that the World’s Healthiest Foods were helping them
to lose weight by eating healthier without going on a diet or requiring
undue deprivation. 
Healthy Weight Loss and Improved Health
While excess weight in and of itself may be cosmetically undesirable,
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
its most serious harmful effects result from the fact that excess fat,
particularly around the mid-section, greatly increases risk of developing
a myriad of other health conditions, including high cholesterol, high
blood pressure, and elevated blood sugar levels. Many Readers have reported that eating World’s Healthiest Foods not only helped them lose
weight, but also alleviated weight-related health problems as well:
By using some of the guides, recipes, and tips from WHFoods, I've
lost 40 pounds. I feel better and my thinking is more clear. I had
high blood pressure but that went away when I lost the weight. 
- Kmuzu 
Since I started eating the World’s Healthiest Foods, my blood sugar
has stabilized, and I have lost 50 pounds! I have truly turned my
life around. - Cindy 
I changed the way I ate, and I have the World's Healthiest Foods to
thank. I have lost over 75 pounds. My blood pressure medication is
gone. I didn't count calories and I didn’t even care about portion
control. - Mary
With your help, I have lost 80 pounds; my cholesterol was 280 and
is now down to 170! - KC
Thank you so very much for your food information. I have been
religiously following your advice for about two years. I've lost 100
pounds. You literally don't have time to read my long litany of health
improvements, but they range from dramatically improved mood to
amazing night vision. - BI 
For more testimonials see page 216.
Scientific studies show that chronic preventable health conditions,
including high blood pressure, high cholesterol, type 2 diabetes,
heart disease, and stroke are increasingly being associated with
excess weight. For example, experts estimate that one-half of all type
2 diabetes cases could be prevented simply by controlling obesity!
16
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthy Weight Loss and Increased Energy Levels
Many readers commented that the key to losing weight was forgetting
about counting calories and focusing instead on eating more of the
World's Healthiest Foods. Readers told us that these foods not only
helped them feel more vibrant and energetic, but they successfully
lost weight without feeling deprived or sacrificing anything—including enjoyment—in the process:
I’ve been researching and preparing meals based on WHFoods.org
for the past month. I feel far more alive, alert, enlightened, and
energized. I now experience greater degrees of balance, equilibrium,
and sound sleep and no more mood swings. - Michelle
I have lost weight while I eat more. I have also found more energy
and strength. And for that reason, I wish to thank you very much. 
- Mitch
It has been nearly six months since I began changing over to the
World's Healthiest Foods, and I am pleasantly surprised at my increase in energy, the loss of dress sizes, and the overall feeling of
good health. I find that my refrigerator is not filled with "empty
calories" and that I can always have great snacks and healthy delicious food to eat. - Terri 
Thank you!!! I just needed to thank you for changing my life. This
information has created a better, healthier, and more energetic me.
I have lost close to 30 pounds by changing my way of eating. I was
a terrible fast-food, processed-food eater, never drank water or ate
any kind of fruit; now I think I would die without those things. Just
the thought of fast foods makes me sick. I just couldn't let this
change in my life go without thanking you so much for helping me.
- DL 
For more testimonials see page 216.
Every moment of every day our bodies need energy to keep going.
Energy is needed not only to move our muscles, but also to keep us
17
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
breathing, keep our heart beating, and maintain our body temperature.
Actually, it needed for every body function to occur. 
Nothing helps to make day-to-day life more enjoyable than abundant energy levels. Maintaining a healthy metabolism is key both for
having plenty of energy for your daily activities and for losing those
extra pounds. What is metabolism? It is the rate at which your body
burns energy. And a healthy metabolism requires optimal nutritional
support—the kind of support you will get from enjoying foods like
the World's Healthiest Foods—especially those rich in metabolismboosting protein, magnesium, iron, sulfur-containing compounds,
and vitamins B1 (thiamin), B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin), B5
(pantothenic acid) and B6 (pyridoxine). 
Healthy Weight Loss and the Healthiest Way of
Cooking
I have spent years developing cooking methods and recipes to make
the World's Healthiest Foods taste great because no matter how
nutritious your food, you won't enjoy it, and won’t keep eating it, if
it doesn't taste good. Readers have written us about how much they
love our easy-to-prepare recipes using our Healthiest Way of Cooking
methods:
I started using the Healthy Sauté method of preparing food. I am a
65-year-old male who now weighs 172 pounds. I began at 245
pounds. I only use fresh veggies, fruits, etc. and the Healthy Sauté
method for cooking. I do grill and eat meat/fish in moderation. I
want to thank you so much for changing my life. I have maintained
my current weight for 6 months and increased my exercise regimen
from swimming to a full gym program. Food now is so important to
me because you have been there to help people like me. Keep up the
good work. I love the recipes. I have discovered so much. - DD
With your assistance I have lost 17 pounds, which previously
seemed impossible. Your recipes taste so good—easy and fast, which
is what we all need. I have purchased your book for my mother,
18
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
sister and two friends. I share your daily recipes with my co-workers
who also want your book. Thanks so much for providing all of us so
much help. - Cheryl 
I bought George's book, The World's Healthiest Foods, in January
and began to look at how I ate, what I ate, how much I ate. After less
than four months, I found my weight down almost 20 pounds; my
husband (who had not meant to go on a diet, but whose cook is,
yes, me) had lost seven pounds as well. My energy level has increased
as well, and the level of fruit and veggie intake has increased
dramatically. Salads became an adventure, and the use of nuts and
spices added zest to the foods. - Ann 
Your Plan meets all of my requirements for becoming healthy: simple
prep time, quick and easy cooking methods, and gourmet tasting
meals every time! I've lost over thirty pounds in three and one-half
months. I have more energy than I can use, and better skin than I
ever would have thought possible. The World's Healthiest Foods are
truly the best guide for those of us who want to pursue health while
having time to enjoy life outside of the kitchen. - Rosemary 
I am loving this site, and my interest in whole foods and preparing
(with your methods of course) my meals has never been like this. 
- BI
The style of cooking you have perfected makes food preparation so
easy and the outcome so richly flavorful. - Marie
For more testimonials see page 216.
So, not only were Readers losing weight, they were enjoying great
tasting food that was easy to prepare. They loved eating the World’s
Healthiest Foods and preparing the quick-and-easy recipes included
on the WHFoods.org website and in The World’s Healthiest Foods
book. They reported feeling healthier, having more energy, and
enjoying food like never before.
Usually when you embark on a weight loss diet, it means giving up
19
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
the pleasure of eating! They often require letting others make all the
decisions for us, and usually involve having to give up the joys of
eating for a promise that we will lose weight. 
Many weight loss diets ask us to turn our lives completely over to a
predetermined script not of our making. We are often asked to build
our breakfasts, lunches, and dinners around highly processed foods
that we didn’t select, cook, or even choose from a list of favorites.
By letting someone else make all of these decisions for us, and by
give up the joys of eating for a promise that we will lose weight.
On the contrary, I am of the opinion that selecting and preparing
your own meals—like I did when I lost my own weight—is one of
the best ways to help you lose weight, save money, and make healthy
eating a regular part of your lifestyle; you don’t experience this from
a temporary diet. That's why I developed my new Healthiest Way of
Cooking methods to help you prepare the World's Healthiest Foods in
hundreds of healthy, great tasting recipes, which make weight loss an
easy and enjoyable pursuit that anybody can undertake.
Healthy Weight Loss – Without Dieting
What Readers had written about turned out to be an unexpected
finding about World’s Healthiest Foods—without additional effort
they watched extra pounds melt away! 
Their letters were an inspiration to me! Not only were they rewarding
to read but they also clearly made me see more about how improved
health and weight loss go hand-in-hand. Their successful weight loss
stories are the foundation for my insights about the way to achieve
healthy weight loss without dieting, which I share with you in this
book. I want to express my sincere appreciation to these readers
for taking the time to relay their stories to me. I hope this book will
help you to realize that healthy weight loss is not merely an idealistic
goal but one you can readily achieve with the World's Healthiest
Foods.
20
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
I found from Readers that losing weight doesn’t have to come from
being on an onerous diet, where you look at your food intake
through a special, and short-term, lens. Rather, they easily lost
weight just by following the healthy lifestyle principles of eating a
cornucopia of the World’s Healthiest Foods and preparing them
using the Healthiest Way of Cooking Methods that enhance their
flavor while preserving nutrients. This is not a diet; it’s a delicious
way of losing weight and at the same time enjoying your food. 
This is what our Readers discovered; and I want to congratulate
them in identifying a weight loss approach—one that emphasized
the World’s Healthiest Foods—that will help many others that
struggle with the epidemic problem of weight gain. To continue our
shared learning in this area of health promotion, I would like to
encourage you to send us your weight loss stories; we will post them
to our website, WHFoods.org, so that everyone can benefit.
What is the Secret of Healthy Weight Loss?
So, by now you must be wondering, “What is it about the World’s
Healthiest Foods that made them so effective in producing healthy
lasting weight loss, vibrant health, and energy for the Readers who
shared their success stories?”
It’s simple, actually. The World’s Healthiest Foods are nutrient-rich
foods. I believe that this is the secret of why the Readers were losing
weight –the wide range and quantity of nutrients these foods deliver
for the small amount of calories that they contain (what I refer to as
“nutrient-richness”). 
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods = Maximum Nutrients
Minimal Calories
The classification of a food as nutrient-rich reflects its ability to
provide a wealth of nutrients (vitamins, minerals, phytonutrients,
antioxidants, fiber, protein, omega-3 fatty acids, and other health21
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
promoting compounds) for a minimal amount of calories. In sharp
contrast, nutrient-poor foods are ones that provide a small number
of nutrients, but a large number of calories; these include processed,
refined, and fast foods.
So by enjoying their meals composed of nutrient-rich World's
Healthiest Foods, it was much easier for Readers to get all of the
nutrients their bodies required for vital health and energy without
exceeding the amount of calories that their bodies needed to maintain
optimal weight. And, at the same time, they were satisfying their
appetite and taste buds. For this reason, when they relied on the
World’s Healthiest Foods, they lost weight naturally, effortlessly,
and surprisingly quickly—a winning combination. These foods are
nutritional bargains; they provide an abundance of health-promoting
nutrients without a lot of calories. 
The World’s Healthiest Foods are whole foods that contain all of the
nutrients that nature provides to ensure the health and life of plants
and animals. When we eat nutrient-rich World's Healthiest Foods,
especially when they are organically grown, we enjoy the protective
qualities nature has supplied; nothing is contained in these foods
that doesn’t need to be there. Because the World’s Healthiest Foods
provide what is essential and leave out what it unnecessary, they are
custom-tailored for weight management. And the more you eat them,
the better they will taste. Nutrient-rich World's Healthiest Foods are
the new force for change—they can make a healthier and slimmer you. 
Why the Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods 
Promote Healthy Weight Loss
What is it about nutrient-richness that helps promote weight loss?
Several factors are involved. Nutrient-rich foods provide our body
with outstanding nutrient support that enables our body to carry out
its metabolic activities in an optimal way. Metabolic activities, such
as the burning of unwanted fat (a process called beta-oxidation), are
best supported by a diet that is rich in nutrients. 
22
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Nutrient-richness also means that we provide our body with ample
nutrients at a minimal calorie cost. (Many researchers use the term
“nutrient density” to describe this special dietary combination of
high-nutrients plus low-calories.) It’s helpful to think about nutrientrichness by comparing it to its dietary opposite. Imagine a person
whose diet is largely composed of nutrient-poor highly processed
fatty foods and fast food, i.e, extremely low-quality food containing
very few nutrients. If that person consumes enough food, he or she
will eventually obtain a supply of some nutrients; however, many
vitamins and minerals necessary for a healthy metabolism—as well
as most recently discovered antioxidants and phytonutrients abundant
in plant foods that research is now showing to play important roles
in maintaining a healthy weight—will be virtually absent. 
In addition, how many calories of low nutrient-density food will it
take to get even some nutrient basics? With very low-quality foods,
if a person eats somewhere around 6,000 or 7,000 calories’ worth of
food, he or she will probably get an adequate supply of basic nutrients.
But the caloric cost will be far too high. Body fat and weight gain
will increase from excessive calorie consumption. 
In contrast, the use of low-calorie foods to increase food volume
and the use of nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods to support
metabolism are core research principles in the science of weight
loss. When your weight loss strategy centers around low-calorie and
nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods, the research odds are
strongly in your favor for weight loss success. And this is not difficult
to do; in fact, I will show you how to get most of the nutrients you
need in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan (page 91) and spend
less than 1600 calories. 
Why the World’s Healthiest Foods are HealthPromoting Foods
The health-promoting nutrients contained in the World’s Healthiest
Foods are necessary for body systems, tissues, and cells to function
at their peak, which is essential not only for enhancing healthy
23
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
weight loss, but also for vibrant health and energy. (For more on
nutrient-rich foods on page 30.)
Hundreds of epidemiological studies have looked at the relationship
between nutrient-rich foods, such as the World’s Healthiest Foods,
and health conditions such as obesity, high cholesterol, high blood
pressure, and elevated blood sugar levels. Not only can these foods
reduce your chances of experiencing chronic conditions but they can
also enhance your day-to-day health. For example, they will give
you more energy, help you think more clearly, make your hair and
skin more lustrous, and contribute to an overall feeling of vitality.
What makes them beneficial to health is the health-promoting nutrients
they contain. Not because they are rich in one or two specific
nutrients but because they contain the whole range of important
ones. This is essential because what researchers have consistently
found is that nutrients working together provide greater health
benefits than those working alone. What that means is that there is
no miracle food or miracle nutrient. There is only the miracle of how
the different aspects of your nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods
work together to provide you with optimal health and weight loss.
How the Health-Promoting Nutrients in World’s
Healthiest Foods Contribute to Health and Healthy
Weight Loss
If healthy cells can be considered the spark plugs that jumpstart your
metabolism and if systems that generate energy and increase
metabolism are one of the keys to healthy weight loss, then, of
course, we want to do everything we can to ensure that our cells are
functioning optimally. That's where the nutrient-rich World's
Healthiest Foods come in. Scientific studies have shown that healthpromoting nutrients are the key to having your cells and all of your
body systems function at their best. This includes your nervous
system, cardiovascular system, digestive system, musculoskeletal
system, detoxification system, and, key to your ability to lose excess
24
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
weight, the systems that generate energy and spark your metabolism.
We now know that excess fat, especially visceral fat, is not merely
a storage depot for extra calories, but functions as an endocrine
organ significantly increasing inflammation. Many of the healthpromoting nutrients found in nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods
help keep inflammation under control, which is especially important
if you have excess fat that you are trying to lose. Since excess fat
stored into your fat cells acts as a trigger for unwanted inflammation,
when you lose your unwanted fat, you will also be reducing unwanted
inflammation. This is one of the key reasons that excess weight is
associated with so many health problems. (I’ll cover inflammation
and weight control in more detail in Chapter 10).
A balanced intake of the World's Healthiest Foods enables you to
meet your nutrient needs without exceeding your caloric needs—
the ideal formula for health and healthy weight loss. Unlike traditional diets, which only focus on reducing calorie intake, leaving
you at risk of being nutrient-deprived (and remember, those nutrients
are needed to run your metabolic engine), Healthy Weight Loss –
Without Dieting focuses on nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods,
which deliver lots of nutrients for few calories, literally priming
your metabolic pump to burn stored fat. When enjoying the World's
Healthiest Foods losing excess weight is not only effortless but
virtually inevitable.
In addition to providing you with the health-promoting nutrients
your body must have if you are to feel your best and lose weight, the
nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods naturally satisfy your appetite
because they contain a diversity of all the nutrients that play a
biochemical role in satiety (quenching your appetite). These nutrients
include soluble and insoluble fiber, amino acids, fatty acids, and a
number of other unique food components. All of these are in the
World’s Healthiest Foods pre-packaged in just the right amounts.
For all these reasons, the World’s Healthiest Foods fill you up without
filling you out. You’ll enjoy what you eat and feel satisfied by your
25
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
foods. You’ll gain vitality and lose weight since you’ll be receiving
an abundance of all the necessary nutrients instead of just taking in
empty calories. 
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan Will Show You
How Easy It Is To Enjoy Nutrient-rich World’s
Healthiest Foods
I have found that one of the most difficult aspects about changing to
a lifestyle of healthier eating is that people don't know where to
begin. It all seems overwhelming at first. That's why I created the
Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan that combines the World's Healthiest
Foods and our Healthiest Way of Cooking methods and integrates
them into a menu filled with great-tasting recipes. Readers love these
recipes that take few ingredients, little time, and are easy to prepare. 
I have done all the work for you. For 4 weeks, you won’t have to
worry about what to eat for breakfast or what you’ll cook for dinner.
Everything is spelled out. By the end of the 4 weeks you will have
a good idea of how to fit a healthy eating lifestyle to your personal
tastes. They say it takes about 4 weeks to change a habit so after
these 4 weeks the Healthiest Way of Eating will become almost
second nature to you. And because eating this way is enjoyable and
you will be feeling so good, you won't want to quit. You will be on
the delicious path to a slim and vibrantly healthy life.
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan is powerful because it provides
a combination of nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods that contain
many nutrients that work together synergistically. And never
underestimate the importance of the health benefits from the synergistic effects of the World’s Healthiest Foods. Synergies among the
matrix found in nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods add up to
much more than sum of their individual parts. If you want to be on
the cutting edge of the Healthiest Way of Eating, enjoy delicious
meals composed of a variety of World’s Healthiest Foods like those
in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan.
26
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
New Paradigm in Weight Loss
Most weight loss plans require you to follow some new type of diet
for the first time in your life. These weight loss plans depend upon
a certain amount of novelty. They are betting that you’ve never eaten
this way before (and chances are, you will never eat this way
again!). They are also assuming that you aren’t familiar with the
“special twists” in their theory of weight loss. They give you a diet
that includes these special twists in the hope that you’ll find it new
and interesting enough to make you willing to put up with whatever
unbalanced regimen is prescribed through a period of initial weight
loss. Then you get bored, go back to the way of eating that put on
those pounds in the first place, and gain it all back – just in time for
the next weight loss novelty book to hit the market. As I present in
this book, the World’s Healthiest Foods as the key to Healthy Weight
Loss is different. 
The World's Healthiest Foods aren’t part of a diet relying on some
new gimmick to be followed on a temporary basis. These foods are
part of the everyday eating habits that will make you lean and
healthy. Our focus is a package of nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest
Foods and very quick-and-easy recipes and menu suggestions. The
basis of Healthy Weight Loss –Without Dieting is simply enjoying a
cornucopia of World’s Healthiest Foods prepared using the Healthiest
Way of Cooking Methods, which enhance flavor while preserving
nutrients. It’s not a diet; it’s a way of eating that serves up a delicious,
potently healthy way of life.
Our new paradigm parts company with the catchy fad diets that ask
you to follow unusual food rules or dietary restrictions. Our new
paradigm insists that the “tried-and-true” principles of healthy eating
can be followed at all times in life, including those times when you
most desperately want to lose weight! 
These basic rules include a focus on:
• Nutrient-rich foods like the World’s Healthiest Foods that
27
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
give you the largest number of nutrients for the smallest 
number of calories.
• Simple, quick, cooking practices that preserve as much of
a food’s natural constituents as possible.
• And, just as important, that magical kind of pleasure that 
comes from the delicious tastes and textures of real food. 
I’ve incorporated these guiding principles into this book, Healthy
Weight Loss – Without Dieting, an approach that features no gimmicks
and no temporary food restrictions. As you are making changes in
your meal plan that facilitate your weight loss, you’ll be making the
exact same changes that you will be depending on in the future to
maintain your lower weight. The World’s Healthiest Foods set you
up for optimal weight and vibrant health for life, not just for the next
diet to appear on the block.
Our new paradigm does not involve counting calories, carbohydrates, grams of fat, or any other food component. It’s not that these
components are unimportant, however. Unless you burn more calories
than you obtain from your food, you will not be able to lose weight
in a steady or lasting way. Nobody ever—I repeat, EVER—lost
weight and kept it off while consuming excess calories (excess, in
this case, simply means more than the body needs). And if your
carbohydrate and fat intake soar outside of a healthy range, you’ll
have difficulty maintaining a healthy weight loss. The wonderful
benefit of our nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods and our
Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan, however, is the ability of these
featured foods to help do your counting for you! 
We're confident that you will be able to balance your nutrient-rich
World’s Healthiest Foods intake effectively! The reason is simple:
our recipes and food preparation tips already combine whole, natural
foods in a balanced way. Our recipes are naturally balanced when it
comes to nutrition and also naturally delicious! That’s the beauty
and the magic of the World’s Healthiest Foods. They are foods that
combine tastes and textures in a way that gives you the most food
28
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
satisfaction and the best weight loss opportunity together at once;
they don’t taste like diet foods. The Healthy Weight Loss Eating
Plan will provide you with great examples of how to enjoy delicious World’s Healthiest Foods and recipes. 
Other approaches usually force you to go in one direction or the
other—delicious taste without a reasonable chance of weight loss,
or great weight loss without the pleasure of eating. Our World’s
Healthiest Foods approach gives you both experiences together!
29
Healthy Weight Loss Stories
Readers wrote to tell me that when they shifted their meals to include
more of the World’s Healthiest Foods, they not only experienced
enhanced health, but—without even trying—those who wanted to
lose weight found that they were readily doing so. The research we
did helped us to more clearly understand why Readers lost weight
and why the World’s Healthiest Foods were so effective in weight
loss.
And now let me explain why it can work for you. The reason these
foods are so beneficial is that they are concentrated sources of a vast
array of health-promoting nutrients. Nutrient-richness is the term I
use to describe this remarkable feature of the World’s Healthiest
Foods. I want to explain more about the benefits of this key criterion
of the World’s Healthiest Foods, so you can fully understand why
it’s so important. 
Nutrient-richness is a measurement of the concentration of nutrients
a food can deliver in exchange for the amount of calories it contains.
On the World’s Healthiest Foods website (www.WHFoods.org) and
in my book, The World’s Healthiest Foods, nutrient-richness is
shown both qualitatively (a food may be defined as a good, very
good, or excellent source of a particular nutrient) and quantitatively
(the numerical scores that a food achieves in association with each
particular nutrient).
Since we only have a limited amount of calories that we can consume
if we want to lose weight or maintain our weight while simultaneously
taking in a sufficient range and amount of nutrients to maintain our
health, it is essential for us to get as many nutrients as possible in comparison to the number of calories we consume. Fortunately, it’s easy
CHAPTER 2
Why Nutrient-Richness Can
Help You Lose Weight
30
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
to do this by focusing on the nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods.
The latest scientific research clearly shows that successful weight
loss requires that we eat nutrient-rich foods. In large, nationwide
studies that have included both healthy-weight and overweight
participants, insufficient intake of vitamins and minerals has been
consistently linked to higher body weights. Eating few fresh
vegetables and fruits leads not only to inadequate nourishment, but
has also been linked to weight problems. In studies of overweight
children attempting to lose weight, increased consumption of nutrientrich vegetables has also been associated with better weight loss
success.
New evidence associates diets high in salads, vegetables, and fruits
and low in processed and refined foods with healthy weight because
they contain phytonutrients—beneficial compounds found exclusively
in fruits and vegetables that possess the power to help keep us
healthy and help the body maintain an optimal, healthy weight. Also
salads, vegetables, and fruits are rich in antioxidants, which we need
if we want to lose weight. Studies show that overweight individuals
have higher levels of oxidative stress from an excess of free radicals
and lack of antioxidants. 
What is it about nutrient-richness that helps promote weight loss?
Several factors are involved. Nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods
provide our body with outstanding nutrient support that enables our
body to carry out its metabolic activities in an optimal way. Metabolic
activities, such as the burning of unwanted fat (a process called betaoxidation), are best supported by a diet that is rich in nutrients. 
Since we only have a limited amount of calories that we can
consume if we want to lose weight or maintain our weight and
simultaneously take in a sufficient range and amount of nutrients to
maintain our health, it is essential for us to get as many nutrients as
possible in comparison to the number of calories we consume.
Fortunately, it’s easy to do this by focusing on the nutrient-rich
World’s Healthiest Foods.
31
Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
The Nutrients We Need Each Day
Each day, we need hundreds of nutrients to stay healthy, and these
nutrients must be supplied by the food we eat. 
The following chart will give you a sense of the variety of some of
the nutrients we must get each day from our food if we wish to
experience a healthy weight and optimal health. Please note that this
chart is by no means comprehensive; it doesn’t show you all of the
nutrients you need. 
For example, phytonutrients—plant nutrients such as carotenoids
(beta carotene, lutein, zeaxanthan) and flavonoids (anthocyanins,
catechins, quercetin)—are now known to be essential to health, but
while researchers have identified approximately 10,000 phytonutrients, they estimate at least 40,000 phyonutrients may eventually
be catalogued. 
Even though they have yet to be named or identified in the laboratory, these phytonutrients are still very much present—in nutrientrich foods, like the World’s Healthiest Foods. In fact, that is the only
place you can currently get them! They cannot, for example, be
obtained from dietary supplements because they have not yet been
isolated from the whole, natural foods that contain them. Nor are
they available in highly processed “fast” foods. 
The following chart contains some well-established and wellresearched nutrients that are included in the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration’s “Reference Values for Nutrition Labeling.” Next
to each nutrient you’ll see the Daily Value (DV) that was established
as part of the FDA’s labeling program. Please note that this DV value
is a population-based goal and may not reflect the exact amount of
the nutrient that would be best for you (for this information you should
seek the advice of a nutrition-oriented healthcare practitioner). Yet,
these Daily Values can give you a sense of general nutrient intake
goals and emphasize how nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods can
provide you with outstanding benefits in terms of Daily Values. (For
more on the functions of each of these nutrients, please see the chart
onpage 47.)
32
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
All DVs, except for omega-3 fatty acids, based upon the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration’s Reference Values for Nutrition Labeling. DVs 
based on 2000 calories per day.
* As there is currently no DV set by the FDA for omega-3 fatty
acids, we adopted the standards set forth in a 1999 workshop
33
Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
Nutrient DV
Biotin (mcg) 300
Calcium (mg) 1000
Carbohydrates (mg) 300
Chromium (mcg) 120
Copper (mcg) 2000
Fat – total (g) 65
Fiber (g) 25
Folate (mcg) 400
Iodine (mcg) 150
Iron (mg) 18
Magnesium (mg) 400
Manganese (mg) 2.0
Molybdenum (mcg) 75
Vitamin B3-Niacin (mg NE) 20
Omega-3 fatty acids* (g) 2.5
Pantothenic Acid (mg) 10
Phosphorous (mg) 1000
Potassium (g) 3.5
Protein (g) 50
Vitamin B2-Riboflavin (mg) 1.7
Selenium (mcg) 70
Vitamin B1-Thiamin (mg) 1.5
Vitamin A (IU) 5000
Vitamin B12 (mcg) 6
Vitamin B6 (mg) 2
Vitamin C (mg) 60
Vitamin D (IU) 400
Vitamin E (IU) 30
Vitamin K (mcg) 80
Zinc (mg) 15
conducted at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The workshop
concluded that at least 1.2% of daily calories should come from
omega-3 fatty acids, including 1% from alpha-linolenic acid and
0.1% each from EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) When translated into the context of an 1800-calorie
diet, this workshop standard represented a recommendation of 2.4
grams of omega-3 fatty acids per day, which we adopted as our food
and recipe rating system standard. 
** On our website and in The World’s Healthiest Foods book, we
offer a DV of 0.35 grams for the amino acid trytophan calculated
for 31-50 year old female based on 2002 DRI value of 7 mg/g of
protein and protein DV of 50g.
Fresh Fruits, Salads, and Vegetables are Among
the Most Nutrient-Rich Foods
It’s clear that nutrient-richness is a key to maintaining health and
losing weight healthfully. And what are among the most nutrientrich foods that people can easily incorporate into their Healthiest
Way of Eating to help them boost their well-being? Fresh fruits,
salads, and vegetables.
Yet, which foods do most of us not eat enough of? Fresh fruits, salads,
and vegetables.
In fact, 80% of Americans are compromising their ability to maintain
a healthy weight and endangering their health by failing to eat
enough fresh fruits, salads, and vegetables. I find this to be of great
concern. It’s quite straightforward: the more fruits, salads, and
vegetables, the easier it will be for you to get the nutrients you
need for optimal health at a “caloric cost” so low that you will
easily lose excess weight. I strongly believe that Americans’ seeming
aversion to whole fruits, salads, and vegetables is one of the major
causes of the obesity epidemic in this country (and, in the Healthy
34
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Weight Loss Eating Plan, I will show you how to make these foods
taste good so that you will truly enjoy them).
My approach to healthy weight loss emphasizes fresh fruits, salads,
and vegetables—the lowest calorie food group available on the
planet. On the WHFoods.org website and The World’s Healthiest
Foods book, we profile more than two dozen low-calorie vegetables
and over twenty fruits. With easy-to-prepare recipes and menus—
which rely on low-calorie, deliciously prepared fresh fruits, salads,
and vegetables—I will help you to have 5-9 recommended servings
every day. Based on the weight loss research, these foods are your
best option for increasing food volume and enjoying tasty, satisfying
meals while keeping your overall calories low. 
Nutrient-Rich Food Illustrations
Spinach 
To further explain the unique qualities of nutrient-rich World’s
Healthiest Foods, and to clearly illustrate how important they are to
health and healthy weight loss, I want to share with you some food
comparisons. Following is a chart showing the contributions of
nutrients, including the % Daily Value (DV) of 22 nutrients of which
spinach is an especially concentrated source.
35
Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
36
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
One cup cooked spinach 41 calories
Nutrient %DV
Vitamin K 1111
Vitamin A 377
Manganese 84
Folate 66
Magnesium 39
Iron 36
Vitamin C 29
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 25
Calcium 25
Potassium 24
Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine) 22
Tryptophan 22
Vitamin E 19
Dietary Fiber 17
Copper 16
Vitamin B1 (Thiamin) 11
Protein 11
Phosphorus 10
Zinc 9
Omega-3 Fatty Acids 6
Vitamin B3 (Niacin) 4
Selenium 4
(Beta-carotene and lutein/zeaxanthin are carotenoids that are also highly 
concentrated in spinach. Since there is not a DV for carotenoids, however,
they are not included above.)
As you can see, one cup of cooked spinach contains only 41 calories.
That’s 2.3% of the calories that would be included in a 1,800-calorie
diet. Yet, for just over 2% of your daily calories, you get between 10%
and 100% of the Daily Value for 16 nutrients! In addition to these
remarkable benefits for these nutrients, this one-cup serving of
spinach lets you exceed (by leaps and bounds) your daily intake goals
for vitamin K (1111%) and pro-vitamin A (295%). All of these
amazing benefits and you still have about 1,760 calories left to enjoy
and “use” to get more nutrients! That’s almost 98% of your day’s
calories left to enjoy after meeting such important nutritional goals on
your path to vibrant health, increased energy, and healthy weight loss. 
Romaine lettuce
Speaking of salads, most people who struggle with getting 5-9 daily
servings of vegetables forget that enjoying a salad—as part of lunch
and/or dinner—can put them well on their way to meeting these
goals. That’s because a food like romaine lettuce is more than just a
base for a delicious salad. It provides an impressive handful of
nutrients for an equally impressive small number of calories. If you
look at the following chart, you’ll see how two cups of romaine
lettuce—the least you’d probably use for making a salad—is so
nutrient-rich. For just 16 calories, you’re well on your way to meeting
your daily goals for vitamin K, pro-vitamin A, vitamin C, folate,
manganese, and chromium, while also enjoying a host of other healthpromoting nutrients. This is why I recommend eating a salad made of
romaine lettuce (or another type of nutrient-rich lettuce) everyday. 
37
Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
(Beta-carotene and lutein/zeaxanthin are carotenoids that are also found in
concentrated amounts in romaine lettuce. Since there is not a DV for 
carotenoids, they are not included above.)
38
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Two cups romaine lettuce 16 calories
Nutrient %DV
Vitamin K 144 
Pro-vitamin A 58 
Vitamin C 45 
Folate 38 
Manganese 36 
Chromium 13 
Potassium 9 
Molybdenum 9 
Dietary Fiber 8 
Vitamin B1 (Thiamin) 7 
Iron 7 
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 7 
Phosphorus 5 
Calcium 4 
Protein 4 
Omega-3 Fatty Acids 3 
Tryptophan 3 
B3 (Niacin) 3 
B6 (Pyridoxine) 3
Molybdenum 9 
Dietary Fiber 8 
Vitamin B1 (Thiamin) 7 
Iron 7 
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 7 
Phosphorus 5 
Calcium 4 
Protein 4 
Omega-3 Fatty Acids 3 
Tryptophan 3 
B3 (Niacin) 3 
B6 (Pyridoxine) 3
Now, let’s compare romaine lettuce with iceberg lettuce, so we can
get an even better feel for the amazing way in which the World’s
Healthiest Foods provide optimal nutrient benefits without wrecking your calorie budget. Iceberg lettuce—while definitely a whole, natural food—is not as nutrient-rich as many of the World’s Healthiest
Foods, including romaine lettuce. That’s the reason you won’t find
iceberg lettuce listed on our food chart. While iceberg lettuce is very
low in calories (20 calories per two cups of shredded lettuce), it
contains far less nutrients than a best-choice nutrient-rich World’s
Healthiest Food like romaine lettuce. 
For example, two cups of iceberg lettuce provide 723 IU of provitamin A—only about one-quarter the amount provided by two
cups of romaine lettuce. Therefore, to get the same amount of provitamin A contained in two cups of romaine lettuce, you’d need to
eat about eight cups of iceberg lettuce (an amount you would probably
not be willing to consume) and which would end up costing you
about 64 additional calories. These 64 added calories may not seem
like a lot, but they are when you are trying to lose weight and make
every calorie count. If you had to allocate those 64 added calories
every day of your weight loss, you would directly slow your weight
loss down by about 450 calories per week, or one-eighth of a pound
per week. In one month, you’d be slowing your weight loss down by
about one-half pound and in six months, three full pounds. 
Just think: if each day you ate four cups of nutrient-rich salads that
included romaine lettuce, you’d probably spend under 100 calories
while meeting (or exceeding) your goals for dozens of healthpromoting nutrients. Now, that’s what I call a great formula for
health, and healthy weight loss.
Blueberries
Fruits are another incredibly concentrated source of nutrients. Plus,
they offer another terrific benefit: as a natural source of sugar, they
can satisfy a sweet tooth. So when you eat fruit for a snack or
dessert, you will not only be benefiting from their range of vitamins,
39
Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
minerals, fiber, and phytonutrients, but you’ll be avoiding calorierich sugary foods such as cakes, cookies, and ice cream.
Using blueberries as an example for fruit, you can see from the chart
below that it is concentrated in important essential nutrients. Yet, the
chart here can be deceiving since what blueberries—as well as many
other fruits—also deliver are vast amounts of phytonutrients, such as
carotenoids and flavonoids. As these nutrients currently do not have
DVs, they are not represented in the chart.
Some World’s Healthiest Foods Are More
Nutrient-rich Than Others
I’ve set the bar of nutrient-richness high for all of the World’s
Healthiest Foods. However, even within the master list of my
World’s Healthiest Foods, some foods are more nutrient-rich than
others. To easily evaluate the level of nutrients that these foods provide
per calorie, look at the Total Nutrient-Richness Chart below. It shows
the World’s Healthiest Foods arranged by food group and total nutrient-richness score. This score was calculated by evaluating each food
and seeing how many health-promoting nutrients it provided at a
richness level of excellent, very good, or good. For more details on
how this total score was calculated, see page 213 in the Appendix. 
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
1 cup blueberries 81 calories
Nutrient %DV
Vitamin C 31 
Manganese 20 
Dietary Fiber 16 
Vitamin E 7 
40
41
Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
TOTAL NUTRIENT-RICHNESS CHART
Vegetables Fruits 
Spinach 65 Strawberries 24
Swiss chard 55 Raspberries 18
Crimini mushrooms 47 Cantaloupe 14
Asparagus 43 Pineapple 12
Broccoli 40 Kiwifruit 11
Romaine Lettuce/Salads 40 Oranges 11
Collard Greens 38 Papaya 11
Kale/Mustard Greens 34 Watermelon 11
Tomatoes 34 Apricots 9
Brussels Sprouts 33 Grapefruit 8
Green Beans 33 Grapes/Raisins 8
Summer Squash 32 Blueberries 7
Bell Peppers 29 Cranberries 7
Cauliflower 29 Bananas 6
Celery/Fennel 25 Plums/Prunes 6
Green Peas 24 Lemons/Limes 4
Carrots 22 Apples 3
Winter Squash 20 Figs 3
Beets/Beet Greens 15 Pears 3
Eggplant 15 
Garlic 15 Beans and Legumes
Sweet Potatoes 13 Lentils 20
Cucumber 11 Soybeans 20
Potatoes 8 Kidney Beans/Pinto Beans 19
Avocados 7 Lima Beans 18
Corn 7 Black Beans/Navy Beans 16
Sea Vegetables 7 Garbonzo Beans 16
Shiitake Mushrooms 5 Tofu 16
Olives/Olive Oil 4 Dried Peas 14
Fish and Shellfish Nuts and Seeds
Tuna 24 Sunflower Seeds 18
Shrimp 23 Flaxseeds 13
Salmon 21 Sesame Seeds 12
Cod 21 Pumpkin Seeds 11
Sardines 20 Walnuts 8
Scallops 14 Almonds 7
Peanuts 6
Cashews 5
Dairy and Eggs Whole Grains
Eggs 18 Oats 12
Low-Fat Milk 17 Rye 10
Yogurt 15 Quinoa 7
Low-Fat Cheese 9 Brown Rice 7
Goat’s Milk 8 Whole Wheat 7
Buckwheat 5
Herbs and Spices 
Parsley 21 Poultry and Lean Meats
Mustard Seeds 15 Calf’s Liver 41
Basil 11 Beef, Grass-Fed 15
Turmeric 11 Venison 14
Cinnamon 10 Lamb 12
Cayenne/Red Chili Peppers 8 Chicken 11
Black Pepper 7 Turkey 11
Ginger 5 
Dill 4 
Cilantro 3 
Rosemary 3 
This chart can provide you with some very interesting findings. For
example, look at how high the values are for vegetables. This insight
makes complete sense because vegetables contain an especially
large number of health-promoting nutrients and an unusually small
number of calories. Now compare these values to those of another
food group—for example, whole grains. You’ll see that no whole
grain has a total nutrient-richness score above 12. Yet, 77% of the
vegetables do. Vegetables, as a whole, are more nutrient-rich than
whole grains.
If you look at the nutrient-richness score for a grain like whole
wheat and compare it to the score for a vegetable like spinach, you’ll
immediately see the difference in nutrient-richness. Unlike the
spinach example on page 36 that featured 22 nutrients in high
concentration, whole wheat only features four. 
42
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
43
Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
This is not to say that whole grains, such as whole wheat, can’t play
a very important role in a healthy diet, even a healthy diet geared
towards losing weight. All of the World’s Healthiest Foods can. It’s
just that their role should be more limited than that of fresh fruits,
salads, and vegetables, whose high amount of health-promoting
nutrients coupled with their low level of calories makes them the
perfect food to be the foundation of Healthy Weight Loss. Looking
at the charts again will really emphasize this. For 41 calories,
spinach features 22 nutrients of which it is very concentrated source,
while for almost four times that many calories whole wheat only
features four! 
I’d like to add one further point about these total nutrient-richness
scores. As I have already noted, they let you see at a glance which
foods serve you best as the foundation for your weight loss program.
Right off the bat, they show you what salads and vegetables can do
that no other food group can. The need to emphasize salads and
vegetables in a World’s Healthiest Foods’ approach to weight loss
cannot be overstated!
Now that I’ve shared with you the basics of nutrient-richness, I’m
going to finish up Section 1 by telling you some of the important
ways that nutrients contained in these foods support your health.
Then I’ll move on in Section 2 to show you exactly how these foods
make it easier for you to lose weight.
One cup cooked cracked 16 calories
wheat
Nutrient %DV
Manganese 56 
Dietary Fiber 33 
Tryptophan 28 
Magnesium 15 
CHAPTER 3
Why Nutrient-Rich World’s
Healthiest Foods are the
Key to Health and
Healthy Weight Loss
Nutrients are the Body’s Ingredients for Health
In this chapter, I am going to review why the nutrients, in which the
World’s Healthiest Foods are so concentrated, are essential to your
health. You’ll see how they provide so many great benefits and are
therefore the key to healthy weight loss and optimal health.
Even though most everyone is familiar with the idea of nutrition and
nutrients, many people do not really know what nutrients actually do
and how they work, including how they contribute to weight loss. I
want to tell you what nutrients do by starting out with the simple
example of calcium. 
You’ve no doubt heard that calcium is important for the health of
your bones. And you may also have heard that osteoporosis—a bone
problem that affects 20 million adults in the U.S.—can be “prevented
by calcium.” 
I wish things were this simple! But unfortunately, they are not. Even
though calcium plays a pivotal role in maintaining our bone health,
it’s just not true that calcium, all by itself, can prevent the occurrence of osteoporosis. 
First of all, there are many more nutrients that bones need to build
their structure and density. For example, for good bone health you
44
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
45
need magnesium, manganese, zinc, vitamin D, vitamin C, vitamin K,
boron, silicon, potassium, and a variety of other nutrients. Just
focusing on calcium won’t allow you to achieve the goal of good bone
health. You need a much broader list of nutrients that can only be provided by nutrient-rich foods like the World’s Healthiest Foods. 
Most people are used to thinking about nutrients in a “this cures
that” type of way. This way of thinking is sometimes encouraged
by the overly simplified positioning of dietary supplements in the
marketplace. Manufacturers often include health claims on their
product labels that present relatively simple cause-effect relationships
between nutrients and health. For example, a supplement manufacturer might claim that calcium builds strong bones, or that fiber
maintains bowel regularity, or that vitamin E supports heart health.
While all of these connections between nutrients and health have
science-based validity, consumers might end up concluding that all
they need for a healthy heart is vitamin E, or that nothing more is
needed for building strong bones than calcium. The truth of the
matter is that no single nutrient is a magic bullet that can singlehandedly prevent a disease or protect an entire body system like
blood vessels or bones. 
It’s not as if a nutrient waves a magic want and voila…a health
problem is fixed. The reason that nutrients are related to the
prevention of future health problems and the improvement of existing
ones is connected to the role that nutrients play in all of the body’s
underlying structures and metabolic activities. They are the resources
that our body needs to make and maintain healthy cells. They are the
substances that help run our metabolism and allow our body to go
about its moment-by-moment physiologic activities. Without them,
our body cannot do the things it needs to do: for example, our cells
can’t communicate, our muscles can’t contract, and oxygen can’t
be carried in our blood. Those three activities are joined by literally
thousands of other activities that go on every second at a metabolic
level that is invisible to us but absolutely critical to our health.
Nutrients, therefore, are the ingredients in the body’s recipe for
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods Key to Healthy Weight Loss
46
supporting its underlying structure and function, which serve as the
foundation for our physical health. 
You can get a glimpse of this massive underlying health foundation
if you take any single nutrient and look at everything it does in the
body. As an example, let’s take magnesium. 
Magnesium is a co-factor in over 300 different enzymatic reactions.
These include many steps in the energy production cycle as well as
the synthesis of our DNA. Magnesium is also an important component
in bone structure and plays an important role in cell-to-cell communication, especially that involving our nerve and muscle cells.
Without adequate amounts of magnesium, our bodies wouldn’t be
able to function properly, which can first lead to lowered energy and
then potentially progress to a variety of different signs, symptoms,
and health conditions when things aren’t working well. As you can
also see, it’s more complicated than simply saying that the role of
magnesium is to promote heart health or bone health, two claims
that are often associated with this mineral. Magnesium, like all other
nutrients, is needed in hundreds of different ways for support of our
underlying metabolic processes, and it is these underlying processes
that serve as the true foundation for our overall physical health.
You might think that this more comprehensive and holistic view of
health and nutrients would make nourishment more complicated.
But it’s actually the opposite! The true role of nutrients in your
health actually makes things much simpler. 
That’s because the World’s Healthiest Foods are comprehensive and
holistic as well! If you consider the World’s Healthiest Foods as a
group, you will discover that their nutrients support every aspect of
our metabolic and cellular needs. Not only do they maintain this
massive underlying biochemical structure that supports all of our
health, but they do so in an optimal way by combining nutrients in
their most natural patterns. No supplement will ever be able to
achieve this amazing level of synergy between nutrients! All you
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
have to do is focus on enjoying the World’s Healthiest Foods since
their nutrient-richness and natural synergy of nutrients will do the
rest of the work for you. 
The Functions of Nutrients
That being said, I still think that it’s important to know about some
of the functions and benefits of different nutrients—all those contained in the World’s Healthiest Foods—to help you lose weight and
get healthy. The following chart will give you some key examples
from the broad spectrum of identified nutrients that our bodies need
in order to be healthy and healthfully lose weight.
POTENTIAL HEALTHPROMOTING
FUNCTIONS
POSSIBLE 
INDICATIONS THAT
MORE IS NEEDED 
Biotin Helps support healthy
skin; Helps maintain
nerves’ energy supply
Depression;
Nervousness;
Memory problems
Calcium Helps maintains healthy
strong bones; Helps
support proper functioning
of nerves 
Tingling and numbness of
hands and feet; Muscular
pain and spasms
Carotenoids Helps protect cells from
free radicals; Helps
promote eye and lung
health; Helps enhance
functioning of immune
system
Low intake of fruits and
vegetables; Smoking;
Regular alcohol
consumption
Choline Helps promote cell
membrane function;
Assists nerve-muscle communication; Helps prevent
homocysteine build-up
Fatigue; Insomnia;
Fat accumulation in
blood; Nerve muscle
problems
Cysteine Helps protect cells from
free radical damage; Helps
detoxify chemicals and
heavy metals; Helps
breaks down excess lung
mucous
Frequent colds; COPD
47
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods Key to Healthy Weight Loss
48
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Copper Helps maintain the health
of bones and connective
tissue; Helps keep the
thyroid gland functioning
normally
Blood vessels that rupture
easily; Frequent 
infections; Loss of hair or
skin color
Dietary Fiber Helps support bowel
regularity; Helps maintain
normal cholesterol and
blood sugar levels; Helps
provide satiety (quenching
of appetite) to help promote weight loss
Constipation;
Hemorrhoids; High Blood
sugar levels; High 
cholesterol levels
Flavonoids Help prevent excessive inflammation; Help promote
blood vessel integrity;
Helps protect cells from
free radicals; Enhance activity of vitamin C
Easy bruising; Excessive
swelling after injury;
Frequent colds or
infections; Frequent nose
bleeds; Low intake of
fruits and vegetables
Folic Acid Helps support red blood
cell production; Helps support heart health; Helps
nerves to function properly
Depression; Irritability;
Mental Fatigue; Confusion; Forgetfulness; Insomnia 
Glutamine Helps maintain health of
intestinal tract; Helps 
produce glutathione, a key
antioxidant; Helps ensure
proper acid-base balance;
Helps maintain muscle mass 
Regular high-intensity
exercise; Intestinal
dysbiosis; Frequent colds
or flu
Iodine Helps ensure proper 
thyroid function
Goiter; Depression; 
Fatigue
Magnesium Helps prevent free-radical
damage; Helps keep bones
strong and healthy 
Insulin resistance and elevated blood sugar levels;
Decreased bone mineral
density 
Manganese Helps prevent free-radical
damage; Helps keep bones
strong and healthy 
Insulin resistance and elevated blood sugar levels;
Decreased bone mineral
density 
49
B3 (Niacin) Helps stabilize blood sugar
levels; Helps lower 
cholesterol levels; Helps
body process fat
Fatigue, listlessness;
Sensations of weakness;
Numbness, tingling, and
shooting pains in feet
Omega-3
Fatty Acids
Help prevent excessive inflammation throughout
body; Help keep blood
from clotting excessively
Dry, itchy skin; Brittle
hair and nails; Fatigue;
Depression; Inability to
concentrate; Joint pain
Pantothenic
acid
Helps transform carbohydrates and fats into energy;
Can improve ability to respond to stress; Helps assure adequate production
of healthy fats in cells;
Helps body process fat
Fatigue, listlessness; 
Sensations of weakness;
Numbness, tingling, and
shooting pains in feet
Phosphorus Helps form bones and
teeth; Vital for energy 
production
Weakness; Weight loss;
Irritability; Anxiety;
Increased incidence of
hypertension
Potassium Lowers risk of high blood
pressure; Helps maintain
pH balance
Muscular weakness;
Confusion; Irritability;
Fatigue; Heart problems;
Chronic diarrhea
Protein Helps maintain healthy
skin, hair, and nails; Helps
keep immune system
functioning properly
Weight loss; Muscle
wasting; Fatigue and
weakness; Frequent
infections
Selenium Helps protect cells from
free-radical damage; 
Required for thyroid
hormone production
Whitening of fingernail
beds; Weakness and pain
in muscles; Discoloration
of hair and skin
Tryptophan Required for proper sleep
regulation; Helps regulate
appetite
Overeating or carbohydrate cravings; Depression; Anxiety; Inability to
concentrate
Vitamin A Helps preserve and
improve eyesight; Helps
fight viral infections,
colds, and flu
Dry, scaly, rough skin;
Frequent infections; Night
blindness
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods Key to Healthy Weight Loss
B1 (Thiamin) Helps maintain energy
supplies; Helps support
proper heart function
Pins and needles sensations; Feeling of numbness, especially in legs;
Muscular tenderness
B2
(Riboflavin)
Helps protect cells from
oxygen damage; Helps
support cellular energy
production
Sensitivity to light; Tearing, burning, and itching
of eyes; Soreness around
lips, mouth, and tongue;
Cracking of the skin in
corners of the mouth
B6
(Pyrodoxine)
Helps support nervous
system health; Help
promote proper breakdown
of sugar and starches
Fatigue; Anemia; Skin
disorders including
eczema and dermatitis
Vitamin B12 Helps prevent anemia;
Required for nerve cells to
develop properly; Helps
cells metabolize protein,
carbohydrates, and fats
Tingling or numbness in
feet; Red or sore tongue;
Depression; Nervousness;
Memory problems
Vitamin C Helps protect cells from
free-radical damage; 
Improves iron absorption
from plant foods 
Frequent colds and
infections; Lung-related
problems; Poor wound
healing
Vitamin D Helps keep bones and
teeth strong and healthy;
Helps prevent excessive
inflammation 
Thinning bones; Frequent
bone fractures/soft bones;
Lack of exposure to sunlight; Bone deformities in
children
Vitamin E Helps prevent cell damage
from free radicals; Helps
protect skin from
excessive exposure to
ultraviolet light
Tingling or loss of
sensation in arms, hands,
legs and feet; Digestive
system problems
(malabsorption)
Vitamin K Allows blood to clot
normally; Helps
absorption of calcium and
helps prevent osteoporosis
Excessive bruising and
bleeding; Digestion, liver,
and gallbladder problems
Zinc Helps balance blood sugar;
Helps support optimal
sense of smell and taste
Frequent colds and
infections; Depression;
Impaired sense of taste
and smell
50
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Why Health and Healthy Weight Becomes
Challenged When You Don’t Get Enough
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods
The modern American diet is often criticized as being a diet that is
prone to excess. Too many fats, too many sweets, too much fried
food, too much salt, too much meat, and too many calories! Many
health analysts think about obesity in precisely this way—as a problem
resulting from excess and overconsumption. 
Yet the opposite side of the equation when it comes to health and
maintaining a healthy weight—the side involving underconsumption
and nutrient deficiency—is equally true. The American diet is just
as much one of deficiency and undernourishment. The average U.S.
adult consumes a daily diet that fails to provide 100% of the Dietary
Reference Intake (DRI) level for: 
• vitamin A 
• vitamin K
• choline 
It also provides less than 50% of the DRI for:
• vitamin D
• folate 
• calcium 
• magnesium
• selenium
• fiber 
• the omega-3 fatty acid, EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid)
• the omega-3 fatty acid, DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) 
What happens when we get this low in our nutrient intake? If it’s only
for a few days, usually nothing. When we are healthy, our bodies have
nutrient reserves that they can draw upon to meet our nutritional needs.
But if we are low in nutrients week after week, month after month, this
nutrient deficiency can start us off on the road to chronic disease and
51
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods Key to Healthy Weight Loss
52
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
unhealthy weight gain. Developing a serious illness as a result of
nutrient deficiency is not a quick or immediately visible process.
In the past, we have tended to think about nutrient deficiency
conditions as involving the total absence of a single nutrient and
fairly rapid appearance of unusual symptoms. The disease called
scurvy that gets triggered by vitamin C deficiency is a good example.
This condition, which is readily visible in the form of damage to
gums of the mouth, was originally seen in sailors in the middle of
long voyages without the benefit of fruits and vegetables on board.
In this situation, there is a fairly fast-developing and direct relationship
between a single nutrient deficiency (vitamin C) and a very unique
set of symptoms (damage to the gums). 
Today’s nutrient deficiency diseases do not fit into this scurvy type
of pattern. Today, it is not one single nutrient that has fallen below
the recommended intake level. It is more like a dozen nutrients as we
consume all of them in amounts that fall far below the amounts we
need. Over a period of time involving several years, we may still not
see any visible signs of disease related to these nutrient deficiencies.
Instead, we may only feel like we’re tired more often than we should
be. Or that we don’t sleep as soundly as we should, or don’t feel well
rested upon waking. Or that we are fatigued and can’t concentrate well.
Our chronic nutrient deficiency is definitely leading us in the direction
of more serious health problems, even though we may have yet to see
any visible evidence of these problems. 
Underneath the surface, at a cellular level, long-term nutrient deficiency
changes the way our body functions. Virtually all body functions
require unique combinations of nutrients. We cannot keep our cell
membranes intact without the help of vitamin E. We cannot protect
the structures inside the cell from oxygen-related damage without
the help of copper, zinc, and selenium. Inside the energy-producing
mitochondria in our cells, manganese is essential. Our muscles cannot
use carbohydrates for fuel without a specific mixture of B-complex
vitamins. Chronic nutrient deficiency disrupts all of these processes.
They don’t altogether cease, but rather continue to operate in a
53
sub-optimal way. Over time, what starts out as sub-optimal progresses
onward to fully problematic. 
Being overweight as well as virtually all chronic diseases have
nutrient deficiency as a well-researched contributing factor. (In
addition, many commonly-eaten, processed foods that can place us
at greater risk of chronic disease can also place us at greater risk for
obesity.) With cardiovascular disease, these nutrient deficiencies
clearly involve vitamins B6, B12, and folate. With diabetes, the role
of nutrient deficiency is not yet as clear as it is in the case of cardiovascular disease, but at least in animal studies, biotin, magnesium,
vitamin E, coenzyme Q, and lipoic acid have all been implicated
as nutrients that may contribute to disease risk when chronically
deficient in the body. A long list of anti-inflammatory nutrients—
including the flavonoids and carotenoids found in most fresh fruits
and vegetables—is becoming a particular area of focus when it
comes to nutrient deficiency and chronic disease. Deficiency of these
anti-inflammatory nutrients may be especially important because
so many chronic diseases and obesity appear to have an inflammatory component. 
As you can see, the connection between nutrient deficiency and
chronic disease is not a fast, simple, or readily apparent one. But
the take-away message here is definitely simple and readily apparent:
we need to do everything we can to avoid nutrient deficiency in our
meal plans if we want to minimize our risk of chronic disease and
obesity.
That’s where the World’s Healthiest Foods come in. They provide
you with all of the nutrients you need for health. And with the
Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan, you’ll see how easy it is to eat a
variety of these foods to make delicious meals while getting all of
the nutrients you need for health and keep you from becoming
nutrient-deficient or malnourished.
In the next chapter, we’ll take this topic of nutrients and health one
step further. We’ll look very specifically at why they are so important
to healthy weight loss and good health.
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods Key to Healthy Weight Loss
SECTION 2
Why Nutrient-Rich
World’s Healthiest Foods
Are Important to
Healthy Weight Loss
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
54
Adverse food reactions (what people may call “food allergies”) can
cause numerous symptoms and can be the underlying reason for
challenges to optimal health. These negative reactions to specific
foods are more common than you might expect, and they can be
surprisingly difficult to pinpoint as contributing factors to health
problems. Adverse food reactions can include food allergies that
start in early childhood and continue on throughout life. They can
also involve more temporary reactions to food that occur when you
are feeling particularly low in energy and when your physical health
is especially compromised. But in either case, you will not always
have an easy-to-spot symptom that tells you, “Aha! My body is
having a problem with something I ate.” In the case of adverse food
reactions, it’s much more likely that you will feel bad in some way
(i.e., fatigued, irritable, depressed, foggy headed, lethargic) that
could involve dozens of causes. All of the above symptoms, for
example, could be caused by lack of sleep, or chronic stress, or a
long list of psychological factors. 
When we have adverse food reactions, we might be reacting to several
different food components. It could be some unique food proteins
that are triggering our problematic reactions. It could also be the
presence of sugars in food that we lack the enzymes to digest properly.
We might also react to food additives and preservatives, or to pesticides
or other food contaminants. 
Regardless of the food component that is triggering an adverse
CHAPTER 4
World’s Healthiest Foods 
Help You Manage Adverse
Food Reactions 
55
56
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
reaction, you almost always feel better if you can eliminate the food
from your meal plan (or at least substantially cut back on your
consumption of the food). As you will see later in this chapter, this
process of avoiding potentially troublesome foods usually falls
under the heading of an “elimination diet.” Later in this chapter, I’ll
be telling you much more about the details of a modified elimination
diet that you can follow in your own meal planning as you pursue
weight loss and more vibrant health.
Adverse food reactions really boil down to a kind of mismatch
between a person and a food. You and I may just not be cut out to
eat anything and everything! If you and your food are mismatched,
you may have a more difficult time losing weight. Recent reviews
of popular weight loss diets clearly show that unusual diets—
mismatched not only to a person’s nutrient needs but also to a
person’s broader metabolic pattern—are unsupportive of weight loss
in comparison to balanced, metabolically matched diets. Although
adverse food reactions have not been specifically studied in this
regard, they are established as real-life responses to food that can
upset many different metabolic balances in a person’s body, and can
compromise function in several different body systems, including
the digestive system, immune system, nervous system, endocrine
system, and inflammatory system. If these body systems are not
working well, your path to healthy and optimal weight loss will be
compromised.
Two important examples of adverse food reactions—not specifically
linked to weight management problems but relatively high up on
most research lists of foods most likely to cause adverse reactions—
are dairy and wheat. Here’s a closer look at each of those foods and
their potential for adverse reactions.
In the case of dairy, as many as 15% of all U.S. infants show unwanted
reactions to cow’s milk, including common symptoms that can be
related to many other factors besides food. These symptoms include
irritableness, fussiness, upset stomach, and bowel problems like
57
excessive gas, bloating, or diarrhea. When tested for food allergy,
however, as few as 5% of all infants actually test positive for cow’s
milk allergy. The frequency of dairy allergy in adults has been estimated in some studies to be similar to the frequency in children, and
in other studies to be somewhat lower. (As is the case for all food
allergies, we do not have very accurate data to estimate the number
of people actually affected.) 
In the case of dairy, sometimes the adverse reaction is related to milk
sugar (lactose). Not all individuals have enough of the enzyme
lactase to break down milk sugar and allow it to digest properly.
Unfortunately, in the processed food world, milk sugar (lactose) is
often added to non-dairy foods for flavor, and the only way to avoid
it is to read the ingredient list on the package. Sliced deli meats,
powdered coffee creamers, and ready-to-eat baked goods are examples
of foods that can contain lactose. Many individuals also have allergic
reactions to special proteins in cow’s milk called caseins. Unfortunately, in the processed food world, these proteins are also frequently
found in a wide variety of foods in forms like calcium caseinate or
sodium caseinate. Hot dogs, deli meats, nutrition bars, and protein
powder drinks are examples of foods that can contain casein. Individuals who experience adverse reactions to dairy often feel like
their entirely dietary balance is affected. The consequences of
consuming dairy can detract too much from the satisfaction of
eating, or lead to confusion about the trustworthiness of the diet.
Under these circumstances, the challenges of weight management
often become more difficult.
In the case of wheat, there is even less conclusive research on adverse
food reactions than there is for dairy. But scientists continue to
investigate links between specific wheat proteins, including gliadin
proteins and lectins (especially WGA, or wheat germ agglutinin)
and their ability to cause adverse reactions. Much like the situation
for lactose and casein in dairy, wheat components find their way into
many types of processed foods, and it is possible to experience an
adverse reaction to wheat even if you do not eat foods like wheat
World’s Healthiest Foods Help You Manage Adverse Food Reactions
58
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
bread and wheat pasta that are clearly recognizable as wheatcontaining foods. The list of processed foods that can contain wheat
components includes soy sauce, teriyaki sauce, and seasoning mixes;
common processed food ingredients like malt (including barley malt
and malt extract) may also contain components of wheat. Like
adverse reactions to dairy, adverse reactions to wheat can leave
individuals feeling like their entire dietary balance is thrown off,
and can increase the difficulty of weight management. 
Elimination Diet
I have seen that adverse food reactions can be a barrier to losing
weight. As such, when you embark on your Healthy Weight Loss, if
you find that after three weeks of focusing your diet on enjoying
the World’s Healthiest Foods you don’t lose any weight, you may
want to investigate whether adverse food reactions may be the
culprit. 
What I would recommend in this situation is a modified elimination
diet. One of the best tools to use for this is to keep a journal. Write
down all the foods that eat each meal, and then when you reintroduce
eliminated foods, write down whether or not you notice experiencing
an adverse reaction to them.
I realize that you’ll need the help of a licensed healthcare practitioner
to diagnose or treat a food allergy, and that you will also need the
support of a healthcare practitioner to go on a full-fledged, nutritionally restrictive or nutritionally complicated elimination diet. (I
should also point out here that in the case of some full-blown
elimination diets, medical monitoring is important from a safety
standpoint.) But I am not talking about a full-blown elimination diet
in this situation. I am only talking about some practical steps you
can take to experiment with avoidance of foods that are most
commonly associated with adverse food reactions. The chart below
shows the foods that are less likely to be associated with these kinds
of problematic reactions. 
59
You’ll have to decide how comfortable you are restricting your food
intake to the above list. If you are worried about staying well-nourished
Cabbage
Carrots
Celery
Collard greens
Garlic
Green beans
Green peas
Kale
Olive oil
Onions
Lettuce
Sea vegetables
Summer squash (zucchini)
Sweet potatoes
Swiss chard
Winter squash
Apples
Grapes
Lemons
Pears
Brown rice
Black beans
Garbonzo beans
Lentils
Pumpkin seeds
Sesame seeds
Sunflower seeds
Cod
Salmon 
Lamb
World’s Healthiest Foods Help You Manage Adverse Food Reactions
on the above foods, you should consult with a healthcare practitioner rather than attempting these dietary changes on your own.
You aren’t likely to see many changes in your health or well-being
unless you stick with these food modifications for at least one week,
so you need to feel comfortable in sticking to this restricted meal
plan for that amount of time. At the end of one week, you will want
to start re-introducing old foods back into your meal plan. I recommend that you introduce only one food at a time, and that you wait
at least two days before re-introducing another food. I would also
recommend that you start with asparagus, avocados, beets, broccoli,
Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, cucumbers, blueberries, watermelon,
flaxseeds, and quinoa when starting this food re-introduction
process since they are not as commonly associated with adverse
food reactions as some of the other foods you might have eliminated
from your meal plan. 
After that, you will want to continue re-introducing other foods back
into your meal plan, on this same one-per-day basis and waiting at
least two days before you add the next food. While you are re-introducing the foods that you avoided during your week on the modified
elimination diet, try to notice any adverse reactions that you may
have. Try to pay special attention to any problems that prompted
you to experiment with food elimination in the first place. If these
problems return, it might be evidence that the newly re-introduced
food is not well-matched for your body’s metabolism and might be
worth avoiding in future meal planning. 
If you do suspect any adverse reactions using this modified elimination
approach, you should definitely consider a consultation with a
nutritionist or other healthcare provider who has extensive experience
with food allergy. A more structured elimination-challenge diet
might also be important to consider. For more information on food
allergy and sensitivity, see page 719 of The World’s Healthiest Foods
book.
60
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
We all want extra energy—usually at all times, but especially when
we think about losing weight. It’s common to experience a depletion
of energy when we change our food intake patterns or cut back on
our overall caloric intake. At these times, it’s more important than
ever for our food to give us that extra energy boost.
This is one reason why nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods are so
beneficial—they help you feel energized while shedding pounds.
And it’s quite simple how it happens: the World’s Healthiest Foods
can help energize you by providing your body with ample amounts
of nutrients required by the body’s energy production systems. 
It’s not just that they provide you with enough macronutrients
(carbohydrates, protein, fat) that serve as the starting place for the
production of energy. They also contain micronutrients (vitamins
and minerals) that help to release the energy and then recapture it
so it can be stored for later use when and where it’s most needed.
Capturing energy from the food you eat takes place in your cells.
Some of the most important energy production spots are very
small microstructures inside our cells called mitochondria. The
energy production process that takes place in our mitochondria is
a complicated process. To function properly it involves a variety of
enzymes that require many vital health-promoting nutrients—such
as vitamins B1, B2, B3, B5, and B6, lipoic acid, coenzyme Q, as
well as iron, magnesium, and sulfur. So, imagine the difference in
how much energy you’ll feel from eating nutrient-poor refined
foods as opposed to nutrient-rich whole foods such as fresh fruits,
CHAPTER 5
World’s Healthiest Foods
Promote Energy Production
61
salads, and vegetables. These and other World’s Healthiest Foods
will definitely keep your energy systems supplied with the healthpromoting nutrients it needs to fuel your vitality. 
Additionally, nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods—especially
fruits and vegetables—contain phytonutrients that act as powerful
antioxidants. In addition to the many other benefits that these plantbased nutrients provide, they have the ability to support healthy energy
production. That’s because in the process of making energy, your
body also creates oxygen radicals that can damage the mitochondria’s energy centers as well as many cells and tissues, leading to
reduced and inefficient energy production. But, the phytonutrients
and other antioxidants (such as vitamin E) contained in nutrientrich World’s Healthiest Foods can act as protective sentries for your
cells, quenching oxygen radicals so that they can not do damage.
62
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthy weight loss involves the burning of body fat, while preserving
other tissue (such as muscle mass). While “fat burning” may sound
like a fairly simple process, it is anything but. 
In chemical terms, “fat burning” means oxidation of fat. In order to
breakdown body fat and turn it into energy, many different enzymes
and nutrients are required. Directly involved in this process are the
vitamins B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin), and B5 (pantothenic acid).
Also involved are proteins, together with sulfur- and phosphoruscontaining molecules. If our food fails to provide us with an ample
supply of these fat-metabolizing nutrients, we are not going to burn
body fat in an optimal way. That’s why it’s so important to focus on
nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods—for their concentration of
these and other nutrients—when looking to optimize healthy weight
loss.
There is also some preliminary research on the role of certain nutrients
to induce “thermogenesis” in brown fat cells. The World’s Healthiest
Foods—notably those that provide higher protein and lower refined
carbohydrates, as well as those rich in fiber—are integral to activating
the thermogenic production of heat in brown adipose (fat) cells. In
addition, they decrease storage of dietary fat in ordinary cells;
therefore, they may be helpful aspects to consider in the process of
weight loss or any aspect of weight management.
One of the foods (well, actually beverages) that I emphasize in the
CHAPTER 6
World’s Healthiest Foods 
Promote Optimal
Metabolism
63
64
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan that has made headlines when it
comes to its role in healthy weight loss is green tea, which contains
major components that may help to promote fat loss: catechins,
caffeine, and theanine. Studies suggest that green tea compounds
may help promote fat loss by inhibiting both gastric and pancreatic
lipase, the enzymes that digest triglycerides, and synthetase, the
enzyme responsible for synthesizing fatty acids into the form in
which they can be stored in the body’s adipose (fat) cells. It is for
this reason—as well as the fact that green tea’s antioxidant concentration has been found to be health promoting on many levels—that
I emphasize its consumption in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating
Plan. (My Healthier Lifestyle Tea is composed of green tea and
lemon juice.)
I’d like to point out one further area of research involving optimal
metabolism and weight loss—that area is contamination of whole,
natural foods with pesticides and other toxic substances when these
foods are grown and processed in an unhealthy way. There’s some
preliminary evidence to suggest that chlorine-containing pesticides
and other compounds (collectively referred to as “organochlorines”)
can interrupt the process of thermogenesis and make weight loss
more difficult through this means. My emphasis on organically
grown foods lets you steer clear of these organochlorine contaminants! You won’t have to worry about them interrupting your
body’s metabolism if you stick as much as possible with organically grown whole foods. 
65
The World’s Healthiest Foods provide our digestive system with the
health-promoting nutrients it needs to function at its best. This is not
only important to overall health but to successful weight loss as well. 
In order to achieve healthy weight loss, it is necessary to maintain
metabolic supplies of energy to our brain, muscles, and other organ
systems. This “metabolic maintenance” can only be achieved when
the digestive tract is working properly. Your digestive tract is the
place where everything starts. 
The digestive process begins when you chew your food. It’s important
to adequately chew in order to break the food down into small
enough pieces to allow for the best digestion. I think that the more
you chew, the more weight you can lose. Unless you can break down
your food effectively, nutrients will not be made available for
absorption up into your body. And if you cannot absorb the nutrients,
they cannot provide benefits to the rest of your body. It’s absolutely
essential for you to digest food and absorb nutrients in an optimal
way if you want to achieve healthy weight loss. 
As I will present in Chapter 10, inflammatory balance in the body
may be especially important to maintain during times of weight loss.
One way to maintain this balance is to make sure your digestive tract
is functioning optimally. That’s because if there is any compromise
in your digestion, unwanted molecules (like toxic residues or allergycausing substances) can sometimes get absorbed into the blood
stream and trigger unwanted inflammatory responses.
CHAPTER 7
World’s Healthiest Foods
Promote Digestive Health
World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Optimal Metabolism
While all nutrients are important to maintaining digestive health,
following are a few of the health-promoting nutrients found in the
World’s Healthiest Foods that have been singled out for their special
contribution. 
Dietary Fiber
At the top of many lists for digestive tract support is dietary fiber.
Your food simply cannot pass through you in an optimal way unless
it contains fiber. Ideally, we should have at least 10 grams of fiber
with every meal and at least 5 grams with every snack, although 20
grams per meal and 10 grams per snack would also be helpful to
most of our digestive tracts. Whole, unprocessed foods are essential
for adequate fiber. Of special importance are World’s Healthiest
Foods such as vegetables, legumes (like beans or lentils) and whole
grains. The skins of fruit are also rich in fiber. Fiber helps keep food
moving through our intestines at a gradual pace—not too fast and
not too slow.
Glutamine
Although not as well known in the conventional world of nutrition,
glutamine is an amino acid that serves as one of the primary fuels
for cells that line our small intestine. It can be made from other
amino acids found in food or in our body, but it is also found
preformed in a variety of World’s Healthiest Foods, including cabbage,
beets, beef, chicken, fish, beans, and dairy products.
Short Chain Fatty Acids
Like glutamine, short chain fatty acids (or SCFAs) are not wellknown in the conventional world of nutrition, but these key nutrients
serve as preferred fuels for cells that line our large intestine. If these
cells do not have adequate energy, they cannot process our food
properly. SCFAs are formed by bacteria in our small intestine when
these bacteria process starches (especially resistant starches) and
several other types of carbohydrate-related molecules found in our
food. World’s Healthiest Foods such as whole grains like corn, oats,
wheat, rye, and brown rice; fruits such as apples and citrus fruits;
66
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
and all legumes are good sources of resistant starch and non-starch
carbohydrates that our intestinal bacteria can convert into SCFAs. 
Other Digestive-Health Nutrients
The process of digestion and absorption is a complicated one that
involves dozens of different cell types, dozens of different enzymes,
the movement of smooth muscles around our intestines, and the
trigger of these muscles by our nerves. It’s literally impossible to
name a single vitamin or mineral that does not play a role either directly or indirectly in some aspect of digestive health. For this reason, foods with the greatest concentration of nutrients and greatest
variety of nutrients are optimal for digestive support. The World’s
Healthiest Foods fit this description exactly because they have all
been chosen on the basis of nutrient-richness. They provide our
digestive tract with all of necessary nutrients, while at the same
time avoiding putting pressure on the digestive tract to work unduly
hard.
67
World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Digestive Health
68
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Dietary balance and nutrient-richness are the keys for supporting
your liver and the keys for supporting healthy weight loss as well.
Good balance and nutrient-richness work equally well for weight
loss and liver health because both processes depend on the same
dietary foundation of nourishment. 
The World’s Healthiest Foods are important for delivering a concentrated and varied mixture of metabolic-support nutrients to your
liver. If you can choose the certified organic version of nutrient-rich
World’s Healthiest Foods you will also be able to avoid unnecessary
metabolic loads on your liver that can occur from toxic residues
found in non-organic foods (for more on organic foods, see page
199). Since the World’s Healthiest Foods are minimally processed
foods, they also support liver health by freeing your liver from the
task of processing additives. An approach to food that emphasizes
the above principles—relying on nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest
Foods as the foundation of your diet, and choosing organically
grown varieties when possible—can work wonders for your liver,
and in keeping your weight loss process a healthy one.
Why is the liver so important for healthy weight loss? From a metabolic standpoint, losing weight places an extra toll on our body. It’s
a metabolic challenge for our body to shift from weight maintenance
over into weight loss. Alongside of the digestive tract, our liver lies
at the very center of this process. Our liver is the place where things
get sorted out in terms of metabolism. The breakdown of fat into
energy and the transport of unwanted fat both require a healthy liver.
So does production of energy to fuel the brain during a time of
CHAPTER 8
World’s Healthiest Foods
Promote Liver Health
69
metabolic stress. Healthy blood sugar balance, healthy wakefulness
and sleep, and healthy processing of vitamins and minerals all
depend on a healthy liver. 
Will you feel healthy enough to stick with your weight loss? Will
you be able to sustain the process over many months because you
feel healthy and up to the task? The answers to those questions point
directly to your liver as the organ system that is focused on metabolic
challenges and optimal metabolism. So, as you can see, supporting
your liver is a very important aspect of encouraging healthy weight
loss and the World’s Healthiest Foods provide the nutrients that can
promote liver health.
World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Liver Health
CHAPTER 9
World’s Healthiest Foods
Balance Blood Sugar Levels 
Keeping Blood Sugar Balanced
Glucose—a type of sugar found in our blood—is a necessary nutrient
for many cells, especially the brain. An essential feature of maintaining health is to have balanced blood glucose levels. If these levels
are too low, our cells may not be properly nourished. If these levels
are too high, metabolic consequences can occur which can lead to
damage to the kidneys, arteries, and other body systems. High blood
glucose levels also usually reflect that the cells are not being able to
take in the glucose and therefore are not getting the energy they need
for normal function. 
When we speak about blood sugar, we are not talking about the
same type of sugar as you find as table sugar. Blood sugar is glucose,
a simple sugar that others can be broken down into.
At every moment of every day, our blood sugar level is shifting
slightly. Eating a meal can shift our blood sugar level dramatically—
depending, of course, on which foods we eat and how thoroughly we
are able to chew and digest them. It’s natural for our blood sugar to
increase after a meal. However, it’s unnatural for it to increase beyond certain limits. Similarly, between meals, it is natural for our
blood sugar to drop. But excessive drops are problematic. 
If we eat in a way that turns our blood sugar balance into a rollercoaster ride, we risk several unwanted consequences, including the
possibility of unwanted weight gain. The connection between large
blood sugar swings and potential weight gain is fairly simple. If our
70
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
blood sugar goes up too dramatically and then drops, we may
experience this drop-off as a need for more food to raise our blood
sugar back up again, often to its elevated level. Similarly, if we go
too long without eating and our blood sugar “bottoms out” at an
excessively low level, we may feel desperate for whatever we can get
our hands on. In either direction, the rollercoaster ride can spell
trouble for excess eating. 
If we get caught up in large pendulum swings with our blood sugar,
we are more likely to want high-sugar, high-calorie, and nutrientpoor foods. That situation can only increase our risk of unwanted
weight gain. 
Processed foods with high levels of simple sugar will spike our
blood sugar up more quickly than whole, natural foods. These
processed foods are often storehouses of refined carbohydrates,
almost never contain enough fiber to balance digestion and provide
for a very gradual breakdown and release of carbohydrates into our
digestive tract, and are usually deficient in the vitamins and minerals
needed to support insulin production and the uptake of glucose into
our cells. This can trigger a yo-yo effect in our blood sugar levels and
also increase our risk of unwanted weight gain.
Nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods contain a wealth of vitamins,
minerals, fiber, and other health-promoting compounds that can help
us maintain optimal blood sugar regulation. They are rich in fiber,
which steadies the speed of digestion. They contain chromium and
vitamin B3, which are involved in the process of insulin metabolism
and the ability of this hormone to clear sugar from our bloodstream.
Many nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods are also storehouses
of zinc, a mineral that plays an important role in blood sugar balance.
So, you can see how eating nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods
can help to keep your blood sugar on par. Not only will this nutrient
contribution help with your ability to lose weight but it will also
provide you with great overall health benefits since excess blood
71
World’s Healthiest Foods Balance Blood Sugar Levels
72
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
sugar levels can lead to insulin resistance, a condition that we now
recognize as a critical factor in the development of many health
conditions.
Insulin Resistance
Health scientists have always looked at the process of developing a
chronic disease—like obesity, or diabetes, or high blood pressure—
as being a complicated one that involves many factors. One of the
most prominent factors in this mix is insulin resistance. In the year
2007 alone, over 900 research studies focused exclusively on insulin
resistance and its relationship to long-term health. Insulin resistance
has become so important in our understanding of health that it is no
longer possible to understand a simple process like chronic weight
gain without considering insulin resistance and its potential role in
the process.
How Insulin Resistance Becomes a Problem 
The most common source of energy in our body is sugar (glucose.)
When our cells need energy, sugar is the fuel they depend on most
often. The sugar needed by our cells is constantly flowing through
our blood. However, the help of insulin—a protein hormone made
by our pancreas—is usually required in order for sugar to leave our
bloodstream and flow into our cells. Insulin resistance is a situation
in which this process breaks down and our cells stop responding
effectively to the insulin produced by our pancreas. Our pancreas
may make an unusually high amount of insulin in an effort to get
sugar into our cells. But insulin resistance prevents this effort from
being fully effective because the actions of insulin continue to be
resisted in some way. “Insulin resistance” is the name given to this
unwanted set of events. Insulin resistance can become more than just
temporary—it can become an everyday roadblock to health.
How Insulin Resistance Affects Weight Management
There is not one simple, easy-to-describe relationship between insulin
resistance and body weight. But there are several easy-to-describe
features. First, excess body weight in the form of excess fat—particularly
73
around the middle (or abdomen)—is closely related to development
of insulin resistance. Particularly when a man has a waist circumference of more than 40 inches or a woman’s is 35 inches or more,
insulin resistance is significantly more likely to occur. 
How does excess abdominal fat help to trigger insulin resistance?
Researchers are not entirely certain about this set of events. Traditionally, all of the research on insulin and blood sugar balance has
focused on muscle rather than fat. When insulin helps sugar leave the
bloodstream, it usually helps sugar enter a muscle cell—not a fat
cell. 
Until recently, the role of fat cells in blood sugar balance has been
overlooked because the muscles have been viewed as so very important
in receiving sugar from the blood. Current research, however, has
made it clear that fat cells (called adipose tissue) also play a key role
in insulin metabolism and blood sugar regulation. One of these connections, as described in the chapter on inflammation, is related to
the fact that overly fatty fat cells start making insufficient amounts
of adiponectin, a protein that helps insulin to lock onto cells and
escort sugar out of our blood. When adiponectin is in short supply,
too much sugar can remain in the blood, causing our pancreas to
produce more insulin in an effort to compensate. But the true problem
cannot be solved by more insulin. The true problem is insulin resistance—in this case, being caused by too much abdominal body fat. 
Insulin Resistance and the Tendency to Become Overweight
Just as too much abdominal fat can increase our tendency to develop
insulin resistance, insulin resistance can increase our tendency to
become overweight. Particularly in women who are lean and have
lower amounts of total body fat, insulin resistance increases the
chance of weight gain and obesity. Women who have gone through
menopause also have increased risk of weight gain following the
development of insulin resistance. In women who are already obese,
however, insulin resistance may actually protect against weight gain
and make weight loss easier. Finally, there is some fascinating
World’s Healthiest Foods Balance Blood Sugar Levels
74
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
research showing that individuals who develop insulin resistance—
and at the same time obtain a high percent of their total calories
from fat—have a greater chance of gaining weight and becoming
obese than individuals who have insulin resistance but obtain only
a moderate percent of total calories from fat.
How the World’s Healthiest Foods Can Help Prevent 
Insulin Resistance and Unwanted Weight Gain
There are three basic ways in which your diet can help prevent insulin
resistance. Fortunately, the World’s Healthiest Foods can help you
in each of these three basic ways.
First is the task of avoiding, or getting rid of, excess abdominal fat.
(If you are already overweight and already have increased fat around
the middle section, you will still want to avoid the addition of more
abdominal fat.) Since the risk of insulin resistance increases as the
amount of abdominal fat gets larger, this step seems like an important
one. So even if you’ve already got too much fat around the middle
section, or if your waistline is fine and you are simply trying to avoid
unwanted weight gain around your middle, you’ll want make the
World’s Healthiest Foods more of a priority in your diet since they
are the key to reduced risk of insulin resistance. Even though there is
no way to “spot reduce” and lose fat pounds exclusively from your
middle section, overall weight loss will include loss of fat from your
middle section, and you can accomplish this overall weight loss
most effectively with nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods. 
Second is the task of avoiding a high-fat diet. People who develop
insulin resistance—and at the same time obtain a high percent of
their total calories from fat—have a greater chance of gaining
weight than people who have insulin resistance but obtain only a
moderate percent of total calories from fat. As you’ll see, the menus
that I provide in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan provide an
average of 249 total calories from fat. This is ideal for moderating fat
intake and keeping the risk of weight gain down from an insulin resistance standpoint. 
75
Third, and perhaps most important, is steadying your blood sugar
as much as possible by the way you eat. Here the World’s Healthiest
Foods can help you in a variety of ways. High-fiber foods are essential
for stabilizing your blood sugar because they help regulate the pace
of your digestion. And since most of the World’s Healthiest Foods
are plant-based foods they are naturally rich in fiber. 
Also important for stabilizing blood sugar are protein-rich foods.
Protein digests at a moderate pace that is easy on blood sugar levels.
The lean meats, fish, low-fat dairy foods, legumes, and most of the
nuts and seeds included as World’s Healthiest Foods are considered
rich protein sources. Once again, the recipes included in the Healthy
Weight Loss Eating Plan frequently feature these protein-rich foods. 
Finally, nothing is harder on our blood sugar levels than a diet filled
with highly processed foods in which the fiber, vitamins, and minerals
have been largely removed through processing. Since the Healthy
Weight Loss – Without Dieting emphasizes World’s Healthiest Foods
it keeps these processed foods out of your mainstream meal plan,
and in this way, it pays huge dividends in terms of blood sugar balance.
Maintaining Balanced Blood Sugar Levels by
Choosing Foods Based on the Glycemic Index
It’s important to remember that not all foods, not even all of the
World’s Healthiest Foods, are created alike when it comes to their
effects on our blood sugar. Some foods can cause stark spikes while
others keep circulating blood sugar levels on a relatively even keel.
The Glycemic Index (GI) is a numerical scale used to indicate how
fast and how high a particular food can raise our blood glucose
(blood sugar) level. A food with a low GI will typically prompt a
moderate rise in blood glucose, while a food with a high GI may
cause our blood glucose level to increase above the optimal level.
Selecting foods based on their GI is a great way to control fluctuations
in your blood sugar levels.
World’s Healthiest Foods Balance Blood Sugar Levels
76
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
An awareness of foods’ GI can help you control your blood sugar
levels, and by doing so, may help you to achieve or maintain a
healthy weight, let alone prevent heart disease, improve cholesterol
levels, and prevent insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, and certain
cancers. A substantial amount of research suggests a low-GI diet
provides these significant health benefits and can be a helpful
component of a healthy weight loss approach. 
The following chart details the GI of the World’s Healthiest Foods.
Next to each food you will find a classification, which are based
upon the Canadian Diabetes Association’s ranking of GI and their
threshold points. Therefore, in this chart, very low is associated with
foods that have a GI of 20 or less, low with a GI of 55 or less,
medium with a GI of 56-69, and high with a GI of 70 or greater. 
FOOD ITEMS Glycemic Index
VEGETABLES
Spinach Very low
Lettuce Very low
Zucchini Very low 
Asparagus Very low
Cabbage Very low
Celery Very low
Cucumbers Very low
Dill Pickles Very low
Radishes Very low
Broccoli Very low
Brussels Sprouts Very low
Eggplant Very low
Onions Very low
Tomatoes Very low
Cauliflower Low
Bell Peppers Low
Green Peas Low
Squash Low
77
GRAIN ITEMS
Barley
^Pearled barley, cooked Low
^Barley kernel bread (50% kernels) Medium
^Barley flour bread (80% barley,
20% white wheat flour) High
^Whole meal barley porridge High
Buckwheat
^Buckwheat bread (50% dehusked buckwheat
groats, 50% white flour) Medium
^Buckwheat, cooked High
Corn
^Corn, yellow High
^Corn tortillas High
^Cornmeal, boiled in salted water 2 minutes High
Millet
^Millet, boiled High
Oats
^Oat bran bread (45% oat bran,
50% white wheat flour) Medium
^Oatmeal (thick, dehulled oat flakes) High
^Oat bran cereal High
^Muesli High
^Oatmeal (rolled oats), cooked High
^Oat bread (80% intact oat kernels, 20%
white wheat flour) High
^Oatmeal (one-minute oats) High
Rice
^Wild rice High
^Rice cakes High
^Rice noodles, cooked High
^White, boiled High
^Parboiled rice High
^Rice bread High
World’s Healthiest Foods Balance Blood Sugar Levels
78
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Rye
^Rye, whole kernels, cooked Low
^Rye kernel bread (80% kernels, 20% white
wheat flour) High
^Whole meal rye bread High
Wheat
^Spaghetti, whole meal Medium
^Whole wheat kernels, cooked Medium
^Spaghetti, white, boiled 10-15 minutes Medium
^Cracked wheat, bulgar, boiled Medium
^Wheat kernel bread (80% intact kernels, 20%
white wheat flour) High
^Couscous (from semolina-durham wheat,)
boiled High
^Whole wheat bread High
^White flour bread High
^Gluten-free High
FRUITS
Grapefruit Low
Apples, dried Low
Prunes Low
Apricots, dried Low
Apples, raw Low
Pears Low
Plums Low
Strawberries Medium
Oranges Medium
Pineapple juice Medium
Grapes Medium
Orange juice High
Bananas High
Kiwifruit High
Apricots, raw High
Papaya High
Pineapple High
Figs High
79
Raisins High
Cantaloupe High
Watermelon High
STARCHY VEGETABLES
Beets Medium
Carrots Medium
Sweet potatoes High
Potatoes, baked High
Potatoes, mashed High
Potatoes, boiled 15 minutes, cubed, peeled High
LEGUMES
Soybeans, cooked Very low
Lentils, red, cooked Low
Garbanzo beans, boiled Low
Kidney beans Low
Lentils, green, cooked Low
Split peas, yellow, cooked Low
Soymilk, Low
Navy beans, cooked Low
Pinto beans, cooked Low
Pinto beans, canned Medium
DAIRY
Yogurt, low-fat, plain Very low
Whole fat milk Low
Skim milk Low
Yogurt, low-fat, with fruit Low
My recommendations for considering the GI values of foods in
terms of healthy weight loss are:
• Try whenever possible to make the majority of your foods lowGI or very-low-GI on a day-by-day basis.
• Allow yourself healthy foods on a daily basis that are mediumGI. However, do not allow these medium-GI foods to become
the majority of foods eaten within the day.
• Limit your consumption of high-GI foods. Treat these foods like
a special accompaniment to your plan rather than the foundation.
World’s Healthiest Foods Balance Blood Sugar Levels
In this chapter I want to share with you a new area of health research:
the role of inflammation on healthy weight loss. Although my special
focus is going to be on inflammation, I will also be telling you about
your fat-burning processes, and the best way for you to avoid certain
problems in these areas.
What is Inflammation?
We hear a lot about inflammation these days and how it contributes
to health conditions such as cardiovascular disease and arthritis.
Before I discuss the link between inflammation and weight management,
I wanted to first explain what inflammation is.
Inflammation is actually a natural biological response that occurs in
the body. Inflammation, in general, is not bad and we don’t want to
stop the entirety of inflammatory mechanisms in our body if we want
to promote good health. What we want to do is control inflammation
and not have excess inflammation occurring in our body. It is
imbalanced inflammation that can propagate health conditions and
related symptoms as well as that which plays a role in weight
management.
Reducing Fat Storage Cells and Controlling
Inflammation
The study of fat cells and their role in health has produced some
great surprises in the past 10 years, including the knowledge that fat
cells are anything but inactive storage spots for fat. We are used to
thinking of our body fat as “just sitting there,” placing extra weight
CHAPTER 10
World’s Healthiest Foods
Reduce Inflammation
80
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
on our bones, and stressing our heart and joints from the sheer extra
poundage. 
What we have learned in the past 10 years is that fat cells are
metabolically active, and when too much fat is stored up inside
them, they go to work sending off messages that act to increase
inflammation and inflammatory problems. Some of the messaging
molecules that signal inflammation are only produced in overly fatty
fat cells! Conversely, fat cells are also capable of producing anti-inflammatory molecules, and production of these molecules can be
reduced when the fat cells become overloaded with fat. 
You may already have heard about a weight loss program called The
Fat Resistance Diet by Dr. Leo Galland (Broadway Books, 2005) or
a second weight loss approach called UltraMetabolism: The Simple
Plan for Automatic Weight Loss by Dr. Mark Hyman (Scribner,
2006). Both of these programs recognize several newly found
connections between weight management, our brains, our fat cells,
and inflammation. There are a good number of important and cuttingedge facts that you are going to want to consider in your healthy
weight loss planning when it comes to inflammation. For this
reason, I am going to tell you about this inflammation story in a more
detailed way.
Understanding Fat Cells and Leptin
Leptin is a particularly important molecule that our fat cells produce.
When we have too little fat stored up inside our fat cells, our fat
cells cut way back on their production of leptin. 
The reverse set of events holds true when we overeat and our fat
stores become too great. Under those conditions, our fat cells start
to produce more and more leptin. The increased production of
leptin in turn will trigger two sets of events: it will decrease our
appetite and it will increase our body’s ability to burn fat. 
At this point in the story, we have come to the role of inflammation.
World’s Healthiest Foods Reduce Inflammation
81
82
It turns out that most people who have too much fat stored up in
their fat cells also have plenty of leptin. Their fat cells seem to do a
good job when it comes to increasing production of leptin when this
molecule is needed to help lower appetite and increase fat burning.
However, despite having this plentiful supply of leptin, the leptin
does not seem to do its job effectively. The appetite reduction and
increased fat burn do not seem to take place, even though there is
more leptin being produced. This clearly problematic situation is
called leptin resistance. Our bodies seem to resist the effects of leptin,
even though they would definitely benefit if leptin could do its job.
Research studies make it clear that inflammation is one factor that
can contribute to leptin resistance. In fact, it may be the major factor
involved with leptin resistance for many individuals. Although it is
not yet clear exactly how the two are connected, individuals with
chronic, low-grade inflammation are at greater risk for leptin
resistance. Anyone living or eating in a way that increases their risk
of chronic, unwanted inflammation is also increasing their risk of
appetite problems and fat-burning problems due to this problem of
leptin resistance. This set of facts is one clear reason to why a
Healthiest Way of Eating includes a significant amount of foods that
have anti-inflammatory properties.
Adiponectin Can Also Impact Weight Loss
Like leptin, adiponectin is a regulatory molecule produced by our fat
cells. Unlike leptin, however, adiponectin will be produced in lower
supplies (not greater supplies) by our fat cells when we overeat and
start storing up too much unwanted body fat. Adiponectin acts somewhat like a “fat protector,” making sure that enough fat will be
around in times of short energy supplies. However, excessive and
continual overeating that results in chronic deficiency of adiponectin
is harmful, not helpful, to our health. 
Adiponectin is one of the anti-inflammatory fat-cell-produced
molecules that suffers when fat cells become overly loaded with fat.
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
83
And when the production of adiponectin drops, the body’s ability to
balance blood sugar also drops. The reason is simple. Adiponectin
produced by fat cells is a protein that helps insulin bind onto cells
and encourages the flow of sugar out of the bloodstream and into
the cells. When fat cells stop producing enough adiponectin, too
much sugar stays in the blood.
Keeping Inflammation in Check
What does this complicated set of events mean for a meal plan based
on the World’s Healthiest Foods? First, it means that a diet that can
prevent over-accumulation of fat in fat cells is highly desirable. What
diet best prevents over-accumulation of fat in fat cells? Research
suggests it is the diet that contains the greatest percentage of nutrientrich foods such as the World’s Healthiest Foods—foods that provide
the best variety and quantity of nutrients for the least amount of
calories. Second, it means that blood sugar balance and inflammatory
balance are extremely important when weight is a problem. Because
the World’s Healthiest Foods are concentrated in nutrients required
for blood sugar regulation, insulin regulation, and inflammatory
balance, they are also your best bet when you have excess fat in your
fat cells. They are the perfect foods for getting you safely from here
(excess fat in fat cells) to there (fat cells not triggering inflammation
from excess storage of fat). 
I believe that avoidance of chronic inflammation plays a very
important role in weight management. If the body is experiencing
too much inflammation, it will not only risk damage to cells and
tissues—and cause a domino-like cascade that can lead to disease—
but it will also tax our nutrient supplies. It will beckon for antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory nutrients to help stave off untoward physiological events. This process will in turn reduce the supply of nutrients
that our body has available to accomplish its other functions. 
Remember also that inflammation can upset the metabolism that is
going on in our fat cells and disrupt the communication that our fats
cells are trying to have with our brain, digestive system, and bloodWorld’s Healthiest Foods Reduce Inflammation
84
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
stream. By disrupting our fat cell metabolism, inflammation can
confront us with a new risk related to food. This risk is unrelated to
any temptations that we might feel. It’s a risk of overeating that
stems from disruption in the control of our appetite and control of
our fat burning processes. 
Whether you are trying to lose weight, maintain a recent weight
loss, or healthfully maintain the ideal weight you have been at for a
while, it pays to stay well nourished in a way that allows your
metabolism to adjust along with your new or changing weight. You
will be short-changing your metabolism if you drain too many
nutrient resources while trying to cope with chronic inflammation. 
The last few years of research about inflammation and obesity make
me more convinced than ever about the value of the World’s
Healthiest Foods! I have always believed that nutrient-richness was
a key to successful weight loss. How could a person possibly go
through a challenging period of time like weight loss without needing
more nutritional support for their body’s metabolism? The answer
is: they couldn’t! But how could a person get more nutritional support
at a time when they clearly needed to eat less food? The answer nutrient-richness—pack more nourishment in fewer calories. 
Now research studies have given us the added issue of inflammation.
They have told us that inflammation is the part of obesity that can
lead to diabetes and heart disease. Inflammation is the part of obesity
that can even lead to premature death. This new set of discoveries
about inflammation has made us realize what’s really at stake when
we are trying to lose weight. When we undertake the weight loss
process, we are not only trying to lower some numbers on the scale
or fit back into old clothes. We are also trying to prevent our bodies
from becoming metabolically out-of-balance in a potentially permanent
way that will go far beyond the presence of unwanted fat around
our middle. 
The obesity-inflammation research has made me realize how
85
important the nutrient-rich anti-inflammatory diet—an approach to
eating that will prevent the occurrence of unwanted inflammation
and avoid that slippery slope between obesity and diabetes and heart
disease—really is. But what’s most exciting for me to report is the
ability of the World’s Healthiest Foods to accomplish both tasks at
once. The same foods that provide you with the highest forms of
nutrient-richness simultaneously provide you with the very best antiinflammatory nutrients. These nutrients include omega-3 fatty acids,
many vitamins and minerals, flavonoids, carotenoids, and a long list
of other phytonutrients that are unsurpassed in other foods. Read on
to learn more about these health-promoting nutrients.
Food Choices Can Help Prevent Inflammation
Always keep in mind that what you eat can help with inflammation
in three different ways. These three aspects are taken into consideration
in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan, which will show you examples
of how to construct a nutrient-rich way of eating that helps to keep
inflammation in check. 
First, what you eat can be adjusted to avoid deficiency of antiinflammatory nutrients. An inadequate supply of omega-3 fatty
acids, for example, can increase the risk of chronic inflammation.
By adjusting the diet to include more omega-3s, the risk of chronic
inflammation can be lowered. 
Second, what you eat can be adjusted to avoid triggering too much
inflammation. Since toxins found in food can serve as inflammatory
triggers, you can lower your risk of unwanted and chronic inflammation
by eliminating these toxins from your meal plan as much as possible 
Finally, a diet can be adjusted to avoid imbalances that trigger chronic
inflammation. A diet that contains too many processed foods, for
example, will provide too many calories in the form of simple sugars
and too few calories from nutrient-rich foods. By shifting the balance
in this area, unwanted inflammation can become less likely. Let’s
look at some basic dos and don’ts in each of these three areas.
World’s Healthiest Foods Reduce Inflammation
86
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Getting Plenty of Anti-Inflammatory Nutrients
At the top of the list for anti-inflammatory nutrients are two broad
groups of phytonutrients called flavonoids and carotenoids. Many
flavonoids and carotenoids have strong anti-inflammatory properties,
which are often unique to the specific food involved. Richly colored
vegetables and fruits are some of your best bets here, including dark
green leafy vegetables, beets, and berries. Pineapple also contains a
proteolytic (protein-digesting) enzyme called bromelain that has
been shown to have anti-inflammatory activity. These foods are
included among the World’s Healthiest Foods.
Some research studies have found that some individuals with high
intake of flavonoids and carotenoids do not show reduced tendency
to chronic inflammation. These studies make it clear that there are
no “magic bullets” when it comes to dietary prevention of chronic
disease. While it’s important to ensure that you are getting adequate
supplies of carotenoids and flavonoids, this shouldn’t be at the
expense of other nutrients, since all are important. Yet, luckily
since carotenoid- and flavonoid-containing foods are also generally
rich in so many other vitamins and minerals, they can make great
overall contributions to your nutrient goals. 
Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids can also be considered anti-inflammatory because omega-3 fatty acids like alpha-linolenic acid (ALA),
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) can
be converted into regulatory molecules that put the brakes on inflammation. Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids include: fish such as
salmon, sardines, tuna, and other cold-water fish; and, nuts and
seeds, especially flaxseeds, hemp seeds, and walnuts. Other foods
that contain omega-3s in lesser, but still very helpful, amounts include
soybeans, winter squash, and purslane. 
Extra virgin olive oil is another food that has been shown to have
anti-inflammatory benefits. Some of these benefits come from oleuropein and hydroxytyrosol, two unique polyphenols found in olives.
It is important to note that these two phytonutrients are more
87
concentrated in extra virgin olive than in other types of olive oil. As
you’ll see in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan, I place a strong
emphasis on extra virgin olive oil because it has such great health
benefits.
Avoiding Inflammatory Triggers in Your Meal Plan
Artificial additives, including colors, flavors, and preservatives can
all trigger unwanted inflammatory response in the body, not only in
the digestive system, but in other body systems once these food
toxins get absorbed. On a day-in and day-out basis, processed foods
containing these additives can trigger chronic, low-level inflammation
throughout the body. The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan avoid
these inflammatory triggers.
To lower your risk in this area, your best bet is to choose whole foods
that are organically grown whenever possible. Locally grown, seasonal
foods are also usually lower in total toxins because they have undergone processing and don’t require the same kind of preservation for
extended shelf life. If you cannot purchase either organic or seasonal,
locally grown foods, fresh whole foods—like fresh fruits and
vegetables in their whole, natural form—are still likely to be lower
in total toxins than processed foods found in pre-packaged frozen
dinners or other pre-packaged items. 
Achieving a Dietary Balance That Will Prevent
Unwanted Inflammation
Overall dietary balance (and lifestyle balance as well) is extremely
important in preventing chronic inflammation. It’s impossible for
any nutrient, or even a large group of nutrients, to overcome the
problems associated with an unbalanced diet. If your diet includes
too much fat (especially long chain saturated fat), too many
processed foods with simple sugars and little fiber, inadequate protein,
too many calories, too few calories, poor timing, or poor eating
habits (like inadequate chewing and eating under stress), it is going
to be impossible for your anti-inflammatory nutrients to do their job. 
World’s Healthiest Foods Reduce Inflammation
88
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
This same word of caution applies to lifestyle. Multiple studies show
the powerful role of regular exercise in reducing risk of chronic
inflammation. Healthy and adequate sleep is also clearly documented
as an important component of an anti-inflammatory lifestyle. Don’t
count on your diet alone to offset a long list of imbalanced living
habits. But given a chance within the context of reasonable life
choices, an approach to eating—such as that outlined in the Healthy
Weight Loss Eating Plan—can take you a long way down the path
of reduced inflammatory risk. 
Achieving an Anti-Inflammatory Dietary Balance
I want you to know that the inflammation story is by no means
complete, and you can expect to see plenty of new research in this
area, including research related to weight loss. Some of the most
fascinating research might come in the area of cells and their
development. 
Already, many scientists believe that some of our cells actually pass
through a kind of decision point, in which they have to decide
whether to become fat cells, or whether to become another type of
cell, called macrophages. Macrophages are cells that come from
white blood cells and form a very important part of our body’s immune
system. Their name in Greek comes from makros meaning “big”
and phagein meaning “eat.” As “big eaters,” macrophages are
designed to help our body get rid of dangerous substances and
micro-organisms that might pose a threat to our health. 
In some individuals, nearly half of the cells found in fat tissue (adipose
tissue) might be made up of macrophages. This very close connection
between our fat cells and our immune system is likely to give us a new
understanding of the events involved with excess fat storage and also
with loss of stored fat.
Beyond the inflammation question is also the general recognition
that weight loss is not simply a matter of counting calories. It’s also
a matter of our physiological health, metabolic regulation of our
89
appetite, our fat burning processes, and other aspects of our metabolism. I do not expect future research to ever “let us off the hook”
when it comes to calories or temptations or other all-too-familiar
aspects of weight loss. But I do expect it to add new factors into the
mix and to give us new and unexpected ways to succeed in this aspect
of our health!
World’s Healthiest Foods Reduce Inflammation
SECTION 3
The Healthy Weight Loss
Eating Plan
90
Introduction
What is the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan?
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan was developed to provide you
with a meals composed of nutrient-rich foods that are delicious to
your taste buds, satisfying in terms of amount, and make weight loss
an attainable goal. The 4 week's worth of menus in the Plan were developed to give you a basic blueprint—a practical guideline for
weight loss. What I hope is that you will be able to use the 4-week
blueprint as a guideline for developing your own personalized strategy for continued healthy weight loss.
Who can benefit from implementation of the Plan
The Plan was developed to improve the health of the average individual who is overweight and wants to become healthier in a way
that includes healthy weight loss. The Plan is not a clinical plan, and
it is not designed to address clinical problems. You'll need to solicit
the help of your healthcare provider if you face any clinical issues
in your healthcare, including any issues that might impact your
choice of a weight loss plan. In general, since our weight loss plan
averages about 1,530 calories per day, we would expect it to provide the most weight loss benefit for individuals who are currently
consuming a substantially higher level of calories. 
Who should consult a healthcare practitioner before
implementing the Plan
91
CHAPTER 11
The Healthy Weight Loss
Eating Plan
All of the following individuals need to consult with their healthcare
provider before implementing our weight loss plan:
• All pregnant women, women who are nursing, and women
who are considering becoming pregnant
• All individuals under 18 years of age
• All individuals who are concerned about obtaining Daily 
Value levels of nutrient intake for all nutrients based on diet
alone and without the help of dietary supplements
• All individuals with special concerns about their intake of
vitamin D, vitamin B5, vitamin B12, or zinc. 
What to expect when following the Plan
In the U.S., adults consume an average of approximately 2,100 calories of food per day. On average, U.S. adults are also overweight,
and their intake of dietary calories is related to their overweight status. Since our weight loss plan averages about 1,530 calories per
day, it represents a decrease of about 570 calories per day for the average U.S. adult. Over one week's period of time—and all other factors being equal—that 570-per-day calorie decrease would be
expected to result in a weight loss of about 1 pound. In one month,
the expected weight loss would be 4 pounds, and in one year, 48
pounds. 
Regardless of the weight loss plan you follow, your daily calorie intake must be matched up correctly with your activity level. If you
consume exactly the number of daily calories needed to complete
your daily activities (including exercise), you can expect to maintain
your current weight. If you exceed that number, you can expect to
gain weight. If you consume fewer calories than are needed to complete your daily activities (including exercise), you can expect to
lose weight. Of course, in practice, weight loss never occurs with
this degree of mathematical exactness! 
92
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
The amount of calories that a person expends by doing an exercise
depends upon personal factors such as their body weight. There are
numerous calorie expenditure calculators available on the Internet,
which you can use to figure out how much you will burn by participating in different forms of exercise and activities. 
Remember, before you embark on any exercise program, you’ll want
to check in with your physician who should be familiar enough with
your health to give you personalized guidelines and any important
do’s/don’ts. 
When following the Plan, you should expect to start developing a
sense of foods, food groups, food selection, recipes, and menu planning that can serve as a springboard for development of your own
ongoing weight loss approach that takes advantage of nutrient-rich,
whole natural foods and that fits with your individual health status
and lifestyle. You can also expect to get a sense of what a healthy,
1,530 calorie feels like, and how it fits in with your other lifestyle
goals. On a 1,530-calorie diet, many individuals will not be able to
see weekly changes in their weight status unless daily exercise is incorporated into their weight loss plan.
How to Start the Plan
Welcome to the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan—a 28-day guide
to help you lose weight. I believe that everyone can lead a healthy
life and be slim, and that eating healthier affects how you feel, how
much energy you have, and how healthy you are. I have created a
complete Plan to help you lose weight, gain more control of your
health, supercharge your immune system, and help rejuvenate your
entire body. In this Plan you will discover some of the most nutritious foods around—The World's Healthiest Foods. 
While you will likely feel the benefits during the first few days,
know that it takes about 4 weeks for a habit to settle in. So give yourself this time and be patient with yourself as you embark on this
93
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
Healthiest Way of Eating journey.
The Plan is not a diet nor an expensive, time-consuming program.
It is a way to begin a lifestyle change to the Healthiest Way of Eating.
And I’ve done all the work for you so it’s easy! I provide you with
recipes that not only taste great but take only minutes to prepare—
most take 7 minutes or less and you can make an entire meal in just
15 minutes! You just have to do the shopping and you don't have to
break the bank to buy the foods called for in these recipes. 
The Benefits of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan 
The Plan consists of 28 days’ worth of daily menus that embrace
the Healthiest Way of Eating. Since each of the breakfasts, lunches,
dinners, and snacks for the week have a similar level of calories and
nutrients, the Plan features a flexible approach that allows you to
swap meals from one day to the next, if you would like. This will
allow you to make the Plan work for your individual needs.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea
The Plan features Healthier Lifestyle Tea, which you drink before
each meal. This tea is made from green tea and lemon juice. Green
tea is not only delicious but is renowned for its health-promoting
properties. These have been linked to a high concentration of
catechin phytonutrients, which have a wide variety of protective
benefits, many related to their potent ability to cleanse free radicals.
Adding 1 teaspoon lemon juice per cup of green tea not only gives
it a refreshing taste but additional benefits. There have been studies
that have found that participants received weight loss benefits drinking
green tea; for example in one study, participants reduced their body
weight and waist circumference by 5% in three months. If you’re
sensitive to or want to limit your caffeine intake, drink decaffeinated
green tea.
High-Energy Breakfast
Breakfasts feature good carbohydrates—primarily from fruits and
94
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
whole grains—and delicious foods rich in protein—primarily from
nuts, seeds, and eggs—to provide you with the energy you need to
make it through the morning feeling satisfied, curbing your appetite
until lunch. They offer you a supply of omega-3 fatty acids from
walnuts and flaxseeds. Their appetite-satisfying qualities also come
from the concentrations of dietary fiber that they provide.
Energizing Snack
Each day you’ll enjoy energizing snacks that provide you with delicious tastes. Sweet fruits will curb a sweet tooth while giving you
vitamins, minerals, phytonutrients and other nutrients. Nuts and
seeds will offer you protein and other nutrients that may help reduce
blood sugar dips. Studies have found that people who snack on nuts
and seeds (in moderation) tend to be slimmer than those who don’t
consume these delicious foods.
Power Lunch
The Plan’s lunches are delicious while keeping your appetite satisfied. They are a good mixture of protein, carbohydrates and good
fats. 
Most lunches feature a delicious salad, a great facet of a healthy
weight loss approach. For example, one study found that women
who ate a large low-calorie salad ate 12% less pasta even when they
were offered as much as they wanted. Not only will your appetite be
more satisfied but you’ll also greatly benefit from all of the important nutrients it has to offer. Studies have shown that people who ate
one large salad a day with dressing also had high levels of vitamin
C and E, folic acid, lycopene and other carotenoids than those who
did not add salad as part of their daily menu. All this without having to consume that many calories; for example, you could have as
a base of a salad, 2 cups of romaine lettuce. This salad green features
great taste and satisfying crunch, let alone a multitude of vitamins,
minerals, phytonutrients, antioxidants and fiber. And it only contains 16 calories. Eating salads will curb your appetite allowing you
95
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
to consume less calories over an entire meal. 
In some of the lunches, you’ll also find legumes and beans highlighted. These foods are so slow to digest that many people find
them to be natural appetite suppressants. With their low glycemic
index (GI) they keep blood sugar on an even keel and stave off
hunger.
Good fats—like omega-3s from seafood and monounsaturated fats
from extra virgin olive oil—are important to health on many levels
including helping with the absorption of fat-soluble nutrients and
phytonutrients. As a concentrated source of monounsaturated fats,
you’ll find extra virgin olive oil, which has antioxidant nutrients and
also helps enhance the flavor of the dishes to which you apply it.
Some studies have found that extra virgin olive oil can lead to small,
but significant, loss of both body weight and mass.
Slimming Dinner
Before the entrée, each dinner features an Appetizer Satisfier of crudite vegetables. This will help you to not overeat and to feel satisfied. And keep you from starving when you are preparing dinner. 
Let me tell you I prepare one of my favorite quick-and-easy Appetizer Satisfier. I tear off a few leaves from a head of romaine lettuce,
wash them, shake the water off them, and sprinkle with salt and
enjoy. (When using the outer big leaves, I cut off the tips because
they can be bitter and dry). Ancient Romans were known for eating
this salted lettuce; in fact, our word for salad is derived from their
their name for this salted lettuce—salata.
The foods featured are also rich in fiber, which helps to curb the appetite as well as enhance digestion. You’ll notice the inclusion of
many herbs and spices—like ginger, cayenne, turmeric, mustard,
and garlic—in the dinner recipes. Not only do they lend great flavor
but they are rich in unique nutrients including those that help to pro96
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
mote beneficial digestion. As the dinners are satisfying yet not too
heavy, they may also help you with a better night’s sleep.
Each dinner includes a Green Power Side Dish. These easy-toprepare foods are at the cornerstone of the Healthiest Way of Eating.
These foods are so rich in chlorophyll and contain so many nutrients
(including flavonoid and carotenoid antioxidants) but yet they have
so few calories that they are essential to healthy weight loss. These
nutrients will help support optimal metabolism because it provides
your body systems with the nutrients it needs; if you don’t have
enough nutrients to support your metabolism, you won’t be able to
optimize your weight loss. 
Green Power Side Dishes can be so important for healthy weight
loss. Just think if you ate two cups of green vegetables in place of a
baked potato with butter or margarine, you’ll save over 300 calories. These foods are also low in GI so they help balance blood sugar. 
Sweet Desserts
While desserts are optional in the Plan, if you want dessert, I think
that fresh fruit makes a great one as it can curb a sweet tooth while
at the same time providing you with a storehouse of health-promoting nutrients. These nutrients include antioxidants that help to
quench free radicals in the body. Choosing a healthy sweet dessert
can really make a difference when it comes to weight loss; for example, a parfait made with low-fat yogurt and berries will save you
200 calories compared with eating one cup of ice cream.
97
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
WEEK 1
The Healthy Weight Loss
Eating Plan
98
Week 1–Day 1
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast, you’ll enjoy high-fiber cereal with fruit and nuts, for the Power Lunch a
Mediterranean Caesar Salad, and for the Slimming Dinner tasty Salmon with
Dill Sauce over Spinach. Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy
Snack of apple, almond butter, orange, and walnuts; an Appetizer Satisfier of
crudite and guacamole; a Green Power Side Dish featuring broccoli; and
Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that
give you many of the health-promoting nutrients you need every day. 
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
1 cup high-fiber cereal
½ cup blueberries
2 TBS chopped walnuts
1 banana, sliced
1 cup nonfat skim milk
Energizing Snack: 
1 medium-sized apple
1 TBS almond butter
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch: 
Mediterranean Caesar Salad (pg. 148)
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-sized orange
3 walnut halves
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
1 cup carrot strips/slices
1 cup celery sticks 
1 cup sliced cucumber
3-Minute Guacamole (pg. 173)
Salmon with Dill Sauce (pg. 165) served over
Green Power Side Dish
1-Minute Spinach 3 (pg. 172)
5-Minute Broccoli (pg. 176)
99
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
100
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Week 1–Day 2
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty of
delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast,
you’ll enjoy a Tropical Energy Smoothie, for the Power Lunch a Mediterranean Turkey Salad with Mushrooms, and for the Slimming Dinner tasty
Mediterranean Cod with Red Peppers and Basil. Along with these, you’ll also
enjoy a High-Energy Snack of pears, almonds, and grapes; an Appetizer Satisfier of zucchini, carrots, and cauliflower; a Green Power Side Dish featuring kale; and Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These meals are composed of
nutrient-rich foods that give you many of the health-promoting nutrients you
need every day. 
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
Tropical Energy Smoothie (pg. 141)
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-sized pear
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Mediterranean Turkey Salad with Mushrooms (pg. 151)
Energizing Snack:
1 cup red grapes
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
1 cup zucchini slices
½ cup sliced carrots
½ cup cauliflower florets
Mediterranean Cod with Red Peppers and Basil (pg. 161)
Healthy Mashed Sweet Potatoes (pg. 185)
Green Power Side Dish:
5-Minute Kale (pg. 182)
101
Week 1–Day 3
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty of
delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast,
you’ll enjoy a poached egg with Swiss chard, for the Power Lunch Romaine
Salad with Goat Cheese and Mushrooms, and for the Slimming Dinner Spicy
Asian Shrimp with Spinach. Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy
Snack of papaya, walnuts, pear, and almonds; an Appetizer Satisfier of bell
peppers, carrots, and cucumber; a Green Power Side Dish featuring broccoli;
and Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods
that give you many of the health-promoting nutrients you need every day. 
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
3-minute Swiss Chard 2 (pg. 175) topped with ¼ cup pumpkin seeds and 1
TBS sunflower seeds and 1 poached egg, preferably omega-3-rich egg
1 slice 100% whole wheat toast
½ cantaloupe
Energizing Snack:
Papaya with Lime (pg. 139)
3 walnut halves
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Romaine Salad with Goat Cheese and Mushrooms (pg. 154)
Energizing Snack:
Pear
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
½ cup sliced red bell peppers
½ cup carrot slices/sticks
½ cup cucumber slices
Spicy Asian Shrimp (pg. 168) served over
Green Power Side Dish:
1-Minute Spinach 3 (pg. 172)
5-Minute Broccoli 2 (pg. 177) with 1 TBS sunflower seeds
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
102
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Week 1–Day 4
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast, you’ll enjoy yogurt with fruit, for the Power Lunch Greek Salad with
Garbanzo Beans and Feta Cheese, and for the Slimming Dinner Salmon with
Ginger Mint Salsa. Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy Snack
of orange, Brazil nuts, figs, and almonds; an Appetizer Satisfier of cucumbers, bell peppers and zucchini; a Green Power Side Dish featuring Swiss
chard; and Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These meals are composed of nutrientrich foods that give you many of the health-promoting nutrients you need
every day. 
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
8 oz cup plain nonfat yogurt with 1 TBS blackstrap molasses
½ cup blueberries
½ fresh large papaya
1 medium banana
1 slice 100% whole wheat toast
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size orange
1 Brazil nut
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Greek Salad with Garbanzo Beans and Feta Cheese (pg. 144)
Energizing Snack: 
2 dried figs 
3 dried almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
1 cup celery sticks
1 cup cucumber slices
1 cup carrot slices/sticks
Guacamole (pg. 173)
Salmon with Ginger Mint Salsa (pg. 164) served over
Green Power Side Dish:
3-Minute Swiss Chard 2 (pg. 175)
103
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
Week 1–Day 5 
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast, you’ll enjoy Poached Egg over Spinach and Mushrooms, for the Power
Lunch Healthy Chef's Salad with Cheddar Cheese and Garbanzo Beans, and
for the Slimming Dinner Halibut with Ginger and Scallions. Along with these,
you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy Snack of apple, sunflower seeds, orange segments, and almonds; an Appetizer Satisfier of bell peppers, cucumbers, and
carrots; a Green Power Side Dish featuring Brussels sprouts, and Healthier
Lifestyle Tea. These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you
many of the health-promoting nutrients you need every day. 
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
Combine 1-Minute Spinach 1 (pg. 170) with Healthy Sautéed Crimini Mushrooms 2 (pg. 187)
Top with 1 poached egg, preferably omega-rich egg
1 slice 100% whole wheat toast
½ cantaloupe
Energizing Snack: 
1 medium-size apple
6 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Healthy Chef's Salad with Cheddar Cheese and Garbanzo Beans (pg. 145)
Energizing Snack: 
1 medium-size orange
6 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
½ cup sliced red bell peppers
½ cup sliced cucumbers
½ cup carrot slices/sticks
Halibut with Ginger and Scallions (pg. 160) 
5-Minute Cauliflower with Turmeric (pg. 179)
Green Power Side Dish:
5-Minute Brussels Sprouts with Mustard (pg. 178)
Week 1–Day 6
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast you’ll enjoy high-fiber cereal with fruit, for the Power Lunch Chinese
Chicken Cabbage Salad with Cilantro and Ginger, and for the Slimming Dinner Salmon with Mustard over Spinach. Along with these, you’ll also enjoy
a High-Energy Snack of orange segments, walnuts, pear, and sunflower seeds;
an Appetizer Satisfier of cucumbers, bell peppers, and tomato; a Green Power
Side Dish featuring spinach; and Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These meals are
composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you many of the health-promoting
nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
1 cup high-fiber cereal
¼ cup raisins
¼ cup strawberry slices
1 cup nonfat skim milk
Energizing Snack: 
1 medium-size orange 
4 walnut halves
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Chinese Chicken Cabbage Salad with Cilantro and Ginger (pg. 142)
Energizing Snack: 
1 pear
1 TBS sunflower seeds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
½ cup sliced cucumbers
½ cup sliced red bell peppers
1 medium tomato, sliced
Salmon with Mustard (pg. 166)
Green Power Side Dish:
1-Minute Spinach 1 (pg. 170)
104
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Week 1–Day 7 
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast you’ll enjoy Huevos Rancheros, for the Power Lunch Lentil Salad, and
for the Slimming Dinner Chicken Breast with Rosemary, Thyme, and Sage.
Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy Snack of apple, Brazil
nuts, pear, and yogurt; an Appetizer Satisfier of crudite with garlic dip; a
Green Power Side Dish featuring broccoli; and Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These
meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you many of the healthpromoting nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
Huevos Rancheros (pg. 140)
½ large cantaloupe
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size apple
2 Brazil nuts
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Mediterranean Lentil Salad (pg. 150)
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size pear
4 oz plain nonfat yogurt
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
Garlic Dip (pg. 184) served with
½ cup cucumber slices
½ cup fresh red bell pepper slices
½ cup fresh zucchini slices
Chicken Breast with Rosemary, Thyme, and Sage (pg. 159)
Healthy Sautéed Crimini Mushrooms 1 (pg. 186)
Green Power Side Dish:
5-Minute Broccoli 2 (pg. 177) with 2 TBS sunflower seeds
105
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
Week 1 of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan provides you with
100% or more of the Daily Value for 19 health-promoting nutrients
and their health benefits for maintaining good health. The Plan will
help you avoid nutrient deficiencies because, as you can see, it is
built around nutrient-rich foods—rich in vitamins, minerals, hardto-find omega-3 fatty acids, protein, fiber, antioxidants, and many
other nutrients. The nutrient-rich foods in the Plan can provide nutrients in forms that are more available to you than most nutritional
capsules. It is also an anti-inflammatory and immunity plan because
it helps protect against inflammation, reduces free radicals, and bolsters the immune system.
Nutrients provided by the foods in the Plan perform many health
functions in your body:
over 100% for protein helps maintain healthy skin, hair, and muscles
over 100% for fiber helps support intestinal regularity
over 100% for vitamin A helps promote vision health
over 100% for vitamin B1 helps maintain energy supplies
over 100% for vitamin B2 helps protect cells from oxygen damage
over 100% for vitamin B3 helps promote cholesterol level balance
over 100% for vitamin B6 helps support your nervous system
over 100% for folate helps support heart health
over 100% for vitamin C helps protect against free radical damage
over 100% for vitamin E helps protect skin from ultraviolet light
over 100% for vitamin K helps blood to clot normally
over 100% for calcium helps build strong bones
over 100% for copper helps promote proper thyroid function
over 100% for iron helps keep immune system healthy
over 100% for magnesium helps relax nerves
over 100% for manganese helps supports your nervous system
over 100% for phosphorus helps in energy production
over 100% for potassium helps lower risk of high blood pressure
over 100% for selenium helps protect cells from free radical damage
16.7 g insoluble fiber promotes healthy bowel regularity
6.9 g soluble fiber helps lower cholesterol levels
106
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
107
65.8 IU vitamin D promotes bone health
7.3 mg pantothenic acid helps turn carbohydrates and fats into useable 
energy
2.1 mcg vitamin B12 helps prevent anemia
69.0 mcg molybdenum helps protect against inflammation
9.2 mg zinc helps support sense of smell and taste
2.3 g omega-3s helps reduce inflammation
0.7 g tryptophan helps promote better sleep
32,765 mcg beta-carotene antioxidant that helps protect cells from free 
radicals
lutein&zeaxanthin helps support vision health
lycopene antioxidant that helps protect cells from free 
radicals
anthocyanins antioxidants that help protect cells from free 
radicals
Calories, carbohydrates, fats, saturated fats, cholesterol, and sodium
are lower than 100% DVs, which is desirable for most individuals.
Analysis for the following nutrients are not readily available: biotin,
chromium, and iodine (found in sea vegetables).
You can get vitamin D from the sun; 15 minutes in the middle of the
day will provide you your DV for vitamin D. Or, you can add 3.5 oz
of sockeye salmon, which provides 247% DV for vitamin D, or 3.5 oz
of ahi tuna, which provides 101% DV to your menu for the day.
To increase your intake of zinc, vitamin B12, and vitamin B5 to over
100%, consider having one serving of calf’s liver each week.
Since there are no Daily Values for tryptophan, omega-3 fatty acids,
and antioxidant like beta-carotene, lutein/zeaxanthin, lycopene, and
anthocyanins, % DVs are not provided in the chart above.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's "A Food Labeling Guide"
(US FDA, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition/Office of Nutrition, Labeling, and Dietary Supplements, April 2008) was used as a
foundation for the Daily Values we use to evaluate the Healthiest Way of
Eating Plan. When you see the phrase "100% DV," it means that you are
getting 100% or more of the Daily Value (DV). For more, see page 213.
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
108
WEEK 2
The Healthy Weight Loss
Eating Plan
109
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
Week 2–Day 1
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast, you’ll enjoy Energizing Oatmeal, for the Power Lunch a Healthy Chef's
Salad with Chicken, Cheddar Cheese, and Avocados, and for the Slimming
Dinner tasty Miso Salmon with Swiss Chard. Along with these, you’ll also
enjoy a High-Energy Snack of kiwifruit, almonds, orange segments, and
Brazil nuts; an Appetizer Satisfier of bell peppers, zucchini, and cucumbers;
a Green Power Side Dish featuring Brussels sprouts; and Healthier Lifestyle
Tea. These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you many of
the health-promoting nutrients you need every day. 
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
Energizing Oatmeal (pg. 135)
½ papaya
Energizing Snack:
2 kiwifruit
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Healthy Chef's Salad with Chicken, Cheddar Cheese, and Avocados (pg. 146)
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size orange
1 Brazil nut
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
½ cup sliced red bell peppers
½ cup zucchini slices
½ cup cucumber slices
Miso Salmon (pg. 162) served over
Green Power Side Dish:
3-Minute Swiss Chard 2 (pg. 175)
5-Minute Brussels Sprouts with Mustard (pg. 178)
Week 2–Day 2 
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty of
delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast,
you’ll enjoy yogurt with fruit and sunflower seeds, for the Power Lunch a
Healthy Waldorf Salad, and for the Slimming Dinner Healthy Sautéed Scallops.
Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy Snack of orange wedges,
sunflower seeds, figs and almonds; an Appetizer Satisfier of crudite with
hummus; a Green Power Side Dish featuring broccoli and kale; and Healthier
Lifestyle Tea. These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you
many of the health-promoting nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
8 oz plain nonfat yogurt
½ cup strawberries
3 TBS sunflower seeds
1 medium banana, sliced
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size orange
1 TBS sunflower seeds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Healthy Waldorf Salad (pg. 147)
Energizing Snack:
2 dried figs
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
¼ cup red bell peppers
1 cup carrot slices/strips
¼ cup cucumber slices
Mediterranean Hummus (pg. 190)
3-Minute Scallops (pg. 156) 
Healthy 3-Minute Sauteed Scallops (pg. 156) served over 
Green Power Side Dish:
1-Minute Spinach 3 (pg. 172)
5-Minute Mediterranean Medley (pg. 183)
110
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Week 2–Day 3
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition you’ll enjoy plenty of
delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast,
you’ll enjoy high-fiber cereal with berries and sunflower seeds, for the Power
Lunch Mexican Cheese Salad, and for the Slimming Dinner 7-Minute
Sautéed Chicken and Asparagus. Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a HighEnergy Snack of grapes, Brazil nuts, rye crackers, and almond butter; an Appetizer Satisfier of zucchini, bell peppers, and cucumbers; a Green Power Side
Dish featuring collard greens; and Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These meals are
composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you many of the health-promoting
nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
1 cup high-fiber cereal
½ cup blueberries
¼ cup sunflower seeds
1 cup nonfat skim milk
Energizing Snack:
1 cup grapes
1 Brazil nut
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Mexican Cheese Salad (pg. 152) 
Energizing Snack:
2 rye crackers 
1 TBS almond butter
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
1 cup sliced zucchini
½ cup sliced red bell peppers 
½ cup sliced cucumbers
7-Minute Sautéed Chicken and Asparagus (pg. 157)
Green Power Side Dish:
5-Minute Collard Greens 1 (pg. 180) (or Broccoli 1 (pg. 176))
111
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
Week 2–Day 4
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty of
delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast,
you’ll enjoy Poached Egg over Spinach and Mushrooms, for the Power Lunch
Pineapple Chicken Salad, and for the Slimming Dinner Black Bean Chili.
Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy Snack of yogurt, apple,
kiwifruit, and almonds; an Appetizer Satisfier of carrots, zucchini, and cucumbers; a Green Power Side Dish featuring spinach, and Healthier Lifestyle
Tea. These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you many of
the health-promoting nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
Combine Healthy Sautéed Crimini Mushrooms 2 (pg. 187) with 1-Minute
Spinach 1 (pg. 170)
Top spinach and mushroom with 2 TBS pumpkin seeds and 1 oz feta cheese
and 1 poached egg, preferably -rich egg
1 slice 100% whole wheat toast
Energizing Snack:
4 oz plain non-fat yogurt 
½ medium-size apple
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Pineapple Chicken Salad (pg. 153)
Energizing Snack:
2 kiwifruit
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
1 cup carrot slices/sticks
1 cup zucchini slices
½ cup sliced cucumbers
Black Bean Chili (pg. 158)
¼ cup brown rice
Green Power Side Dish:
1-Minute Spinach 1 (pg. 170)
112
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Week 2–Day 5
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast, you’ll enjoy High-Energy Breakfast Shake, for the Power Lunch
Mediterranean Garbanzo Bean Salad, and for the Slimming Dinner Seared
Asian Tuna. Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy Snack of
apple, almonds, yogurt, and walnuts; an Appetizer Satisfier of bell peppers,
zucchini, and cauliflower; a Green Power Side Dish featuring red cabbage
(the red phytonutrients cover up the green ones), and Healthier Lifestyle Tea.
These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you many of the
health-promoting nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
High-Energy Breakfast Shake (pg. 138)
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size apple
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Mediterranean Garbanzo Bean Salad (pg. 149)
Energizing Snack:
4 oz plain nonfat yogurt
1 TBS sunflower seeds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
½ cup sliced red bell peppers
1 cup sliced zucchini
¼ cup cauliflower florets
Seared Asian Tuna (pg. 167)
Green Power Side Dish:
Healthy Sautéed Red Cabbage (pg. 189) topped with 2 TBS sunflower seeds
Healthy Sautéed Crimini Mushrooms 1 (pg. 186)
113
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
Week 2–Day 6
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty of
delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast,
you’ll enjoy Poached Egg over Mushrooms and Kale, for the Power Lunch
Citrus Spinach Salad With Shrimp, and for the Slimming Dinner Halibut with
Cauliflower and Fennel. Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy
Snack of pear, almonds, yogurt, and cantaloupe; an Appetizer Satisfier of
crudite with tahini; a Green Power Side Dish featuring collard greens; and
Healthier Lifestyle Tea. These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that
give you many of the health-promoting nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
Combine Healthy Sautéed Crimini Mushrooms 1 (pg. 186) with 5-Minute
Italian Kale (pg. 182) and top with 1 poached egg, preferably omega-rich egg
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size pear
3 almonds
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Citrus Spinach Salad With Shrimp (pg. 143)
Energizing Snack:
2 oz plain non-fat yogurt
½ cantaloupe, cubed
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
½ cup carrot slices/strips
½ cup cucumbers slices
1 cup zucchini slices
Halibut with Cauliflower and Fennel (pg. 163)
Healthy Sautéed Shiitake Mushrooms (pg. 188)
Green Power Side Dish:
5-Minute Collard Greens 1 (pg. 180) or Broccoli 1 (pg. 176)
Optional Dessert: 10-Minute Berry Dessert with Yogurt and Chocolate (pg. 191)
114
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Week 2–Day 7
This day of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan features easy-to-prepare
menus, which offer exciting flavors and good nutrition; you’ll enjoy plenty
of delicious foods that will keep you satisfied. For the High-Energy Breakfast, you’ll enjoy Ground Turkey with Italian Kale, for the Power Lunch Tuna
Salad Without Mayo, and for the Slimming Dinner Thai Shrimp with Basil.
Along with these, you’ll also enjoy a High-Energy Snack of apple, almond
butter, pear, and yogurt; an Appetizer Satisfier of zucchini and carrots, a
Green Power Side Dish featuring collard greens; and Healthier Lifestyle Tea.
These meals are composed of nutrient-rich foods that give you many of the
health-promoting nutrients you need every day.
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
High-Energy Breakfast:
Ground Turkey with Italian Kale (pg. 136)
½ cantaloupe
1 slice 100% whole wheat toast
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size apple with 1 TBS almond butter
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Power Lunch:
Tuna Salad Without Mayo (pg. 155)
Energizing Snack:
1 medium-size pear
4 oz nonfat plain yogurt
Healthier Lifestyle Tea (pg. 137)
Slimming Dinner:
Appetizer Satisfier:
1 cup zucchini slices
½ cup carrot slices/sticks
Thai Shrimp with Basil (pg. 169) served over
Green Power Side Dish:
5-Minute Collard Greens 2 (pg. 181)
Optional Dessert:
5-Minute Ginger Pineapple (pg. 192) or 10-Minute Orange Treat (pg. 193)
115
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
116
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Week 2 of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan provides you with
100% or more of the Daily Value for 19 health-promoting nutrients
and their health benefits for maintaining good health. The Plan will
help you avoid nutrient deficiencies because, as you can see, it is
built around nutrient-rich foods—rich in vitamins, minerals, hardto-find protein, fiber, antioxidants, and many other nutrients. The
nutrient-rich foods in the Plan can provide nutrients in forms that are
more available to you than most nutritional capsules. It is also an
anti-inflammatory and immunity plan because it helps protect
against inflammation, reduces free radicals, and bolsters the immune
system.
Nutrients provided by the foods in the Plan perform many health
functions in your body:
over 100% for protein helps maintain healthy skin, hair, and muscles
over 100% for fiber helps support intestinal regularity
over 100% for vitamin A helps promote vision health
over 100% for vitamin B1 helps maintain energy supplies
over 100% for vitamin B2 helps protect cells from oxygen damage
over 100% for vitamin B3 helps promote cholesterol level balance
over 100% for vitamin B6 helps support your nervous system
over 100% for folate helps support heart health
over 100% for vitamin C helps protect against free radical damage
over 100% for vitamin E helps protect skin from ultraviolet light
over 100% for vitamin K helps blood to clot normally
over 100% for calcium helps build strong bones
over 100% for copper helps promote proper thyroid function
over 100% for iron helps keep immune system healthy
over 100% for magnesium helps relax nerves
over 100% for manganese helps supports your nervous system
over 100% for phosphorus helps in energy production
over 100% for potassium helps lower risk of high blood pressure
over 100% for selenium helps protect cells from free radical damage
17.7 g insoluble fiber promotes healthy bowel regularity
9.28 g soluble fiber helps lower cholesterol levels
21.3 IU vitamin D promotes bone health
Calories, carbohydrates, fats, saturated fats, cholesterol, and sodium
are lower than 100% DVs, which is desirable for most individuals.
Analysis for the following nutrients are not readily available: biotin,
chromium, and iodine (found in sea vegetables).
You can get vitamin D from the sun; 15 minutes in the middle of the
day will provide you your DV for vitamin D. Or, you can add 3.5 oz
of sockeye salmon, which provides 247% DV for vitamin D, or 3.5
oz of ahi tuna, which provides 101% DV to your menu for the day.
To increase your intake of zinc, vitamin B12, and vitamin B5 to over
100%, consider having one serving of calf’s liver each week.
Since there are no Daily Values for tryptophan and antioxidants like
beta-carotene, lutein/zeaxanthin, lycopene, and anthocyanins, 
% DVs are not provided in the chart above.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's "A Food Labeling Guide"
(US FDA, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition/Office of
Nutrition, Labeling, and Dietary Supplements, April 2008) was used
as a foundation for the Daily Values we use to evaluate the
117
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan
7.0 mg pantothenic acid helps turn carbohydrates and fats into useable 
energy
1.6 mcg vitamin B12 helps prevent anemia
69.0 mcg molybdenum helps protect against inflammation
9.2 mg zinc helps support sense of smell and taste
62.2 g omega-3s helps reduce inflammation
8.9 g tryptophan helps promote better sleep
30,545 mcg beta-carotene antioxidant that helps protect cells from free 
radicals
lutein&zeaxanthin helps support vision health
lycopene antioxidant that helps protect cells from free 
radicals
anthocyanins antioxidants that help protect cells from free 
radicals
118
Healthiest Way of Eating Plan. When you see the phrase "100%
DV," it means that you are getting 100% or more of the Daily Value
(DV). For more, see page 213.
Congratulations
Congratulations, now you have finished the first 14 days of the Plan.
You should start to see your body respond quickly when you eat the
foods in the Plan. You will also be feeling more alert and energized
while starting to lose weight. Now that this way of eating has started
to work, you should repeat the two weeks you have just finished to
complete the 28-day weight loss plan. By the time you are done,
you will be well on your way to a slimmer you. 
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
CHAPTER 12
Practical Tips for Continued
Healthy Weight Loss
Healthiest Way of Eating Tips for Weight Loss: 
Breakfast
Making time for a healthy breakfast sets the stage for healthy eating
throughout the day. For most people, breakfast time comes at least
8-10 hours after their previous meal. So, in essence, while sleeping
you have also been "fasting." In fact, the word itself, when broken
down, means to "break a fast." When you wake up in the morning
your blood sugar may be low or you may feel hungry. A general
guideline is to have your breakfast contribute from 350 to 500 of
your daily intake of calories. 
Breakfast should contain around one-quarter of your protein requirements for the day. You can do this by enjoying nuts, seeds, eggs,
complex carbohydrates, and whole grain cereals as part of your first
meal of the day.
When you select cereal it is best to look for one that is made from
whole grains and has 5 grams of fiber per serving and not too much
sugar or salt. Try not to eat foods that are high in refined carbohydrates (for example sugary cereals; pancakes, waffles, bagels, and
muffins made from white flour; or white flour-based breakfast rolls
or bars) first thing in the morning. These foods can cause a rapid
spike in your blood sugar and may give you a short burst of energy
but may cause you to "crash" an hour or two later. 
What happens if you skip a healthy breakfast? If you don't give your
body some real nourishment first thing in the morning, you may
119
120
experience many unwanted consequences, including insufficient
blood sugar levels and metabolic imbalances that leave you feeling
sleepy or fatigued. And by the time lunch rolls around you will
probably be so hungry that you will eat anything in sight! Several
studies have found that skipping breakfast is a risk factor for becoming
overweight or obese.
Many people say that they are not hungry first thing in the morning,
which makes it difficult to eat breakfast. Eating a smaller meal for
dinner will help increase your appetite for breakfast. If you don't
have much of an appetite in the morning, begin the habit of eating
breakfast by starting with something very small, such as a half a
piece of whole grain toast with nut butter or a small bowl of whole
grain cereal (with no added sugars!) with milk. As your body gets
used to digesting food in the morning, you might notice a bigger
appetite in the morning. Latest scientific studies show that those who
eat breakfast everyday lost more weight.
Examples of a good breakfast:
Green Tea (Healthier Lifestyle Tea) with one of the following: 
• Energizing oatmeal made with milk (or soy or rice milk) 
topped with blueberries and almonds
• Whole grain, breakfast cereal with fruit and nuts or seeds 
(sunflower or pumpkin)
• Poached eggs over spinach
• Healthy breakfast frittata
Healthiest Way of Eating Tips for Weight Loss: Lunch
What I have discovered as the answer to the dilemma of not having
enough time to prepare a healthy lunch is to prepare a salad meal
for lunch. Salad meals can provide you with all of the nutritional
benefits of the Healthiest Way of Eating without having to cook!
They take little time to prepare and the varieties you can enjoy are
only limited by your imagination. To prepare a salad meal, you
just need to assemble all of ingredients you want to include. These
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
salad meals are not the "salads" that many of us grew up with consisting of a bowl of iceberg lettuce topped with tomatoes and French
dressing. These are nutrient-rich, nourishing meals that can be
prepared in just minutes using easy-to-find fresh ingredients. 
I rediscovered the lost history of the classic Mediterranean-style
salad while traveling the world to more than 80 countries, visiting
people and cultures where there were traditionally few, if any, instances
of the modern diseases that plague us today. These were countries
where the people had come to expect the natural enjoyment of a long
and vigorous life such as the Mediterranean countries, including
the Greek Island of Crete. Salad meals were a large part of the diets
in these areas. The Romans called them salatas.
Mediterranean-style salad meals are fresh, crisp, and delicious and
there is absolutely no nutrient that cannot be obtained from them. It
can be one of the most enjoyable meals of the day. In fact, a salad
meal with a foundation of different types of lettuce and containing
a wide variety of foods will often be closer to a "complete meal"
than many other food possibilities. However, not all lettuce is created
equal. The darker leaf lettuces provide you with more vitamins. And
the lettuce in salads provides you with plenty of fiber so you feel
satisfied and satiated. In addition, if you limit the amount of dressing,
they can also be low in calories!
Here are some of your best salad green choices
• Romaine lettuce
• Spinach 
• Green leafy lettuce
• Red leaf lettuce 
• Boston lettuce
• Arugula
• Watercresss
• Endive
121
Practical Tips for Continued Healthy Weight Loss
122
Topping lettuce and salad greens with chicken, seeds, nuts, fish,
shellfish, or beans can provide you with more protein than a hamburger,
twice as many nutrients as a traditional "entrée" plus two "side
vegetables" as well as contributing hard-to-find omega-3 fatty acids
to the salad meal. They can also be very low on the glycemic index. 
Even small amounts of "garnish" type ingredients—like a tablespoon
of pumpkin seeds or a sprinkling of walnuts instead of croutons—are
a very worthwhile addition in terms of nutrients. Trace minerals and
small amounts of high-quality omega-3 fats are nutrients that most
U.S. adults don't get nearly enough of, and it doesn't take many
pumpkin seeds or walnuts to bring some of these vital nutrients into
the day's Healthiest Way of Eating. 
Think of a salad meal as a canvas upon which you can mix the different “colors” of foods. Depending upon your mood, the season,
and the content of your refrigerator, you can make a salad with a
mixture of your favorite lettuce. Starting with a nutrient-rich lettuce
like romaine and adding a mesclun or spring mix variety of lettuces
will create a great foundation for any salad. From there you can add
in a selection of leafy greens, root vegetables, or other vegetables. 
The sky's the limit as to what combination of nutrient-rich foods you
can use. From there, you can add fruit, nuts, seeds, beans,
legumes…the list of what you can add to a salad meal to make it
delicious and nutritious goes on and on. Mix up a lot of different
foods that feature a spectrum of nutrients and your salad bowl may
one day replace your multivitamin supplement. 
And don't forget the dressing. The reason is that the fats in dressings
are necessary for our bodies to absorb carotenoids—the red, yellow,
and orange pigments in fruits and vegetables, which act as antioxidants
and prevent free radical damage that promotes aging and chronic
disease. This is because carotenoids (along with vitamins A, D, and
E) are fat-soluble, so our bodies cannot absorb them unless fat is
present. Studies have shown that adding just a little fat to your salads
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
can make a big difference in the amount of the protective compounds
you absorb. People using full-fat dressing absorb twice the nutrients
than those using reduced-fat dressing. And there was no absorption
found among those using non-fat dressing! 
Eating a salad meal is one of the most healthful eating habits you
can adapt and one of the simplest. In just 5 minutes and you can
have a health-promoting meal rich in enough protein, healthy fats,
vitamins, minerals, and powerful antioxidants to carry you through
the entire afternoon. 
Healthiest Way of Eating Tips for Weight Loss:
Dinner
From a nutritional research perspective, there are three basic don’ts
when it comes to dinner and how it might affect your sleep. First,
don’t make your dinner meal too large in size, especially when it
comes to volume of food and amount of fat. It just takes too long for
your stomach to empty large amounts of food. For example, some
studies have shown that approximately 10-15 grams of fat in food
can be processed in the stomach and passed on to the small intestine
in one hour. It’s not unusual for there to be 20 grams of fat in one
fried chicken breast and another 30 grams of fat in one large serving
of French fries. The 50 grams of fat found in those two foods alone
might drag out digestion time in the stomach to 5 hours! If you ate
these two foods for dinner at 8:00 pm, it might be 1:00 am before
they even left your stomach. (During the nighttime, too much
secretion of gastric acid in your stomach can be a factor that disrupts
sleep.) As a general guideline, you’ll usually want to keep your dinners
in the 350-550 calorie range, and you’ll want to keep your dinner
food fats to about 10-15 grams. Typically, that will mean no fried
foods and only a few tablespoons of fat-containing sauces and salad
dressings.
The second don’t is related to the glycemic index. Although I’ve
seen some research and some Internet discussion of high-glycemic
123
Practical Tips for Continued Healthy Weight Loss
124
index foods and their benefits for sleep, I believe that the best research
here and the most healthful approach is to stick with low-glycemic
index (low-GI) foods at dinner (and at other meals as well). Repeated
studies have made it clear that low-GI foods at dinner can improve
blood sugar reactions following breakfast the next morning and can
help the entire next day start out in a way that is better for your blood
sugar balance. 
When you eat breakfast and lunch, your food needs to provide you
with the nourishment and energy to get you through the rest of the
day. When you eat dinner (unless you work a late shift, or have
responsibilities that force you to change your schedule from the
natural cycle of waking hours in the daylight and sleep hours in the
dark), you are no longer trying to gear up for your day’s activities.
Instead, you are trying to prepare for a good night’s sleep and wake
up with a refreshed start to the next day. I believe that low-GI foods
are the best way to help you accomplish this task. Green leafy
vegetables, cruciferous vegetables, and salad-type vegetables (including lettuce, tomatoes, celery, bell peppers, radish, and cucumbers) have
the lowest GI values of any food group and can be especially good
choices here. On the don’t list, however, would be processed and
refined grain products (like breads and pastas not made from 100%
whole grains) and sugar-added foods or drinks. 
The third and final don’t involves timing. You don’t want to eat your
dinner meal too close before bedtime. Your digestive tract works best
when you are upright and sleep is not a good time for your stomach
to be working in overdrive. If you keep your dinner meals in the
350-550 calorie and 10-15 grams of fat range I recommend, you
should be able to eat your dinner meal approximately 3-4 hours
before bedtime and have it work compatibly with your sleep. 
As mentioned earlier, low-GI foods and moderate fat foods are good
choices when it comes to dinner. In the low-GI category, you will
want to focus on the type of vegetables described earlier: green leafy
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
vegetables, cruciferous vegetables, and salad-type vegetables including
lettuce, tomatoes, celery, bell peppers, radishes, and cucumbers.
If you’re going to include starchier vegetables like potatoes or
green peas, I recommend keeping them to the _-1 cup range in terms
of serving size. Whole grains can also make good choices here, kept
once again in the 1 cup range. 
A second “do” when it comes to dinner is protein-containing foods.
The combination of low-GI carbs and protein at a dinner meal has
been shown in some research studies to help improve sleep, and
there is some evidence that one particular amino acid—tryptophan—
has a better chance to play a helpful role in our sleep-related nervous
system activity when we combine dinner foods that provide protein
and low-GI carbs. One very good protein choices here would be fish
(but stay away from fried or breaded fish). If you enjoy and do well
on lean meats, they can also be a healthy protein source and should
be kept in the 4-6 ounce range at dinner.
A final “do” when it comes to dinner meals is the importance of a
relaxed, enjoyable meal! Since dinner is coming at a time that is
relatively close to bedtime, it’s especially important to do thorough
chewing of your dinner food and to relax in a way that will allow
your body to engage in optimal digestion. This is one of the best
time to savor the smells and textures and flavors of the World’s
Healthiest Foods. 
Stick with some healthy protein choices (like non-fried fish) and
low-GI (glycemic index) foods (like fresh green vegetables) at
dinnertime. As a general guideline, keep your dinner meal in the
350-550 calorie and 10-15 grams-of-fat range. Don’t go overboard
on amounts for any food and leave a period of 3-4 hours between
your dinner and your bedtime. And equally important, treat your
dinner as the kind of meal that is designed to be especially relaxing
and enjoyable. 
125
Practical Tips for Continued Healthy Weight Loss
126
Healthiest Way of Eating Tips for Weight Loss: 
Snacks
Healthy snacks contain an appropriate amount of protein, fats, fiber,
and accompanying nutrients that will not only satiate your appetite
so you will be less hungry between meals, but they also provide you
with health-promoting nutrients to provide you with long-lasting
energy.
Snacks should also provide energy and the feeling of satiety for the
least number of calories. That's why I don't recommend popular
snacks like energy bars because they contain excess amounts of fats
and sweeteners, which contribute empty calories to your daily quota
of calories. While a small amount of fat helps to maintain satiety,
excessive amounts of fat can slow down your digestion to the point
where it takes too long for you to derive energy and nourishment
from your food. And excessive amounts of simple sugars can digest
too quickly so you will be hungry in a very short time—much before
the next meal. They also do not contain any fresh ingredients, which
can help increase your energy and vitality. 
An example of a healthy snack is fresh fruit (such as apples, pears,
and blueberries) combined with nuts (such as almonds, walnuts and
cashews) as it provides a good combination of fiber from the fruit
and protein from the nuts (the latter increases the "holding power"
of the snack). The fats from the almonds are a good addition to help
slow digestive process and stretch the snack's impact. Fresh fruit and
yogurt is also a great combination for a healthy snack. These snacks
are not just good for you; they are less expensive than pre-packaged
energy bars. 
I'd like to add one last set of observations about individuals who find
they snack too frequently. It's important to think about the pattern of
your entire day in terms of enjoyment and activities. You may or
may not want to make healthy snacking the solution to a daily pattern
that just isn't working for you in terms of balance and enjoyment. In
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
some cases, planning a larger, more nourishing meal before a difficult
snack period time—and then shifting activities to turn a former
snack period into a period of time focused on other enjoyable pursuits—
can be a more effective way of "tiding yourself over" than experimenting with your snack content. 
Healthiest Way of Eating Tips for Weight Loss:
Appetizers
Even when I prepare dinner for myself I prepare appetizers such as
broccoli and cauliflower florets, cucumbers, red bell peppers, and
zucchini and serve them with a health-promoting dip such as
guacamole or hummus. These are among the most healthy and easy
appetizers to prepare. Extra virgin olive oil, balsamic vinegar, low-fat
yogurt, and nut/seed butters—such as almond butter or tahini
(sesame seed butter) —also make great dips that require very little
preparation. I enjoy these more than the more traditional soup and
salad appetizer, and they can be more healthy and easier to prepare. 
Even though it is not highly time-consuming to do the cutting and
chopping of the vegetables yourself, you might want to consider the
added convenience of pre-chopped and pre-sliced vegetables (although
they are a bit more expensive). Many stores offer organically grown,
pre-cut vegetables that could provide just the right amount of extra
convenience to get you going on some improved appetizer options.
You will often find that it is often recommended to soak vegetables
in ice water one hour before serving. I would avoid this practice as
soaking leaches out many (about 20) of the nutrients found in the
vegetables. 
Appetizers consisting of vegetable-plus-dip combinations will take the
edge off of your hunger and also help prevent overeating once the meal
is served. Healthy appetizers will usually contain about 100 calories. 
My recommendations for best healthy appetizers include fresh
vegetable crudités served with accompaniments, such as: 
127
Practical Tips for Continued Healthy Weight Loss
128
• Hummus 
• Guacamole
• Tahini
• Salsa 
• Olive tapenade
• Nut butters
Healthiest Way of Eating Tips for Weight Loss:
Beverages
Most people recognize, to varying extents of course, that what they
eat (or don't eat) impacts their overall health. And, because of this
recognition, many people try to eat more fruits and vegetables as
well as less saturated fat and cholesterol while also cutting out junk
foods. 
However, it is important to remember that what you drink (or don't
drink) also impacts your health. If you are careful to eat well, but
drink excessive amounts of soda, fruit beverages, coffee, and/or
alcoholic beverages you may not be as healthy as you could be. That
is because such beverages contain a variety of substances that, when
consumed in excess, are not health-giving. These substances include
refined or artificial sweeteners, artificial flavorings, artificial colorings,
synthetic preservatives, caffeine, and alcohol. In order to keep your
beverage choices at the same peak nourishment level as your food
choices, here are my recommendations: 
Water: You can't go wrong with high-quality water. This beverage
is not only at the top of my list, it is in a category all its own. While
your water intake needs will vary from day to day, in its Dietary
Reference Intake (DRI) recommendations, the National Academy
of Sciences recommends about 13 cups of water each day for men
and 9 cups for women. Space your intake throughout the day, make
sure to rehydrate during and after exercise, and steer clear of excess
water drinking during meal times if you find that practice to be
personally helpful. For the highest quality water, I recommend
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
attaching a high-quality filter to your tap water supply and drinking
this filtered tap water as your primary source of water. To give
yourself plenty of easy access to home-filtered waters, you may
want to purchase an easy-to-carry water bottle and refill it whenever
you are home so that you can have water with you when you are on
the go. Look for glass or stainless steel ones. If you’re getting a hard
plastic (polycarbonate) bottle, be sure to purchase a "BPA-free" one.
(BPA stands for bisphenol A, a problematic toxin that has often been
added to polycarbonate plastics.) 
100% fruit juices: Fruit juice can be healthy when it is 100% fruit
juice, with no added sweeteners. But, keep in mind, that juice can
pack a powerful punch in terms of calories and sugar, so it may not
be wise to consume a lot of juice, even 100% fruit juice, if you are
trying to lose weight or have blood sugar regulation concerns. To
take full advantage of the nutrients available in the fruit, press or
juice the fruit at home and consume it immediately. If you want to
buy fruit juice at a grocery store, keep in mind that 100% fruit juice
is harder to find than you might think as many fruit beverages sold
in supermarkets contain only a small percentage (usually less than
10%) of actual fruit juice. For a special occasion, instead of serving
soda, make a refreshing and healthy punch by combining sparkling
water with 100% cranberry juice, ice, and orange slices in a large
bowl. (Remember though that while 100% fruit juice may be a
healthful beverage, it shouldn’t be thought of as a substitute for
whole fresh fruit.)
Iced herbal tea: Instead of regular iced tea, treat yourself to a cool
drink of herbal iced tea. Many herbs are rich in powerful antioxidants,
which support the immune system and overall health. Brew the tea
stronger than you would if you were planning to serve the tea hot
and then add ice and a sprig of mint or a slice of lemon. Peppermint
tea is wonderful when served cold. Or, try a combination of various
herbs: chamomile, hibiscus flower, lemon grass, orange peel, rose
hips, and strawberry leaf. 
129
Practical Tips for Continued Healthy Weight Loss
130
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthier Lifestyle Tea: Healthier Lifestyle Tea is the name I have
given to a delicious and health-supporting beverage made of one
cup of green tea and one teaspoon of lemon juice. Green tea is not
only delicious but is renowned for its health-promoting properties.
These have been linked to its high concentration of catechin phytonutrients, which have a wide variety of protective benefits, many
related to their potent ability to fight free radicals. Adding 1 tsp of
lemon juice per cup of green tea not only gives it a refreshing taste
but additional benefits. Lemon juice is a concentrated source of
vitamin C, and hot water and lemon is a very cleansing and energizing
beverage. If you are sensitive to caffeine, you can drink decaffeinated green tea. Green tea is best enjoyed hot without sweeteners, however if you want to sweeten your green tea, stevia, agave
nectar, or honey are your best choices. 
Red wine: Red wine has been associated with health-promoting
benefits. Always drink the wine with meals. Current recommendations
are 1 glass for women and 2 glasses for men per day. If you cannot
tolerate alcohol or choose not to include it in your diet, you can
benefit from the resveratrol found in alcohol by enjoying alcoholfree red wine or purple grape juice.
131
CHAPTER 13
The Healthiest Way
of Cooking
From the time that I was five years old, cooking has been my passion.
I studied at some of the greatest schools in the world including La
Varenne in Paris, Guiliano Bugialli’s cooking school in Florence,
and Gourmet’s Oxford in England. My experience cooking as well
as in food development (when I ran Health Valley Foods) inspired
my determination to create recipes and preparation techniques that
enhanced the health benefits of foods. I call this style the Healthiest
Way of Cooking.
In addition to choosing the World’s Healthiest Foods as mainstays of
your Healthiest Way of Eating, it is important to cook them in ways
that conserve their nutrient-richness. That’s because the difference
in nutritional quality between a food (let’s say a vegetable, for example) that is cooked enough for it to have enhanced taste and texture compared to one that is overcooked is vastly different. 
If you want to enjoy the full benefits that the World’s Healthiest
Foods offer, it’s important to cook them for minimal amounts of time
in order to preserve their health-promoting compounds. That’s why
you’ll notice that most of the Healthiest Way of Cooking recommendations for the vegetables in my book, The World’s Healthiest
Foods: Essential Guide for the Healthiest Way of Eating (and those
I featured in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan) entail only five
or so minutes. In this short period of time you can cook vegetables
al dente—tender on the outside, crisp on the inside—so that they
have a delightful texture and vibrant flavor while maintaining so
many more nutrients than if you cooked them for longer. Following
my recommendations for the best cooking method and cooking time
for each of the World’s Healthiest Foods, as outlined in The World’s
132
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthiest Foods book and the recipes included in this e-book, will
ensure you’ll enjoy great tasting foods that will provide you with
great nutrition. 
In addition to preserving nutrients during cooking it’s important to
cook foods using methods that don’t create harmful compounds. For
example, cooking with oil can oxidize their fats and cause lipid peroxidation products that can cause problems in the body and increase the
risk of atherosclerosis. Instead of cooking with oil, I have come up
with a healthy cooking method called Healthy Sauté that uses vegetable or chicken broth. 
Healthy Sauté is a very special way of preparing foods because it
has the benefits of three methods in one. It is a sauté that uses vegetable or chicken broth in place of heated oils; I am particularly conscious of creating recipes that do not use heated oils because they
can potentially have negative effects on your health. It is like stir-fry
because it brings out the robust flavor of foods but cooks them at a
lower temperature. It is like steaming because there is enough moisture to soften the cellulose and hemicellulose, which aids digestibility. Healthy Sauté requires just a small amount of liquid to
make the vegetables moist and tender. Vegetables such as cauliflower and asparagus, which only require a small amount of liquid
to tenderize them, are especially good candidates for Healthy Sauté
because steaming and boiling will dilute their flavor.
Healthy Sauté, Step-by-Step
• Heat 3-5 tablespoons broth in a stainless steel skillet.
• When broth begins to steam, add vegetables.
• Cover if necessary and sauté for recommended period of
time.
In addition to reducing your exposure to oxidized oils, there is another
great benefit of Healthy Sauté inherently important to healthy weight
loss—the reduced consumption of calories. Just think…typically you
may use a few tablespoons of oil when you sauté vegetables. All you
are really getting from the oil is the texture and oftentimes you don’t
really get much flavor. But two tablespoons of oil can add more than
133
The Healthiest Way of Cooking
200 calories to your meal. By using broth instead of oil to sauté, you
can save yourself most of these calories. You probably don’t disagree
that that’s a lot of calories, that can be used in a better way. 
One more note about oil: as you’ll notice, extra virgin olive oil is a
key component of the Mediterranean diet, and it is also one of the
foods (and the only oil) included as a World’s Healthiest Food. But
I don’t suggest cooking with it because its monounsaturated fats and
polyphenol antioxidants can become damaged. Instead I suggest
using it in salads and dressings, and drizzled on vegetables, fish,
and chicken. (The highest heat I think it can take would be in the
making of sauces.)
How to bring out the health benefits of alllium and 
cruciferous vegetables
After you cut your allium vegetables or cruciferous vegetables, if
you let them sit for 5-10 minutes before cooking them you can help
enhance their health-promoting properties.
Allium vegetables
The latest scientific research tells us that slicing, chopping, mincing
or pressing allium vegetables (i.e, garlic, onions, and leeks) before
cooking will enhance the health-promoting properties of garlic. A
sulfur-based compound called alliin and an enzyme called alliinase
are separated in the garlic's cell structure when it is whole. Cutting
garlic ruptures the cells and releases these elements allowing them
to come in contact and form a powerful new compound called alliicin which not only adds to the number of garlic's health-promoting
benefits but is also the culprit behind their pungent aroma and gives
garlic its "bite".
When it comes to garlic, the more finely it is chopped, the more alliicin is produced. Pressing garlic or mincing them into a smooth
paste will give you the strongest flavor and the greatest amount of
alliicin. The stronger the smell and flavor of garlic, the more healthpromoting nutrients they contain. So the next time you chop, mince
134
or press your garlic, you may have a greater appreciation of its strong
aroma knowing that the more pungent the smell the better it is for
your health!
Because this process takes some time, I recommend letting garlic
sit for about 5-10 minutes after cutting while you prepare other ingredients. This is to ensure the maximum synthesis of alliicin. Once
the compounds are formed they are quite stable and will withstand
low heat for a short period of time, approximately 15 minutes. Research on garlic reinforces the validity of this practice. When
crushed garlic was heated its ability to inhibit cancer development in
animals was blocked; yet, when the researchers allowed the crushed
garlic to “stand” for 10 minutes before heating, its anticancer activity was preserved.
Cruciferous vegetables
Research also shows that cutting cruciferous vegetables (i.e., cabbage, kale, broccoli, cauliflower, mustard greens, etc.) into small
pieces breaks down cell walls and enhances the activation of an enzyme called myrosinase that slowly converts some of the plant nutrients into their active forms, which have been shown to contain
health-promoting properties. So, to get the enhanced benefits from
these vegetables, let them sit for a minimum of 5 minutes, optimally
10 minutes, after cutting, before eating or cooking.
Heat will inactivate the effect of myrosinase, which is why it is
important to allow the cruciferous vegetables to sit for 5-10 minutes
before cooking to give the enzyme ample opportunity to enhance the
concentration of active phytonutrients. Cooking at low or medium heat
for short periods of time (up to 15 minutes) should not destroy the active
phytonutrients since once they are formed, they are fairly stable.
Since ascorbic acid (vitamin C) increases myrosinase activity, you
can sprinkle a little lemon juice on the cruciferous vegetable before
cooking in order to further enhance its beneficial phytonutrient
concentration.
The Healthiest Way of Cooking
135
Recipes - Breakfast and Snacks
CHAPTER 14
Recipes
Breakfast and Snacks
Energizing Oatmeal
A perfect way to start the day! And who
would have thought that a bowl of oatmeal could provide so many nutrients to
your Healthy Weight Loss Plan.
Ingredients: 
2 cups water 
1 cup old fashioned rolled oats 
1 apple, chopped
¼ cup raisins
¼ cup dried cranberries
½ tsp cinnamon 
1 TBS ground flax seeds
1 TBS chopped walnuts
1 cup non-fat milk 
1 TBS blackstrap molasses 
Directions: 
1. Bring the water and salt to a boil in a saucepan, then turn the heat to
low and add the oats, chopped apple, raisins, and dried cranberries.
2. Cook for about 5 minutes, stirring regularly so that the oatmeal will
not clump together. Add cinnamon, flax seeds, and walnuts, stir,
cover the pan and turn off heat. Let sit for 5 minutes. Serve with
milk and molasses. 
Serves 2
Calories 402.75
Calories-Saturated Fat 6.96
Protein 11.92 g
Carbohydrates 80.22 g
Dietary Fiber 9.37 g
Soluble Fiber 2.09 g
InSoluble Fiber 2.57 g
Fat - Total 6.93 g
Cholesterol 2.5 mg
Calcium 285.01 mg
Potassium 806.46 mg
Sodium 75.5 mg
Nutritional Profile
136
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Ground Turkey with Italian
Kale
Include Italian kale for breakfast—it's a
great way to add nutrition to your
Healthy Weigh Loss menu.
Ingredients: 
2 cloves garlic, chopped
½ medium onion, chopped
2 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth
¼ lb low-fat ground turkey
6 cups chopped Italian kale (or any variety)
Sea salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and onion and let sit for at least 5 minutes to bring out
their health-promoting properties.
1. Heat 2 TBS broth on medium heat. Add onion and sauté for 3
minutes, stirring frequently. 
2. Add garlic and turkey and cook for an additional 3 minutes breaking
up the clumps of turkey.
3. Steam kale for 5 minutes.
4. Combine steamed kale and turkey mixture. Season with salt and
pepper to taste.
Serves 2
Calories 191.52
Calories-Saturated Fat 10.72
Protein 18.08 g
Carbohydrates 23.89 g
Dietary Fiber 4.47 g
Soluble Fiber 1.63 g
InSoluble Fiber 2.77 g
Fat - Total 4.94 g
Cholesterol 32.5 mg
Calcium 282.83 mg
Potassium 950.1 mg
Sodium 127.77 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown without ground turkey
137
Recipes - Breakfast and Snacks
Healthier Lifestyle Tea
Healthier Lifestyle Tea is green tea with
lemon. It's a very cleansing and energizing
way to start the day. If you’re sensitive to
caffeine, you can drink decaffeinated
green tea.
Green tea is not only delicious but is
renowned for its health-promoting
properties. These have been linked to its high concentration of catechin
phytonutrients, which have a wide variety of protective benefits, many related
to their potent ability to fight free radicals. Adding 1 tsp lemon juice per cup
of green tea not only gives it a refreshing taste but additional benefits. Lemon
juice is a concentrated source of vitamin C, and hot water and lemon is a
very cleansing and energizing beverage
Ingredients: 
1 cup green tea
1 tsp lemon juice
Directions: 
1. Fill a non-reactive pot or pan (glass or stainless steel) with water and
bring to a temperature of 160-170F.
2. Measure 1 tsp of green tea into a sieve or tea ball and place in 1 cup
hot water.
3. Let steep for 2-3 minutes and add lemon juice. Steeping too long
will make it bitter.
Green tea is not only delicious but is renowned for its health-promoting properties. These have been linked to its high concentration of catechin phytonutrients, which have a wide variety of protective benefits, many related to
their potent ability to fight free radicals. Adding 1 tsp lemon juice per cup of
green tea not only gives it a refreshing taste but additional benefits. Lemon
juice is a concentrated source of vitamin C, and hot water and lemon is a very
cleansing and energizing
Calories 1.27
Calories-Saturated Fat 0
Protein 0.02 g
Carbohydrates 0.44 g
Dietary Fiber 0.02 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 0 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 0.36 mg
Potassium 31.3 mg
Sodium 0.05 mg
Nutritional Profile
138
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
High-Energy Breakfast
Shake 
Quick, easy, and healthy—a great way to
start the day when you're on the go and
low in calories. 
Ingredients: 
1 medium banana 
½ cup whole strawberries 
2 cups non-fat milk 
1 TBS almond butter 
2 TBS ground flaxseeds 
1 TBS blackstrap molasses 
2 TBS sunflower seeds
Directions: 
Grind sunflower seeds and add rest of ingredients and blend until smooth.
Serves 2
Calories 326.53
Calories-Saturated Fat 11.58
Protein 15 g
Carbohydrates 42.14 g
Dietary Fiber 6.19 g
Soluble Fiber 0.49 g
InSoluble Fiber 1.46 g
Fat - Total 12.67 g
Cholesterol 5 mg
Calcium 447.67 mg
Potassium 988.93 mg
Sodium 175.31 mg
Nutritional Profile
139
Papaya with Lime
(or substitute grapefruit for 
papaya)
Rich in vitamin C, potassium, and folate,
papayas are also low in calories making
them a great addition to our Healthy
Weight Loss Plan.
Ingredients: 
1 medium papaya (or ½ grapefruit)
1 TBS lime juice
¼ tsp lime zest
Directions: 
Cut papaya in half and serve with lime juice and zest. 
Serves 2
Calories 61.32
Calories-Saturated Fat 0.59
Protein 0.96 g
Carbohydrates 15.6 g
Dietary Fiber 2.79 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.02 g
Fat - Total 0.22 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 37.89 mg
Potassium 400.03 mg
Sodium 4.73 mg
Nutritional Profile
Recipes - Breakfast and Snacks
140
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Poached Huevos
Rancheros 
Add an international flavor to your breakfast menu with this easy-to-prepare version of a popular Mexican dish that will
add both flavor and nutrition to your
weight loss menu.
Ingredients:
3 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth
2 cups cooked black beans (or 1 15 oz can of black beans, drained) 
1 tsp ground cumin 
3/4 TBS red chili powder 
2 TBS chopped fresh cilantro 
Salt and black pepper to taste 
2 cups shredded romaine lettuce 
½ large avocado, cubed 
1-½ TBS prepared salsa 
Serve with 2 poached eggs, preferably omega-rich eggs
Directions: 
1. Heat broth, beans, cumin, and red chili powder for about 10 minutes
on medium low heat, stirring occasionally. Add cilantro, salt, and
pepper. 
2. Serve beans with poached egg, salsa, shredded romaine lettuce, and
avocado. 
Serves 2
Calories 331.85
Calories-Saturated Fat 19.71
Protein 18.68 g
Carbohydrates 39.08 g
Dietary Fiber 11.47 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0 g
Fat - Total 13.31 g
Cholesterol 211 mg
Calcium 130.98 mg
Potassium 478.85 mg
Sodium 511.42 mg
Nutritional Profile
141
Tropical Energy Smoothie
Add a bit of the tropics to your Weight
Loss Plan with this quick-and-easy
smoothie; the tahini adds protein to help
carry you through the morning. And it is
low in calories!
Ingredients: 
2 TBS tahini 
1 medium ripe banana 
1 cup non-fat plain yogurt 
1-½ cups pineapple juice 
1 medium papaya 
Directions: 
Scoop out flesh from papaya with spoon and add to blender with rest of
ingredients. Blend until smooth. . 
Serves 2 (8 oz. glasses each)
Calories 358.08
Calories-Saturated Fat 10.69
Protein 9.64 g
Carbohydrates 67.97 g
Dietary Fiber 5.82 g
Soluble Fiber 0.11 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.26 g
Fat - Total 8.31 g
Cholesterol 2.5 mg
Calcium 239.51 mg
Potassium 910.74 mg
Sodium 79.19 mg
Nutritional Profile
Recipes - Breakfast and Snacks
142
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Chinese Chicken 
Cabbage Salad 
Like other members of the cabbage family
Chinese cabbage is low in calories but
boasts the highest concentration of B
vitamins, folate and incredible amounts
of zinc.
Ingredients: 
8 cups Napa cabbage, sliced thin 
1 tsp tamari (soy sauce)
1 TBS minced ginger 
2 medium cloves garlic, pressed 
½ cup chopped cilantro 
4 oz-wt cooked chicken breast, shredded or cut into 1" cubes 
½ medium avocado, sliced
2 TBS extra virgin olive oil 
2 TBS rice vinegar 
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all salad ingredients and then toss with olive and vinegar.
Serves 2
Recipes
Lunch and Salads
Calories 353.58
Calories-Saturated Fat 29.05
Protein 23.65 g
Carbohydrates 18.11 g
Dietary Fiber 5.68 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0 g
Fat - Total 23.66 g
Cholesterol 48.2 mg
Calcium 258.66 mg
Potassium 433.95 mg
Sodium 253.84 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with sea vegetable and 
red bell peppers
143
Citrus Spinach Salad With
Shrimp
Baby spinach has become a favorite salad
ingredient. Enjoy this low calorie, nutritious salad; the oranges give you a big
boost of vitamin C!
Ingredients: 
12 cups fresh baby spinach
2 medium oranges, cut segments into small pieces
2 TBS chopped dates
4 oz-wt cooked shrimp
2 TBS lemon juice
2 TBS extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all salad ingredients and toss with lemon juice and extra virgin
olive oil. 
Serves 2
Calories 342.88
Calories-Saturated Fat 18.18
Protein 19.14 g
Carbohydrates 40.14 g
Dietary Fiber 10.8 g
Soluble Fiber 2.09 g
InSoluble Fiber 1.11 g
Fat - Total 15.17 g
Cholesterol 114.75 mg
Calcium 201.82 mg
Potassium 469.52 mg
Sodium 400.33 mg
Nutritional Profile
Recipes - Lunch and Salads
Photo shown without shrimp and
orange wedges
144
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Greek Salad with Garbanzo
Beans and Feta Cheese
Salads with garbanzo beans are among
the favorites along the Mediterranean.
This version is not only nutritious with
great flavor, but the addition of the mint
makes it wonderfully refreshing as well.
Ingredients:
12 cups mixed greens salad 
½ cup fresh peppermint
2 oz reduced-fat feta cheese
1-½ cups garbanzo beans 
2 tsp sunflower seeds 
½ medium avocado
Salt and pepper to taste
2 TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 TBS red wine vinegar
Directions:
Combine all salad ingredients and then toss with olive oil and vinegar.
Serves 2
Calories 488.86
Calories-Saturated Fat 44.33
Protein 23.98 g
Carbohydrates 43.29 g
Dietary Fiber 16.7 g
Soluble Fiber 3.08 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.37 g
Fat - Total 29.12 g
Cholesterol 10 mg
Calcium 339.87 mg
Potassium 1677.53 mg
Sodium 455.89 mg
Nutritional Profile
145
Healthy Chef's Salad with
Cheddar Cheese and
Garbanzo Beans
Variety is of key importance to enjoying
and sticking to your Healthy Weight Loss
menu. This salad is a great example of how
innovative you can become in creating a
delicious salad that is low in calories.
Ingredients: 
8 cups mixed greens salad
2 oz low-fat cheddar cheese, shredded
½ cup sliced cucumber, unpeeled
½ cup red ripe tomato 
½ cup fresh sweet red bell peppers, chopped
1 cup avocado, diced
2 cups garbanzo beans
1 cups crimini mushrooms, sliced
½ cup raisins
2 TBS sunflower seeds
2 TBS extra virgin olive oil
1 TBS balsamic vinegar or lemon juice
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all salad ingredients and then toss with olive oil and vinegar/lemon
juice.
Serves 2
Calories 430.43
Calories-Saturated Fat 30.73
Protein 17.25 g
Carbohydrates 48.66 g
Dietary Fiber 13.04 g
Soluble Fiber 2.6 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.49 g
Fat - Total 21.56 g
Cholesterol 2.98 mg
Calcium 218.59 mg
Potassium 1575.9 mg
Sodium 130.32 mg
Nutritional Profile
Recipes - Lunch and Salads
Not all ingredients shown in photo
146
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthy Chef's Salad with
Chicken, Cheddar
Cheese and Avocados
We love salads, but they are only limited
by your imagination. The protein provided by the chicken and cheddar cheese
will help keep you satisfied until your
mid-day snack. 
Ingredients: 
12 cups mixed greens salad
2 oz chicken breast, shredded or cubed
1 oz low-fat cheddar cheese, shredded
½ cup sliced cucumbers
½ cup tomatoes, diced
½ cup red bell peppers diced
½ cup fresh crimini mushrooms, sliced
½ medium avocado, sliced
½ cup frozen green peas, thawed
½ cup garbanzo beans
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil
1 TBS lemon juice
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all salad ingredients and then toss with olive oil and lemon juice.
Serves 2
Calories 388.98
Calories-Saturated Fat 24.9
Protein 27.38 g
Carbohydrates 38.28 g
Dietary Fiber 15.76 g
Soluble Fiber 3.53 g
InSoluble Fiber 6.94 g
Fat - Total 18.7 g
Cholesterol 27.07 mg
Calcium 309.92 mg
Potassium 2134.57 mg
Sodium 237.75 mg
Nutritional Profile
Not all ingredients shown in photo;
walnuts added
147
Healthy Waldorf Salad
This low-calorie version of the classic
Waldorf salad not only satisfies your
hunger, but it is easy to prepare and tastes
great! 
Ingredients: 
1 medium apple, chopped
1 stalk celery, diced
4 oz-wt chicken breast, diced
2 TBS walnuts, chopped
2 TBS sunflower seeds
2 TBS parsley, chopped
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 TBS lemon juice
12 cups mixed salad greens
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all ingredients except for salad greens and then serve over the
salad greens.
Serves 2
Calories 274.07
Calories-Saturated Fat 18.04
Protein 21.2 g
Carbohydrates 16.52 g
Dietary Fiber 4.63 g
Soluble Fiber 0.5 g
InSoluble Fiber 1.01 g
Fat - Total 14.91 g
Cholesterol 48.2 mg
Calcium 42.54 mg
Potassium 452.42 mg
Sodium 69.63 mg
Nutritional Profile
Recipes - Lunch and Salads
Not all ingredients shown; cucumbers
and tomatoes added
148
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Mediterranean Caesar
Salad
One of the benefits of the Mediterraneanstyle of eating is its abundance of vegetables and legumes, which provide rich
sources of dietary fiber that help you feel
satiated and satisfied—an important
factor in any Healthy Weight Loss Plan.
Ingredients: 
12 cups romaine lettuce
2 medium red tomato, sliced or diced
½ cup sliced cucumbers with peel
1.5 cups kidney beans (or legume of your choice)
1 cup sliced crimini mushrooms
2 TBS grated Parmesan cheese
Dressing:
4 TBS lemon juice
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 garlic cloves, chopped (optional)
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all ingredients and toss with dressing ingredients. Dressing ingredients don't have to be combined separately before tossing.
Serves 2
Calories 361.78
Calories-Saturated Fat 18.86
Protein 23.09 g
Carbohydrates 54.32 g
Dietary Fiber 25.23 g
Soluble Fiber 0.18 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.42 g
Fat - Total 9.95 g
Cholesterol 4.4 mg
Calcium 308.8 mg
Potassium 2523.15 mg
Sodium 142.5 mg
Nutritional Profile
149
Recipes - Lunch and Salads
Mediterranean Garbanzo
Bean Salad
Legumes, such as garbanzo beans, provide
the great combination of protein and
fiber—both of which help you remain
feeling satisfied until your next meal. 
Ingredients: 
12 cups salad greens
1 cup garbanzo beans
4 TBS red onion, chopped 
2 TBS Parmesan cheese
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
2 TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 TBS lemon juice
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all salad ingredients and toss with olive oil and lemon juice.
Serves 2
Calories 362.74
Calories-Saturated Fat 27.01
Protein 15.44 g
Carbohydrates 39.28 g
Dietary Fiber 13.47 g
Soluble Fiber 3.02 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.45 g
Fat - Total 18.2 g
Cholesterol 3.6 mg
Calcium 328.96 mg
Potassium 1708 mg
Sodium 174.37 mg
Nutritional Profile
150
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Mediterranean Lentil
Salad 
Unlike beans, lentils don't require soaking before cooking and can be prepared
in 20-30 minutes. They provide you with
a great source of molybdenum and folate
in your Healthy Weight Loss Plan.
Ingredients: 
2 cups cooked lentils 
½ medium red onion, chopped
2 cloves garlic, chopped
½ cup tomatoes, diced
½ cup red bell pepper, diced
2 tsp fresh lemon juice 
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil 
4 TBS sunflower seeds
4 cups romaine lettuce
Salt and pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to bring out its health-promoting
properties.
2. Combine all ingredients and toss. Serve with romaine lettuce.
Serves 2
Calories 385.64
Calories-Saturated Fat 18.27
Protein 19.63 g
Carbohydrates 44.63 g
Dietary Fiber 20.16 g
Soluble Fiber 0.79 g
InSoluble Fiber 2.17 g
Fat - Total 16.52 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 63.83 mg
Potassium 592.1 mg
Sodium 258.85 mg
Nutritional Profile
151
Recipes - Lunch and Salads
Mediterranean Turkey
Salad with Mushrooms
If you want to add more selenium, B vitamins, and copper to your Healthy Weight
Loss Plan, you may be surprised that
crimini mushrooms are an excellent
source of these important nutrients.
Ingredients: 
12 cups salad greens
1 medium tomato, diced
1 cup sliced cucumbers
8 kalamata olives
2 oz turkey breast
1 cup crimini mushrooms, sliced
Dressing:
2 TBS extra virgin olive oil
1 TBS lemon juice
1 clove garlic, chopped (optional)
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all ingredients and toss with dressing ingredients. Dressing ingredients don't have to be combined separately before tossing.
Serves 2
Calories 316.84
Calories-Saturated Fat 24.47
Protein 20.39 g
Carbohydrates 20.15 g
Dietary Fiber 11.23 g
Soluble Fiber 3.1 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.48 g
Fat - Total 19.2 g
Cholesterol 23.53 mg
Calcium 204.79 mg
Potassium 1389.12 mg
Sodium 394.06 mg
Nutritional Profile
152
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Mexican Cheese Salad 
In this easy addition to your Healthy
Weight Loss Plan, enjoy the healthpromoting anthocyanins found in black
beans, which not only give them their
beautiful dark coloration but provide
you with protection against free radical
activity.
Ingredients: 
8 cups salad greens
2 cups cooked black or pinto beans (or 1 15-oz can, rinsed and drained) 
½ medium avocado, cubed 
1 medium tomato, diced 
2 oz-wt low-fat cheddar cheese, grated 
¼ cup salsa
Juice from lime wedges, to taste 
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Divide greens onto two plates. Sprinkle beans, avocado, and tomato
over greens. 
2. Top with cheddar cheese, your favorite salsa, and the juice of lime
wedges. 
Serves 2
Calories 334.33
Calories-Saturated Fat 17.74
Protein 21.49 g
Carbohydrates 45.99 g
Dietary Fiber 14.99 g
Soluble Fiber 0.16 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.52 g
Fat - Total 10.45 g
Cholesterol 5.95 mg
Calcium 264.65 mg
Potassium 908.52 mg
Sodium 604.97 mg
Nutritional Profile
153
Recipes - Lunch and Salads
Pineapple Chicken Salad
This unique combination of ingredients
not only tastes great but the low-incalorie pineapple provides you with an
extra boost of vitamin C for added antioxidant protection and immune support.
Ingredients: 
2 cup diced pineapple
2 fennel bulb, sliced thin
½ cup diced chicken breast
3 TBS extra virgin olive oil
1 TBS lemon juice
12 cups salad greens
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all ingredients except salad greens. Divide salad greens onto two
plates and top with half of the Pineapple Chicken Salad mixture.
Serves 2
Calories 452.58
Calories-Saturated Fat 35.18
Protein 19.5 g
Carbohydrates 47.07 g
Dietary Fiber 16.58 g
Soluble Fiber 2.99 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.17 g
Fat - Total 25.2 g
Cholesterol 29.4 mg
Calcium 321.08 mg
Potassium 2287.65 mg
Sodium 231.98 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with tumeric added
154
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Romaine Salad with Goat
Cheese and Mushrooms
Adding salmon or sardines to a Healthy
Weight Loss Salad is an easy way to help
meet the recommended intake of those
hard-to-find omega-3 fatty acids so important for optimal health.
Ingredients: 
2 oz-wt sardines or canned salmon 
12 cups fresh romaine lettuce, chopped
1 cup sliced fresh crimini mushrooms
½ cup frozen green peas, thawed
2 medium tomato, diced
3 oz low-fat soft goat cheese 
2 TBS sunflower seeds
Dressing:
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 fresh garlic cloves
2 tsp fresh lemon juice
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Combine all ingredients and toss with dressing ingredients. Dressing 
ingredients don't have to be combined separately before tossing.
Serves 2
Calories 447
Calories-Saturated Fat 53.69
Protein 25.81 g
Carbohydrates 36.7 g
Dietary Fiber 14.84 g
Soluble Fiber 1.03 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.18 g
Fat - Total 25.53 g
Cholesterol 30.75 mg
Calcium 212.26 mg
Potassium 2090.53 mg
Sodium 550.08 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown without goat cheese
and sunflower seeds
155
Tuna Salad Without Mayo
If you didn't think you could have a tuna
salad without mayo, try this unique
version that is low in calories and still
provides you with great taste.
Ingredients: 
½ 6 oz can light tuna packed in water, drained
2 cloves garlic, chopped
1 TBS Dijon mustard
1 tsp honey
4 tsp fresh lemon juice
2 oz-wt soft silken tofu
½ cup celery, chopped
8 olives, sliced
2 tsp sunflower seeds
1 medium avocado, diced
8 cups salad greens
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to bring out its health-promoting
properties.
2. Combine all ingredients except avocado and salad greens.
3. Place 4 cups of greens and half of the avocado on a plate and top
with half of the Tuna Without Mayo recipe.
Serves 2
Calories 277.88
Calories-Saturated Fat 19.08
Protein 16.18 g
Carbohydrates 14.1 g
Dietary Fiber 3.49 g
Soluble Fiber 0.14 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.54 g
Fat - Total 22.26 g
Cholesterol 12.38 mg
Calcium 46.6 mg
Potassium 664.06 mg
Sodium 473.2 mg
Nutritional Profile
Recipes - Lunch and Salads
156
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Recipes
Dinners
3-Minute Scallops 
Healthy Sauté your scallops and enjoy a
great tasting dish without the use of
heated oils that are not only unhealthy but
add extra calories when trying to lose
weight. 
Ingredients: 
1/3 lb bay scallops or sea scallops 
1 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth 
2 medium cloves garlic, chopped
1 tsp extra virgin olive oil 
1 TBS fresh lemon juice 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to enhance its health-promoting
benefits. 
2. Bring 2 quarts of water to a fast boil.
3. Heat 1 TBS broth over medium heat in a stainless steel skillet. 
4. When broth begins to steam, add scallops and garlic and sauté for 2
minutes stirring frequently. After 2 minutes, turn scallops over and
let cook on the other side for 1 minute. Scallops cook very quickly
so watch your cooking time. Overcooked scallops become tough. (If
you are using larger sea scallops, you'll need to cook for 1-2 minutes
longer.) 
5. Dress with extra virgin olive oil, lemon juice, garlic, salt and pepper. 
Serves 2
Calories 94.1
Calories-Saturated Fat 3.68
Protein 13.06 g
Carbohydrates 3.52 g
Dietary Fiber 0.09 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.02 g
Fat - Total 2.97 g
Cholesterol 24.95 mg
Calcium 24.41 mg
Potassium 271.36 mg
Sodium 124.55 mg
Nutritional Profile
157
Recipes - Dinners
7-Minute Sautéed
Chicken and Asparagus 
Enjoy a rich source of protein and folate
when you make this great-tasting chicken
and asparagus Healthy Weight Loss meal. 
Ingredients: 
2 medium cloves garlic, pressed 
3 TBS chicken broth 
½ lb boneless, skinless chicken breasts, cut into 1-inch pieces 
1-½ lb asparagus, cut into 1-inch pieces (about 2 cups when cut) 
2 tsp lemon juice
Pinch of red chili flakes 
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil
Salt and white pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes to bring out its hidden
health benefits. 
2. Heat 3 TBS broth in a stainless steel wok or 12-inch skillet. When
broth begins to steam add chicken and cook for 3-4 minutes.
3. Add asparagus, lemon juice, and red chili flakes. Stir together and
cover. Cook for another 2-3 minutes. This may have to cook for an
extra couple minutes if the asparagus is thick. Toss with extra virgin
olive oil. Season with salt and pepper to taste. 
Serves 2
Calories 238.96
Calories-Saturated Fat 32.03
Protein 24.76 g
Carbohydrates 2.62 g
Dietary Fiber 0.54 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 14.14 g
Cholesterol 72.58 mg
Calcium 23.73 mg
Potassium 339.75 mg
Sodium 78.75 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with onions and mustard added
158
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Black Bean Chili 
A rich, hearty and flavorful vegetarian
Weight Loss meal that is rich in nutrients
and only take about 30 minutes to prepare. 
Ingredients: 
1 medium onion, chopped 
2 cloves garlic, minced or pressed 
2 cups cooked black beans (1 15 oz can black beans, rinsed)
1 15 oz can diced tomatoes 
2 TBS chili powder 
½ cup cilantro 
Directions: 
1. Chop onions and mince or press garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes to enhance their health-promoting properties. 
2. Place all ingredients—except cilantro—in a pot, cover, and let simmer for about 20 minutes. 
3. Top with cilantro and serve. 
Serves 2
Calories 271.68
Calories-Saturated Fat 0.13
Protein 13.67 g
Carbohydrates 49.9 g
Dietary Fiber 12.24 g
Soluble Fiber 0.04 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.73 g
Fat - Total 1.33 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 121.62 mg
Potassium 333.39 mg
Sodium 910.66 mg
Nutritional Profile
159
Recipes - Dinners
Chicken Breast with 
Rosemary, Thyme and
Sage
Herbs and spices are a great way to season almost any Healthy Weight Loss dish
with few extra calories. 
Ingredients: 
2 cloves garlic, chopped
2 oz-wt chicken breast, cut into cubes
1 TBS fresh lemon juice
4 cup organic low-fat chicken or vegetable broth 
2 tsp fresh sage
2 tsp fresh thyme
2 tsp fresh rosemary
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to bring out its healthpromoting properties.
2. Cut chicken and coat with lemon juice, salt, and pepper. 
3. Heat broth and add chicken and herbs. Cook for 3-4 minutes until
chicken is cooked through.
Serves 2
Calories 59.35
Calories-Saturated Fat 3.34
Protein 9.36 g
Carbohydrates 2.37 g
Dietary Fiber 0.19 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.02 g
Fat - Total 1.26 g
Cholesterol 24.1 mg
Calcium 25.47 mg
Potassium 105.21 mg
Sodium 77.03 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with onions and mustard added
160
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Halibut with Ginger and
Scallions 
Add this delicious low-calorie Asian-flavored dish to your Healthy Weight Loss
menu. With plenty of protein and little
fat, it's one of our favorites.
Ingredients: 
¼ lb halibut, cut into two pieces 
2 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth 
1 TBS mirin rice wine* 
1 medium cloves garlic, chopped 
½ TBS tamari (soy sauce) 
½ TBS fresh lemon juice 
½ TBS minced fresh ginger 
½ cup coarsely chopped scallion 
Salt and white pepper to taste 
* Japanese rice cooking wine found in Asian section of market
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to enhance its health-promoting
properties. 
2. Bring the broth to a simmer on medium-high heat in a 10-inch skillet. 
3. Add garlic, tamari, lemon juice, ginger, and scallions. 
4. Place halibut steaks on top, reduce heat to low and cover. Cook for
about 5 minutes, depending on thickness. Season with salt and pepper.
Remove steaks and place on a plate. Spoon ginger and scallion
mixture over fish and serve. 
Serves 2
Calories 83
Calories-Saturated Fat 2.02
Protein 13.25 g
Carbohydrates 4.29 g
Dietary Fiber 0.81 g
Soluble Fiber 0.22 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.47 g
Fat - Total 1.46 g
Cholesterol 18.14 mg
Calcium 51.29 mg
Potassium 376.64 mg
Sodium 291.2 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with broccoli, cabbage
and cilantro added
161
Recipes - Dinners
Mediterranean Cod with
Red Bell Peppers and Basil
Healthy Weight Loss is all about combining great taste with great nutrition and
a minimal number of calories. This recipe
is a winner on all three fronts.
Ingredients: 
¼ lb cod fillets
2 TBS + ½ cup low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth
1 medium onion, sliced thin
1 medium red bell pepper, diced
2 medium tomatoes, diced
1 TBS fresh basil, chopped
2 TBS fresh parsley, chopped
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Slice onion and let sit for 5 minutes to bring out its health-promoting
properties. 
2. Heat 2 TBS broth in skillet. When broth begins to steam, add onions
and bell pepper. 
3. Add ½ cup broth, cod fillets, and tomatoes 
4. Cover and cook over medium heat for 3-5 minutes or until fish is
cooked. 
5. Add chopped basil, parsley, and salt and pepper to taste. 
Serves 2
Calories 118.85
Calories-Saturated Fat 2.75
Protein 12.88 g
Carbohydrates 15.65 g
Dietary Fiber 3.47 g
Soluble Fiber 0.36 g
InSoluble Fiber 1.77 g
Fat - Total 1.3 g
Cholesterol 24.38 mg
Calcium 38.7 mg
Potassium 738.87 mg
Sodium 156.68 mg
Nutritional Profile
162
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Miso Salmon 
Among those fats that are important in
Healthy Weight Loss are the health-promoting omega-3 fatty acids, of which
salmon is a great source. Enjoy this
unique tasting salmon recipe that takes
little time to prepare.
Ingredients: 
1/3 lb salmon, cut into two pieces
1 TBS light miso 
1 TBS Dijon mustard 
3 tsp mirin* 
1 tsp minced fresh ginger 
1 tsp rice vinegar
* Japanese rice cooking wine found in Asian section of market
Directions: 
1. Preheat broiler with rack in the middle of the oven. Place a stainless
steel or cast iron skillet big enough to hold salmon under heat to get
very hot (about 10 minutes). 
2. Prepare glaze by mixing miso, Dijon mustard, mirin, ginger, and
vinegar. Generously coat salmon with mixture. 
3. Remove pan that was heating from broiler and place salmon in it.
depending on thickness of salmon. 
4. While salmon is cooking, bring 2 quarts water to boil. Add Swiss
chard and boil for 3 minutes.
Serves 2
Calories 179.45
Calories-Saturated Fat 22.29
Protein 16.62 g
Carbohydrates 5.64 g
Dietary Fiber 0.58 g
Soluble Fiber 0.22 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.24 g
Fat - Total 9.09 g
Cholesterol 37.8 mg
Calcium 35.91 mg
Potassium 333.94 mg
Sodium 545.53 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown served over shiitake mushrooms
163
Recipes - Dinners
Poached Halibut with 
Fennel and Cauliflower 
Healthy Weight Loss dishes taste so good
you can share their great taste (and nutritional value) with your most finicky
friends. This is among my favorites to
serve to guests.
Ingredients: 
¼ lbs halibut, cut into small pieces
1-½ tsp fresh lemon juice 
1 TBS + ½ cup chicken or vegetable broth 
½ medium-sized onion, cut in half and sliced medium thick 
1 small carrot, sliced into ½-inch pieces 
3/4 cups cauliflower florets, cut into quarters 
½ medium-sized fennel bulb, sliced medium thick 
2 medium cloves garlic, pressed 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Chopped fennel green tops for garnish 
Directions: 
1. Slice onion and chop garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes to bring
out their hidden health-promoting properties. 
2. Rub halibut with lemon juice and season with a little salt and pepper.
Set aside. 
3. Heat 1 TBS broth in a 12-inch stainless steel skillet Healthy Sauté
onion in broth over medium heat for 5 minutes stirring frequently. 
4. Add rest of broth and carrots. Simmer on medium heat for about 10
minutes covered. 
5. Add cauliflower, fennel, and garlic. Place halibut steaks on top and
continue to cook covered for about 6 more minutes. Season with salt
and pepper. 
6. Serve halibut with vegetables and broth. Sprinkle with chopped 
fennel greens. 
Serves 2
Calories 130.34
Calories-Saturated Fat 2.84
Protein 15.41 g
Carbohydrates 14.04 g
Dietary Fiber 3.96 g
Soluble Fiber 0.36 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.96 g
Fat - Total 1.88 g
Cholesterol 18.14 mg
Calcium 86.45 mg
Potassium 825.43 mg
Sodium 107.88 mg
Nutritional Profile
164
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Quick Broiled Salmon with
Ginger Mint Salsa 
Variety is an important part of Healthy
Weight Loss. This great-tasting salsa is
especially good served on salmon.
Ingredients: 
¼ lb salmon fillet, cut in half 
2 tsp lemon juice 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Extra virgin olive oil, to taste
Salsa
1 ripe tomato, diced 
½ cup green onions, minced 
1 tsp ginger, minced 
2 tsp fresh mint, minced 
1 tsp lime juice 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Preheat broiler and place an all stainless steel skillet (be sure the
handle is also stainless steel) or cast iron pan under the heat for
about 10 minutes to get it very hot. The pan should be 5 to 7 inches
from the heat source. 
2. Rub salmon with 2 tsp fresh lemon juice, salt and pepper. (You can
Quick Broil with the skin on; it just takes a minute or two longer.
The skin will peel right off after cooking.) 
3. Using a hot pad, pull pan away from heat and place salmon on hot
pan, skin side down. Return to broiler. Keep in mind that it is cooking rapidly on both sides so it will be done very quickly, usually in 7
minutes depending on thickness. Test with a fork for doneness. It
will flake easily when it is cooked. Salmon is best when it is still
pink inside. 
4. While the salmon is cooking, combine all salsa ingredients.
5. When salmon is ready, spoon salsa over salmon.
6. Garnish with mint and a sprinkle of extra virgin olive oil
Serves 2
Calories 127.33
Calories-Saturated Fat 16.21
Protein 12.39 g
Carbohydrates 6.01 g
Dietary Fiber 1.47 g
Soluble Fiber 0.37 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.98 g
Fat - Total 6.2 g
Cholesterol 28.35 mg
Calcium 38.36 mg
Potassium 454.96 mg
Sodium 36.88 mg
Nutritional Profile
165
Recipes - Dinners
Salmon with Dill Sauce 
A classic dish that offers great taste and nutrition to your Healthy Weight Loss Plan.
Salmon is one of the best sources of those
hard-to-come-by omega-3 fatty acids.
Enjoy!
Ingredients: 
1/3 pound salmon fillet, cut in half
1 + 1 tsp lemon juice
Salt and pepper to taste 
Dill Sauce 
4 oz low-fat plain yogurt
1 medium cucumber, seeded and diced
1 TBS fresh dill weed, chopped
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Preheat broiler on high and place an all stainless steel skillet (be sure
the handle is also stainless steel) or cast iron pan under the heat for
about 10 minutes to get it very hot. The pan should be 5 to 7 inches
from the heat source. 
2. Rub salmon with 1 tsp lemon juice, salt and pepper. (You can Quick
Broil with the skin on; it just takes a minute or two longer. The skin will
peel right off after cooking.) 
3. Using a hot pad, pull pan away from heat and place salmon on hot pan,
skin side down. Return to broiler. Keep in mind that it is cooking rapidly on both sides so it will be done very quickly, usually in 7 minutes
depending on thickness. Test with a fork for doneness. It will flake easily when it is cooked. Salmon is best when it is still pink inside. After
salmon is cooked, sprinkle it with remaining 1 tsp lemon juice.
4. Top salmon with dill sauce.
Serves 2
Calories 250.48
Calories-Saturated Fat 25.76
Protein 26.59 g
Carbohydrates 18.08 g
Dietary Fiber 6.53 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0 g
Fat - Total 9.4 g
Cholesterol 41.55 mg
Calcium 375.63 mg
Potassium 1824.55 mg
Sodium 262.41 mg
Nutritional Profile
166
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Salmon with Mustard 
Mustard adds a tangy flavor to omega-3
rich salmon—a great combination to add
to your Healthy Weight Loss menu.
Ingredients: 
¼ lb salmon fillet, cut in half 
2 tsp lemon juice 
Salt and pepper to taste 
1 TBS Dijon mustard 
Directions: 
1. Preheat broiler and place an all stainless steel skillet (be sure the
handle is also stainless steel) or cast iron pan under the heat for
about 10 minutes to get it very hot. The pan should be 5 to 7 inches
from the heat source. 
2. Rub salmon with fresh lemon juice, salt and pepper and spread
Dijon mustard on fillets before broiling. (You can Quick Broil with
the skin on; it just takes a minute or two longer. The skin will peel
right off after cooking.) 
3. Using a hot pad, pull pan away from heat and place salmon on hot
pan, skin side down. Return to broiler. Keep in mind that it is cooking
rapidly on both sides so it will be done very quickly, in about 5 minutes. Test with a fork for doneness. It will flake easily when it is
cooked. Salmon is best when it is still pink inside. Cooking time is
based on 10 minutes for every inch of thickness.
Serves 2
Calories 116.31
Calories-Saturated Fat 15.83
Protein 12.97 g
Carbohydrates 3.75 g
Dietary Fiber 0.11 g
Soluble Fiber 0.04 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.04 g
Fat - Total 5.92 g
Cholesterol 28.35 mg
Calcium 18.88 mg
Potassium 269.63 mg
Sodium 207.11 mg
Nutritional Profile
167
Recipes - Dinners
Seared Asian Tuna 
Rich in B-vitamins, selenium, and protein,
this nutrient-rich and flavorful Asianinspired dish can be preparedin a matter
of minutes.
Ingredients:
4 oz of tuna, cut into 2 pieces
2 TBS mirin* 
1 + 1 TBS fresh squeezed lemon juice 
2 TBS tamari (soy sauce) 
1 TBS minced fresh ginger
6 TBS minced scallion 
Salt and white pepper to taste 
* Japanese rice cooking wine found in Asian section of market
Directions: 
1. Preheat 10-12 inch stainless steel skillet over medium-high heat for
2 minutes. 
2. While pan is preheating, rub tuna with 1 TBS lemon juice, season
with a little salt and white pepper, and prepare ginger and scallion. 
3. Place tuna on preheated skillet and cook for 1-2 minutes on each
side, depending on thickness, and then remove from skillet. Seared
tuna is best when medium rare. 
4. Turn heat down to medium and add rest of ingredients to pan in
order given, and cook for 1 minute. Season with salt and pepper.
Pour over tuna and serve. 
Serves 2
Calories 120.75
Calories-Saturated Fat 1.39
Protein 15.74 g
Carbohydrates 9.55 g
Dietary Fiber 0.82 g
Soluble Fiber 0.18 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.37 g
Fat - Total 0.64 g
Cholesterol 25.52 mg
Calcium 29.49 mg
Potassium 387.96 mg
Sodium 1030.47 mg
Nutritional Profile
168
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Spicy Asian Shrimp 
Shrimp is a good source of vitamin D —
a vitamin which has been receiving increasing notoriety of late, especially for
its importance in bone health. This recipe
is not only low in calories, but will get
you a long way to meet the daily requirements for vitamin D.
Ingredients:
3 oz-wt medium-sized shrimp, peeled and deveined 
2 TBS + 1 TBS fresh lemon juice 
Salt and pepper to taste 
3 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth 
2 medium garlic cloves, chopped 
1/8 tsp red pepper flakes 
¼ cup orange juice 
1 TBS minced fresh ginger 
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil 
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to enhance its health-promoting
properties. 
2. Peel and devein shrimp. 
3. Rub shrimp with 2 TBS lemon juice, salt and pepper. 
4. Heat 3 TBS broth over medium-low heat in a stainless steel skillet. 
5. When broth begins to steam, add shrimp, red pepper flakes, orange
juice, and ginger and sauté. Stir frequently. After 2 minutes, turn the
shrimp over and add garlic. Sauté until shrimp are pink and opaque
throughout (approximately 3 minutes). Shrimp cook quickly, so
watch your cooking time. They become tough if overcooked. 
6. Dress with the extra virgin olive oil and the remaining 1 TBS lemon
juice. 
Serves 2
Calories 180.2
Calories-Saturated Fat 8.23
Protein 19.32 g
Carbohydrates 18.52 g
Dietary Fiber 7.73 g
Soluble Fiber 0.03 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.06 g
Fat - Total 5.82 g
Cholesterol 64.64 mg
Calcium 369.68 mg
Potassium 2094.67 mg
Sodium 339.65 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown served on bed of tomatoes
169
Recipes - Dinners
Thai Scallops (or Shrimp)
with Basil
Rich in nutrients and flavor, this Thai
inspired Healthy Weight Loss dish is
hard to beat.
Ingredients:
1-¼ cups low-sodium chicken or 
vegetable broth
2 cups green beans, cut into1-inch lengths
1 cup fresh sliced red bell peppers, sliced
1 tsp grated ginger
1 clove garlic
¼ cup coconut milk
1 tsp Thai curry paste
¼ lb medium raw shrimp or scallops
¼ cup fresh basil, chopped
½ cup sunflower seeds
Directions: 
1. Healthy sauté green beans in 3 TBS broth for 3 minutes covered.
2. Add bell peppers and sauté for an additional 3 minutes covered.
3. Add 1 tsp Thai curry paste, garlic, ginger and coconut milk. Simmer
for 3-5 minutes. 
4. Add shrimp, basil, and sunflower seeds and cook for another 3
minutes uncovered.
Serves 2
Calories 375.15
Calories-Saturated Fat 68.09
Protein 23.58 g
Carbohydrates 19.85 g
Dietary Fiber 8.14 g
Soluble Fiber 2.75 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.77 g
Fat - Total 25.4 g
Cholesterol 18.71 mg
Calcium 118.56 mg
Potassium 895.86 mg
Sodium 148.54 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with carrots and without shellfish
170
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
1-Minute Spinach 1 
Enjoy this quick and easy addition to
your Healthy Weight Loss Plan that
provides you with a rich source of healthpromoting nutrients such as vitamin A,K,
C, as well as manganese and folate. 
Ingredients:
1 lb fresh spinach 
1 tsp lemon juice 
1 medium fresh garlic, pressed or chopped 
1 tsp extra virgin olive oil 
Salt and cracked black pepper to taste 
Optional: chopped tomato 
Directions: 
1. Chop or press garlic and let it sit for 5 minutes to bring out its
health-promoting benefits. 
2. Bring lightly salted water to a rapid boil in a large pot. 
3. Cut stems off spinach leaves and clean well. This can be done easily
by leaving spinach bundled and cutting off stems all at once. Rinse
spinach leaves very well as they often contain a lot of soil.
4. Cook spinach in boiling water for 1 minute. 
5. Drain and press out excess water. Toss in rest of ingredients while
spinach is still hot.
Serves 2
Recipes
Dips and Side Vegetables
Calories 75.67
Calories-Saturated Fat 4.3
Protein 6.6 g
Carbohydrates 9.17 g
Dietary Fiber 5.04 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 3.23 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 227.6 mg
Potassium 1277.86 mg
Sodium 179.48 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown topped with chopped tomatoes
171
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
1-Minute Spinach 2
Enjoy this quick and easy addition to
your Healthy Weight Loss Plan that provides you with a rich source of healthy
promoting nutrients such as vitamin A,K,
C, as well as manganese and folate. 
Ingredients: 
2 lbs fresh spinach 
1 tsp lemon juice 
1 medium fresh garlic, pressed or chopped 
Salt and cracked black pepper to taste 
Optional: chopped tomato 
Directions: 
1. Chop or press garlic and let it sit for 5 minutes to bring out its
health-promoting benefits. 
2. Bring lightly salted water to a rapid boil in a large pot. 
3. Cut stems off spinach leaves and clean well. This can be done easily
by leaving spinach bundled and cutting off stems all at once. Rinse
spinach leaves very well as they often contain a lot of soil. 
4. Cook spinach in boiling water for 1 minute. 
5. Drain and press out excess water. 
Serves 2
Calories 107.83
Calories-Saturated Fat 2.58
Protein 13.09 g
Carbohydrates 17.4 g
Dietary Fiber 10.03 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 1.78 g
Cholesterol 41.55 mg
Calcium 452.13 mg
Potassium 2543.41 mg
Sodium 358.65 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown topped with chopped tomatoes
172
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
1-Minute Spinach 3
Enjoy this quick and easy addition to
your Healthy Weight Loss Plan that provides you with a rich source of healthy
promoting nutrients such as vitamin A,K,
C, as well as manganese and folate.
Ingredients:
1 lb fresh spinach
1 tsp lemon juice
1 medium fresh garlic, pressed or chopped
Salt and cracked black pepper to taste
Optional: chopped tomato
Directions: 
1. Chop or press garlic and let it sit for 5 minutes to bring out its
health-promoting benefits.
2. Bring lightly salted water to a rapid boil in a large pot.
3. Cut stems off spinach leaves and clean well. This can be done easily
by leaving spinach bundled and cutting off stems all at once. Rinse
spinach leaves very well as they often contain a lot of soil.
4. Cook spinach in boiling water for 1 minute.
5. Drain and press out excess water. Toss in rest of ingredients while
spinach is still hot.
Serves 2
Calories 55.03
Calories-Saturated Fat 1.3
Protein 6.59 g
Carbohydrates 8.95 g
Dietary Fiber 5.03 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 0.89 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 227.42 mg
Potassium 1274.71 mg
Sodium 179.45 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown topped with chopped tomatoes
173
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
3-Minute Guacamole
Guacamole is very popular in Mexico
and Southwestern cuisines. It only takes 3
minutes to add this easy version to your
Healthy Weight Loss Plan and get an
extra boost of vitamins A, C, and K.
Ingredients:
½ medium avocado 
1 TBS lemon juice
½ cup fresh cilantro leaves
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
Mash avocado with a fork and combine with remaining ingredients.
Serves 2
Calories 65.33
Calories-Saturated Fat 5.63
Protein 1.36 g
Carbohydrates 3.3 g
Dietary Fiber 1.39 g
Soluble Fiber 0.01 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.02 g
Fat - Total 7.52 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 3.21 mg
Potassium 230.29 mg
Sodium 1.92 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with tomatoes added
174
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
3-Minute Swiss Chard 1
Swiss chard is one of the most nutrientrich foods to add to your Healthy Weight
Loss Eating Plan. It's a great source of vitamins A, C, K, magnesium, and manganese, and a complement to almost any
of your favorite meals. 
Ingredients:
1 lb Swiss chard, chopped 
1 medium clove garlic, chopped or pressed
1 tsp extra virgin olive oil
1 tsp lemon juice 
Salt and black pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Chop or press garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to bring out its healthpromoting properties. 
2. Fill a large pot (3 quart) with lots of water. Make sure water is at a
rapid boil before adding Swiss chard. 
3. Cut off tough bottom part of Swiss chard stems. 
4. Chop leaves and then add them to the boiling water. Do not cover.
Cook for 3 minutes; begin timing as soon as you drop the Swiss
chard into the boiling water. 
5. Carefully remove chard from water, place in colander and press out
excess water. 
6. Transfer to serving dish and toss with lemon juice, olive oil, salt and
pepper.
Serves 2
Calories 65.96
Calories-Saturated Fat 3.62
Protein 4.19 g
Carbohydrates 9.2 g
Dietary Fiber 3.67 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 2.79 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 118.56 mg
Potassium 868.74 mg
Sodium 483.36 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown served with goat cheese
175
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
3-Minute Swiss Chard 2
Swiss chard is one of the most nutrientrich foods to add to your Healthy Weight
Loss Eating Plan. It's a great source of vitamins A, C, K, magnesium, and manganese, and a complement to almost any
of your favorite meals. 
Ingredients:
1 lb Swiss chard, chopped 
1 medium clove garlic, chopped or pressed
1 tsp lemon juice 
Salt and black pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Chop or press garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to bring out its healthpromoting properties. 
2. Fill a large pot (3 quart) with lots of water. Make sure water is at a
rapid boil before adding Swiss chard. 
3. Cut off tough bottom part of Swiss chard stems. 
4. Chop leaves and then add them to the boiling water. Do not cover.
Cook for 3 minutes; begin timing as soon as you drop the Swiss
chard into the boiling water. 
5. Carefully remove chard from water, place in colander and press out
excess water. 
6. Transfer to serving dish and toss with lemon juice, salt and pepper.
Serves 2
Calories 45.96
Calories-Saturated Fat 0.62
Protein 4.19 g
Carbohydrates 9.2 g
Dietary Fiber 3.67 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 0.46 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 118.56 mg
Potassium 868.74 mg
Sodium 483.36 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown served with goat cheese
176
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
5-Minute Broccoli 1
Broccoli, like other cruciferous vegetables,
adds not only a rich source of vitamins A,
C, K, and folate to your Healthy Weight
Loss Eating Plan, but health-promoting
sulfur compounds that help your liver
detoxify potentially toxic substances.
Ingredients:
1 lb broccoli 
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 tsp lemon juice
2 cloves garlic
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Fill the bottom of the steamer with 2 inches of water. 
2. While steam is building up in steamer, cut broccoli florets into 
quarters. Peel stems and cut into ¼-inch pieces. Let florets and stems
sit for 5 minutes to bring out their hidden health benefits. 
3. Chop or press garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes. 
4. If you are cooking stems, steam for 2 minutes before adding the 
florets. Steam florets for 5 minutes
5. Transfer to a bowl. Toss broccoli with the remaining ingredients
while it is still hot. 
Serves 2
Calories 99.24
Calories-Saturated Fat 5.63
Protein 6.97 g
Carbohydrates 13.32 g
Dietary Fiber 6.89 g
Soluble Fiber 0.69 g
InSoluble Fiber 6.13 g
Fat - Total 4.31 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 114.65 mg
Potassium 755.43 mg
Sodium 61.8 mg
Nutritional Profile
177
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
5-Minute Broccoli 2
Broccoli, like other cruciferous vegetables,
adds not only a rich source of vitamins A,
C, K, and folate to your Healthy Weight
Loss Eating Plan, but health-promoting
sulfur compounds that help your liver
detoxify potentially toxic substances.
Ingredients:
2 lbs broccoli 
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 tsp lemon juice
2 cloves garlic
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Fill the bottom of the steamer with 2 inches of water. 
2. While steam is building up in steamer, cut broccoli florets into 
quarters. Peel stems and cut into ¼-inch pieces. Let florets and stems
sit for 5 minutes to bring out their hidden health benefits. 
3. Chop or press garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes. 
4. If you are cooking stems, steam for 2 minutes before adding the 
florets. Steam florets for 5 minutes.
5. Transfer to a bowl. For more flavor, toss broccoli with the remaining
ingredients while it is still hot. 
Serves 2
Calories 162.75
Calories-Saturated Fat 6.73
Protein 13.73 g
Carbohydrates 25.2 g
Dietary Fiber 13.69 g
Soluble Fiber 1.37 g
InSoluble Fiber 12.26 g
Fat - Total 5.1 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 223.51 mg
Potassium 1492.53 mg
Sodium 123.03 mg
Nutritional Profile
178
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
5-Minute Brussels Sprouts
with Mustard 
Even if you have not been a fan of Brussels sprouts, I think you will love adding
this recipe to your Healthy Weight Loss
menu. Like their cousins broccoli and
kale, they are rich in health-promoting
sulfur compounds, which help cenhance
liver. And they only take minutes to prepare. Enjoy! 
Ingredients:
1 lb Brussels sprouts 
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil 
1 tsp lemon juice 
2 medium cloves garlic, chopped or pressed 
1 TBS Dijon mustard
1 tsp honey
Salt and black pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Fill the bottom of the steamer with 2 inches of water. 
2. While steam is building up in steamer, cut Brussels sprouts into
quarters and let sit for at least 5 minutes to bring out their hidden
health benefits. 
3. Chop or press garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes to bring out
their health-promoting properties. 
4. Steam Brussels sprouts for 5 minutes. 
5. Transfer to a bowl. Toss Brussels sprouts, while they are still hot,
with the ingredients. 
Serves 2
Calories 152.78
Calories-Saturated Fat 6.09
Protein 8.37 g
Carbohydrates 25.29 g
Dietary Fiber 8.79 g
Soluble Fiber 4.54 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.09 g
Fat - Total 4.88 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 111.68 mg
Potassium 913.15 mg
Sodium 246.75 mg
Nutritional Profile
179
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
5-Minute Cauliflower with
Turmeric
The turmeric in this recipe not only adds
great flavor but added anti-inflammatory
protection to your Healthy Weight Loss
Plan. 
Ingredients:
1 lb cauliflower 
5 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth 
1 tsp turmeric 
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil 
2 tsp lemon juice 
2 medium cloves garlic, pressed or chopped 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Cut cauliflower florets into quarters and let sit for 5 minutes to bring
out their hidden health benefits. 
2. Press or chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes. 
3. Heat 5 TBS broth in a stainless steel skillet on medium heat. 
4. When broth begins to steam, add cauliflower. Sprinkle turmeric on
top of cauliflower and cover. For al dente cauliflower, cook for no
more than 5 minutes. 
5. Transfer to a bowl. For more flavor, toss cauliflower with the remaining ingredients while it is still hot. 
Serves 2
Calories 96.33
Calories-Saturated Fat 5.28
Protein 4.79 g
Carbohydrates 14.17 g
Dietary Fiber 5.99 g
Soluble Fiber 2.05 g
InSoluble Fiber 3.64 g
Fat - Total 3.85 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 57.69 mg
Potassium 733.31 mg
Sodium 69.02 mg
Nutritional Profile
180
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
5-Minute Collard Greens 1 
Collard greens are one of the best plantbased sources of calcium — almost as
much as a cup of milk with half the calories and almost no fat! It's no wonder they
are a great addition to your Healthy
Weight Loss Eating Plan.
Ingredients:
1 lbs collard greens 
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil
1 tsp lemon juice
1 clove garlic, chopped
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Fill the bottom of the steamer with 2 inches of water. 
2. While steam is building up in steamer, chop collard greens and let sit
for 5 minutes to bring out their hidden health benefits. 
3. Chop garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes. 
4. Steam greens for 5 minutes.
5. Transfer to a bowl. For more flavor, toss collard greens, while they
are still hot, with the remaining ingredients.
Serves 2
Calories 130.91
Calories-Saturated Fat 10.13
Protein 5.66 g
Carbohydrates 13.62 g
Dietary Fiber 8.21 g
Soluble Fiber 3.27 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.9 g
Fat - Total 7.96 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 331.75 mg
Potassium 392.46 mg
Sodium 45.64 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown served with sunflower seeds
181
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
5-Minute Collard Greens 2 
Collard greens are one of the best plantbased sources of calcium — almost as
much as a cup of milk with half the calories and almost no fat! It's no wonder they
are a great addition to your Healthy
Weight Loss Eating Plan.
Ingredients:
1 lb collard greens 
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil
1 tsp lemon juice
1 clove garlic, chopped
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Fill the bottom of the steamer with 2 inches of water. 
2. While steam is building up in steamer, chop collard greens and let sit
for 5 minutes to bring out their hidden health benefits. 
3. Chop garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes. 
4. Steam greens for 5 minutes.
5. Transfer to a bowl. For more flavor, toss collard greens, while they
are still hot, with the remaining ingredients. 
Serves 2
Calories 198.95
Calories-Saturated Fat 11.26
Protein 11.22 g
Carbohydrates 26.53 g
Dietary Fiber 16.37 g
Soluble Fiber 6.54 g
InSoluble Fiber 9.8 g
Fat - Total 8.91 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 660.61 mg
Potassium 775.75 mg
Sodium 91 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown served with sunflower seeds
182
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
5-Minute Italian Kale
With this delicious, easy-to-prepare
recipe you can include kale as part of
your Healthiest Way of Eating in a matter
of minutes. Kale is one of the healthiest
vegetables around with one serving
providing you with an excellent source
of health-promoting vitamins A and E.
Enjoy!
Ingredients:
1 pound Italian (Lacinato) kale (or any variety)
2 tsp lemon juice 
1 medium clove garlic, pressed or chopped 
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil 
Salt and black pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to enhance its health-promoting
properties. 
2. Fill bottom of steamer with 2 inches of water and bring to boil. 
3. While water is coming to a boil, slice kale leaves into ½-inch slices,
and cut again crosswise. Cut stems into ¼-inch slices. Let kale sit for
at least 5 minutes to bring out it health-promoting properties. 
4. When water comes to a boil, add kale to the steamer basket and
cover. Steam for 5 minutes. 
5. Transfer to a bowl and toss with additional ingredients. For the best
flavor, do so while kale is still hot. 
Serves 2
Calories 146.91
Calories-Saturated Fat 6.37
Protein 7.6 g
Carbohydrates 23.64 g
Dietary Fiber 4.59 g
Soluble Fiber 1.82 g
InSoluble Fiber 2.73 g
Fat - Total 5.1 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 309.25 mg
Potassium 1026.11 mg
Sodium 97.83 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with onions
183
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
5-Minute Mediterranean
Medley
This is a perfect way to prepare a variety
of vegetables and add more nutrition to
your Healthy Weight Loss menu in the
same amount of time it takes to cook just
one. Use this technique to cook an array
of your favorite vegetables. 
Ingredients:
3 cups broccoli florets, cut into quarters
3 cups kale, chopped
1 medium carrot, sliced
2 cloves garlic, chopped or pressed
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil
2 tsp lemon juice
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Fill the bottom of the steamer with 2 inches of water. 
2. While steam is building up in steamer, cut broccoli, and chop kale
and let sit for at least 5 minutes to bring out its hidden health benefits. 
3. Chop or press garlic and let sit for at least 5 minutes to bring out its
health-promoting properties. 
4. Slice carrots ¼ inch thick.
5. Steam broccoli, kale, and carrots for 5 minutes. 
6. Transfer to a bowl. Toss vegetables, while they are still hot, with the
rest of the ingredients. 
Serves 2
Calories 158.32
Calories-Saturated Fat 10.47
Protein 6.98 g
Carbohydrates 19.99 g
Dietary Fiber 6.04 g
Soluble Fiber 1.51 g
InSoluble Fiber 4.46 g
Fat - Total 8.16 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 202.65 mg
Potassium 911.29 mg
Sodium 93.58 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with zucchini in
place of broccoli
184
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Garlic Dip
This recipe makes a great appetizer before dinner or a snack any time of the
day, Garlic not only has wonderful flavor
but adds extra antibacterial and antioxidant protection to your Healthy Weight
Loss menu.
Ingredients:
2 cups cooked or canned garbanzo beans 
1 TBS lemon juice 
3 cloves garlic, chopped 
¼ cup chicken or vegetable broth 
2 TBS extra virgin olive oil 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Directions: 
Combine all ingredients in a blender and blend until smooth. Serve with
your favorite crudités.
Serves 8
Calories 93.35
Calories-Saturated Fat 4.63
Protein 3.73 g
Carbohydrates 10.13 g
Dietary Fiber 2.53 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0 g
Fat - Total 4.3 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 32.47 mg
Potassium 138.32 mg
Sodium 2.46 mg
Nutritional Profile
185
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
Healthy Mashed Sweet
Potatoes 
This full-flavored sweet potato dish is
quick and easy to prepare and makes a
healthy and unique addition to your
Healthy Weight Loss Plan. In fact, one
serving of this recipe contains only 98
calories but provides 249% of your daily
value (DV) for vitamin A. Enjoy!
Ingredients:
2 medium-sized sweet potatoes or yams, peeled and sliced thin for quick
cooking 
2 TBS fresh orange juice
1 TBS extra virgin olive oil
Salt and white pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Bring lightly salted water to a boil in a steamer with a tight fitting lid. 
2. Steam peeled and sliced sweet potatoes in steamer basket, covered,
for about 10 minutes, or until tender. 
3. Mash with potato masher, adding rest of ingredients. 
Serves 4
Calories 86.29
Calories-Saturated Fat 4.69
Protein 1.2 g
Carbohydrates 12.61 g
Dietary Fiber 1.9 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 3.6 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 22.51 mg
Potassium 286.25 mg
Sodium 20.6 mg
Nutritional Profile
186
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthy Sautéed Crimini
Mushrooms 1
Enjoy this easy-to-prepare recipe that
complements many of your favorite
dishes and is a great addition to your
Healthy Weight Loss Plan. You will also
be enjoying a rich source of health-promoting selenium, vitamin B12, and copper along with the great flavor of crimini
mushrooms.
Ingredients:
1 lb crimini mushrooms, sliced
3 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Heat 3 TBS broth over medium heat in a stainless steel skillet. 
2. When broth begins to steam, add the sliced mushrooms and sauté for
3 minutes. They will release liquid as they cook. As crimini mushrooms are not as watery as other button mushrooms, it is best to stir
constantly for the last 4 minutes. The liquid will evaporate, and the
mushrooms will become golden brown but not burned. 
3. Add salt and pepper to taste.
Serves 2
Calories 58.6
Calories-Saturated Fat 0.67
Protein 6.32 g
Carbohydrates 10.83 g
Dietary Fiber 1.43 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 0.38 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 47.33 mg
Potassium 1050.6 mg
Sodium 20.89 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with onions
187
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
Healthy Sautéed Crimini
Mushrooms 2
Enjoy this easy-to-prepare recipe that
complements many of your favorite
dishes and is a great addition to your
Healthy Weight Loss Plan. You will also
be enjoying a rich source of health-promoting selenium, vitamin B12, and copper along with the great flavor of crimini
mushrooms.
Ingredients:
½ lb crimini mushrooms, sliced
3 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Heat 3 TBS broth over medium heat in a stainless steel skillet. 
2. When broth begins to steam, add the sliced mushrooms and sauté for
3 minutes. They will release liquid as they cook. As crimini mushrooms are not as watery as other button mushrooms, it is best to stir
constantly for the last 4 minutes. The liquid will evaporate, and the
mushrooms will become golden brown but not burned. 
3. Add salt and pepper to taste.
Serves 2
Calories 33.65
Calories-Saturated Fat 0.53
Protein 3.49 g
Carbohydrates 6.15 g
Dietary Fiber 0.75 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.01 g
Fat - Total 0.26 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 26.92 mg
Potassium 542.56 mg
Sodium 14.09 mg
Nutritional Profile
Photo shown with onions
188
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Healthy Sautéed Shiitake
Mushrooms 
Long enjoyed in Asia for their healthpromoting benefits, we now know that
they are a good source or iron and protein
as well s special health-promoting compounds that have cholesterol-lowering
and immune stimulating properties.
Enjoy them as part of your Healthy Weight Loss Plan as a complement to
both fish and poultry dishes.
Ingredients:
1 lb fresh sliced shiitake mushrooms 
3 TBS low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth 
2 cloves garlic, chopped or pressed
Salt and pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let sit for 5 minutes to enhance its health-promoting
properties.
2. Remove stems from mushrooms and slice the mushroom caps. 
3. Heat broth in a stainless steel skillet. When broth begins to steam,
add mushrooms and Healthy Sauté, covered, for 3 minutes. 
4. Remove skillet cover and let mushrooms cook for 4 more minutes. 
5. Place in a bowl and add olive oil and salt and pepper while it is still hot.
Serves 2
Calories 95.3
Calories-Saturated Fat 0.39
Protein 5.63 g
Carbohydrates 13.72 g
Dietary Fiber 2.56 g
Soluble Fiber 0 g
InSoluble Fiber 0 g
Fat - Total 0.15 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 6.33 mg
Potassium 31.38 mg
Sodium 57.11 mg
Nutritional Profile
189
Recipes - Dips and Side Vegetables
Healthy Sautéed Red
Cabbage
Ipsum loren dkvioend jmdoenfdls jdodcndl 
Ingredients:
1 small head red cabbage, sliced
5 TBS low-sodium vegetable or chicken broth
1 TBS lemon juice
1 cloves garlic, chopped
½ TBS extra virgin olive oil
Salt and pepper to taste
Directions: 
1. Chop garlic and let it sit for 5 minutes to bring out its healthpromoting properties.
2. Heat 3 TBS of broth in a large skillet. When broth begins to steam,
add mushrooms and cook for 2 minutes, stirring frequently.
3. Add 5 TBS of broth and sliced cabbage and cook for 5 more minutes.
4. Transfer to a bowl. For more flavor, toss vegetables with the remaining
ingredients while they are still hot.
Serves 2
Calories 127.84
Calories-Saturated Fat 6.01
Protein 4.52 g
Carbohydrates 23.02 g
Dietary Fiber 6.05 g
Soluble Fiber 0.31 g
InSoluble Fiber 5.7 g
Fat - Total 4.12 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 131.36 mg
Potassium 713.83 mg
Sodium 145.7 mg
Nutritional Profile
190
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Mediterranean Hummus 
This Middle Eastern dish adds a great
appetizer or snack to your Healthy
Weight Loss menu. Rich in protein and
dietary fiber, it helps curb your hunger
and keeps you feeling satisfied between
meals.
Ingredients:
2 cups cooked garbanzo beans (or 15 oz can) 
2 TBS low-sodium chicken broth 
1 TBS + 2 TBS extra virgin olive oil 
2 cloves garlic, chopped
1 TBS tahini (sesame butter)
1 TBS lemon juice 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Directions: 
1. Blend garbanzo beans, chicken broth, 1 TBS extra virgin olive oil,
garlic, tahini, and lemon juice in blender or food processor. Add the
2 TBS olive oil a little at a time through the feed hole as the mixture
is blending. 
2. Season to taste with salt and pepper. 
Serve each serving of hummus with crudités. 
Serves 6
Calories 143.5
Calories-Saturated Fat 10.96
Protein 4.48 g
Carbohydrates 11.35 g
Dietary Fiber 2.99 g
Soluble Fiber 0.06 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.19 g
Fat - Total 9.33 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 37.7 mg
Potassium 156.86 mg
Sodium 2.27 mg
Nutritional Profile
191
Recipes
Desserts
10-Minute Fresh Berry
Dessert with Yogurt and
Chocolate 
Healthy Weight Loss is not about deprivation, so a tasty dessert is a great way to
treat yourself—and it's nutritious too!
Ingredients:
1 8-oz basket fresh strawberries or raspberries 
8 oz non-fat vanilla yogurt 
2 oz net-wt dark chocolate 
Directions: 
1. Fold together berries and yogurt. 
2. Melt chocolate in a double boiler with heat on medium. Place berries
and yogurt in individual bowls and drizzle with melted chocolate. 
3. For a more formal presentation you may want to pour a pool of 
yogurt on a plate and place berries on top of pool. Drizzle chocolate
over berries. 
Serves 2
Calories 269.4
Calories-Saturated Fat 52.2
Protein 8.26 g
Carbohydrates 43.96 g
Dietary Fiber 6.06 g
Soluble Fiber 0.75 g
InSoluble Fiber 3.42 g
Fat - Total 8.08 g
Cholesterol 1.82 mg
Calcium 224.87 mg
Potassium 352.03 mg
Sodium 136.24 mg
Nutritional Profile
192
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
5-Minute Ginger Pineapple 
Fruit is a great way to satisfy your sweet
tooth without adding many calories to
your Weight Loss Plan. The ginger adds a
zing to this recipe, which contains only
58 calories and is an excellent source of
vitamin C and manganese. 
Ingredients:
½ medium pineapple 
1 tsp finely minced fresh ginger 
Directions: 
1. Cut pineapple into 1-inch chunks. 
2. Combine pineapple and minced ginger in a bowl and refrigerate for
1/2 hour. 
Serves 2
Healthy Cooking Tips: 
Best eaten within an hour. 
Calories 58.4
Calories-Saturated Fat 0.14
Protein 0.68 g
Carbohydrates 15.29 g
Dietary Fiber 1.7 g
Soluble Fiber -- g
InSoluble Fiber -- g
Fat - Total 0.16 g
Cholesterol 0 mg
Calcium 15.69 mg
Potassium 144.83 mg
Sodium 1.47 mg
Nutritional Profile
193
Recipes - Desserts
10-Minute Orange Treat 
This easy-to-prepare dessert is a great
example of how a dessert can be flavorful,
nutritious, and low in calories. You get
tangy flavor and a rich source of fiber and
vitamin for only 82 calories! 
Ingredients:
½ tsp grated lemon rind* 
½ TBS fresh lemon juice 
2 TBS honey 
2-½ TBS non-fat yogurt 
2 medium oranges 
Optional: Top with orange zest 
Directions: 
1. In a small bowl, whisk lemon rind, lemon juice and honey until the
honey is incorporated. 
2. Add yogurt and whisk thoroughly. 
3. Peel and separate the individual sections of the orange. Be sure to remove the membrane covering from each section. Cut the sections
into thirds crosswise. Place in 2 dessert bowls. 
4. Spoon sauce over the oranges. 
*Use an organic lemon for zest, if possible. 
Serves 2
Calories 143.41
Calories-Saturated Fat 0
Protein 1.87 g
Carbohydrates 40.35 g
Dietary Fiber 7.11 g
Soluble Fiber 0.02 g
InSoluble Fiber 0.05 g
Fat - Total 0 g
Cholesterol 0.39 mg
Calcium 85.65 mg
Potassium 16.55 mg
Sodium 11.46 mg
Nutritional Profile
194
SECTION 4
Healthy Weight Loss Q&As
195
Q&A 1:
What is the Role of Calorie Intake in Weight 
Management?
The relationship between calorie intake and weight management has
always been a controversial one. Within the general U.S. public, the
number of people who have tried calorie counting as a means of
weight loss—and failed—is surely a very high number. In some
ways it is similar to trying to decrease your cholesterol levels—
eating less cholesterol-containing foods does not guarantee your
blood cholesterol levels will decrease.
It should not be surprising that calorie counting has always been a
topic of controversy in the field of nutrition. The concept of a “calorie” is a one that is difficult to understand. When organizations like
the American Heart Association, American Diabetes Association, and
American Dietetic Association all endorse approaches to weight loss
that focus, in part, on calorie counting and calorie intake, it is not surprising that these public health recommendations are frequently misunderstood or misinterpreted.
What Is a Calorie?
In simplest terms, a calorie isn’t any kind of “thing” whatsoever.
Calories are not like proteins, or carbohydrates, or vitamins, or any
kind of nutrient. You can find protein in food. You can find vitamins
in food. Yet, you cannot find a calorie in any food at all. Calories do
not exist in that way. 
Calories are units of measurement. They are like inches, miles,
ounces, degrees of temperature, pounds, tons, gallons, and acres.
They are just a way of understanding how much of something is
present. In the case of calories, this something is energy. The amount
of energy associated with any set of events can be measured in terms
of calories. Calories don’t have to involve food. For example, there
are a specific number of calories that any electrical wire can carry
Healthy Weight Loss Q & As
196
without catching fire. There are a specific number of calories that
strike the earth each day in the form of sunlight. Calories are not
found in food. They are only related to food insofar as food has the
potential to be measured as a form of energy.
Can Food Calories Be Accurately Measured?
Hundreds of Internet website post lists of foods and calories. The
U.S. Department of Agriculture publishes a searchable online database (http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/search/) with calorie
information on thousands of food.
Is the information provided by the USDA and other websites accurate?
Unfortunately, the answer is both yes and no. Yes, there are solid
scientific studies using real foods and real laboratory conditions to
support the specific calorie numbers that appear in the USDA database and in other published lists of food and calories. This research
can be very high quality, sophisticated, and scientifically sound. But
it is research based on laboratory analysis—not research based on
the passage of real food through a person’s digestive tract. Unless
food gets digested, it cannot provide us with any calories (energy).
When food calories are measured in a lab, a device called a bomb
calorimeter is used. This device measures energy in the form of heat.
Within this device, a highly oxygenated, sealed chamber containing a food sample is floated in water. An electrical current is used
to ignite the food-oxygen mixture, and as it burns, the water surrounding the floating chamber heats up. The number of calories in
the food is determined by the change in water temperature. A highcalorie food gets the water hotter by releasing more heat energy
than a low-calorie one.
The human body, of course, is not nearly as simple as a lab device.
We don’t digest food by setting it on fire. We digest chemically, and
our biochemistry is highly individual—in fact, unique. The calories
of energy we obtain (or don’t obtain) from food can vary significantly,
and some individuals are better matched to one kind of food versus
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
197
another. Even though calories can be measured accurately in a lab
where they appear to be a fixed attribute of food, once we get inside
a living person, and a uniquely biochemical digestive tract, all bets
are off when it comes to a rigid set of calorie predictions.
How Is Weight Related to Energy?
Our body weight consists of three main components: water, muscle
mass, and fat mass. With respect to water weight, we’re usually
within the vicinity of 60% total weight. A person weighing 150
pounds would be expected to contain about 60% of those pounds, or
90 pounds, in the form of water.
Living, moving, staying warm, and all other body functions require
energy. At least some of this energy must come to us daily in the
form of food. Other portions of this energy can come from combustion
of fat in our fat cells. If our bodies need more energy than we provide
ourselves through food, our bodies obtain this needed energy from
stored fat. (In certain situations, including emergency situations, our
bodies also use starches stored in our muscles and liver and proteins
found in the muscles themselves.)
When any component of our total body weight goes down (water,
muscle, or fat) while the other components remain steady, we lose
weight. When one component goes up to the same extent that another goes down, we remain the same weight. Over time, if our
bodies require more energy than we provide ourselves through food,
we always lose weight. This “always” cannot be measured in terms
of hours, or even a few days. But over the course of time, it is not
possible for us to remain the same weight if we maintain the same
percent water weight and expend more energy than our digested food
provides.
Proteins, Carbohydrates, Fats, and Calories
The laboratory-based rules in nutrition have always been simple:
proteins and carbohydrates have traditionally been said to contain 4
calories per gram. Fats have been said to contain 9 calories per gram.
Healthy Weight Loss Q & As
198
This calorie-based description of the three primary macronutrients
has been used as the basis for dozens of weight loss programs,
especially programs that advocate low-fat, reduced-calorie intake.
These programs are based on sound science, but once again, the
science is laboratory science, not human digestive tract science.
The reasoning behind these low-fat, calorie-based approaches to
weight loss has been simple. Why risk consumption of one
macronutrient type (fat) when that nutrient type contains more than
twice as many calories (9 per gram) as the other two basic types
(protein and carbohydrate at 4 per gram)? While this reasoning
seems sound in terms of the mathematics, the successful weight loss
experience of many individuals on high-fat, low-carbohydrate diets
has seemed to contradict it. But there is not really a contradiction
here at all. Individuals are not identical in their digestion. They are
differently matched to different foods. Some individuals clearly do
better on higher fat, lower carbohydrate diets—even if those diets
contain the exact same number of calories as higher carbohydrate,
lower fat diets! Figuring out the best dietary balance for your weight
management—especially the best balance of proteins, carbohydrates,
and fats—is important. It’s also a task that is separate from the task
of counting calories.
Do Calories Matter?
If human digestion of food is so individualized and different from
the laboratory analyses, do the lab analyses of food calories really
matter? Yes, they do! No matter how well matched you are to your
weight management meal plan, you simply cannot lose weight if
you do not pay any attention whatsoever to calorie intake. You cannot
lose weight if your body digests food and releases the exact same
amount of energy from the food needed to maintain your muscle
mass, fat mass, and water weight. In this sense, calories definitely
matter. Paying attention to calories is worthwhile. But counting calories isn’t the whole story, and it doesn’t take the place of health-promoting nutrients that you need to burn fat. The key is that you need
more nutrients and fewer calories. 
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
199
Q&A 2:
Why Are Organic Foods Important to Healthy
Weight Loss?
As you know, I am a big proponent of organically grown foods. I believe that they remain your best bet for avoiding food contaminants
and optimizing your nutrient intake. But what about weight loss?
Are organically grown foods better not only for nourishment, but
also for losing or managing weight? While there are no research
studies comparing weight loss on an organic food diet versus weight
loss while consuming non-organic food, there are bits and pieces of
evidence in two areas that have convinced me that it is important to
pay increased attention to the benefits of organics when you want to
lose weight healthfully.
The first area of evidence involves food contaminants. During periods
when we are trying to lose weight, some health risks that would
ordinarily not be bothersome can end up posing a significant risk.
Toxicity risk from environmental pollutants and food contaminants
falls into this category. Research studies have shown that levels of
toxins in our bloodstream and tissues can increase during periods of
weight loss. In addition, normal metabolic patterns used to detoxify
pollutants can become challenged during these periods of time. 
The strict rules that apply to production of organic foods dramatically
reduce levels of food pollutants, including pesticides, solvents, and
heavy metals. These substances can be especially risky when we are
following a weight loss diet. During weight loss, we borrow more
heavily upon our body stores of nutrients. We use fat in our fat cells
for energy—that’s one of the primary ways we lose weight (and
body fat). But we may also move more minerals in and out of our
bones, or more amino acids in and out of our muscles. Even though
our body may be getting smaller in dimension and weight during
weight loss, the load upon our metabolism can increase greatly. If
we’ve stored up any heavy metals (like lead) in our bones, or fatHealthy Weight Loss Q & As
200
soluble toxins (like solvents and some pesticides) in our fat cells,
these toxins may be released from their storage spots during weight
loss. Our liver and kidneys will be called on to respond to this
challenge with more active detoxification—and that challenge in
turn will call for more energy and more nutrients. 
Weight loss is a period of time when we need to get the most from
the least. Weight loss means that we are giving ourselves less food,
but simultaneously asking our body to do more metabolically. From
a nutritional standpoint, we are placing special premium on the food
we do choose to eat. In fact, this reduced amount of food has to
accomplish more from a nutritional and metabolic standpoint. Once
again, organic food is the ticket to success when it comes to getting
the most nutrients from the least amount of food. 
From a research standpoint, there continues to be debate over the
nutritional differences between organic versus non-organic food.
Although a research comparison of organic versus non-organic food
seems like a fairly straightforward proposition, nutritional differences
of this kind are not always that easy to determine. However, given
all of the research studies that we have seen over the past 20 years
of research, we believe that the overall evidence clearly shows better
nutrient composition in organic versus non-organic food. On average,
we believe that this difference falls into the range of 10-20% more
available nutrients in organically grown food. We can get more
nutrients from the calories we spend, or even cut back on our food
without losing nutrients. That’s critical at a time when we are
challenging our body’s metabolism. 
Even though you may be emphasizing more fresh fruits and vegetables
during a time of weight loss, remember that the benefits of organics
aren’t limited to these food groups. Nuts, seeds, olive oil, legumes,
whole grains, lean meats, and low-fat dairy products will all improve
the healthiness of your weight loss if they have been organically
grown/raised.
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
201
Q&A 3:
What Causes Us To Overeat?
Overeating is an extremely common problem that most everyone
has faced at some point in their relationship with food. We overeat
for an infinite number of different reasons that range from stress to
pleasure to prolonged nutrient deficiency. But there are also some
common patterns in overeating, and being aware of these patterns
can be helpful for taking steps in another direction. 
Emotional Overeating
Our moods can definitely contribute to our risk of overeating.
Research studies in this area repeatedly show that negative moods result in greater risk of overeating. These negative moods can include
fear, sadness, anger, resentment, frustration, and stress. Sometimes
a diet can trigger a negative mood all by itself if the daily food plan
is too restrictive, or not enjoyable, or lacking in creativity. One of the
reasons I have confidence in the weight-lowering ability of the
World’s Healthiest Foods is the enjoyment we get from eating them!
With fresh, whole, natural foods and delicious recipes that are simple
to prepare, you are likely to lower your risk of a negative mood
triggered by diet alone. Of course, for other sources of negative
moods—like work problems, or relationship problems, or ongoing
stress—it’s important to start working out better lifestyle solutions
in these areas. 
External Overeating 
In a nutshell, external overeating means overeating as a result of too
much emphasis on food stimuli that are all around you. We live in a
culture that surrounds itself with food, not only in gas station food
marts and community gatherings but also in television commercials,
billboards, and advertising of every kind. The more wrapped up we
get in these cues, the more likely we are to overeat. In research studies of external overeating, the presence of fast foods, convenience
Healthy Weight Loss Q & As
202
foods, and other instantly available pre-packaged foods is linked
with the tendency to overeat. The World’s Healthiest Foods—while
very simple to obtain and prepare—are not “instantly available.” Enjoying them as the main components of your daily meal plan takes
a little bit of effort. This little bit of effort may in fact pay big dividends by limiting your risk of external overeating.
Restriction-Triggered Overeating 
The best-researched pattern when it comes to overeating may be the
pattern that is referred to as restriction-triggered overeating. In this
pattern, there is basically a rebellion that goes on inside of us when
we have put too severe limits on the foods we allow ourselves to
eat. The more unreasonably we restrict ourselves, the greater our
risk of overeating. 
In some cases, researchers have speculated that a specific region of
our brain, called the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VmPFC), may
be involved in this pattern of restriction-triggered overeating. The
VmPFC is partially responsible for our ability to consider long-term
consequences when making an immediate decision. Individuals with
damage to this region of their brain more often make decisions that
focus only on the here and now, without figuring out how to make
long-term consequences work to their advantage. Overly restrictive diets may put us in the exact same kind of predicament: we will
tend to forget about the long-term aspects of weight loss and lifelong health and instead think only about all of the foods we’ve missing out on in the past 24 hours. The Healthy Weight Loss Eating
Plan not only avoids overly restrictive eating, but actually encourages daily meal plans that feel normal, natural, tasty, and freely
chosen.
Overeating Due to Misjudgment
Overeating does not necessarily mean huge portion sizes that look
ridiculously large on your plate. It does not necessarily mean second
or third helpings either. When it comes to weight management, most
people have a difficult time estimating the amount of food they are
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
203
Healthy Weight Loss Q & As
eating. A fairly small error in judgment can be the difference between
weight loss and weight gain. For example, let’s say you consume a
salad five days each week, and you think you are using one tablespoon of oil and vinegar dressing on the salad when in fact you are
using two tablespoons. Over the course of one year, this difference
of one tablespoon will add up to 31,200 calories or nine pounds of
weight!
The Subtle Nature of Overeating
Most individuals do not overeat by consuming vast amounts of food
that look ridiculous to the naked eye. They overeat by making fairly
small errors in judgment about portion size. A 20-calorie mistake
each day can result in a weight gain of approximately one pound
every six months, and a 20-calorie mistake is exceptionally easy to
make. For example, since a single cashew nut contains about 10
calories, a person who ate 12 cashew nuts each day and believed that
he or she only at 10 nuts would be a person 20 calories off, and one
pound heavier every six months.
Overeating Is Partly Natural
Eating too much of a tasty food is not only common but also natural. It’s natural to want more when a food is delicious. If you judge
strictly by the response of your taste buds, you’ve got a good chance
of overeating. That’s why I always focus on the issue of nutrientrichness when I recommend the World’s Healthiest Foods as the
mainstay of your weight loss plan. In addition to delicious taste, I
know that an optimal supply of nutrients is critical for avoidance of
overeating. No foods can provide you with a greater variety of nutrients
or a greater quantity of nutrients than the World’s Healthiest Foods. 
204
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Q&A 4:
How is the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan Similar 
to the Mediterranean Diet?
The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan is the result of my decades of
traveling and researching the foods consumed by populations
throughout the world. It is an extension of my Healthiest Way of
Eating that is specifically geared towards those who are looking to
shed extra pounds.
There are many cultures whose diets may afford them good health.
Yet, when it comes to an easily adoptable way of eating that features
inherently good-for-you foods as well as a reverence for the way
that good food can contribute to health and happiness, I feel that
there is no better model than the Mediterranean diet.
The Mediterranean diet is a term used to describe the food intake
patterns of individuals living in the Mediterranean region (for
example, those in the Greek island of Crete as well as Italy, Spain,
Portugal, and Southern France). In addition to olive oil, the Mediterranean diet focuses on fresh vegetables, fresh fruits, fish, nuts, seeds,
and legumes/beans, food groups at the foundation of the World’s
Healthiest Foods and the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan.
(Before I continue, it’s important to point out that the “diet” in
“Mediterranean diet” means the routine foodways of a culture, the
foods and beverages that they regularly consume. Although the
Mediterranean diet—and the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan that
it has inspired—can lead to weight loss, the inclusion of the term
“diet” doesn’t inherently infer restriction of food intake for the
purpose of losing weight, the other common meaning of this word.)
Decades ago, when scientists began studying the cultures along the
Mediterranean Sea, they found that they had lower rates of disease
and longer life spans than many other populations. The scientists
205
deduced that diet was a major contributor to the Mediterranean
people’s superior health—including lower rates of heart disease and
cancer—laying the foundation for further research that has identified
other health benefits and helped to pinpoint the contribution of
specific foods highlighted in the Mediterranean diet.
While these health benefits are widely touted as the reason to follow
a Mediterranean-inspired diet, there is another benefit that is less
well known. It turns that that those who follow the Mediterranean
diet have less of a chance of becoming obese than those who follow
a typical western-style diet. For example, a study published in 2006
in the medical journal Nutrition found that those who adhered to a
Mediterranean-style diet were 51% less likely to be obese than those
whose diet didn’t resemble this healthy way of eating. Mediterranean-diet adherents have also been found to have lower levels of
systemic inflammation; since inflammation is an outcome of obesity,
and reducing inflammation is a very important facet of a healthy
approach to weight loss, a Mediterranean-style diet can also be
beneficial to healthy weight loss because of its anti-inflammatory
benefits.
Q&A 5:
What Are The Other Qualities That Make a Food 
One of The World’s Healthiest Foods?
While nutrient-richness is a defining feature of the World’s Healthiest
Foods, I felt that it was very important that these foods also be easily
accessible. They had to be foods that you could find in natural food
stores and supermarkets. For example, the vegetable purslane, a staple
in dishes served along the Mediterranean, is very nutrient-rich—
including being a source of hard-to-find omega-3s; yet, I felt that it
wouldn’t be of much service to include it in the list of the World’s
Healthiest Foods (even though it may be one of the world’s healthiest foods) and emphasize it in the Healthy Weight Loss – Without
Dieting, since most people in the U.S. do not readily have access to
Healthy Weight Loss Q & As
206
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
this food as it is yet to be available in many food markets. 
The criterion of accessibility also includes a food’s price; I wanted
to ensure that the World’s Healthiest Foods not be prohibitive so that
they could be regularly included in your diet. For example, while
pomegranates are filled with health-supportive phytonutrients, it is
not uncommon to pay $3US for one organically grown pomegranate.
This is the reason that this fruit is not included on the list.
Another characteristic of a World’s Healthiest Foods is that it is a
common food that can be incorporated into a range of recipes rather
than a “superfood” that is more likely to be enjoyed on its own. This
is one of the reasons that a food such as goji berries is not included. 
While the foods in the World’s Healthiest Foods list should serve as
your foundation, it’s important to note that your diet need not be
limited to them. For example, if you have a favorite fruit, or vegetable,
or nut, or seafood that is not included on the list, by all means please
continue to enjoy it as a routine part of your healthy weight loss. 
Q&A 6:
What Is The Difference Between Nutrient-Rich and 
Energy-Rich Foods?
Nutrient-rich foods aren’t the same as energy-rich foods although
these two terms sound very similar. It’s not nutrients per se that give
us energy; from the standpoint of nutrition, the term “energy” is
actually synonymous with “calories.” High-calorie foods can be
metabolized in our cells to provide us with a large amount of energy. Low-calorie foods cannot provide us with much energy in
terms of calories. They help support our metabolism in an infinite
number of ways, but they cannot provide our muscles and organs
with the “get up and go” they need to get us through our day. 
As in all health-related matters, it’s a question of balance here. We
207
need enough energy-rich foods to give us the caloric energy for our
“get up and go,” and we need enough nutrient-rich foods to support
our metabolism while we’re on the move. 
I can make it easy for you to lock into an optimal mix of energyrich and nutrient-rich! Actually, I don’t have to do much at all, because the world of natural, whole foods has done it for me. The
World’s Healthiest Foods approach is not only nutrient-rich, but it
balances out energy-richness by including energy-rich foods (like
nuts and seeds and olive oil) in your regular meal plan, but also
watching out for the overall amount included, especially in recipes
and stovetop cooking (since I don’t recommend cooking with oil). 
I don’t let energy-richness get out of hand—but I don’t forbid myself
to use energy-rich foods in any of my recipes or meals. At the same
time, I focus heavily on the nutrient-rich foods that are lower energy
in terms of calories—most importantly, fresh vegetables. I use these
foods generously in my weight loss approach, and they are a key
component for balancing out your overall weight loss.
Q&A 7:
Is My Attitude Towards Weight Loss Important?
The aspect of weight loss that many fad diets overlook does not typically involve food selection, but rather, weight loss attitudes and
approaches to the experience of weight loss itself. Although weight
loss attitudes and weight loss approaches may not seem nearly as
important as food selections during weight loss, scientific research
tells us otherwise. 
Put most simply, weight loss only seems to work when we treat it
like part of our everyday lives. Over and over, studies show that
when we step out of our lives to lose weight our success is temporary
at best. Our weight loss under these circumstances may last for
months, but never for years and years. 
Healthy Weight Loss Q & As
208
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
What does it mean, to “step out of our lives?” On many weight loss
diets, it means giving up one of the most natural of human pleasures—
the pleasure of eating! It means giving up the delicious tastes and
aromas of food, giving up the pleasures of robust, shared meals with
family and friends, and giving up our very self-determination with
respect to food choices and food portion sizes. Many weight loss
diets ask us to temporarily step out of our lives and to turn our lives
completely over to a predetermined script not of our making. We
are often asked to build our breakfasts, lunches, and dinners around
prepackaged foods that we didn’t select, cook, or even choose from
a list of favorites. By letting someone else make all of these decisions for us, and by stepping out of our normal role as human beings
whose everyday lives include the joys of eating, we are told that our
chances of losing weight will improve.
Research studies repeatedly show that weight loss works best when
we practice self-determination and self-regulation in our everyday
food choices, when we enjoy the foods we eat, and when we make
healthy lifestyle choices at every step along the way during weight
loss. Here is one very specific but telling example from a fascinating
study that compared intake of solid versus liquid foods in obese and
non-obese individuals. 
In this study, risk of excess calorie intake was studied in forty
participants who alternated between consumption of a variety of
foods in both solid and liquid form. On the solid side were foods
like watermelon, cheese, and coconut meat. On the liquid side were
foods like watermelon juice, cow’s milk, and coconut milk. In this
study, half of the participants were obese and half were healthy in
body weight. Interestingly, the risk of consuming excess calories
was only modestly greater in the obese versus healthy weight participants. What overshadowed the role of body weight in this study
was the role of food texture and food form (liquid versus solid).
Participants were most likely to overeat when consuming liquids
versus solids—regardless of whether the food involved was a highcarb food (watermelon), a high-protein food (dairy), or high-fat food
209
(coconut). From my perspective, it’s not surprising that liquids left
these participants wanting more; the crunchy and chewy and indescribable textures of food are part of our eating enjoyment! Without
these amazing textures and without the relaxed savoring of our food
through chewing, we feel like we’ve been robbed. 
It’s difficult to overstate the benefits of normal, everyday life circumstances for healthy and successful weight loss. We’ve reviewed
studies that look at “the family index,” studies that examine social
support groups, and studies that focus on “flexibility in dietary
restraint.” All of these studies point to one inescapable conclusion:
the more we bring our everyday lives—including family, friends,
and social networks—into our weight loss strategy, the better our
chances of success. And when we give ourselves permission to be
human and to make some mistakes while enjoying the natural pleasures
of food, we optimize our weight loss chances. 
There is actually one new approach to weight loss called the HAES
approach (Health at Every Size) that has evolved to capture some
aspects of the attitude described above. In the HAES approach to
weight loss, individuals become “health-centered” rather than
“weight-centered.” Instead of stepping out of their lives to follow
some temporary and unfamiliar diet plan, individuals step further
into their lives by focusing on long-term lifestyle habits. They also
insist on being healthy and living a healthy lifestyle regardless of
their body size on any given day. This is resonant with my perspectives
related to the Healthy Weight Loss – Without Dieting; it’s not a diet
but a way of life where you enjoy delicious tasting nutrient-rich
foods.
As you can see from all of the examples described above, our weight
loss attitudes are just as important as the foods we choose to eat.
While making a place for low-calorie, nutrient-rich foods in our
weight loss diet, we must also make room for ourselves! 
Healthy Weight Loss Q&As
210
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Q&A 8:
Can You Help Me Further Solve the “Mystery” of 
Weight Gain? 
If you are someone who has struggled with weight management,
you are very likely to have scratched your head at some point in
your life when you gained weight without any apparent rhyme or
reason. From a research perspective, the ease with which many people
gain weight can be explained by two basic factors: (1) the fact that
we’re human and (2) energy balance. 
Let’s take the human part first. In the world of weight loss research,
you’ll find a long list of scientific terms that have been invented to
describe our humanness in managing our weight. Researchers talk
about “flexible cognitive restraint,” “reduced food disinhibition,”
and “decreased food cue susceptibility” when analyzing weight loss
patterns. But what do these terms really mean? “Flexible cognitive
restraint” means that we sometimes stick with our weight loss plan,
but other times we do not. When our thinking tells us to avoid a
certain food, sometimes we do and sometimes we don’t. 
According to researchers, we need to be flexible in these situations.
“Reduced food disinhibition” means that when we violate our own
weight loss rules, we still don’t want to go crazy and eat everything
in sight. “Decreased food cue susceptibility” means that the mere
sight and smell of a food must not always lure us into eating it. All
of these terms are ways of describing our human nature—as human
beings, we not only take pleasure in our lives (including the pleasure
that comes from food) but we also make mistakes and feel overwhelmed in some situations. The research on weight gain says that
weight gain is a natural part of our human experience. Sometimes
we gain weight easily simply because we are human! 
A second factor in easy weight gain is energy balance—or more
precisely, the delicate nature of energy balance for many individuals.
211
Every moment of every day, our bodies need energy to keep going.
Energy is needed not only to move our muscles, but also to keep us
breathing, keep our heart beating, maintain our body temperature,
and to allow for many other bodily functions. Each day, we need to
consume sufficient energy in the form of food to fuel these bodily
functions. For many individuals, however, this energy amount is
relatively small and may often fall into the range of 1,500-1,800
calories per day. If an individual requiring 1,500 calories’ worth of
food consumes 1,500 calories’ worth of food, all is well and energy
balance is maintained. But if 1,600 calories’ worth of food are
consumed, energy balance is lost. In this hypothetical example
involving the consumption of 100 extra calories per day, not much
weight would be gained in a single day, or even over the course of a
week. But over the course of an entire year, this daily difference of
100 calories would add up to a 10-pound weight gain. That’s a very
delicate balance! Especially in the case of processed foods or fried
foods, few of us could accurately determine the difference between
a 600-calorie meal and a 700-calorie meal. 
Physical exercise is also involved in our energy needs, but in slightly
different way than you might expect. While it is true that physical
exercise directly burns calories and increases our energy needs in
this way, it burns surprisingly few calories in the lives of many
individuals. Leisurely-paced walking, for example, tends to burn no
more than 5 calories per minute for many adults. While that amount
is important, it only translates into 100 calories of energy burning per
20 minutes of leisurely walking, or approximately the same amount
of calories found in one tablespoon of dry-roasted nuts. In other
words, 20 minutes of leisurely walking doesn’t buy us very much
room for additional food intake (while still maintaining energy
balance). 
According to energy balance research, what is more important about
physical exercise is its role in building and maintaining our muscle
mass. Since muscle tissue is a relatively active type of tissue in our
Healthy Weight Loss Q&As
212
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
body, building our muscle mass tends to increase our energy needs. 
When added together, these two weight gain factors—being human
and maintaining a delicate energy balance—help explain why
weight gain comes so easily to many individuals. Even with some
physical activity, many individuals have very little room to work
within their allotted calorie intake. This delicate balance is easily
upset because all of us are human, get overwhelmed at times, and
make very human mistakes. 
From a research perspective, the difficulty of weight loss for many
individuals is explained by the same two factors that account for
ease of weight gain: (1) the fact that we’re human and (2) energy
balance. Let’s go back to the example already discussed of a person
whose energy balance allows consumption of only 1,500 calories
per day. If that person wants to lose weight, he or she will need to
burn up more than 1,500 calories on a daily basis or consume 100
fewer calories each day. (Here we have the weight gain situation in
reverse. Instead of gaining 10 pounds per year while consuming 100
extra calories each day, a person is losing 10 pounds per year while
consuming 100 fewer calories each day or burning up 100 more
calories.) 
By burning up 100 extra calories each day, this person could expect
to see about 10 pounds of weight loss per year. Ten pounds per year
is less than one pound per month. Now imagine following a weight
loss diet for 30 days and then stepping on the scale only to find a
weight loss of only one pound! And think how particularly troublesome this result would be if you did not like the weight loss diet
you were following, or if you felt like your weight loss diet was
preventing you from living your everyday life. This is yet another
reason why it’s important not to think short-term, as we do when
we are on a diet. But to undertake a way of eating for our lifetime
that is healthful and enjoyable and that can lead to long-term and
lasting weight loss.
213
APPENDIX 1
The World’s Healthiest
Foods’ Quality Rating
System Methodology
The World’s Healthiest Foods Quality Rating System 
Methodology
In order to quantify the nutrient richness of each of the World’s
Healthiest Foods in this e-book, The World’s Healthiest Foods book,
and the WHFoods.org website, a team of top nutritionists and I designed the World’s Healthiest Foods Quality Rating System (“Rating
System”).
This Rating System qualifies foods as “excellent,” “very good” and
“good” sources of nutrients, providing you with a simple, yet reliable,
way to determine the nutritional attributes of a food. These quality
descriptions don’t just take a food’s nutrient contribution into consideration; rather, they evaluate this nutrient contribution in relationship to the amount of calories a food contains. This way you can
evaluate foods in terms of their ability to maximize your intake of
important nutrients without having to exceed your individual caloric
intake goals. 
To help you better understand the categorization of foods as “excellent,”
“very good” or “good” sources of a particular nutrient, I want to provide
you with some background as to how these quality ratings were derived.
Rating System Categories
We began with a computerized analysis of the nutritional contents
of the World’s Healthiest Foods using the nutritional analysis software,
214
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Food Processor for Windows (ESHA Research, Salem, Oregon,
USA). In other words, we started with a food like carrots, and we
analyzed how much vitamin C, vitamin A, zinc, protein, etc. that
food contained in one commonly eaten serving. 
For each food we found the %Daily Value (DV) contribution of each
nutrient, as well as the food serving’s %DV contribution of calories
(for more on DV, see below); the comparison of the two became the
Density, and is the first (and most important) part of the formula to
determine the food’s quality rating. We then picked a simple, threecategory system for rating all foods: “excellent,” “very good,” and
“good.” The definitions of these rating qualifications are as follows:
Excellent Density>=7.6 And DV>=10% Or DV>=75%
Very Good Density>=3.4 And DV>=5% Or DV>=50%
Good Density>=1.5 And DV>=2.5% Or DV>=25%
In reality, the goal that each individual should strive for in terms of
daily nutrient and caloric intake varies depending upon his or her
personal needs. Yet, to help individuals meet their nutritional needs,
government agencies have created standard recommendations for
intake. The most up-to-date ones in the U.S. are those created by
the Institute of Medicine and are known as the Dietary Reference
Intakes (DRIs). Yet, since these DRIs can have many values for each
nutrient (varying by age, gender and whether a woman is pregnant
or lactating), we chose not to use these as our Daily Value (DV)
standard. Rather, for most nutrients we chose to use the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration’s “Reference Values for Nutrition Labeling”
as our standard for DVs. These are the values used by food manufacturers in the “Food Facts” portion of their product’s label. 
For other nutrients, such as for those where there were no “Reference
Values,” we derived a DV based upon the latest research or opinion
of nutrition science experts. With respect to omega-3 fatty acids, for
example, we adopted the standards set forth in a 1999 workshop
conducted at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The workshop
215
participants—who included prestigious contributors in the field of
nutrition science including Artemis Simopoulos, MD, Alexander
Leaf, MD, and Norman Salem, Jr., Ph.D—concluded that at least
1.2% of daily calories should come from omega-3 fatty acids, including
1% from alpha-linolenic acid and 0.1% each from EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid). When translated
into the context of an 1800-calorie diet, this workshop standard
represented a recommendation of 2.4 grams of omega-3 fatty acids
per day, which we adopted as our food and recipe rating system
standard, given that we use 1,800 calories as the reference diet for the
Rating System. (The 1,800 calories chosen as the reference diet is
based upon the Institute of Medicine’s recommendation for sedentary
women, age 31-50.)
Total Nutrient Richness Chart
Once the density ratings for each food were calculated, I wanted to
create a quantitative way that each food’s density could be compared.
This was the number that was to become the Total Nutrient Richness,
featured on page 41. The number is a reflection of how many “excellent,” “very good” and “good” ratings a food had. Each “excellent”
was assigned a value of 4, each “very good” a value of “2” and each
“good” a value of 1. These were added together to arrive at the Total
Nutrient Richness score.
The World’s Healthiest Foods’ Quality Rating System Methodology
216
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Dear Mr. Mateljan,
I have been doing my own research on health and nutrition for almost a year now and I received a copy of your book for Christmas
last year. I was very impressed with the wealth of information you
provided and your book has become my new bible. Because of you
and the research I have done to date, my life has changed tremendously. I am 49 years old and have done a complete change in my
lifestyle and I am amazed at the difference it has made in my life.
Since I have been following your food guidelines, I have also
changed my life in the amount of exercise I do, the amount of water
I drink, and I have also learned how to handle my stress better. I
have lost weight (not that I really needed to), while I eat more. I
have also found more energy and strength. But this is the best part.
In 1991, I was diagnosed with crohns disease after the birth of my
daughter. They had me on steroids and taking 21 pills of Asacol for
the first year. I am not a pill taker, I despise taking any kind of pills
so after the doctor weaned me off the steroids, I stopped taking all
pills against his advice. From that point on, I was able to manage
my crohns to some extent and suffered in silence when I would
get flare ups. Since I have changed my lifestyle, I have been completely symptoms free for 6 months now. And for that reason, I wish
to thank you very much. I also have your 300 Secrets - Book and I
am telling everyone about you and recommending your book. As a
matter of fact, I think your book is one of the greatest gifts I could
give anyone because it is “the book of life”. I look forward to your
newsletter and to learning all you have teach me about nutrition
(as I am far from being the expert that you are...lol). I am a testament that your knowledge and information shared is priceless.
Thank you again. I am one of your biggest fans. – Mitch
APPENDIX 2
Additional Testimonials
217
PS. I live in Alberta, Canada, and I am enrolling in a University
course called “Nutrition 101”. I hope someday, I can make a
difference in someone’s life like you have made a difference in mine.
Please keep up the good work and know that your efforts to educate people are not in vain.
I just want to say i’ve been visiting WHF for a long time. I appreciate the fact that you “get technical” in the descriptions of foods.
You don’t “dumb it down” but instead explain and go into the
science on a molecular level. I have lost 70 pounds (and kept it off)
in the last 4 years by changing my exercise/eating habits and the
WHFoods List has been a huge help. I have more weight to lose, but
by having a scientific understanding of the foods I eat, I’m confident
I will reach my goal. - Eleni 
A New Life: I just wanted to email to say that your book has truly
changed my life. At 22 years old I had just graduated college and
was a complete mess; my diet was terrible, I couldn’t fall asleep, I
was suffering from anxiety, and I weighed 184 lbs which is a lot for
someone of my height. My dad borrowed this book from his friend
and I started flipping through it and found everything so interesting
and appetizing. He quickly purchased it for me and the day I got it
I started with the diet plan. 
For 4-Weeks straight I ate nothing but food from your book and I
suddenly felt amazing. I can gladly say that now, with the help of
your recipes plus yoga and pilates, that I weigh 145pounds! Not
only did I lose weight but my entire metabolism changed. I no longer
had any desire for sweets, or high fat food and the occasional time
I do I find that I don’t gain weight as quickly. I have lost weight in
the past from other diets but always gain it back once I go back to
eating badly but this is not a diet, it.s a way of life. I swear by your
book and make recipes for all my friends and they are picky eaters
and love them! 
For the first time in my life I feel so happy to just be me... my mood
has completely changed, I’m motivated, I have confidence. I feel
healthy! Not once do I feel deprived because like I said I don’t have
Additional Testimonials
218
cravings anymore! My friends ask me how I do it and I tell them...
its all about The World’s Healthiest foods. I feel great and I’m still
losing weight! Now I can’t wait to get into that bride’s maids dress!
Thank you so much, for changing my life. - Amy 
I swapped hamburger for salmon. I ate shrimp instead of bologna.
Red grapes make a great substitute for salad dressings.
My thinking became, if you eat anything with enough broccoli or
romaine lettuce, it will be okay. Fiber is my friend. All hail green tea. 
Cravings for foods I used to eat became virtually nonexistent. My
weight loss has been remarkably steady even as I branched out with
occasional indulgences. I don’t miss anything I used to eat. The
World’s Healthiest Foods has helped me truly appreciate that I am
what I eat.” — Mary
I have lost around 24 pounds. I have lots more to go. My husband
thinks it will take about another year and one half to lose the rest
of my weight. Anyway, your book and website have helped me a
bunch. – Sarah
I love and appreciate the site. I have been on a diet since December
and lost 45 pounds. The site is incredibly useful in guiding me
towards better foods. – Mike 
I’ve read a lot of your stuff and decided to eat more whole grains
and eat fruit in between meals. The result was that I didn’t get so
hungry in between meals and I lost 30 pounds. When my body
craves sweets I know what it wants is sugar and then I eat fruit
instead. It always helps. – DF 
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
219
Billes, S. K. and Cowley, M. A. Catecholamine Reuptake Inhibition
Causes Weight Loss by Increasing Locomotor Activity and Thermogenesis. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007 Aug 8.
Brand-Miller J. (2005). International GI Database. Human Nutrition
Unit, School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Available online at: www.glycemicindex.com.
Buijsse B, Feskens EJM, Schulze MB et al. Fruit and vegetable intakes and subsequent changes in body weight in European populations: results from the project on Diet, Obesity, and Genes
(DiOGenes). Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90(1):202-209.
Cheskin LJ and Kahan S. Low-carbohydrate and Mediterranean
diets led to greater weight loss than a low-fat diet in moderately
obese adults. Evid. Based Med., Dec 2008; 13: 176.
Cummings, D. E. and Overduin, J. Gastrointestinal regulation of
food intake. J Clin Invest. 2007 Jan; 117(1):13-23.
Dhillo, W. S. and Bloom, S. R. Gastrointestinal hormones and
regulation of food intake. Horm Metab Res. 2004 Nov-2004 Dec
31; 36(11-12):846-51.
Doucet, E.; St-Pierre, S.; Almeras, N.; Despres, J. P.; Bouchard, C.,
and Tremblay, A. Evidence for the existence of adaptive thermogenesis
during weight loss. Br J Nutr. 2001 Jun; 85(6):715-23.
Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Beecher MD et al. Increasing Healthy Eating
vs. Reducing High Energy-dense Foods to Treat Pediatric Obesity.
Obesity (2008) 16, 318–326.
References
220
Field AE, Haines J, Rosner B et al. Weight-control behaviors and
subsequent weight change among adolescents and young adult
females. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Nov 4. [Epub ahead of print]
Flood A, Mitchell N, Jaeb M et al. Energy density and weight change
in a long-term weight-loss trial. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2009
Aug 14;6:57.
Furlow EA and Anderson JW. A systematic review of targeted outcomes associated with a medically supervised commercial weight-loss
program. J Am Diet Assoc. 2009 Aug;109(8):1417-21. 
Greenberg I, Stampfer MJU, Schwarzfuchs D et al. Adherence and
Success in Long-Term Weight Loss Diets: The Dietary Intervention
Randomized Controlled Trial (DIRECT). Journal of the American
College of Nutrition, Vol. 28, No. 2, 159-168 (2009).
Halton, T. L. and Hu, F. B. The effects of high protein diets on thermogenesis, satiety and weight loss: a critical review. J Am Coll Nutr.
2004 Oct; 23(5):373-85.
Kant AK and Graubard BI. Energy density of diets reported by
American adults: association with food group intake, nutrient
intake, and body weight. International Journal of Obesity (2005) 29,
950–956.
Kumanyika SK, Wadden TA, Shults J et al. Trial of family and friend
support for weight loss in African American adults. Arch Intern Med.
2009 Oct 26;169(19):1795-804.
Larson NI, Neumark-Sztainer D and Story M. Weight Control
Behaviors and Dietary Intake among Adolescents and Young Adults:
Longitudinal Findings from Project EAT. J Am Diet Assoc. 2009
Nov;109(11):1869-77.
Mata J, Silva MN, Vieira PN et al. Motivational “spill-over” during
weight control: Increased self-determination and exercise intrinsic
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
221
motivation predict eating self-regulation. Health Psychol. 2009
Nov;28(6):709-16.
Mendez MA, Popkin BM, Jakszyn P et al. Adherence to a Mediterranean Diet Is Associated with Reduced 3-Year Incidence of Obesity.
J. Nutr., Nov 2006; 136: 2934 - 2938.
Mendosa, R. Revised International Table of Glycemic Index (GI)
and Glycemic Load (GL) Values - 2002. www.mendosa.com/gilists.htm
Mourao DM, Bressan J, Campbell WW et al. Effects of food form
on appetite and energy intake in lean and obese young adults.
International Journal of Obesity (2007) 31, 1688–1695.
Newstadt M. Exercise and weight control. J Ky Med Assoc. 2009
Jul;107(7):265-7. 
Phelan S, Liu T, Gorin A et al. What Distinguishes Weight-Loss
Maintainers from the Treatment-Seeking Obese? Analysis of
Environmental, Behavioral, and Psychosocial Variables in Diverse
Populations. Ann Behav Med. 2009 Oct 22. [Epub ahead of print]
Provencher V, Bégin C, Tremblay A et al. Health-at-every-size and
eating behaviors: 1-year follow-up results of a size acceptance
intervention. J Am Diet Assoc. 2009 Nov;109(11):1854-61.
Quatromoni PA, Pencina M, Cobain MR et al. Dietary Quality
Predicts Adult Weight Gain: Findings from the Framingham Offspring Study. Obesity (2006) 14, 1383–1391.
Romaguera D, Norat T, Mouw T et al. Adherence to the Mediterranean diet is associated with lower abdominal adiposity in European
men and women. J Nutr. 2009 Sep;139(9):1728-37. 
Sacks FM, Bray GA, Carey VJ, et al. A weight-loss secret: Calories
matter. Comparison of weight-loss diets with different compositions
of fat, protein, and carbohydrates. New England Journal of Medicine
2009; 360:859-73.
References
222
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Savage JS and Birch LL. Patterns of Weight Control Strategies
Predict Differences in Women’s 4-Year Weight Gain. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2009 Aug 20. [Epub ahead of print]
Savage JS, Marini M, Birch LL et al. Dietary energy density predicts
women’s weight change over 6 y. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition. Bethesda: Sep 1, 2008. Vol. 88, Iss. 3; pg. 677-684.
Shai I, Schwarzfuchs D, Henkin Y et al. Weight Loss with a LowCarbohydrate, Mediterranean, or Low-Fat Diet. N. Engl. J. Med.,
Jul 2008; 359: 229 - 241.
Shixian, Q.; VanCrey, B.; Shi, J.; Kakuda, Y., and Jiang, Y. Green
tea extract thermogenesis-induced weight loss by epigallocatechin gallate inhibition of catechol-O-methyltransferase. J Med Food. 2006 Winter; 9(4):451-8.
Tassone, F.; Broglio, F.; Gianotti, L.; Arvat, E.; Ghigo, E., and Maccario, M. Ghrelin and other gastrointestinal peptides involved in the
control of food intake. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2007 Jan; 7(1):47-53.
Teixeira PJ, Silva MN, Coutinho SR et al. Mediators of Weight Loss
and Weight Loss Maintenance in Middle-aged Women. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2009 Aug 20. [Epub ahead of print]
Tassone, F.; Broglio, F.; Gianotti, L.; Arvat, E.; Ghigo, E., and Maccario, M. Ghrelin and other gastrointestinal peptides involved in the
control of food intake. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2007 Jan; 7(1):47-53.
Trichopoulou A, Naska A, Orfanos P, et al. Mediterranean diet in relation to body mass index and waist-to-hip ratio: the Greek European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition Study Am. J.
Clinical Nutrition, Nov 2005; 82: 935 - 940.
Williams PG, Grafenauer SJ, and O’Shea JE. Cereal grains,
legumes, and weight management: a comprehensive review of the
scientific evidence. Nutr Rev 2008 Apr; 66(4):171-182
About the Author
George Mateljan has had a lifelong
interest in food. From the time he
was five years old, his favorite room
in the house was the kitchen, where
he watched as his mother lovingly
spent hours preparing meals for the
family. He still vividly remembers
seeing a bowl full of ingredients
transformed into dough that rose as
if by magic. Then, after the dough
went into the oven, he was tantalized
by the fragrant aroma of it baking. He loved the wonderful look and
taste of golden loaves of warm bread fresh from the oven.
By watching food being prepared for many years, George learned to
appreciate the way each season brought forth its own special foods,
including fresh fruits and vegetables. In the spring and summer, there
were sweet, juicy strawberries, raspberries, apricots, and many types
of melons. In the fall, there were apples, oranges, and sweet potatoes.
And in the winter, there were hearty root vegetables such as beets,
carrots, and potatoes. George’s favorite times were the holidays
when he helped prepare special festive dishes.
George’s continued passion for food sent him to the ends of the earth
to learn about it. He has spent over 30 years traveling to over 80
countries around the world. He experienced cuisines from many
George Mateljan is a best-selling author and worldrenowned expert on the Healthiest Way of Eating and
Cooking. He is now celebrating ten years of philanthropy
and his dedication to help making this a healthier world.
His website receives over 1 million visitors per month.
226
cultures renowned for their health and longevity and appreciated the
different foods and ways of preparing them that were unique to each.
George's education in biochemistry helped his understanding of
what he learned through observing, tasting and formal training to
create this better and healthier way of cooking. George earned a
certificate studying French cuisine at the renowned La Varenne
cooking school near Paris. He studied Italian cooking at the Guiliano
Bugialli’s cooking school in Florence. He refined his skills at the
Gourmet’s Oxford in England. 
George was disappointed that he couldn’t find nutritious, tasty, and
convenient foods for himself and his family, so in 1970 he founded
Health Valley Foods, the first company in the United States to offer
healthful prepared foods. As time went on, Health Valley produced
thousands of convenient, enjoyable products that were packed with
nutrition and flavor yet completely free of the white flour, refined
sugar, hydrogenated fats, excess salt, chemical preservatives, and
artificial colors that are standard in highly processed foods.
George not only focused on the preparation of healthy foods, he also
led the way in using safe, truthful, environmentally friendly packaging
and encouraged and supported organic farming. Health Valley Foods
has since become the gold standard for healthy, tasty, and conveniently
prepared foods.
In 1996, George sold Health Valley Foods. He felt that after 26 years
he had inspired a number of others to establish companies to produce
nutritious, conveniently prepared foods, and it was time to turn his
energies and resources toward the next phase of helping people
enjoy eating healthier. Today, he shares, free of charge, his passion
to help others, and his experiences and knowledge with everyone
who wants to know about the “Healthiest Way of Eating” through
the not-for-profit George Mateljan Foundation.
Over the years, George had come to identify which foods were
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
227
among the World’s Healthiest. And he also knew that in order to eat
them on a regular basis the preparation of these foods had to fit the
individual tastes and lifestyles of people in today’s busy world. So,
George worked to create and develop preparation methods and
recipes that allow people to enjoy delicious and exciting flavors in
easy and affordable ways. His Foundation supports an extensive
website and the publication of books to share this information
with you.
George has published five books that have been read and used by
millions of people. This includes his latest book, The World's
Healthiest Foods: Essential Guide for the Healthiest Way of Eating,
which is a practical companion to the WHFoods.org website and
won 2007 National Best Book Award.
The WHFoods.org website was the first project that George’s foundation spearheaded. It was launched in 2001 is now one of the most
popular on the Internet when it comes to healthy eating. In fact if you
"Google" search "healthiest eating" or "healthiest recipes," the website
comes up #1! WHFoods.org has over 10 million visitors per year
and was selected as Best of the Best for Healthy Eating in the latest
edition of The Web's Greatest Hits by Lynie Arden. And all of this
with no advertising as George’s foundation has no association with
commercial companies. That's why Readers have come to trust the
unbiased material George presents because he provides great advice,
which is supported by science. Receipts from the sale of our books
and DVD go toward continuing further research on and education
about the Healthiest Way of Eating.
Thank YOU for walking your talk! Thank YOU for giving back!
YOUR efforts to educate and inspire your fellow humans are appreciated. Very few people share their insights, wealth and success with
others, so when I see someone like yourself who does, I wanted to
take the time to say THANKS! —Mike
About the Author
228
For over ten years, the George Mateljan Foundation been changing
the way millions of people make decisions about the way they eat
and how they prepare their food
It was established by George Mateljan to discover, develop, and
share scientifically proven information about the benefits of healthy
eating through the World’s Healthiest Foods website (WHFoods.org)
and to offer this information to you free of charge. The Foundation
is also committed to the publication of books, such as The World’s
Healthiest Foods: Essential Guide for the Healthiest Way of Eating,
which are designed to complement the information on the website
and provide easy, practical ways to integrate the Healthiest Way of
Eating into your lifestyle.
The Independent Perspective 
The Foundation is not-for-profit so it can offer an independent perspective that is not influenced by commercial interests or advertising.
Its only purpose is to help you discover the many joys and benefits
of healthy eating. The Foundation’s independent perspective can help
provide clear and easy-to-understand knowledge on how people of
all ages and backgrounds can achieve vibrant health and energy. 
Beliefs
The Foundation believes that true good health is more than just the absence of disease; it is a state where you enjoy all the energy and benefits life has to offer. One of the keys to achieving good health is to use
the power of nutrient-rich foods to positively affect how you feel, how
much energy you have, and the length and quality of your life. There is
clear and definitive scientific evidence that nutrient-rich foods play an
important and significant role in reducing the risk of degenerative
The George Mateljan
Foundation
229
diseases, and in providing long-term health and longevity.
The Foundation also believes that nutrient-rich foods not only have
the power to provide good health, but that they also have the power
to provide the pure joy of eating, and the joy of sharing with others.
Each individual is unique, so everyone is not fit into the same “food
formula.” Biochemical individuality is respected and a wide variety
of nutrient-rich food options are provided. That way each individual
can discover the personalized information, recipes, cooking methods,
and menu plans to meet his or her needs. 
Our Mission 
The George Mateljan Foundation’s mission is to offer the latest scientific information about the benefits of the World’s Healthiest
Foods and the specific nutrients they provide. Equally important, the
Foundation offers practical, simple, and affordable ways to enjoy
them that fit your individual lifestyle. 
Focus: Helping Everyone Learn How to Eat Healthier
for Free
The George Mateljan Foundation is focused on using the power of
nutrient-rich foods to achieve and maintain good health and the
prevention of disease. George has devoted his life to discovering and
understanding the benefits of the Healthiest Way of Eating, and because of his passion for helping people, he believes that information
on how to achieve vibrant health and energy should be accessible to
everyone. 
So he has made the Foundation’s website, www.WHFoods.org,
available free of charge, to anyone interested in learning about the
Healthiest Way of Eating.
The profits from the sale of this book go to the George Mateljan
Foundation, a not-for-profit organization, which provides funding
for research and education to promote the Healthiest Way of Eating
and the Healthiest Way of Cooking. The Foundation is dedicated to
help make a healthier world.
The George Mateljan Foundation
230
Healthy Weight Loss — Without Dieting
Recipes on Back Cover:
Citrus Spinach Salad with Shrimp
page 143
10-Minute Fresh Berry Dessert with Yogurt and Chocolate
page 191
Poached Halibut with Fennel and
Cauliflower
page 163
Healthiest Way of Cooking video to be released in March, 2010.
Available from the whfoods.org
website at:
http://whfoods.org/
300secrets/sletter.html
Available from the whfoods.org 
website at
http:www.whfoods.org/new
book/bookannounce.html
Other books from George Mateljan and the George Mateljan Foundation.
This is not another diet book because what I present to you is not a
diet. Rather, it’s the Healthiest Way of Eating, which emphasizes
nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods, which can lead to healthful
and true weight loss. You’ll get healthier and lose weight while also
getting healthier by losing weight - a truly winning combination.
The times of losing weight by starving or experiencing depravity is
over. That’s why this is not another diet book: it’s a healthier way of
losing weight and getting healthier. I hope believe this could be your
last attempt to lose weight and that this weight loss book will be the
best one you’ve ever read, and also the last one you do since it will
help you achieve your goals and also help you maintain the weight
that you will lose. If you tried a weight loss program before that
helped you lose weight in a short period of time only to find that you
gained it all back, I have the answer for you—nutrient-rich World’s
Healthiest Foods, which are the force
for changing our perspective of weight
loss from dieting to a journey of getting
healthier.