Would you eat this 3D printed plant-based steak ? 

Redefine Meat are hoping to change the way people think about plant-based food
Redefine Meat are hoping to change the way people think about plant-based food - Copyright AP
By Theo Farrant  & AP • Updated : 08 / 02 / 2022
As the race quickens to provide diners with the best meat alternatives , one start-up is producing so-called ' whole cuts ' of plant-based meat using 3D printers . 

Israeli firm Redefine Meat say they better replicate the texture , flavour and smell of steaks and lamb . 

A five-course lunch at London ' s Chotto Matte was organised for a large-scale tasting , where 50 chefs , restaurant owners and food critics were invited . 

Most were positively surprised by the quality of the product , titled ' New Meat '  . 

Famed Faroese restaurateur takes his Michelin-starred sustainable food to Greenland
Has dog meat had its day in South Korea ? 
A sustainable approach to meat consumption
AP
More people are interested in reducing their meat consumption or adopting vegan dietAP
Jordan Sclare , Global Executive Chef at Chotto Matte which hosted the event , says New Meat is fairly close to the " real thing .  " 

After all , it is composed of real muscle and fat cells , taken from animal cells and woven together . 

  " When you ' re slicing it , there ' s a hell of a lot of similarities . When you ' re cooking it on the barbecue , you can tell that it is a bit different because it cooks very fast and it sears quite quickly . Whereas different cuts of raw meat have different cuts , you know you have the fillet or the shin or the shoulder that slow cooks .  
 
 
 " So it looks kind of like a slow-cooked ' beef '  . But then when you sear , it becomes like pink and seared , like how a ' beef ' fillet would .  " 

Redefine Meat hope to convince heavy meat-eaters and meat lovers to reduce their consumption . 

  " We ' re offering an easy switch and ability to continue eating meat without compromising on health , sustainability or taste . We are trying to convince more and more people to eat less meat ,  " says Eshchar Ben-Shitrit , CEO of Redefine Meat . 

How is ' New Meat ' made ? 
AP
The complex 3D printing process gives the plant-based product it ' s meat-like textureAP
Technically , the R & D team of Redefine Meat first worked to study real cuts of meats — they even developed AI to observe the texture of meat to replicate it . 

That ' s how they ' re able to match the look of a piece of ' beef ' for example . 

And to complete the trick , all senses have to be fooled . 

  " This is the blood and the perfume that actually are carriers of flavours and scents that go inside their final product ,  " says Alexey Tomsov , food engineer for the R & D department of the company . 

The exact list of ingredients is closely guarded . The company says that New Meat is made by " using a range of proprietary and patented technologies " and " plant-based ingredients ,  " including chick peas . 

  " So actually , we have natural colours that are extracts from fruits and vegetables that give it that really typical colour that we expect to get from an animal product . And actually , we also have here flavours and additional elements that give it that really unique flavour that we get from animal-like flavour carrier ,  " he says . 

As for the blood , Tomsov is not allowed to say much more . 

Regarding texture , Redefine Meat is using production facilities with 3D printers . 

A new one will open in the coming months in the Netherlands , where 5 , 000 tonnes of New Meat will be produced per year . 

  " We call it actually additive manufacturing , where you build the product layer by layer . That enables us to control the fibre structure to trap fat and moisture within the fibres and to create a food product that is man-made , the one that you ' re eating today , which is the closest thing to the biological meat that we ' re used to eat . And when you see it , it looks like meat , when you put it in your mouth , it feels like meat and your brain associates it with meat ,  " says Ben-Shitrit . 

How to create restaurant-style fried chicken burgers at home
Tourists tuck in across Italy as chefs celebrate the patron saint of pizzaioli
Changing attitudes towards plant-based alternatives
AP
Chotto Matte will continue to build menu items around New MeatAP
Chotto Matte , the restaurant where the tasting happened , already offers New Meat on its menu . 

For the last two months , it trialled the new product along with 32 other restaurants spread across the UK , the Netherlands and Israel . 

 Chef Sclare designed the menu around the plant-based New Meat . 

He notably used the ' beef ' New Meat in a spicy teriyaki , and cooked the ' lamb ' New Meat with coriander and Peruvian chilli miso . 

Redefine Meat intends to expand to more restaurants in Europe in 2022 , and hopes to make its products available in supermarkets . 

Watch the video above to see if you could tell the difference between New Meat and a regular steak . 

Video editor • THEO FARRANT