Take a sip of vintage Mallorca and explore its rugged peaks
A lighthouse in Mallorca
A lighthouse in Mallorca - Copyright Canva
By Nichola Daunton • Updated : 06 / 02 / 2022
The largest of Spains ’ Balearics , Mallorca is a popular tourist hotspot , but for very good reason . With dazzling Mediterranean beaches , some of the most impressive cave systems in Europe and vineyards aplenty , it ’ s worth dipping your toe into its sapphire waters . 

Though many think they know Mallorca , there ’ s a lot more to the island than first meets the eye . While the epic Catedral-Basílica de Santa María de Mallorca , Palma ’ s gothic monolith , might be the most famous site , if you get off the well-beaten track , there are plenty of other things to see and do . 

From charming coastal villages to mountain range hikes and vintage train rides , Mallorca has surprises at every turn . The Cuevas del Drach and Cuevas de Artà cave systems boast spectacular stalactite and stalagmite formations , many of which can be found dotted around Mallorca ’ s smaller bays too . 

Sports are also popular here - especially as Mallorca ’ s most famous export Rafer Nadel is now the most decorated Men ’ s Singles Tennis Champion of all time . You can hike , bike , sail and climb and with mild temperatures all year round , you needn ’ t stop when the high season ends . 

To give you a taste of what Mallorca offers , we ’ ve rounded up some of our top picks for the coming year . 

Canva
The coastline of MallorcaCanva
What are the travel restrictions for Mallorca ? 
Travellers from the EU and the UK need to show that they are fully vaccinated to enter the Balearic Islands . Passengers will need a COVID-19 vaccination certificate and will also have to fill in a travel health form before entering the country . 

The rules for high-risk countries may vary , you can find more information here . 


Get cultural in Palma de Mallorca
Canva
Mallorca ' s old townCanva
Mallorca ’ s capital city is home to more than half of the island ’ s population , making it a bustling and exciting place to visit . Its compact size means it ’ s easy to navigate and a great base from which to explore the rest of the island . 

Arty types should take a stroll to Es Baluard Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art which houses works by Miró and Picasso . 
Arty types should take a stroll to Es Baluard Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art which houses works by Miró and Picasso . The museum , which opened in 2004 , is one of Spain ’ s most stylish and well-curated galleries . A must-see if contemporary art is your thing . 

Just a 15 minute walk away lies Palma ’ s old town - Casco Antiguo - which is crammed full of history . Expect elegant Spanish squares , medieval churches as well as traditional arts and crafts , including Mallorca ’ s famous woven baskets . 

If you ’ re a foodie , make sure you visit midweek so you can experience ‘ La Ruta Martiana ’  , also known as Tapas Tuesday . Designed to entice customers to the local tapas bars , many of the restaurants offer cheaper snacks . You can move from bar to bar , sampling delicious Spanish flavours as you go . 

Spanish researchers claim to have found lost ancient building dedicated to Hercules
Costa Rica : The pros and cons of a guided tour vs a self-organised trip
Why this rebel rural community in north-east Spain is fighting back against wind farms 
 ' A trip that will stay with me forever '  : Why you need to visit Greenland in 2022
Tour Mallorca on horseback
While walking around Palma will keep you entertained in the evenings , during the day you ’ ll want to get out and see more of what the island has to offer . 

If you like horses , getting in the saddle is a great way to experience the sights and sounds of rural Mallorca . Sign up for a two night trek in the rolling Tramuntana Mountains where you ’ ll trot through warm citrus-scented lemon groves and past the elegant villages of Campanet and Caimari . Your journey ends at the ancient monastery of Lluc where you ’ ll stay for two nights . You can sign up for a guided trek here . 

Take the scenic route by rail
Canva
Mallorca ' s vintage railway trainCanva
One of Mallorca ’ s most popular day trips is the Palma to Sóller vintage train route . Ride through winding valleys of orange and almond groves on a mahogany lined antique train . 

A much cleaner and greener way to travel than by the Palma-Soller road , the train will take you through the Tramuntana mountains , while a connecting tram will deposit you at Port de Sóller . Alternatively you can hop off the brass-fitted train at Bunyola to sample Mallorca ’ s herby liqueurs at the Tunel factory . 

Have a sip of vintage Mallorca
Canva
A vineyard in MallorcaCanva
Though Spanish wine is globally-famous , you might not know that many of the Balearic islands produce their own wine too . And not just any wine , award-winning wine .  
 
 “ Mallorca has always worked towards sustainable tourism , but especially in this post-pandemic era ,  ” says Catalina Cladera Crespí , The President of Mallorca Tourism .  
 
 “ It helps us to maintain our environment and by maintaining our environment we ’ re able to sustain our local products and traditions .  ” 

Wineries and vineyards are popping up all over the island , where the natives grapes include manto negro , moll and callet . 
Wineries and vineyards are popping up all over the island , where the natives grapes include manto negro , moll and callet . These grapes are then blended with imported varieties to produce all the wines of the rainbow . Mallorca Wine Tours offer some great experiences , including a helicopter wine tour and a private winery dinner . 

Enjoy a walk on the wild side
Canva
Mount Puig , MallorcaCanva
If you need to walk off a sore head afterwards , there are some lovely natural landscapes to discover on foot . Mallorca ’ s wetlands are a big draw for birdwatchers with black vultures , moustached warblers and balearic shearwaters to be spotted among the native flora and fauna . 

The Serra de Tramuntana mountain range is another area worth traversing . The range ' s highest peak is Puig Major which stands at 1445 metres . There are nine other peaks over 1 , 000 metres here too if you are a fan of heights . 

Running down the northwestern coast of the island , the mountain range , which translates as the very mythical sounding “ mountains of the north wind ” was declared a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2011 . A craggy , rugged beauty , the arid slopes offer hikers a breathtaking experience . 