Sacrebleu ! Meet the French brewery using algae to make their beer blue 
 ' Line ' beer has employees of Hoppy Urban Brew excited about the future of their blue beverages 
 ' Line ' beer has employees of Hoppy Urban Brew excited about the future of their blue beverages - Copyright Reuters
By Shannon McDonagh with Reuters • Updated : 07 / 02 / 2022
A French brewery has cracked an ancient industry dilemma in successfully using algae with a naturally-occurring pigment to turn their beer blue . 

The beer , given the brand name ' Line '  , is the result of a tie-up between a firm that wants to popularise the algae as a dietary supplement , and a nearby craft brewery that was looking for a way to make its beverages more distinctive . 

2022 sales indicate a considerable demand for ' Line '  , says Sebastien Verbeke , an employee of Hoppy Urban Brew ( HUB )  , which makes the drink .  
 
 " It ' s getting an enormous amount of interest and curiosity on the part of the public ,  " he says . 

Ice Wine : It ' s ten below freezing , it must be harvest time
Would you eat this 3D printed plant-based steak ? 
How is the beer coloured ? 
Reuters
Algae influences the colour of the drink rather than the tasteReuters
The blue tint comes from spirulina , an algae that is grown in basins by a company called Etika Spirulina in Lille , northern France . 

Phycocyanin , the component of the spirulina that gives the blue colour , is then added to the beer during the brewing process . 

Breweries have been trying to achieve the extraordinary shade in hops-based beverages for some time . 


Previously , many who have incorporated spirulina in their production process end up with a green colour due to the naturally yellowish tint of the alcohol . 

The light , fruity tasting beer is selling big
Reuters
Demand for Line blue beer is expected to soar in 2022Reuters
Tasting a freshly produced bottle of ' Line ' beer , brewery employee Mathilde Vanmansart described it as hoppy , light , and with fruity notes , while the only evidence of the added algae was the distinctive colour . 

Xavier Delannoy , whose farm provides the spirulina , explains that after several test batches , the brewery had found a blend that appealed to customers . 

1 , 500 bottles of the blue beer were sold between October and December last year , and the brewery is now preparing to ramp up production to meet demand . 

Has dog meat had its day in South Korea ?  
 " That ' s really what interests us – to try to democratise this so that it not only concerns particular types of people ,  " Delannoy said .  
 
 " We thought that one great way to democratise a product in northern France is to make beer .  " 

Since the last batch sold out in December , a growing demand has led the brewery to find time to make more , Verbeke says , adding that the enthusiasm around the product is " encouraging .  " 