Introduction
Hello , 
My name is Don Orwell and my blog SuperfoodsToday . com is dedicated to
Superfoods lifestyle . I had some life changing experiences in 2009 and that led
me to start rethinking my eating habits and my current lifestyle . 
Basically , I got scared to death and that moved me . My blog and this
book would not exist without my dieting mistakes , so bear with me
and you will get slowly introduced to superfoods . I wish that I had
been clever enough to see my health disaster coming , but I wasn ' t , 
although I always thought of myself as being very smart . I was
healthy by 2009 , and I was overweight , but nothing too dangerous . At
least that is what I thought . Before 2009 I was an average weight loss
yo-yoer , with 2 highlights to brag of . In 1994 I managed to lose 35
kilos ( 75 pounds ) in less than a year . I came down from 120 kg ( 265
pounds ) to 75 kg ( 165 pounds )  . When I think of it now , I know that I
did it in a very stupid way . I wasn ' t exercising at all and I ate very
small amounts of food . I skipped breakfasts and ate some salads with
some low-fat protein for lunch and dinner . 
I remember that I ate tomato and cucumbers in the summer and
sauerkraut in the winter . Initially I thought to exclude bread and
potatoes ; these were the only carbs I ate back then , zero rice and
cereals . I also stopped eating anything sweet , including fruits . I didn ' t
read any books about dieting , I just decided on a whim to start a diet
and since it went great from the beginning , I didn ' t think that I should
educate myself about dieting . So I kept eating smaller and smaller
portions , which slowed my metabolism to almost a full stop . 
Unfortunately , I managed to lose almost all of my muscle mass along
the way . Before that diet I was going to the gym for 9 months and I
was able to push 55-60 kg on a bench press . When I finished my diet
and went back to the gym , I couldn ' t push more than 30 kilos for the
first few weeks , I was so embarrassed . That was a lesson learned the
hard way . Even at 75 kilos , I had some stubborn belly fat that I
couldn ' t get rid of . Being overweight all of my life left a stamp on my
body . A friend who was on medical studies back then , explained that
fat cells are 85% fat and 15% is the cell nucleus and other cell
material . He said that when I lose fat , the fat cell still continues to
exists , it ' s just has less fat , but it ' s still there , dormant and ready to be
filled with fat that body stores when I eat too much calories . Scary to
know , isn ' t it ? Later I read on the internet that dieting has its rhythm
and that person loses the weight easiest in the beginning and that
weight loss gets slower and slower until it stops . That stop can be
prevented if metabolism gets faster and with exercising . 
I was able to keep “ under 100 kg ” weight until 2000 . I went 4-5
times a week to the gym , ate protein rich food and yo-yoed between
82 ( 180
pounds ) and 94 kilos ( 207 pounds )  . Then , in February 2000 , I
switched jobs , life got more stressful and I stopped going to the gym . 
And within a year , I was back to over 250 pounds ( 114 kg )  . But I was
30 at the time and my health was good . Then our son was born at the
end of 2002 and instead of my wife , I gained weight and went to over
120 kg ( 265 pounds )  . Then 15 months later , our daughter was born
and my weight peaked at 275 pounds ( 125 kg )  . But , I had a new job , 
much less stress at work and Atkins diet was all the rage back then in
2004 . 
So I embarked on Atkins diet , but this time I was much better prepared . I wasn ' t
exercising at all , but house chores around kids got me more or less active . I
wasn ’ t worried about muscle loss because Atkins is all protein , right ? I was a
little worried about ketosis and whether my brain will work fine , because brain
feeds on glucose , which is the simplest type of the carbs . And I started the
Atkins diet . I had some terrible side effects during the first weeks ( headache , 
weakness , tiredness , constipation , bad breath ) and it took me a while to find
some sort of food that wouldn ’ t be boring . Atkins diet encourages the eating of
fat cheese and fatty processed meats , but I got bored with them after 2 weeks of
eating it daily and I wanted to speed up the weight loss , so I ate low-fat protein
with raw or steamed cauliflower (  “ official ” 
potato replacement for low carbers )  . That got boring quickly too , so I
educated myself about carbs that should be counted and fiber that
should not be counted and started to eat lots of fiber loaded veggies
with lean protein such as boiled eggs , fish , lean pork and chicken , stir
fried with broccoli or Chinese cabbage , spinach and celery . For
breakfast I eat eggs and every second day either low-fat cottage
cheese or low-fat yogurt with cucumbers and / or celery . I even have
bought ketone test strips and was happily peeing on them every few
days in hope that I ' m still in ketosis . And the weight melted away
really quickly . After 4-5 months I have lost 30-35 kilos again and I
was at 90 kg ( 200
pounds ) and I was really satisfied with the results . I started to preach
Atkins diet and turned myself into a low carb Taliban , proclaiming
sugar and carbs as evil things . And I was able to keep my weight
under 100 kg for almost 3 years , just because I ate low carb office
lunch ( fiber salad and protein )  . But after 3
years , my job got stressful and I went to old eating habits and kilos
started to creep up again . And before I knew what was happening , my
kids told me that I was fat in summer 2008 and end of February 2009 , 
my blood tests came back . I was in the middle of my future diet
engineering , but the results diverted them . 
So I have found out that I suffer from low thyroid , but that was not the thing that
scared me to death . Blood test showed the elevated level of TSH . 
Our family doctor explained everything about hypothyroidism , side
effects and prescribed me some synthetic hormone pills ( thyroxin )  . 
She said that it ' s the easiest to handle and least dangerous chronic
She said that it ' s the easiest to handle and least dangerous chronic
disease that I could have and that I should learn to live with side
effects and take a pill every day until the end of my life . 
At first I didn ' t know how to react . I read that it ' s mostly a female disease and
found out that I had side effects for a few years already ; it was just not showing
on the blood test results before . I started to lose
hair , I was tired all the
time ( I thought it was because I was overweight )  , and I read that I couldn ' t lose
weight as easily as before , which was true . I also noticed that I have poor
memory . I decided to find some natural remedy or anything that can alleviate
side effects . But as I said , low thyroid was not the thing that scared me . Around
the same time I got my first hemorrhoid . And it was very bad one , external as I
have found out later . I went again to our family doctor ( nice older lady in St . 
Lawrence district ) and she prescribed some ointment and decided to check veins
on my legs . And she found out that I have very expanded external veins on my
legs . They were buried in fat , so I couldn ' t see them , although they were as thick
as my thumb . And although I had occasionally heavy legs and itching in lower
legs , I didn ' t have any other side effects of it . Since I ' m sitting during all of my
work hours and I was
overweight , there was no wonder that I got hemorrhoids and expanded
veins . That kind of veins is called varicose veins . That was my second
chronic disease discovered in less than a month . The doctor sent me to
do some additional checks and although they found that my deep
veins were OK , vascular specialist talked to me and said that I have
veins were OK , vascular specialist talked to me and said that I have
lots of small blood clots hanging from the walls of my veins and that
some of them can get released into the blood stream and clog some
vein . And I knew that my veins were already clogged because of my
weight . And that can cause the heart attack , stroke or pulmonary
embolism . 
Well , this is scary !  !  ! 
Knowledge that I can get a stroke or heart attack any time prompted some
serious diet planning . I wanted my veins unclogged as much as possible ASAP !  ! 
But this time I wanted to make a perfect diet , a diet that I won ' t even know that
I ' m on , a lifelong diet . After some thinking and
researching and after examining previous diets attempts , I decided to
continue with a diet plan that was supposed to work for me ( going
through a full cycle every day )  . I wanted to avoid all side effects I had
in previous dieting . I wanted to include carbs in my diet because it
was supposed to be a lifelong diet . I wanted to prevent future weight
cycling . If it ' s going to be a lifelong diet , then there won ' t be any
weight cycling , right ? I wanted to have the perfect solution that will
allow me to never ever go back to my bad eating habits that ruined my
health . Bad eating habits that I ’ m referring to here are processed and
refined foods , sugary breakfasts ( muffins , donuts )  , pop drinks and
lack of whole foods in my diet . So , fad diets were out of the question . 
I mean , I couldn ' t live on smoothies or steak and eggs until the rest of
my life . I also decided to examine the mechanism of fad diets and
weight yo-yoing and facts why people cycle their weight , when
EXACTLY cycling starts ( when exactly they drop the ball and why )  , 
why it happens and how long it takes them to cycle their weight . And
I wanted to compare those facts with my own
experience . I also wanted to discover why there are so many
overweight people around me and understand the processes behind
food intake . Thyroid hormone issue also prompted me to read about
food intake . Thyroid hormone issue also prompted me to read about
hormones in the human body and how they affect weight loss . I was
lucky not to have any blood sugar or cholesterol issues , but I wanted
to find out everything I could about them because my brother and my
father suffer from high blood pressure and my aunt ( my father ’ s
sister ) died of cancer and she was diabetic for last 10 years of her life . 
The last thing that hit my family around that time was information that our son
had ADHD . He was born end of 2002 and in September 2008 he started primary
school . After a few months we got a call from his teacher and she explained that
he is not focused in school and has all symptoms of ADHD 
( Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder )  . A few months of
consultations confirmed that he has ADHD . My wife started to search
for anything that can help alleviate symptoms , hoping that we can
avoid Ritalin and other
medications . Nutrition search discovered that some foods can fuel
ADHD . Also , our friends found out at the same time that their 3-yearold son is autistic and they already started to take nutritional measures
to alleviate autism and that included gluten free and casein free diet . 
They said that he is noticeably better behaving since being on that diet 
( lower hyperactivity , less temper tantrums , he started to make eye
contact and his speech improved ) and we decided to learn everything
we could about foods that fuel ADHD . 
When I started my research , I kept hitting info about high sugar intake , blood
sugar levels , insulin sensitivity , cholesterol levels , fast food diet that most
Americans are used to , processed foods , ingredients in processed food and so on . 
It turned out that the same food that was causing my problems was the food that
is fueling ADHD . Sugar , processed food and refined carbs . 
Then I compiled the list of whole foods that is healthy and can help
with my problems and my son ’ s ADHD . When I started to research
each food more closely , I kept hitting web sites that dealt with
superfoods . When the list was
completed , I found out that all the food from my list were superfoods . 
WOW !  !  !  ! 
Enter the Superfoods
When I had a final list of foods that should allow me to lose weight , and keep
that weight for years , I decided to google all of them to check all their benefits
and make sure that I ’ ll get all necessary vitamins and minerals from them . I
wanted to avoid any supplements ( if possible ) and I wanted to check whether I ’ ll
have any side effects because I ’ m missing some mineral or vitamin . I also
wanted to check whether I should exclude some of them because of something
bad . E . g . goitrogens found in raw cruciferous veggies are bad for low thyroid if
eaten in excess and if iodine intake was low at the same time . Nightshade
veggies cause arthritis problems for some people . Legumes can cause stomach
problems . 
After meticulously checking each food on my list , I decided to call this diet a
Superfoods diet . Most people associate the term superfoods with some sort of
exotic berries , like Acai berry , Goji , or Noni . Those berries are great ; they ’ re full
of antioxidants , but you can ’ t live on them . When I ’ m talking about superfoods
here , think about regular superfoods , like spinach , broccoli , quinoa , olive oil , 
garlic , kale , salmon , ginger , basically food that has nothing bad in it and has
health benefits . 
I also wanted to have a diet that will keep my appetite and cravings under
control . Some people might think that counting calories is all that matters , but
they don ' t take appetite and cravings into equation and I wanted to make sure
that I don ’ t have any cravings . Think about it , what chances you have to shed
successfully off some pounds if you ' re hungry all the time and you can ' t take
pizza and chocolate bars off your mind ? Zero !  ! It is much easier to be on a diet
when you ' re not hungry all the time and when you don ' t crave any food . How
that can be achieved ? By switching to superfoods !  ! Switching to superfoods will
change your palate , it will clean your body of toxins and it will stabilize your
insulin sensitivity and blood sugar level . That is half of the job !  ! 
Glucose drives insulin . Insulin drives fat . Fatty acids will not be released into the
blood stream to be used as energy if the glucose level is high . If you eat a diet
that causes your blood sugar to be frequently high , all energy you consume that
is not immediately needed will be stored in your fat cells and will not be
released . You will not get to use all of the 700 calories you eat at one meal , only
the 100 or so you need immediately , and thus you will soon be hungry again , 
and will overeat . But if your blood sugar is stable and you can access that stored
energy you will not be hungry and won ' t overeat . It doesn ' t matter if you are
eating fat or glucose your body will convert what it ’ s got to what it needs . Every
major nutritional philosophy pegs sugar as being a major problem . Circulating
saturated fatty acids found in the blood ( known as triglycerides in the lipid
panel )  , are indeed a major risk factor in heart disease , but the majority of these
saturated fatty acids are almost without exception the result of liver secretions , 
and are the consequence of a diet that is high in refined carbohydrates . 
Some people are more sensitive to the hormone effects of insulin and cortisol
than other people are . The more sensitive you are , the more you ' re likely to get
fat . Insulin is the primary hormone that fixes fat in the fat cells . This is why
Type I diabetics lose weight : they ' re not producing enough insulin . Since insulin
is manufactured in direct response to carbohydrates , if you don ' t eat them , you
won ' t have a mechanism by which to store fat . 
Since superfoods are whole foods and completely opposite of processed foods , 
switching to superfoods will have a double effect on your body . You will stop
eating processed foods , meaning zero intake of any chemicals , additives , food
colorings , flavor enhancers and all other nastiness found in processed food . You
will also stop getting chemicals found in processed food packaging . Think about
how bad plastic can be for your health or bisphenol-A ( BPA ) found in can
linings . And at the same time you ’ ll be eating whole foods superfoods which do
not contain any chemicals found in processed food , but contains phytonutrients
and antioxidants and that whole food superfoods will detox your body . That
detox will regulate your blood sugar level and insulin sensitivity and that will
lower your sugar cravings . After 10-15 days all these changes will result in your
palate change and you won ’ t crave processed food with flavor enhancers and
you will learn to appreciate natural taste of the whole foods . That is half of the
job on your path to a healthier you . 
And after that change you will feel great , energetic and your body won ' t crave
the salty and fatty food you used to snack or sweet and fatty food you used to
gobble on a daily basis . 280 calories from a chocolate bar and 280 calories from
a lean protein meat with fiber loaded salad are not the same . More water , more
fiber means much bigger amount of food , much more stretch , you will get much
fuller and you ’ ll stay fuller much longer , not to mention antioxidants , minerals , 
vitamins and phytonutrients you ’ ll get from that meal . 
When you choose the right foods , and understand how these foods react with
your body , you will not have cravings for processed food anymore . When I
started this diet for the first time , I have thought sometimes , Hey , I have lost
some weight , I deserve a treat , I ' ll have pizza for lunch or I ’ ll have a small
chocolate bar , but after a few weeks I realized that I don ' t need it and that I don ' t
crave it at all . And every time I had it , I figured out that I didn ’ t need it at all . So
I skipped it and that ' s it . And I felt much prouder of myself . 
So , after 8-9 months on Superfoods diet , I went from 275 pound ( 125 kg ) to 195
pounds ( 89 kg ) in the beginning of 2010 . I felt great , looked decent and decided
that additional weight loss would have to wait for a while . Since then , my weight
went from 195 pounds ( 89 kg ) to 210 pounds ( 95 kg ) and back . And in March
2014 I decided to try to go under 195 pounds and describe that effort in a blog . 
But because I wanted to share everything about Superfoods diet , my
investigation turned into a book . I ’ m writing this in June 2014 and I ’ m at 180
pounds ( 82 kg ) and looking to go under 180 pounds in following months . Whole
my family felt better because of the Superfoods diet , my wife has lost some
weight ( I ’ m not allowed to say how much ) and her waist line has been perfect
ever since . 


UPDATE : Below are pictures from November 2014 , after 3 months of
kettlebells training : 
If you ' re preparing yourself for a diet , along with processed food and sweets that
you have in your pantry and freezer , make sure that you clean from your fridge
the following : 
• Any juices - orange , apple .  .  . they ' re processed food too . 
• Any frozen prepackaged " low-fat " versions of regular meals . 
• Margarine • Any protein / granola bars - make sure to check the amount of
sugar , protein , fat and fiber in it . Some might be ok as a snack , but they have
to have enough protein and fiber and be low on sugar and fat . 
• Any processed meat but ham without sugar ( ham is OK for first one or two
weeks ) • Pasta • Any diet deserts . 
• Diet pop might be OK for first one or two weeks when your body still might
crave sugar , but you should plan to stop using it once the cravings diminish . 
When I mentioned that switching to Superfoods will have a double effect on
your body , you can look at that fact from the other perspective . Basically , there
are really only 2 health problems , toxicity and deficiency and these conditions
can lead to vast array of diseases ( actually symptoms of toxicity or deficiency )  . 
Toxicity is bigger problem than deficiency with modern American diet . 
Processed food is toxic . Toxicity is a state of being infested and overwhelmed
with materials that are known to cause problems in the body , specifically to the
central nervous system . The body has filtering systems to be able to deal with
the toxins that it is exposed too . However , when these systems become
overloaded , toxins can accumulate in the body and cause hundreds of different
symptoms and lead to chronic disease . Toxicity combined with nutritional
deficiency is a recipe for disaster . Our bodies need good nutrition to be able to
rebuild and repair properly . 
If the body has the right supplies or materials it can heal itself of almost
anything . If you are toxic , you can cleanse . If you are deficient , you can
replenish . Processed food is toxic . Superfoods cleanse . Superfoods replenish
any deficiencies . Superfoods are solution . 
Superfoods and disease prevention
Introduction
Superfoods and Hormone imbalance
Superfoods will also fix most of your hormone imbalance . I ' m one of those
people who suffer from low thyroid and I used to have problems to lose weight , 
not to mention tiredness and all other side effects of low thyroid . But since I
changed my diet and switched to superfoods , I can report that I feel much better , 
have much more energy and I ' m losing weight without problems . 
Processed food can disrupt your hormone balances , meaning that your metabolic
rate can be decreased , meaning that you might frequently overeat because your
mechanism that should signal that you ate enough is not working properly . Your
natural mechanisms for fat burning might be disrupt because of hormone
imbalance . 
You might not be gluten intolerant , but think about excluding whole wheat for a
while , just as a test . Even if you ' re not having gluten intolerance , you might be
better off with some other whole grain food . 
Refined grains are a high glycemic food . They stimulate the production of
insulin – your body ’ s fat-storing hormone . The more bread , pasta , cereal and
flour you consume , the more likely you will be overweight . 
Even if you switch to non-gluten food , remember that most commercially
prepared gluten-free foods are no better than their “ super-gluten ” counterparts . 
Most of these foods are highly processed and contain chemicals and
preservatives . Gluten-free packaged foods , such as bread , pasta , cookies , 
crackers and cakes , typically have just as high of a glycemic index as their
wheat-based counterparts ( e . g . they use refined rice flour )  . Basically , they harm
your blood-sugar regulation system just as much as wheat does . The same goes
for make-at-home baking mixes . Not to mention the bread and dessert recipes on
most “ gluten-free ” food blogs . 
I ' m using quinoa / brown rice / oatmeal / buckwheat ( all non-gluten food and all
non-commercially prepared )  . Whole grains are low on the glycemic index , 
meaning they are absorbed slowly and can help you feel full longer . That will
work well with your fixed hormone imbalance and you won ' t feel hungry during
the day . More on wheat and gluten later . 
Superfoods and Heart and vascular diseases
I ’ ll list some reasons why Superfoods diet can prevent heart diseases , including
vascular diseases . Basic superfoods oil is olive oil , which is heart healthy
because it is rich in polyphenols . Polyphenols have antioxidant characteristics
and studies show that they reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease , cancer and
lower blood pressure . Olive oil also contains antioxidants in the form of vitamin
E . As an antioxidant , vitamin E counteracts free radicals just before they hurt or
kill fat cells . Olive oil is one of the number one resources of monounsaturated
fats that assist reduced cholesterol and help lessen inflammation . 
Monounsaturated fats maintain your heart fit by reducing bad and total
cholesterol , battling inflammation , and improving levels of good cholesterol . 
The FDA authorized a health claim for olive oil that says that the
monounsaturated fats you will get from having 2 tbsp . daily might decrease the
danger of coronary heart disease . Avocado is also awesome choice , but eat one
quarter daily if you are aiming for weight loss . 
One of the main reasons that the Superfoods Diet stimulates heart health is the
simple fact that it is a diet that is low in saturated fat . I am referring to saturated
fat coming from hydrogenated oils , rendered animal fats , fat dairy products 
( cheese , creams )  , processed meats , shortening , fatty burgers and hidden fats
located in cakes , cookies and muffins . Superfoods diet includes the consumption
of healthy amounts of monounsaturated fat through usage of olive oil , salmon , 
flax seeds ( rich in Omega 3 and Omega 9 ) and other nuts and seeds . The human
body in fact does require the intake of fat on a day-to-day basis and you should
never even think of going to a completely fat free diet . The best type of fat to
consume is monounsaturated fat . Some amount of saturated fat is also included
in Superfoods diet and it ' s found in lean meats ( pork and beef )  , eggs and in lowfat cheese . Another source of saturated fat is coconut oil , but saturated fat found
in coconut oil is much healthier than the one found in meats . 50 percent of the
fat content in coconut oil is a fat hardly ever found in nature called lauric acid . 
Lauric acid is an effective virus and bacteria destroyer , and coconut oil has the
most lauric acid of any material on Earth . Another reason why superfoods diet is
promoting heart health is an inclusion of significant amounts of fruits , vegetables
and smaller servings of legumes . 
Saturated fat from the animal source raises ‘ bad ’ blood cholesterol levels which
are a sign of possible heart disease and stroke . Monounsaturated fat does not
increase blood cholesterol levels . When consumed in moderation , 
monounsaturated fat gives the body an element it needs for correct functioning
and in general good health . 
Arterial rigidity ( arteriosclerosis or atherosclerosis ) is accountable for most
cardiovascular incidents . It is the leading predecessor of stroke and myocardial
infarction , two of the major causes of death in many high income and middle
income nations . 
Consuming foods that are high in saturated fat can sooner or later cause plaque
to build up within the walls of the arteries . When this takes place , your artery
walls will solidify and your heart will have a difficult time moving blood thru
your body . Clots might form alongside the walls of your artery and this might
make it harder for your blood to move through it . Arterial rigidity might also
result as a complication of a number of medical conditions such as diabetes , 
obesity , and high blood pressure . Here are a few of the problems that might arise
as a consequence of arterial stiffness : 
• Tissue death . Arterial rigidity prevents the supply of blood and nutrients to the
tissues and might cause harm and tissue death . 
• Pulmonary embolism . Arterial rigidity may cause pulmonary embolism if a clot
moves to an artery in your lungs . This condition can be deadly and will call for
emergency treatment . 
• Aneurysm . In many cases , arterial plaque accumulation is triggered by the
decline of the walls of the arteries and might result in the development of
aneurysm ( an irregular widening of a section of the artery )  . Ruptured aneurysms
can be lethal so it is best to prevent them while you can . 
So , think about this when you have been served foods that are high in saturated
fats and instead eat food high in Omega 3 fat . To me , olive oil tastes as great as
bacon or any other type of animal fat , but its way healthier . 
Omega-3′s can keep your skin soft , prevent acne and skin inflammation , delay
the aging process and help you lose or maintain weight . For sure , everyone
would love this . Getting enough omega-3′s into your diet ( found in salmon , flax
and some other food ) can also help keep your blood pressure and blood
cholesterol levels in check to avoid diabetes , heart diseases and stroke . It can
also reduce your risk for arthritis , osteoporosis , emotional and mental disorders 
( ADHD , depression , bipolar disorder , Alzheimer ’ s disease and schizophrenia ) 
and several forms of cancer ( such as breast , colon and prostate cancer )  . Women
can benefit a lot of high Omega 3 intake because it relieves menstrual pain and
cramps , it can enhance fertility , it can reduce the risk of premature birth and it
can reduce severity of post-menopausal symptoms . 
Vitamin K1 is found in leafy greens and is definitely good for you . In one Dutch
study reported in the Journal of Nutrition in 2004 , individuals with the high
vitamin K2 intake had an astonishing 51% reduced risk of heart attack death rate
and a 26% reduced risk of death from all reasons in comparison to those
consuming the very least vitamin K2 . The study determined that high vitamin
K2 consumption decreased arterial calcification . 
Vitamin K2 also helps prevent Arthritis . A study not too long ago published by
the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition ( EPIC ) has
disclosed that elevated intake of vitamin K2 might decrease the risk of prostate
cancer by 35 percent . Foods high in vitamin K2 are farmer ’ s cheese , eggs , 
chicken breast and ground beef . 
Is wheat addictive ? 
To me it is . I actually noticed it before I read about it . 
Initially , I included only oatmeal and brown rice / quinoa as a carb
choice in my diet , paired with carrots , other veggies and fruits . I don ' t
think that I had issues with gluten , but I noticed a strange thing . Every
time I would take a bite of some pastry or store bought bread or
anything made with refined wheat ( after a weeks of avoiding it )  , I
would immediately sense the urge to continue eating it ; it was like a
drug , almost like when you start eating Cheetos or Doritos and you
just can ’ t stop . I thought , it may be the food additives that baking
companies are using , or the combination of refined white flour and
sugar and some fat that was in the pastry , but I felt an incredible urge
to continue eating it . If you decide to avoid bread and wheat flour 
( even whole wheat ) for a while , make sure to observe whether you
would get the same sensation after you taste wheat product again after
a while . After that discovery , I read a lot of articles on the internet and
found out that the compounds found in wheat are responsible for
appetite stimulation , exaggerated rises in blood sugar , and the release
of endorphin-like chemicals that get the brain hooked on breads , 
pastas and crackers . Check the scientific proofs later in the section
about satiety index . Increased wheat consumption can be linked to
higher incidences of celiac disease , diabetes , heart disease , arthritis
and
schizophrenia . Wheat contains amylopectin A , which is more
efficiently
converted to blood sugar than just about any other carbohydrate , 
including table sugar . One of the reasons is that the wheat today is not
the same wheat from 100 years ago . Newer breeds of wheat are
significantly changed and are causing all these problems . Back in the
significantly changed and are causing all these problems . Back in the
1950s , scientists began cross-breeding wheat to make it harder , 
shorter , and better-growing . Today ' s hybridized wheat contains novel
proteins that aren ' t typically found in either the parent or the plant , 
some of which are hard for us to suitably digest . Increase in wheat in
the American diet parallels obesity rates that have nearly tripled since
1960 . 
Whole wheat has the same problems described above . Whole wheat is
healthier than regular processed wheat , but it produces the same
problems as the regular wheat . Wheat also contains appetite-revving
wheat component called gliadin . 
Wheat stimulates your appetite so you want more and more of it and
when you stop eating it , your body goes through withdrawal
symptoms . In fact , wheat ' s effect on the brain is the shared with that
of opiate drugs . One study showed 14% higher caloric intake in wheat
eaters than those on a gluten-free food plan . 
If you haven ’ t been overweight in your life , then wheat probably doesn ’ t affect
you . But if you have been overweight , I would suggest you to try to be either
100% wheat free for a few weeks or months and see if you feel better , or to
lower amount of wheat you ’ re taking to a minimum . I don ’ t need wheat at all , 
I ’ m satisfied with other sources of carbs and I don ’ t have any cravings for any
wheat loaded food . 
If , however , you want to stay on Superfoods Diet and you have to have
pancakes , flat breads and any other type of baked goods , then try some
alternative flours like almond flour , buckwheat , rice flour or some other nongluten flours . Or try pre-hybridized grain like spelt . 
Fibers
The real secret behind my weight loss and maintenance of my lowered weight is
my discovery of fiber loaded foods and bitter foods and what they can do for me
as an experienced yo-yoer . It ’ s not just being fuller because you ate lots of fiber , 
it ’ s sugar level change , it ’ s insulin sensitivity change , it ’ s phytonutrients and
antioxidants in it , it ’ s thermogenic effect , it ’ s 6 in 1 Superfoods deal !  !  !  ! Also , 
fibers may lower your risk of developing hemorrhoids , reduce inflammation , 
lowers cholesterol and regulates bowel function ! In the beginning , I noticed that
I can eat it as much as I want without incurring high calorie intake . It ’ s almost
like a free allowed food that you can eat anytime you ’ re hungry . Most people
will think , hey , how eating a spinach and shredded cabbage salad can be tasty
and exiting ? But you just need a pinch of sea salt , 1 tsp of olive oil and some
lemon and a salad suddenly tastes like heaven . This is also due to the palate
change that comes after you stop eating processed food and suddenly discover
that bitter foods actually tastes great . Low fat yogurt or buttermilk makes it even
tastier . Add any lean protein and you ’ re eating THE healthiest meal on the
planet . 
Dietary fibers are found in the plants that we eat . They are parts of vegetable that
do not break down in our bellies , and instead pass through our system undigested 
( just like cow and grass )  . Dietary fibers are either soluble or insoluble . Both
kinds of fiber are similarly significant for health , digestion , and stopping
conditions such as heart disease , diabetes , diverticulitis , obesity and
constipation . Soluble fiber dissolves in the water . Insoluble fiber doesn ’ t . These
differences govern how each fiber works in the body and benefits your health . 
Soluble fibers draw in the water and form a gelatinized substance that decreases
digestion . Soluble fiber delays the emptying of your belly and will make you
sense full , which assists in weight control . Reduced stomach emptying might
also impact blood sugar values and has an advantageous impact on insulin
sensitivity , which helps control diabetes . Soluble fibers also help lower LDL 
(  ‘  ’ bad ”  ) blood lipids by interfering with the absorption of dietary cholesterol . 
Sources of soluble fiber : lentils , apples , beans , oranges , pears , oat bran , 
strawberries , flaxseeds , nuts , dried peas , cucumbers , blueberries , celery , 
carrots , oatmeal and oat cereal . 
Insoluble fibers are considered good for the gut because they have a laxative
result and add substance to the diet , helping avoid constipation . These fibers
do not break down in the water , so they move through the stomach relatively
intact , and accelerate passing of the food and waste through your gut . 
Insoluble fibers are mostly found in vegetables and whole grains . 
Sources of insoluble fiber : broccoli , dark leafy vegetables , celery , cabbage , 
carrots , brown rice , zucchini , onions , tomatoes , cucumbers , green beans , 
seeds , nuts , grapes , whole grains etc .  . 
Eating high-fiber , nutrient-dense veggie gives you a wealth of health-boosting
antioxidants and also helps you feel full longer . You also get the powerful
metabolism boosting effects of fiber loaded food itself . This diet is low in
calories and high in fiber and above all safe - unlike some high-protein diets . 
This diet will : 
• Promote Healthy and fast weight loss
• Eliminate Excess Fat • Detoxify Your Body • Rest Your System • Stop
Cravings • Break Sugar Habits • Increase Your Will Power • Boost Your
Self-Confidence • Regain Your Energy • Boost Your Immunity • Develop a
Positive Mental Attitude • Regain a Youthful Appearance & Skin • Create a
Positive Lifestyle Change • Promote Longevity • Promote Healthy Eating
Habits for your Kids ! 
Cancer preventing Superfoods
My aunt died in February 2011 , at the age of 60 of lung cancer . She was a chain
smoker . But she also had her uterus removed at the age of 40 due to a womb
cancer . Her eating habits were terrible ; she didn ’ t eat any veggies or fruits , only
meat , potatoes , baked foods and sweets . Lots of sweets . All her life . She was a
diabetic and it was in 2010 that I learned that cinnamon can lower blood sugar
level . She took a cup of yogurt with one tsp . of cinnamon once a day and that
helped her with her diabetes . Her lung ’ s capacity went down to 25% and less
and at the time of her death it was only 16% . She completely ruined her life with
bad habits . I ’ m dedicating this chapter to the memory of her and hope that
someone will get a wake-up call and change their eating habits and think how
taking antioxidant rich food can help in many ways . 
Any antioxidant rich food will protect you from getting cancer . Top antioxidant
foods are : 
• Beans ( Small Red Bean , Pinto , Red Kidney ) 
• Blueberry , Raspberry , Blackberry , Strawberry ( in that order ) 
• Artichoke
• Cranberry , Sweet cherry
• Prunes and plums
• Apples
• Pecan
Any vitamin E rich food will protect you from stomach , colon , lung , liver , and
other cancers . Add vitamin E–rich foods like almonds , cooked spinach and
sunflower seeds to your diet ; they ' ll help keep your cell-defense system strong . 
Beta-carotene is a powerful antioxidant . A diet high in beta-carotene ( meaning
orange colored food and leafy greens ) implies a reduced risk of cancer , 
particularly of the stomach , lung and colon . 
Low vitamin D levels have been linked to several types of cancer , including
breast and colon . Scientists say that vitamin D may help block the growth of
blood vessels that feed growing tumors and help stop the growth and spread of
cancerous and precancerous cells . Eat plenty of vitamin D–rich foods , such as
wild salmon , and choose vitamin D–fortified dairy products , yogurt for example . 
The only supplement I take is Vitamin D , all others vitamin and mineral needs
are provided by superfoods diet . There is just not enough vitamin D in food and
that is the only supplement I recommend . Some people want to boost their
antioxidants intake and therefore take some additional supplements ( Acai berry ) 
which is fine . 
Omega-3 fatty acids may prevent cancer by inhibiting cancer cell propagation
and disrupt steps that are critical to cancer growth . Omega-3 fatty acids also help
decrease inflammations and cellular mutations . But even if omega-3s don ' t
directly reduce the risk of cancer , they surely keep our bodies strong and
healthy . In addition to fatty fish , mixing ground flaxseed into yogurt and
smoothies ( or about just anything ) is a great way to include more omega-3s in
your diet . I always add flax meal to any stew I make , to cooked brown rice or
quinoa or buckwheat . 
Turmeric is a yellow colored spice found in curry powder . Curcumin , the active
ingredient in turmeric , functions as both as an antioxidant and antiinflammatory , and it may help prevent cancer . Curcumin helps prevent liver , 
breast , colon , stomach and lung cancer . Using curry powder to spice up dishes is
an easy way to include it into your diet — and it has the additional bonus of
adding flavor to your meals , almost without any calories . Black pepper enhances
the absorption of curcumin by 2000% , so always add some black pepper to
turmeric dishes . I love turmeric as a spice and I love curries . But I can ’ t eat curry
every day . So I settled for a turmeric supplement . 
Cruciferous vegetables All plant foods contain small amounts of
phytonutrients . They are natural chemical compounds that are just as significant
as vitamins and minerals are for maintaining health . There are thousands of
known phytonutrients ( and probably thousands of those unknown )  , lots of which
have demonstrated the potential to protect us against cancer . Cruciferous
vegetables like broccoli , cauliflower , and cabbage contain phytonutrients , which
may help inhibition of the metabolism of certain carcinogens and stimulate the
body ' s production of detoxification enzymes . 
Green Tea contains compounds that scientists say may help in stopping the
growth of cancer cells and stop cellular mutations that contribute to cancer
development . Green tea drinkers have also been shown to be at reduced risk for
ovarian , colon , breast , prostate , and lung cancers . All types of tea ( green , black , 
oolong , white ) seem to have value as cancer preventive agents , so regularly
drink tea and enjoy all the benefits ! 
Pomegranates are full of ellagic acid , also found in berries , nuts , and
pomegranates for ages . Ellagic acid hinders cancer cell growth and deactivate
carcinogenic compounds . 
As you can see , all this food is superfood and it is included in this diet . 
Cyanide-containing vitamin B 17 arrests , encloses , and even prevents cancer . A
lack of intestinal enzymes was the main pathogen for the onset of cancer . 
Vitamin B17 is a natural cyanide-containing composite that provides its cyanide
content only in the occurrence of a particular enzyme group called beta
glycosidase . This enzyme group is found almost exclusively in cancer tissue , and
that results in the cancer ' s failure to survive the cyanide . There are no recognized
harmful side effects of B17 ( if taken in small amounts , not more than 15 seeds
per day for adults )  , and the cyanide in B17 does not affect non-cancerous cells . 
Fruits are very high in B17 , some fruits are higher than others . The apricot seed
is the richest source of Vitamin B17 . Wild varieties are higher in nutrients than
hybridized varieties . For example , wild cranberries are much higher in B17 than
their hybrid counterparts . The list of foods containing B17 : 
• blackberry , choke cherry
• cranberry , currants
• apple seeds
• apricot seed ( I ’ m taking 8 seeds every day ) 
• buckwheat
• flax
• nectarine seed
• plum seed
• prune seed
• fava beans
• lentils
• almond
• spinach
Certain herbs and spices contain a wide variety of antioxidants . Some spices
such as cloves , turmeric , and cinnamon have 10 times more antioxidants
compared to berries . Besides the antioxidants , herbs and spices can also aid 
( with ) fat burning and metabolism boost , stabilization of blood sugar level and
they also have anti-bacterial , anti-viral , anti-fungal and anti-inflammatory
properties . 
• Turmeric , ginger , rosemary and basil are powerful anti-inflammatories . 
• Turmeric , cumin and sage help fight dementia . 
• Cumin , coriander , cayenne and cinnamon help to regulate insulin and blood
sugar . 
• Nutmeg , bay leaves and saffron have a calming effect . 
• Garlic , mustard seed , and chicory are excellent for the heart . 
• Basil and thyme help your skin become smoother . 
• Cinnamon , thyme , saffron , turmeric , garlic , basil ,  ( garlic ) and ginger boost the
immune system . 
• Allspice , coriander , rosemary , cayenne and black pepper can help banish
depression . 
Buckwheat
Buckwheat was the food I have tried using only once or two times in my life and
I did not like it , the flavor was too intense and unusual and the kitchen smelled
bad after cooking buckwheat . A colleague from Ukraine used it every day and it
looked completely different from the buckwheat I used . She consumed it as a
snack and as a principal starch in her lunch box . The Buckwheat I tried was
brown and had intense taste ; hers was pale and tasted awesome ; it had a very
simple nutty taste . So , she described that I used toasted buckwheat , also known
as kasha , and that she used all-natural raw buckwheat , which is was pale green . 
And she showed me an awesome way to cook it in the office setting . She
purchased a medium size thermos bottle ; she would add 4-5 tbsp . of raw
buckwheat in a thermos bottle , add boiling water into a thermos and she would
promptly shut the bottle . And that is it . After one and a half or two hours she
would have an awesome batch of cooked buckwheat . So , I have purchased
myself a thermos bottle as well and did exact same and since then my regular
office mid-morning delicious snack has been 1 cup of cooked Buckwheat - 155
calories . 
•Buckwheat is gluten free , it is high in protein and fiber and it is a good source
of magnesium and iron . 
•Buckwheat is rich in B vitamins as well as phosphorus , iron , magnesium , folate , 
copper , zinc and manganese . 
•Buckwheat is very high in protein ; the protein found in buckwheat consists of
the eight essential amino acids . 
•Buckwheat is very high in fiber . A single cup of cooked Buckwheat - 155
calories contains over 4 grams of dietary fiber . 
•Buckwheat is a great source of Alpha-Linolenic Acid , which is one of the two
essential fatty acid that is crucial for good health . 
•Buckwheat reduces glucose levels and is helpful for managing diabetes . 
•Buckwheat has been found to reduce blood pressure and reduce cholesterol . 
Glycemic Index and Satiety Index
Glycemic Index ( GI ) is a rating carried out on carbohydrate containing foods and
their particular influence on our blood sugar level . Earlier , most diets supposed
to improve blood sugar assessed the total amount of carbs ( such as sugars and
starches ) in the foods . GI goes outside of this strategy , looking at the impact of
foods on our blood sugar . Rather counting the total quantity of carbohydrates in
foods in their unconsumed condition , GI measures the real influence of these
foods on the blood sugar . Low-GI diets have been connected with reduced risk
of stroke , cardiovascular disease , depression , type 2 diabetes , neural tube
defects , chronic kidney disease , metabolic syndrome , formation of gall stones , 
formation of uterine fibroids , and prostate , colon , breast and pancreas cancer . 
Fruits and veggies tend to have a lower glycemic index . Meat , nuts and seeds , 
dairy products , beans and spices have all low GI . Grains suggested in
Superfoods diet ( brown rice , buckwheat , quinoa , oats ) have low GI . 
Low GI - 55 or less : 
• small seeds ( flax , pumpkin , sunflower , poppy , sesame ) 
• beans and nuts ( kidney , black , white , pink , almond , peanut , lentil , walnut , 
chickpea ) 
• most whole intact grains ( oat , millet , rye , rice ) 
• most veggies
• most sweet fruits ( mangos , strawberries , peaches ) 
Medium GI 56–69 : 
• not intact whole wheat or enriched wheat • basmati rice
• pita bread
• grape juice
• raisins
• unpeeled boiled potato • prunes
• cranberry juice
• pumpernickel bread
• regular ice cream
• banana
• sucrose
High GI 70 and above : • white bread
• most white rice
• extruded breakfast cereals • glucose
• corn flakes
• maltose
• potato
• pretzels
• maltodextrins
• bagels
Satiety Index
Australian scientist Dr . Susanna Holt has examined how long particular foods
can keep your cravings off and the results demonstrated what I had already
encountered ; that bakeshop goods ARE addictive . White bread was rated at 100
and even worse than white bread were bakeshop products like croissants ( 47 )  , 
donuts ( 68 ) and cakes ( 65 )  . This is an additional proof that wheat is addictive
and that consuming bakeshop products will make you desire for more . Foods
that have low satiety index than white bread were are chocolate bars and snacks , 
all refined foods . Foods that have the best satiety index were oatmeal , eggs , 
meats , boiled potatoes , fish , fruits and veggies . 
Thermogenic Superfoods
Thermogenic superfoods are food that require additional calories to be broken
down , leading to the raised metabolism and more calories being used . 
Thermogenic foods are also very high in fiber , which causes a person to become
fuller faster . Simply because of the low calorie content and high fiber , 
thermogenic foods assist in weight loss . Basically , Superfoods diet is relying on
lots of foods that demand more calories to be digested than the exact caloric
value of the food , thus burning up stored fat from one ’ s body . Body needs
energy for body heat and energy to breakdown the food you eat . Food that we
eat uses body organs such as muscles , digestive juices , intestines , liver , blood
cells , pancreas , etc . A 360 calorie piece of birthday cake may require 90 calories
to be broken down resulting in a net gain of 270 calories to be incorporated into
your fat storage . On the other hand , a 28 calorie katabolic food may call for 95
calories to breakdown , resulting in a net loss of 67 calories off your stored fat
deposit . Diets based on katabolic nutrients result in impressive weight losses of
the real fat from the body . 
Plant foods that burn more calories than they contain are : 
• Celery
• Strawberries
• Oranges
• Tangerines
• Carrots
• Apricots
• Grapefruit
• Lettuce
• Cucumbers
• Tomatoes
• Watermelon
• Cauliflower
• Hot Chili Peppers • Apples
• Zucchini
As you can see , all this particular foods are on the Superfoods main list and all
of this foods have plenty of fiber . Many green veggies are thermogenic foods , 
particularly the ones that include the great percentage of water and fiber . 
Broccoli , cabbage and Brussels sprouts are green veggies that are common
thermogenic foods . Celery is also a great additional example of thermogenic
food mainly because it is primarily made of water and fiber . The body requires
more energy to digest these foods than the quantity of energy they provide . 
Green tea has two significant chemicals - polyphenols called the catechins and
caffeine . Both these chemical substances are known to promote thermogenesis . 
Apart from these two chemicals , green tea is also high in catechin known as
epigallocatechingallate , a compound that enhances the process of thermogenesis . 
The gymnemic acid and cannatic extracts in green tea decrease the assimilation
of sugar into your blood . Green tea also suppress your body ' s ability to digest
carbs . As you likely know , sugar and high glycemic index carbs are two of the
main factors of weight gain . 
Coconut oil is as well one of thermogenic food . Medium-chain triglycerides 
( MCT ) found in coconut oil hold off the buildup of fat in the body . Coconut oil
therefore promotes thermogenesis . A British study has discover that adding chili
and MCT ( coconut oil ) to meals boost thermogenesis by over 50 percent that
with time may cumulate to help promote weight loss and restrict weight gain . 
Eating ginger has anti-hypertensive , glucose-sensitizing , anti-inflammatory and
stimulatory effects on the gastrointestinal tract . 
Cinnamon is a thermogenic spice that assists and influence blood sugar levels . 
Suggested daily consumption of 1 g of cinnamon in individuals with type 2
diabetes has been discovered to reduce blood sugar , LDL “ bad ” cholesterol , 
triglycerides and total cholesterol levels . 
A protein-rich diet is recognized as enhancer of thermogenic process ( unlike
high-fat or high carbohydrate diets )  . As an example , study shows that there is a 6
to 8 percent boost in energy expenditure with carb meals , 3 percent boost with
fat , and a tremendous 25 to 40 percent with protein based meals . Lean proteins
are an awesome example of thermogenic foods . Lean proteins are located in
foods such as chicken breast , turkey , buffalo , lean red meat like sirloin or top
round , bison and other game meats . A really good source of lean proteins comes
from seafood like shellfish and almost every different kind of fish . Some
researchers found that people whose diets consisted of more protein not only
increased thermogenesis ( ie . their metabolism )  , but also enhanced their satiety
and assisted in the maintenance of an all-around leaner body mass . Simply said , 
it takes a lot of body energy to digest lean proteins . 
Celery is one of the greatest thermogenic foods . First of all , it is really low in
calories which is why it is a really popular food for those on a diet . It also helps
burn off more calories simply because of its thermogenic effect . Celery has a
really mild taste that makes it simple to include in any meals . You can also dip it
in low-fat yogurt or low-fat farmers ’ cheese toned down with some yogurt for a
delicious snack . 
Perhaps the most recognized thermogenic foods are spices such as chili pepper
or cayenne pepper ( Capsicum annuum )  . In fact , such spices can boost your
metabolic rate by 25% because they contain capsaicin , chemical compound that
speeds up the metabolism and dilates the blood vessels . So , if you frequently eat
spicy hot dishes , then you are definitely helping your weight loss . If you can ’ t
stand hot food but you want the capsaicin benefits , you can use capsaicin
supplement . 
Hot foods are not the only thermogenic foods . Consuming ice water can also
possess a thermogenic effect on the body . This is mainly because your body has
to work harder in order to deal with the cold temperature . Nevertheless , make
sure that you don ' t consume ice cold water with your meals as it can disturb your
digestion . 
Probiotic Superfoods
There has been recently a lot of fascination with probiotic foods , thanks to
studies signifying that friendly bacteria might help to deal with or prevent an
array of problems : from irritable bowel syndrome to stomach upset and diarrhea
to constant inflammation — the underlying cause of heart disease , diabetes and
cancer . Sauerkraut keeps fresh for months and delivers outstanding health
benefits in the form of probiotics and nutrients that the cabbage in its natural
form doesn ' t have . 
Every research carried out on overweight people focused on gut bacteria , 
discovered higher instances of " bad " bacteria and reduced levels of probiotics
amongst these people . Keeping the preferred ratio of " good bacteria " to " bad
bacteria " is now getting appreciation as perhaps the most important step you can
take to defend your health and fat loss goals . 
These are the signs that your digestive bacterial harmony is beginning to go out
of control : 
• Gas and bloating
• Acid reflux
• A failure to lose weight
• Skin problems
• Overall sickness
• Headaches
• Constipation and / or diarrhea
• Urinary tract infections
• Sugar cravings , particularly for heavily refined carbohydrates
• Trouble sleeping
Perfect healthy ratio of " good " to " bad " bacteria is 85% to 15% , or 9 to 1 . How
can you re-balance your intestine bacteria ratio and begin experiencing weight
loss advantages for yourself ? You need to eat more probiotic food and reduce
your sugar , artificial sweeteners , antacids , processed food , laxatives and
antibiotic consumption . Superfoods proposed are yogurt , any fermented
vegetables ( cabbage , cucumbers )  , kefir and kimchee . Now , make sure that you
know the distinction between pickled and naturally fermented . 
Pickled means that the vegetables are preserved in various acidic liquids , 
commonly vinegar . But these vegetables are NOT fermented and do not provide
the probiotic and enzymatic benefits of naturally fermented vegetables . Simple
home recipe for fermented vegetables includes salt and water and process of
fermentation produces its own acidic liquid as a by-product . So , naturally
fermented vegetables are both fermented and pickled . 
Lactobacilli discovered in all vegetables are triggering fermentation and lactic
acid is the one that pickles and preserves the vegetables . It also boosts health : 
• Improves the vitamin content of the food . 
• Heightens nutrient bio-availability in the body . 
• Preserves and at times boost the enzyme content of the food . 
• Heightens the digestibility of the food and even cooked foods that are eaten
along with it ! 
Manufacturing preservation of veggies is done by high temperature and pressure
and that damages nutrients . Make sure that you meticulously check whether the
store purchased pickled veggies are factory pickled or naturally fermented . You
will most likely find some naturally fermented food in health food shops . Check
the description in any case and if it includes vinegar , it ' s most likely fake , since
vinegar is used in mass manufacturing . You can with ease make your own at
home ; it ' s quick , easy and inexpensive . 
Fermented foods are high in “ good ” probiotic bacteria , and their intake will help
stabilize your total gut bacteria ratio . The next step is to eliminate pretty much
all sugar in your diet . Consuming sugar laden foods in fact feeds the bad or
pathogenic bacteria , yeast and fungi in your intestine , which can in fact have
more of a damaging influence on your health than sugars influence on blood
sugar and insulin resistance . What ’ s more , artificial sweeteners are worse than
ordinary sugar because they have chlorine that kills off the good bacteria in your
intestine just like chlorine kills microorganisms in swimming pools . 
Sauerkraut and Kim Chee are age-old Superfoods that are starting to make a
comeback mainly because of their unique taste and advantages of ' good bacteria '  . 
Fresh cabbage is full of bacteria needed to lacto ferment itself . Sauerkraut
fermentation procedure is accomplished with lactic acid bacteria handling
cabbage sugar in a process comparable to how yogurt is made . Just like yogurt , 
the fermentation process makes cabbage much healthier and more digestible than
the plant is in its primary form . In addition to producing a naturally occurring
probiotic supplement , fermentation adds other nurturing benefits as well . 
Cabbage in its raw form includes materials called ' goitrogens ' that can block the
production of thyroid hormone , but goitrogens are decreased or eliminated
through the fermentation process . This is very significant for people who suffer
from low thyroid . Those people should eat additional sauerkraut or cooked
cabbage rather than raw cabbage . I ’ m one of those folks and I try to have raw
cabbage incorporated in my salad only 2-3 times a week . Sauerkraut is in fact
higher in B vitamins than cabbage , especially in vitamin B12 , and that makes
sauerkraut an ideal food for vegans . Just as kimchi , sauerkraut is high in vitamin
C and intestinal enzymes . It is also a great source of all-natural lactic acid
bacteria such as pediococcus and lactobacillus . 
If you ’ re purchasing sauerkraut in a container , make sure that it says ' Raw ' or 
 ' Unpasteurized ' in order to make certain that it ' s a ' living ' food with worthwhile
bacteria . Even better , homemade sauerkraut is an uncomplicated and
inexpensive way to get an excellent natural probiotic ' supplement ' that won ' t call
for taking any pills , powders or potions . 
One of the very best probiotic foods is live-cultured yogurt , particularly
homemade . Search for Greek low-fat yogurt or check goat ’ s milk yogurt that has
been blended with probiotics like lactobacillus or acidophilus . Goats ’ milk and
cheese are especially high in probiotics like bifudus , bulgaricus , thermophillus
and acidophilus . Double-check the ingredients list , as not all yogurt is made
equally . Some prominent brands are filled with high fructose corn syrup , 
artificial colors and artificial sweeteners , so they are basically sweet , unhealthy
ice cream . Choose Greek or plain low-fat as an alternative . If however , you don ’ t
like the taste of probiotic foods , you can use supplement . 
The Health Benefits of Probiotics : 
• Calms colon discomfort following surgical procedure
• Boosted immune system response
• Relieves negative effects of consuming many types of antibiotics
• Helps to support healthful skin in youth
• Boost ability to absorb the nutrients from food
• Enhanced ability to digest food
• Acts as a treatment for bad breath ( halitosis ) 
• Decreases lactose intolerance
• Decreases incidence of vaginitis , candidiasis and yeast infections
• Therapeutic for upper respiratory problems
• Relieves many common digestive disorders such as constipation , diarrhea and
IBS
• Improves ability to absorb calcium
• Improves ability to synthesize vitamin B
Bitter Foods
As I have previously said , my taste changed considerably when I quit eating
refined food . It took me perhaps 10-15 days to observe the change . My sugar
urges ended almost entirely . And I learned to enjoy the bitter taste in coffee , 
wines , cocoa , and dark green leafy vegetables . So , my coffee consuming habits
transformed from double cream and double sugar to double cream with stevia
throughout my Atkins period and after I began superfoods diet , it transformed to
pure black . My chocolate taste transformed from milk chocolate to dark
chocolate and subsequently to extra dark ( 85% cocoa becoming the favored
one )  . Also , chocolate intake went from 8-12 squares of milk chocolate to 1 or 2
squares of dark chocolate . My wine consuming habit modified from Merlot to
Cabernet Sauvignon , which kind of I could not stand previously because of
intense tannins . Now Merlot tastes dull to me . My cocoa consuming habits
altered from cacao with milk and sugar to cacao with only a dash of milk and
subsequently to pure cacao . I believed that this would be the really last thing that
I might have to either sweeten only a little bit or to use only a little bit of cream
or milk to take the very top off the bitterness . But today , I take pleasure in pure
cacao with hot water . 
The exact same story is with bitter greens . I did not like them a lot before and I
have constantly seasoned them in order to play-down the bitterness . Bitter greens
possess phytonutrients that assist the liver as it does its job handling cholesterol , 
detoxifying the blood and balancing hormones . Bitter greens are awesome
sources of the vitamins A , C , and K and minerals potassium , calcium , and
magnesium . They are also very high in foliate and fiber and low in sodium and
fat . 
The bitter taste : 
• is anti-toxic . It is antibacterial and antiviral so it assists with detox of the body
• detoxifies your liver • kills germs
• assists with skin disorders • increases the firmness of the skin and muscles
• decrease fever
• assists digestion and minimizes intestinal gas . 
List of bitter foods : • burdock root
• Jerusalem artichoke : rich in inulin ( prebiotic )  , which is a starchy food that is
handled by the body in a different way than sugars . It is also high in magnesium , 
iron , potassium and B vitamins . 
• bitter melon
• dandelion greens , • arugula
• Kale - has vitamins , anti-inflammatory properties , antioxidants and calcium . 
• sesame seeds
• eggplant
• castor oil
• cocoa and dark chocolate • dill
• sesame oil
• cumin
• neem leaves
• saffron
• fenugreek
• Coffee
• turmeric helps detoxify the blood , replenish damaged liver cells , and fight
stomach upset and inflammation . 
• Garden Sage ( Salvia officinalis ) tea addresses disorders of the respiratory tract , 
gastrointestinal tract , dental abscesses , skin , mouth , throat infections , infected
gums and mouth ulcers . It includes thiamin , folic acid , pyridoxine and
riboflavin . 
Prebiotic Superfoods
Once I first read about prebiotics , I figured , what the hell that is , if that a typo , 
instead of probiotics . But later on , Wikipedia offered me some insight .  
 “ Prebiotics are non-digestible food substances that encourage the development
and / or activity of micro-organisms in the intestinal system in ways reported to be
useful to health .  ” Prebiotics , just like probiotics , are a thing between foods and
drugs . The established definition by Dr . Roberfroid is :  
 “ A prebiotic is a selectively fermented substance that enables specific changes , 
both in the structure and / or activity in the intestinal micro flora that confers
advantages upon host well-being and overall health .  ” 
As you can see , it ’ s really directly associated to probiotic food . Resources of
prebiotics include beans , garlic , raw oats , raw dandelion leaves , leeks , inulin
sources ( like jicama , Jerusalem artichoke and chicory root ) and onions . 
Essentially , if you eat day-to-day raw leeks , raw onions or raw garlic and you
include onions to anything you cook , you ’ re acquiring enough prebiotic
definitely . Studies have confirmed evident effects on calcium and other mineral
assimilation , immune system effectiveness , bowel pH , reducing of colon cancer
risk , hypertension , inflammatory bowel problems and intestinal constipation . 
Prebiotic also reduce the risk of colon cancer . So , add raw onions or raw leeks to
all of your salads , cook with onion and you are all set . 
Many people know that the red wine is great simply because it contains
antioxidants and resveratrol . But studies showed that individuals who drank 2
glasses of dry red wine per day had high levels of effective bacteria in their gut
and low levels of bad bacteria in the gut . The research concluded that while the
red wine intake reduced bad bacteria in the gut , it in fact had a prebiotic effect in
the gut in that it reinforced the development of colonies of healthy gut microbes
which defend your health . 
How Antioxidants slow aging
Each part of your body ages . From your bone tissues to your skin and your brain , 
what we eat determines how we will really feel , whether or not we will be
healthy and how long we will live . 
We all understand about the hazard of free radicals and how antioxidants
eliminate them . Antioxidants , vitamins and minerals that decrease aging are
coenzyme Q10 , alpha-lipoic acid , carnitine , vitamins A , C , D , E , K , essential
fatty acids , lutein , many of the B vitamin complexes , magnesium , phosphorous , 
zinc , potassium , taurine , iron and selenium . 
Keep in mind , you won ' t get 3 times additional advantages if you take 300% of
recommended daily consumption of any vitamin , antioxidant or mineral . Don ' t
purchase manufactured food that has been marked as " rich in antioxidant " and
don ' t believe that relying on supplements is the very best way to go . Buy local
natural and organic whole foods superfoods . Eat as lots of different fruits and
vegetables , nuts and animal healthy proteins every day . Rotate your antioxidants , 
don ’ t stick to the same fruits , veggies and spices . Increasing the intake of one
antioxidant won ' t substitute the other one . If you absorb 200% of daily suggested
vitamin C intake , that won ' t substitute for vitamin B12 or vitamin E for that
particular day . So , antioxidants ought to come from an eating habits and not
from a tablet . Antioxidants in a tablet are isolated synthetic materials , but fruits
and vegetables have phyto-chemicals that are not even found out and titled and
you can enjoy them now . Whole food consists of a bunch of ingredients that
function in synergy and are far more efficient than supplement that just provide
one of them . 
Let me tell you one thing I read some time ago about telomeres . After 2009
Nobel Prize was awarded to Elizabeth H . Blackburn , Jack W . Szostak and Carol
W . Greider for the finding of how chromosomes are shielded by telomeres and
the enzyme telomerase , there are tons of writings about telomeres on the
internet . Alexey Olovnikov identified telomeres in 1973 . He discovered that the
very small units of DNA ( telomeres ) at the end of every chromosome decrease
in time mainly because they can ’ t reproduce completely each time the cell
separates . So , as you get more mature , your telomeres get reduced . Eventually , 
DNA reproduction and cell partition stops entirely , at which point you pass
away . But , some scholars are revealing that certain nutrients carry out a
considerable role in guarding telomere length . That indicates that we can
manipulate telomeres length . Vitamins B9 and B12 can impact telomere length , 
as well as iron , vitamin D3 , omega-3 fatty acids , zinc , and vitamins C and E . 
Telomere decreasing has been connected to the type 2 diabetes , DNA harm , 
lowered immunity , atherosclerosis and neurodegenerative illnesses . 
Antioxidants impact aging in different ways , e . g .  : 
• Coenzyme Q10 - early aging is primary side effect of having too small
Coenzyme Q10 because this crucial vitamin reprocesses different antioxidants , 
such as vitamin C and E . Coenzyme Q10 deficit also speeds up DNA damage , 
and because Coenzyme Q10 is beneficial to heart well-being and muscles this
reduction brings muscle fragility , soreness , fatigue and heart problems . 
Coenzyme Q10 essentially had a strong anti-aging impact , in the sense that you
can maintain youthfulness up until the very end of life . Coenzyme Q10 ample
foods are beef and beef organ meats , sardine , pistachios , sesame seeds , 
mackerel , cuttlefish , tuna , herring , yellow tail , pollock , chicken and adzuki
beans , and besides them , there are Coenzyme Q10 supplements and Q10 antiaging creams . 
• Vitamin D - People with elevated vitamin D amounts were found to have much
less aging associated variations in their DNA , as well as decreased inflammatory
issues . 
• Astaxanthin offers anti-inflammatory and DNA-protective abilities and helps
reduce inflammation . Astaxanthin has been discovered in microalgae
Haematococcus pluvialis . Astaxanthin is 65 times much more efficient than
vitamin C , 54 times more effective than beta-carotene , and 14 times more
powerful than vitamin E . 
• Probiotics - well , let ' s first describe the main reason of bad gut flora in
overweight people - > High fructose corn syrup . HFCS is main element in nearly
all refined foods , from snacks , frozen meals , to dressings to soft drink . It causes
genetic variations and failures that can cause illness in future generations . 
Refined , sugar-and chemical-laden foods actually destroy your digestive
microflora . Your gut flora handles your immune system ( your body ' s all-natural
protection system )  . Artificial sweeteners , antibiotics , stress and some other
issues can also reduce the amount of probiotics ( useful bacteria ) in your
intestine , which can encourage disease and early aging . You can choose
probiotic supplements , but much much healthier is to include fermented food
into your diet regime , e . g . sauerkraut , kefir and plain yogurt . Yogurt is great
source of iodine and zinc . If however , you don ’ t like the taste of probiotic foods , 
you can use supplement . 
• Vitamin B9 and B12 - B9 has a significant role in the upkeep of DNA integrity
and DNA methylation , both of which affect the size of your telomeres . B9 can
be found in leafy green veggies and beans . B12 is found in salmon , beef liver , 
lamb , snapper , beef , scallops , venison , shrimp , eggs and poultry . If you don ’ t
like the B12 rich foods or you are vegan , you can use supplement . 
• Vitamin K2 - K2 is found in chicken breast , cheese , eggs and ground beef . 
People who take 45 mcg of K2 daily live seven years further than people
obtaining 12 mcg per day . If you don ’ t like the K2 rich foods , you can use
supplement . 
• Omega-3 - individuals who have an omega-3 index of lower than four per cent
age a lot faster than individuals with indexes over eight percent . Omega-3 index
is an awesome new way to examine your health . Force your Omega-3 index over
8 percent if you wish to postpone aging . Omega-3 index under 4 percent sets you
at elevated danger for heart attack . Omega-3 fat acids can in fact invert telomere
reducing . If the rate of omega-6 / omega-3 is greater than 10 , your body is in a
condition of inflammation . Type of quiet inflammation ( arthritis or other
diseases )  . In order to much better shield yourself from cancer , you ought to
ideally take this ratio beneath 3 . When you ' ve got active cancer , you need bring
the rate to under 1 – in different words , your objective should be to have a lot
more omega 3s than omega-6s in your body . Krill Oil is recommended Omega-3
supplement mainly because its assimilation rate is much greater than fish oil . 
• Magnesium - Magnesium has a significant role in DNA reproduction , repair , 
and RNA activity , and it ’ s been disclosed that magnesium favorably relate with
increased telomere length in women . 
• Polyphenols are intense antioxidants related to anti-aging advantages and
disease decrease . Resveratrol is discovered in grapes and red wine and cacao and
green tea possess lots of polyphenols . 
• Vitamin A - Telomere extent is related with dietary consumption of vitamin A . 
Vitamin A has a significant role in your immune system . 
• Turmeric - Turmeric is immune enhancement and acts anti-inflammatory . But
it ' s mainly known for anti-cancer capabilities . 
• Exercise decrease telomere decrease . 
And in the end , you ' re most likely questioning which foods should be
eliminated ? Well , the answer is the exact same as always , processed and refined
food and sugar . Recognize that overwhelming sugar consumption brings to
insulin resistance , and insulin resistance tends to be the origin of numerous if not
the majority chronic disease . So far , scientific researchers have connected
extreme sugar intake to about 78 various diseases and health issues , such as heart
disease and cancer . 
Weight loss related Hormones – Leptin , Ghrelin , 
Cortisol , Insulin and some others
Weight loss is managed with hormones leptin and ghrelin , but cortisol and
insulin also carry out important role . The ghrelin hormone is the " cravings
hormone " and leptin is the " hunger hormone " or " satiety hormone "  . Plenty of
leptin speeds up the metabolism , reduced level decreases it . Ghrelin amounts go
up considerably before you eat ; it indicates the hunger and it ’ s important to
know that ghrelin is released by stomach tissue . Ghrelin then moves down for
around two-three hours following a meal . Research reveals that reducing levels
of ghrelin results in reduced body fat . The ghrelin hormone encourages the brain
to boost appetite , but also encourages the buildup of fat found in the abdominal
region . Ghrelin levels raise after dieting because body wants to go back to higher
set point . That is one of the causes why fad diets are unsuccessful and why those
on a fad diet yo-yo their weight . Body wants all that processed foods that it was
missing during the diet , ghrelin is high all the time and people go back to eating
processed foods and guess what : they put all the weight back . They didn ’ t reset
their set point to a lower value , adjusted to a new weight , they didn ’ t fix their
hormones with Superfoods and after a fad diet they ’ re back to square 1 . 
Leptin is your food cravings suppressor – the hormone that indicates to your
body that you ’ ve had sufficient to eat and is a key player in perfecting weight
loss . Numerous foods can either block or boost leptin . Leptin signals your brain
that you have adequate energy stored in your fat tissue to take part in regular
metabolic processes . Leptin is released by fat cells and brain should recognize
that body has enough fat and that should mean that body has enough energy
stored . But guess what ? Processed food disrupts receiving part of your brain and
brain doesn ’ t recognize leptin signals . The fatter you are , the more leptin is
secreted and it looks like that this is perfect self-regulating mechanism because
brain should recognize that body has more than enough energy stored as fat . And
it is perfect self-regulating mechanism , but only in lean people and people that
don ’ t eat processed foods . Their hormonal signals are fully recognized by the
brain and everything works fine . But for overweight people , these leptin signals
are not properly recognized and brain thinks “ Hey , these leptin signals are pretty
weak , body is starving , let ’ s store more fat ”  . This leptin insensitivity is also
called leptin resistance and it ’ s primarily caused by inflammations , which are
again caused by processed foods . Genetics , environmental factors , stress and
lack of sleep are also influencing leptin resistance to a degree . 
When men and women diet , they eat a bit less and their fat cells eliminate some
fat , which then reduces the amount of leptin created . And then the brain detects
starvation . Yo-Yo weight cycling results in lower leptin . Anytime you are on a
fad diet that limits calories that diet decreases leptin , increases ghrelin and
enhances appetite . This seems like a hormonal snowball effect that hinders
weight loss , isn ’ t it ? That is why it is crucial to have the right , wholesome foods
superfoods diet already as a component of your life as soon as you have done
with weight loss period . Because superfoods diet reduces calories , but keeps a
belly full with proteins and fibers and that enhance satiety , reduces the hunger 
( reduces ghrelin ) and fixes your appetite . Consuming 5 meals a day also controls
ghrelin production . 
Evolution makes it hard for women to lose fat , simply because their body is
preprogrammed to accumulate fat and energy for babies . 
There are no leptin abundant foods because our intestinal tracts cannot process
it . But we can enhance our sensitivity to it . Some foods can help enhance the
sensitivity , and that indicates that our metabolism can go upward , cravings can
go downward , and our battle can be aided along . Eat protein for breakfast . Eat
dark leafy dietary fiber rich vegetables . Eat fish . All such foods increase
sensitiveness to anything , leptin included . Exercising also improves leptin
sensitiveness . 
Swedish experts have found that thylakoids found in spinach and some other
leafy greens work as a normal appetite suppressant that controls food intake , 
inhibits weight gain and encourages weight loss . Thylakoids postpone digestion
because they attach to fats and decrease hydrolysis of the fats . They also
stimulate the release of cholecystokinin , and that is the primary signal for satiety . 
Thylakoids also elevate leptin amount for up to six hours after consuming a meal
and decrease ghrelin ( measured 2 hours after a meal ) and insulin . 
Foods that reduce leptin sensitivity are , you have suspected it , refined foods . All
of them . Carbs are particularly terrible . Excessive carbohydrates are not only
awful about stopping the leptin signals ; they are also what we get a hold of when
we are truly craving something . The more carbohydrates we consume , the more
you desire them . 
A couple of words about the last portion of persistent fat that won ’ t go off even
when we have achieved our ideal weight . Immediately after you eat , insulin and
fatty acids are elevated . You are in the fed condition and there is no fat
consumption going on . Your body relies entirely on glucose oxidation during the
hours following a meal . 
As the hours go by and the nutrients coming from a meal are utilized there is a
move to fat burning and usage of stored fat . This process is mediated by insulin
and blood borne fat acids . Superfoods meal plans split meals with carbohydrates
for 5-6 hours . That keeps insulin down most of the days . Because insulin closes
down fat burning , if you separate carbohydrate meals , that action will bring more
fat burning time . 
As long as insulin is present in your system , your body will not burn fat . If you
think to lose fat , do not eat carbohydrates 3 hours before workout and don ' t eat
carbohydrates within 2 hours after workout . That time will be utilized for fat
burning . The more insulin you have in the system during workouts , the less fat
you ' ll burn . Insulin transports calories into tissues , sugar into fatty cells and
muscles and closes down fat cells from delivering energy for a period of time . 
There are two releases of insulin usually . First one once the carbohydrates enter
the blood , and that peaks 30 mins after a meal . Then in following 3 . 5 hours
insulin gradually drops in the blood . Glucagon ( which is hormone complete
opposite of insulin ) starts trickling and increasing . It ' s opposite of insulin , and
it ' s accountable for fat to drip out of the fatty cells and be utilized as energy and
it draws sugar out of the muscles for energy . Glucagon shot ( injection ) is
provided to diabetics when they feel sugar drop or faint . 
Glucagon and insulin can ' t be increased at the same time . Too numerous meals
with carbohydrates will keep insulin level increased and there is no opportunity
for glucagon to do its fat loss miracle . 
So , again , divide meals with carbohydrates for 5-6 hours , so glucagon can do the
trick . I ’ m talking about starchy carbohydrates like oatmeal , brown rice , sweet
potato and such . Carbohydrates from other vegetables are not impacting insulin
levels , feel free to eat cooked meats with fiber packed salads . 
When fat acids in blood levels decrease , an energy shortfall is " sensed " and
adrenaline and noradrenaline raise . 
Adrenaline and noradrenaline move through blood and hook up to receptors on
fat cells . A receptor can be thought of as a " lock .  " Hormones and
neurotransmitters are „keys “ that are appropriate for that lock and make things
happen . Ordinary fat contains a bunch of beta-2 receptors in proportion to alpha2 receptors . B2-receptors are " accelerators " for fat reduction and a2-receptors are 
 " breaks " for fat reduction . 
The ratio between b2-receptors and a2-receptors controls how easy it is to allowfat loss from one region of the body .  " Easy " fat has a very good ratio of b2-
receptors to a2-receptors , whilst difficult fat has a higher ratio of a2-receptors to
b2-receptors . Easy fat is on our limbs and difficult fat is belly and love handles
in both the men and women and thighs solely in women . Woman can have up to
5-8 times more a-2 receptors in her hip and thigh fat . Stimulation of the a1 and
b-receptors is lipolytic ( causes fat elimination ) while activation of the a2
receptor is anti-lipolytic ( blunts fat elimination )  . Persistent fat areas have a high
concentration of a2 receptors , making it harder for fat meltdown to occur in that
area . Stress and sleep also impact your ability to lose persistent fat . So , make
sure that you get adequate sleep and reduce your stress level as much as you can . 
Also , eat frequently , 3 meals and 2 snacks per day . Missing meals boost stress . 
Here is where cortisol will come into the game . 
Cortisol is the stress hormone . It ’ s a crucial hormone that is essential for human
survival . Every time your body encounters any stress , your body produces
cortisol , which then initiate a cascade of other physiological responses necessary
for your body to carry on functioning . 
You can look at it like a crisis generator . Cortisol turns “ off ” many of the
regular physiological systems and turns “ on ” many short-term physiological
systems . 
In a regular situation , cortisol release only lasts for a brief burst of time and
following that all metabolic functions go back to normal . But this is exactly
where things can go wrong , simply because in lots of instances these stresses
that trigger your body to emit cortisol take place too often and stay “ on ” for too
long . 
When your body encounters constant stress , it continuously secretes cortisol and
that ’ s when cortisol becomes into a damaging to your body . And dependent on
how long and the amount of cortisol you have in your body , it can really damage
your health and change your metabolic process leading to you to gain persistent
belly fat ! Superfoods Diet stabilizes cortisol production . When your stress and
cortisol levels are elevated , the body basically resists weight loss . Your body
reasons : days are tough and you may starve , so it holds the fat you eat or have
current on / in your body . Cortisol has a practice to take fat from healthier
locations , like your limbs and hips , and relocate it to your abdomen area which
has additional cortisol receptors . 
But as a summary , remember this fact : certain belly fat is natural . Its main
function is actually to guard vital inner organs . To drop all your belly fat is to
oppose nature . This is why it is so hard to achieve . I have decided to lose weight
and not stress personally about few pounds of the belly fat . 
Inflammation – story about Omega 3 and Omega 6
Inflammations are the huge problem in today ’ s American society . Most of them
are induced by refined foods . Inflammation leads to achy joint parts , early aging
of the skin and inner organs . They make it difficult to lose fat . They make you
depressive and moody . Omega 6 is the primary cause of inflammation and in the
perfect world , proportion to Omega - 3 should be 1 : 1 . Contemporary Western
diets typically have proportions of omega-6 to omega-3 in excess of 10 to 1 , 
some as elevated as 30 to 1 . Japanese diet is the only diet that has the ratio of
4 : 1 . 
Excess omega-6 fatty acids from vegetable oils interfere with the health benefits
of omega-3 fats , in part simply because they compete for the same rate-limiting
digestive enzymes . A high balance of omega-6 to omega-3 fats in the diet acts
pro-thrombotic , pro-constrictive and pro-inflammatory . Chronic excessive
production of omega-6 eicosanoids is correlated with arthritis , cancer and
inflammation . Omega-3 fatty acids are anti-inflammatories and Omega 6 fatty
acids are pro-inflammatory . More than half of Americans suffer from one kind
of chronic illness or another . 
Don ' t buy products that offer you Omega-3 / Omega-6 / Omega-9 combination . 
You need more Omega-3 and Omega-9 and not so much Omega-6 because
you ' re obtaining enough of Omega-6 from your diet anyway . Organic feed farm
animals have way lower amount Omega-6 then farmed animals . It ' s straight
forward , when the diet of the animals are changed , their meat is changed as well . 
Omega-6 is not a wrong fat , we need it , and it ’ s just bad if you have a great deal
of it and not enough Omega-3 at the same time . 
A person can think of Omega-3 as a thinning agent in the blood and Omega-6 as
the thickening agent . Fish high in Omega-3 gets Omega-3 from algae . Omega-3
is also located in green leaves . Think of Omega-3 as " spring season fat "  , found
in leafy vegetables . It thins our bloodstream , so we can move faster and be more
agile . Than imagine Omega-6 as " fall fats "  , the ones that are eaten by animals
preparing for the winter . As you can picture , Omega-6 is found in corn , nuts , soy
and seeds . All of them are ready for usage in autumn , just before winter . Think
of Omega-6 as fat storage space for animals . And THAT is what American
people eat the whole year . LOADS of high processed corn syrup and soy oils . 
Everywhere . Whole year . If you draw a diagram of refined wheat , corn and soy
intake increase in the western society and if you draw a diagram of grown
obesity , you will see the connection . 
How to change your diet so you eat perfectly balanced Omega-6 to Omega-3
ratio ? Try consuming more Omega-3 ( avocado , flax , salmon , chia seeds , raw
nuts ) or take Omega-3 supplements and avoid vegetable oils full with Omega-6 . 
High Omega-6 intakes are associated with a rise of all inflammatory diseases : 
• atherosclerosis • cardiovascular disease • type 2 diabetes • rheumatoid arthritis
• obesity
• metabolic syndrome • irritable bowel syndrome • cancer
• macular degeneration • asthma
• psychiatric disorders • autoimmune diseases Some pro-inflammatory foods
found in the Western diet are : 
• Trans fat
• Processed oils
• Sugar
• Flour containing gluten • Corn
• Fatty meat and dairy • Soy
• Alcohol
Foods , herbs and spices that have anti-inflammatory properties are pomegranate , 
green tea , ginger , turmeric , garlic and all foods with high Omega-3 content . 
Kids
Eating habits are learned behaviors . What your children learn to eat at home
early in life stays with them forever . Kids under 2 years of age easier accept new
foods , so start as early as possible . Most research says that it takes an average of
ten to twelve attempts before a child will try a new food . 
Problem with todays ’ western diet is that we are disconnected from whole food
sources and we rely on processed food too much . 67% of calories in the Western
diet come from wheat , corn and soy !  ! Compare that to the diet 100 or 200 years
ago !  ! Fewer and fewer people cook meals from scratch because it ’ s easier and
faster to throw a frozen dinner in the oven or get something from a fast-food
restaurant on the way home from work . That is an easy way . But we have to
strive to provide a variety , moderation , and balance to your kids menu . We have
to be good role models . In order to be good role model we must educate
ourselves first and then practice what we preach . Take kids with you when you
go grocery shopping . Let them decide which fruit they will eat . While we always
want to make the healthiest choices for our children ’ s bodies , a special treat ( ice
cream ) once a week won ’ t do any damage . 
Kids don ’ t need French fries , Doritos and pizza to keep them happy . Highly
processed foods like these are loaded with chemicals , synthetic fats , additives , 
artificial sweeteners , and food colorings . Food colorings and additives are
fueling ADHD . Unfortunately , you can ' t keep heavily processed foods out of
their diets forever . But the longer you limit exposure while teaching those
healthy eating habits , the more likely your children will be to make better
choices when left to their own . Don ’ t use food as rewards , bribes , or
punishments , stickers work just as well . 
Let kids help in the kitchen . Offer them a variety , cut veggies in ribbons , 
julienne them or cut in any weird shapes you can think of . Let them dip veggies
in hummus or pesto or salsa or guacamole , those condiments are all healthy
compared to ketchup full of corn syrup or mayonnaise full of soy oil . Also , 
timing is important , if they ’ re hungry , they ’ re less picky . Enforce a 3 bites rule . I
was able to get my kids try anything and if they didn ’ t like it , they were allowed
to stop after 3 bites . If everything else fails , sneak healthy ingredients . 
My kids eat some veggies only when they are cut differently than usual . They
will eat carrots cut like spaghetti , but not plain carrots . I discovered by chance
that they liked carrot spaghetti mixed within salad with green leafy spinach and
lettuce . But they didn ’ t want to eat a salad , they tried to fish out the carrot
spaghetti out of a salad and eat only them . Next day I served only carrot
spaghetti on a plate thinking that they ’ ll be delighted , but they didn ’ t want to eat
them . They said that carrot spaghetti doesn ’ t taste the same as yesterday . What
the heck ? Then I figured out , they were covered with salt and olive oil , so I
added some salt and olive oil . Nope , they ’ re not fun to eat , they want to fish
them out of the big bowl of green leaves . So , we let them do that . They ate tons
of carrot that evening . On any other day they would eat leafy green salad without
complaining , but on the next few days all they wanted was to fish out the carrot
spaghetti out of a salad . Luckily , after some time they started to eat a mixture of
spinach and carrot spaghetti and they eat it ever since . With broccoli we had a
different story . They didn ’ t want broccoli in their soup . Carrot is fine , but not the
broccoli . I mean , soup cooked with broccoli tastes different , but they will eat it , 
they just don ’ t want to see the broccoli in their soup bowls . But if I serve them
cooked broccoli without soup , drizzled with olive oil and a little bit of salt , they
will eat it . Somehow olive oil and a little bit of salt over any veggie , cooked or
uncooked , does wonders with my kids . 
Next example . My daughter likes to eat nuts as a snack and oatmeal with milk
for breakfast . But she won ’ t eat them mixed all in one hot breakfast , if the nuts
and flax seed are ground . Her explanation is that the ground nuts are scratching
her throat . Go figure . So , we serve nuts as a snack , flax meal goes in some other
dishes and we don ’ t enforce them for breakfast . I personally love to eat hot milk 
& oatmeal breakfast with 1 tbsp of grounded nuts , seeds , flax meal and some
cinnamon and cocoa . 
What olive oil and salt are for veggies , raw honey is for fruits . Pour a little bit of
raw honey on the fruit they don ’ t like and they will eat it . 
My daughter is generally pickier than my son . She won ’ t eat fruits that are not
ripe or ones that are passed their prime . So , we serve her fruits that are in season . 
Cutting fruits and veggies in different shapes helped when they were small and
they ’ re eating now pretty much any veggie or fruit . The point is : don ’ t stop
trying , serve kid ’ s fruits and veggies in all possible shapes and occasions and
eventually they will accept it . My daughter eats raw cooking onions for
breakfast !  ?  ! I would never think that she might do something like that , but she
keeps asking and we give it to her . But only if they ’ re cut in wedges , so go
figure . She ’ ll eat them in any form in salad , but if they ’ re served separately , she
wants them in wedges . Although her teacher complained a few times that she
had bad breath in the morning , she keeps eating it with savory dishes for
breakfast . Her favorite salad is one medium sized onion cut in small pieces , 1
tomato or 1 cup any green leafy vegies , covered with Superfoods yogurt dressing
mixed with 100 grams of soft farmers ’ cheese . I mix the yogurt dressing and the
cheese first and form a thick paste ( consistency of a mayo , she actually calls this
mix a healthy mayo and it does tastes like mayo if you put slightly more olive
oil ) and then I fold the veggies and mix until they ’ re properly covered . That
salad is a complete meal for her , she is not asking for anything else with it . 
And last but not least , sneak a lot of Omega-3 rich food into their meals ; it boost
brain power . I ’ m adding flax meal to anything I make and surprisingly , it doesn ’ t
scratch their throat when sneaked in cooked rice or stew . 
A few words about ADHD . Before switching to superfoods , we noticed how
much food additives and artificial colors affected our son . During and after kids ’ 
birthdays , where he would gobble Doritos , Coke and Spiderman colored
birthday cakes , he would become virtually impossible to handle . He wouldn ’ t
listen to anyone and he ’ d be the hyperactive poster child . We tried virtually
everything , gluten free diet , casein free diet , both of them at the same time and
noticed that gluten free diet improved his behavior immediately . We
reintroduced superfoods dairy product ( low-fat Greek yogurt , kefir and low-fat
farmers ’ cheese ) into his diet and noticed that he was still behaving great . But
the most important change was when we excluded all processed food from our
diet and started to eat only whole food superfoods . That was the period when we
abandoned Play Attention and self-concluded that he doesn ’ t have ADHD
anymore . Of course , we were wrong , but his behavior now is almost perfect . He
still makes noises , sometimes louder that we ’ d prefer , but that is the only ADHD
related behavior that we can spot . His school behavior is great , he ’ s focused , 
motivated and people who don ’ t know him from his ADHD period don ’ t suspect
that he was diagnosed with ADHD . If your child has ADHD and you ’ re already
on casein free diet , you can exclude dairy ingredients from superfoods recipes
and replace them with other ingredients . For example , you can replace yogurt in
any of the recipes with light tahini sauce ( tahini , olive oil , lemon juice , salt , 
eventually diluted with little water if necessary )  . For stronger tahini sauce add
ground cumin , minced garlic and chopped cilantro . Farmers or cottage cheese
can be replaced with hummus , guacamole or red pepper dip . 
Superfoods Diet Conclusion
As you can see , superfoods that are recommended are both high in fiber , 
thermogenic , low in saturated fat , has tons of antioxidants , probiotic , vitamins , 
minerals , high in Omega 3 fats and above all tasty . It ’ s also very close to Paleo
in terms that processed food and wheat are not included . Paleo diet doesn ’ t allow
beans , oats , cheese and yogurt , but I think that there is no bad stuff in them
because beans are full of antioxidants , they lowers cholesterol and blood
pressure , and yogurt has huge probiotic values and it ’ s just incredible addition to
spinach or cucumber based salads . The latest dietary guidelines recommend we
triple our current beans intake from 1 to 3 cups per week . Beans have lots of
protein and the main difference is fiber content , meaning that meat is digested
fairly quickly , whereas beans are digested slowly , keeping you satisfied longer . 
Plus , beans are low in sugar , which prevents insulin in the bloodstream from
spiking and causing the hunger . When you substitute beans for meat in your diet , 
you get the bonus of a decrease in saturated fat . These reasons are enough for me
and my family to keep eating beans in any form . 
Superfoods cuisine is also very similar to Mediterranean diet , although it
excludes pasta , hard cheeses , smoked meats and gluten breads . 
As you can notice from my dieting ideas , I went through several stages . First , I
was sure that cycling daily is the thing that will 100% work and allow me to lose
weight effortlessly . But when my palate changed because of Superfoods , I
noticed that I don ’ t need “ normal lunch ” at all and certainly none of the planned
junk food meals I dreamed off . As software techies would say , I went through
several iterations of my diet idea and settled for the one that suits me the best . 
You ’ re free to stick with “ cycling daily ” idea if you want and keep meat and
potato lunch or fast food lunch . 
What Superfoods are NOT : 
• No processed or refined foods • No preservatives , additives or artificial
coloring
• No smoked food or processed meats • No canned vegetables or meats ( beans , 
garbanzos , beets , corned beef ) except canned fish ( sardines , tuna ) once or twice
a week
• No wheat , refined flour or sugar . 
• No corn , white rice and potatoes . Brown rice and quinoa are fine . 
• No vegetable oils or fried food . Olive oil and Coconut oil are fine . 
• No soy products or tofu • No pasta except gluten free soba noodles ( 100%
buckwheat ) or acorn or mung bean noodles . 
• No full fat dairy cheese . Yogurt , kefir and low-fat farmers ’ cheese / cottage
cheese / Greek feta cheese are OK and occasionally ( context related ) some low-fat
cheddar or mozzarella are OK . Context related means it ’ s OK to sprinkle some
grated low-fat cheddar or mozzarella on casseroles or superfoods pizza . 
• No store bought salad dressings or condiments with vegetable oils or corn
syrup ( Mayo , Ketchup , BBQ sauce )  . Hummus , Guacamole , Mustard , Pesto and
hot sauces are fine . 
Superfoods meals exist for ages , and you will find some superfoods recipes in
Mediterranean , Chinese , Japanese or European cookbooks . Superfoods cuisine is
leaned toward soups , salads , stews and grilled meats and veggies . Some
examples of well-known superfoods recipes are hummus , guacamole , tapenade , 
basic chicken or beef soup with vegetables and without noodles , any slow
cooked stew with leaner meats and veggies , some bean dishes without ketchup
and sugar , some lentil dishes and curries , any salad without store bought
dressing , pasta , bacon or bread , any grilled leaner fish or meat and veggie . Lots
of other classical recipes can be easily modified and become superfoods stars , 
like swapping white rice for brown rice and omit sugar and soy in Japanese
recipes or swapping rice , sauce thickener , soy and oil in Chinese stir fries . 
I don ’ t believe in any diet that restricts any type of food in the long term , except
diets that exclude processed industrial food . We have witnessed what the
industrial food did to modern society and that is not the option for lots of people . 
Yo-Yo Nation should switch to superfoods and not junk food !  ! 
Let me mention last reason why I ’ m sure that Superfoods Diet will change your
life forever . Once you know everything about benefits of vast array of
superfoods and once you learn why processed food is so bad on so many levels , 
I ’ m pretty sure that you will think twice every time you get served any processed
food and I ’ m sure that you will keep thinking ,  “ Why am I eating this , why am I
ruining my health ? I can do better , there is tasty food that will help me with my
inflammations and that will protect me from cancer .  ” Once you expand your
knowledge , you can ’ t go back and forget about all the facts about superfoods and
all the facts about processed food . And if you have kids , I ’ m pretty sure that you
will think twice before you serve them processed colored food instead of
healthy , tasty Superfoods meal . 
Some people hate to cook or they don ’ t have enough time . And it ’ s obvious that
Superfoods Diet will require some time to shop for fresh foods and some time
for preparation . Good news is that 90% of the meals are very quick to be
prepared . Let me give you some examples of 10 minutes prep time Superfoods
meals : 
• You can chop veggies while you grill meat or fish . 
• Stir fries are typically prepared in 10 minutes . 
• Slow cooker meals or casseroles or stews are also typically prepared
in 10 minutes or less . In all of them you typically include chopped
onions , carrots , meat and one more veggie ( green peas , green beans , 
mushrooms , eggplants , red peppers etc .  )  . And you just pour all
ingredients in a pot , casserole or slow cooker and you ’ re done , 
monitoring stews as it cook is not a huge time wasting task ( same with
monitoring casserole in the oven )  . You can prepare large pot or
casserole once a week and freeze it and eat it once or twice during the
week . Prepare 2 such meals on Sunday evening and you ’ re set for the
week . 
• Superfoods breakfasts are very quick , eggs or oatmeal don ’ t take too
much time . 
My point is that you can eat healthy if you are mentally prepared for
healthy ingredients shopping and healthy meal preparation . If you
have a bunch of kids and 2 jobs , you can still find 2-3 hours on
Sunday evening to prepare all these food for the rest of the week . Buy
already cut bags of spinach and cabbage and other veggies and only
add olive oil , lemon or apple cider vinegar and salt before you eat it . 
Cut some veggies for salads and snack on Sunday evening , put it in
your Tupperware and you ’ re set for 2-3 days . And at the same time
cook one stew in the huge pot and load food in the slow cooker . And
freeze all that cooked food . Have a bunch of hard boiled eggs in your
fridge . Be over-prepared for your weight loss journey . You ’ re about to
become a Superfoodie !  ! Read the Superfoodie Manifesto . 
Switch to Superfoods ! 
Well , this is it , you don ’ t have any processed food in your house , you ’ re stocked
on fresh veggies , fruits and other healthy stuff and you ’ re ready to change your
life ! Congratulations for willingness to get healthier and better looking you !  ! 
Please remember these common facts : 
Breakfast Veggies : When I ’ m referring to breakfast veggies , I mean some
red or yellow pepper stripes , cucumber and pickles . If you want , you can eat
celery , green onions ( spring onions ) and sauerkraut , I eat them with eggs or
farmers or cottage cheese . Hey , you can even eat broccoli , cauliflower , lettuce
and spinach for breakfast . If you want , you can roast or grill some veggies 
( eggplant , zucchini and peppers ) and have them with savory breakfasts . 
Cinnamon : Cinnamon lowers blood sugar , helps maintain insulin sensitivity
and is a very powerful antioxidant . Add it every time you eat oatmeal . 
Cocoa : Cocoa consumption is associated with decreased blood pressure , 
improved blood vessel health , and improvement in cholesterol levels . Some
people eat dark chocolate ; I add it to oatmeal or drink it . Buy unsweetened
cocoa , ideally unprocessed one , because processing at high temperature destroy
healthy ingredients in it . 
Nuts and Seeds : Flax should be always ground . Buy flax meal or grind them
with a coffee grinder . Almond is healthiest nut , but you can sometimes eat
walnuts , Brazil nuts or pecan instead . It ’ s clever to eat every time a different
type of nuts , but remember that almonds are the healthiest ones . 
Grilling and Frying : Fry on a little bit of coconut oil in the skillet , 7 to 10
minutes for most of the meat and fish . Don ’ t overdo it . Don ’ t grill for too long . 
If you don ’ t like the meat suggested in the recipe , replace it with something
similar . Use beef instead of pork or chicken instead of fish . Think about organ
meats , liver or kidneys , they have more vitamins then meat . If you don ’ t want
red meat , use chicken . If you crave fried food , dip the meat in beaten eggs
mixture , cover it with flax meal instead of breadcrumbs and bake it in the oven , 
it ’ s delicious !  ! 
Coconut oil : Use coconut oil . Period . Avoid blended vegetable oils , corn oil
and soybean oil . I ’ m cooking with coconut oil and eat one spoon of coconut oil
once a day because of my low thyroid ; to me , it tastes like heaven , way better
than the Bounty . Coconut oil also fights cancer , it contains MCTs—medium
chain triglycerides , who are fighting plaque in the brain . Plaque in the brain is
causing Alzheimer ’ s disease . Coconut oil also boost metabolism and it ’ s great
for the skin . Some people experience stomach discomfort when taking a spoon
of coconut oil on empty stomach , some even vomit . If you experience this , eat
coconut oil after meal or mix it in a meal . 
Extra-virgin olive oil : Olive oil is the healthiest oil you can buy , as it
contains the highest monounsaturated content . Extra-virgin is the oil that results
from the first cold pressing of the olives . Being the purest olive oil , it ' s also the
most expensive . But because it has a low smoke point , it should not be used for
cooking . 
Yogurt and low-fat cheese : Low fat or non-fat Greek ( or plain ) yogurt is
the only one recommended . If you can ’ t find Greek Yogurt , use any plain
yogurt . 0 . 5% or 1% fat Yogurt tastes the best , if you ask me . If you want fruit
yogurt , add some fresh berries ( or frozen ) or fruits in the plain or Greek yogurt
and add some Stevia or raw honey if you have to . Doing that , you ’ ll know what
exactly went into that snack and you ’ ll avoid industrial chemicals found in fruit
yogurts . Choose low-fat farmers cheese over cottage cheese . When choosing
Cheddar , Colby or Mozzarella , choose low-fat . 
Ham : Buy low-fat lean ham or deli meat without sugar added or with the least
amount of sugar . I don ’ t advocate eating anything processed , but I figure out that
people who are just switching from processed food have to eat something
familiar and “ almost healthy ” and lean ham is one of those things . Within 2
weeks , I switched from ham to canned sardines . They ’ re also processed food , 
but with the least chemicals and additives and loaded with protein , Omega-3 , 
selenium , phosphorus and vitamin D . Sardines packed in olive oil are preferred
to the one packed in soybean oil . Drain them from excess oil if it ’ s not olive oil . 
Avoid purchasing canned sardines in vinyl-lined cans that contain BPA . 
Breads : You would be better off if you avoid any breads , paleo or non-gluten . 
If you crave something bread like , try egg based flatbreads recipes , like egg
pancakes , egg muffins or egg pizza crust or Almond / Tapioca flour naan . 
Salad Dressings : Store bought salad dressing contain high fructose corn
syrup and soybean oil or canola oil . Forget them . Forever . Superfoods dressing
would be similar to “ Italian Dressing ” - olive oil / lemon / minced garlic / salt + 
some herbs . We ’ ll call second dressing a “ Yogurt Dressing ” – half a cup of plain
low-fat Yogurt or low-fat buttermilk with olive oil / minced garlic / salt . Amount of
olive oil I ’ m using is usually 1 teaspoon per person and the rest is added to taste . 
Occasionally I would add a teaspoon of mustard or some herbs like basil , 
oregano , marjoram , chives , thyme , parsley , dill or mint . If you like spicy hot
food , add some cayenne in the dressing . It will speed up your metabolism . 
Stir Fry Stir fry meat and veggies in coconut oil . Add some garlic , ginger and
half of the onion cut in wedges and season only with fish sauce . If you have to , 
thicken the sauce with tapioca flour or arrowroot flour . 
Condiments Forget about Mayo or Tartar sauce ( it ’ s processed food
containing refined soybean oil )  , Ketchup ( contains high fructose corn syrup ) or
BBQ sauce ( more high fructose corn syrup then ketchup )  . Healthy condiments
are hummus , salsa , hot sauce , guacamole , mustard and pesto . Use them sparingly
in Phase 1 . 
Broths : Cook broths and freeze . I cook every few weeks a large pot of chicken
soup and freeze half of it , because I don ’ t want to eat processed food . 
Oatmeal : Buy regular oatmeal , unenriched and not sweetened . 
Exotic Superfoods : When people hear that I ’ m eating only Superfoods they
usually comment “ Oh , Superfoods are so expensive ” thinking on various
Superfoods in powder form ( Spirulina , Chlorella ) or Superfoods berries and
seeds ( Goji , Chia )  . When I explain that I eat regular everyday Superfoods such
as kale and avocado , they keep asking have I experimented with exotic
Superfoods . Yes I have , but I didn ’ t wanted to create recipes where such
Superfoods are prominently featured or put them in regular recipes because
people will complain that recipe ingredients are expensive . So , I ’ ll list here how
I use various exotic Superfoods : 
• I add seaweeds to any soup or stew I make and you can do the same with
Chlorella and Spirulina . They also can be added to smoothies , condiments and
salads . Some people use them in granola recipes or energy bars along with Maca
powder . 
• Spike any salad dressing with 1 Tbsp . of Spirulina , Chlorella , Maca or Matcha . 
Chlorella has a strong taste ( think pond water or horse hay J )  , Spirulina has
oceanic taste ( think seaweed or something fishy )  , Maca has earthy / nutty taste 
( goes well with smoothies ) and Matcha is basically a powdered green tea , so you
know the taste . Spirulina and seaweeds taste best in some veggie soup or any
fish stew . It tastes nasty in average smoothies , but some strong taste can hide it 
( think grapefruit , lemon , lime , pomegranate or granny Smith apples ) 
• I eat Goji berries as a snack or sprinkle them on oatmeal breakfasts and
smoothies . 
• Wherever flax seeds are used , you can use Chia seeds instead ( oatmeal
breakfasts , smoothies ) 
Superfoods Cookbook
Allergy labels : SF – Soy Free , GF – Gluten Free , DF – Dairy Free , EF – Egg
Free , V - Vegan , NF – Nut Free
Condiments
Basil Pesto
• 1 cup basil • 1 / 3 cup cashews • 2 garlic cloves , chopped • 1 / 2 cup
olive oil Process basil , cashews and garlic until smooth . Add oil in a slow
stream . Process to combine . Transfer to a bowl . Season with salt and pepper . Stir
to combine . Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
Cilantro Pesto
• 1 cup cilantro • 1 / 3 cup cashews • 2 garlic cloves , chopped • 1 / 2 cup
olive oil or avocado oil Process cilantro , cashews and garlic . Add oil in a slow
stream . Process to combine . Transfer to a bowl . Season with salt and pepper . Stir
to combine . Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
Sundried Tomato Pesto
• 3 / 4 cup sundried tomatoes • 1 / 3 cup cashews • 2 garlic cloves , 
chopped • 1 / 2 cup olive oil or avocado oil Process tomato , cashews and garlic . 
Add oil in a slow stream . Process to combine . Transfer to a bowl . Season with
salt and pepper . Stir to combine . Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
Broths
Some recipes require a cup or more of various broths , vegetable , beef or chicken
broth . I usually cook the whole pot and freeze it . 
Vegetable broth
Servings : 6 cups Ingredients
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 large onion
• 2 stalks celery , including some leaves • 2 large carrots
• 1 bunch green onions , chopped
• 8 cloves garlic , minced
• 8 sprigs fresh parsley
• 6 sprigs fresh thyme
• 2 bay leaves
• 1 tsp . salt
• 2 quarts water
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
Chop veggies into small chunks . Heat oil in a soup pot and add onion , scallions , 
celery , carrots , garlic , parsley , thyme , and bay leaves . Cook over high heat for 5
to 7 minutes , stirring occasionally . 
Bring to a boil and add salt . Lower heat and simmer , uncovered , for 30 minutes . 
Strain . Other ingredients to consider : broccoli stalk , celery root

Chicken Broth
Ingredients
• 4 lbs . fresh chicken ( wings , necks , backs , legs , bones ) 
• 2 peeled onions or 1 cup chopped leeks
• 2 celery stalks • 1 carrot • 8 black peppercorns • 2 sprigs fresh thyme • 2
sprigs fresh parsley • 1 tsp . salt Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Put cold water in a stock pot and add chicken . Bring just to a boil . Skim any
foam from the surface . Add other ingredients , return just to a boil , and reduce
heat to a slow simmer . Simmer for 2 hours . Let cool to warm room temperature
and strain . Keep chilled and use or freeze broth within a few days . Before using , 
defrost and boil . 
Beef Broth
Ingredients
• 4-5 pounds beef bones and few veal bones
• 1 pound of stew meat ( chuck or flank steak ) cut into 2-inch chunks • olive oil
or avocado oil • 1-2 medium onions , peeled and quartered
• 1-2 large carrots , cut into 1-2 inch segments
• 1 celery rib , cut into 1 inch segments
• 2-3 cloves of garlic , unpeeled
• Handful of parsley , stems and leaves
• 1-2 bay leaves
• 10 peppercorns
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Heat oven to 375°F . Rub olive oil over the stew meat pieces , carrots , and onions . 
Place stew meat or beef scraps , stock bones , carrots and onions in a large
roasting pan . Roast in oven for about 45 minutes , turning everything half-way
through the cooking . 
Place everything from the oven in a large stock pot . Pour some boiling water in
the oven pan and scrape up all of the browned bits and pour all in the stock pot . 
Add parsley , celery , garlic , bay leaves , and peppercorns to the pot . Fill the pot
with cold water , to 1 inch over the top of the bones . Bring the stock pot to a
regular simmer and then reduce the heat to low , so it just barely simmers . Cover
the pot loosely and let simmer low and slow for 3-4 hours . 
Scoop away the fat and any scum that rises to the surface once in a while . 
After cooking , remove the bones and vegetables from the pot . Strain the broth . 
Let cool to room temperature and then put in the refrigerator . 
The fat will solidify once the broth has chilled . Discard the fat ( or reuse it ) and
pour the broth into a jar and freeze it . 

Pastes
Curry Paste
This should not be prepared in advance , but there are several curry recipes that
are using curry paste and I decided to take the curry paste recipe out and have it
separately . So , when you see that the recipe is using curry paste , please go to this
part of the book and prepare it from scratch . Don ’ t use processed curry pastes or
curry powder ; make it every time from scratch . Keep the spices in original form 
( seeds , pods )  , ground them just before making the curry paste . You can dry heat
in the skillet cloves , cardamom , cumin and coriander and then crush them
coarsely with mortar and pestle . 
Ingredients
• 2 onions , minced
• 2 cloves garlic , minced
• 2 teaspoons fresh ginger root , finely chopped
• 6 whole cloves • 2 cardamom pods
• 2 ( 2 inch ) pieces cinnamon sticks , crushed
• 1 tsp . ground cumin
• 1 tsp . ground coriander
• 1 tsp . salt
• 1 tsp . ground cayenne pepper
• 1 tsp . ground turmeric
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
Heat oil in a frying pan over medium heat and fry onions until transparent . Stir
in garlic , cumin , ginger , cloves , cinnamon , coriander , salt , cayenne , and
turmeric . Cook for 1 minute over medium heat , stirring constantly . At this point
other curry ingredients should be added . 

Tomato paste
Some recipes ( chili ) require tomato paste . I usually prepare 20 or so liters at
once ( when tomato is in season , which is usually September ) and freeze it . 
Ingredients
• 5 lbs . chopped plum tomatoes
• 1 / 4 cup extra-virgin olive oil or avocado oil plus 2 tbsp . 
• salt , to taste Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
Heat 1 / 4 cup of the oil in a skillet over medium heat . Add tomatoes . Season with
salt . Bring to a boil . Cook , stirring , until very soft , about 8 minutes . 
Pass the tomatoes through the finest plate of a food mill . Push as much of the
pulp through the sieve as possible and leave the seeds behind . 
Bring it to boil , lower it and then boil uncovered , so the liquid will thicken 
( approx . 30-40 minutes )  . That will give you homemade tomato juice . You get
tomato paste if you boil for 60 minutes , it gets thick like store bought ketchup . 
Store sealed in an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to one month , or
freeze , for up to 6 months . 
Precooked beans
Again , some recipes require that you cook some beans ( butter beans , red kidney , 
garbanzo ) in advance . Cooking beans takes around 3 hours and it can be done in
advance or every few weeks and the rest get frozen . Soak beans for 24 hours
before cooking them . After the first boil , throw the water , add new water and
continue cooking . Some beans or lentils can be sprouted for few days before
cooking and that helps people with stomach problems . 
Breakfast - Oatmeal
Superfoods Oatmeal Breakfast
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 cup cooked oatmeal
• 1 tsp . of ground flax seeds • 1 tsp . of sunflower seeds
• A dash of cinnamon
• Half of the tsp . of cocoa
Cook oatmeal with hot water and after that mix all ingredients . Sweeten if you
have to with few drops of raw honey . Optional : You can replace sunflower seeds
with pumpkin seed or chia seed . You can add a handful of blueberries or any
berries instead of cocoa . 

Oatmeal Yogurt Breakfast
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 / 2 cup dry oatmeal
• Handful of blueberries ( optional ) 
• 1 cup of low-fat yogurt
Mix all ingredients and wait 20 minutes or leave overnight in the fridge if using
steel cut oats . 
Cocoa Oatmeal
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 1 / 2 cup oats
• 2 cups water
• A pinch tsp . salt
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground vanilla bean • 2 tbsp . cocoa powder
• 1 tbsp . raw honey
• 2 tbsp . ground flax seeds meal • a dash of cinnamon
• 2 egg whites
Instructions
In a saucepan over high heat , place the oats and salt . Cover with 3
cups water . Bring to a boil and cook for 3-5 minutes , stirring
occasionally . Keep adding 1 / 2 cup water if necessary as the mixture
thickens . 
In a separate bowl , whisk 4 tbsp . water into the 4 tbsp . cocoa powder
to form a smooth sauce . Add the vanilla to the pan and stir . 
Turn the heat down to low . Add the egg whites and whisk
immediately . Add the flax meal , and cinnamon . Stir to combine . 
Remove from heat , add raw honey and serve immediately . 
Topping suggestions : sliced strawberries , blueberries or few almonds . 

Flax and Blueberry Vanilla Overnight Oats
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , V , NF
• 1 / 2 cup oats
• 1 / 3 cup water
• 1 / 4 cup low-fat yogurt
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground vanilla bean • 1 tbsp . flax seeds meal • A pinch of
salt
• Blueberries , almonds , blackberries , raw honey for topping
Instructions
Add the ingredients ( except for toppings ) to the bowl in the evening . 
Refrigerate overnight . 
In the morning , stir up the mixture . It should be thick . Add the
toppings of your choice . 
Apple Oatmeal
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 grated apple
• 1 / 2 cup oats
• 1 cup water • Dash of cinnamon
• 2 tsp . raw honey
Instructions
Cook the oats with the water for 3-5 minutes . 
Add grated apple and cinnamon . Stir in the raw honey . 
Almond Butter Banana Oats
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF
• 1 / 2 cup oats
• 3 / 4 cup water
• 1 egg white
• 1 banana • 1 tbs . flax seeds meal • 1 tsp raw honey
• pinch cinnamon
• 1 / 2 tbs . almond butter Instructions
Combine oats and water in a bowl . Beat the egg white , then whisk it
in with the uncooked oats . Boil on stovetop . Check consistency and
continue to heat as necessary until the oats are fluffy and thick . Mash
banana and add to oats . Heat for 1 minute Stir in flax , raw honey , and
cinnamon . Top with almond butter ! 
Coconut Pomegranate Oatmeal
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 / 2 cup oats
• 1 / 3 cup coconut milk
• 1 cup water
• 2 tbs . shredded unsweetened coconut
• 1-2 tbs . flax seeds meal • 1 tbs . raw honey
• 3 tbs . pomegranate seeds
Instructions
Cook oats with the coconut milk , water , and salt . 
Stir in the coconut , raw honey and flaxseed meal . Sprinkle with extra
coconut and pomegranate seeds . 
Savory Breakfasts
Serves 1
Regular egg recipes
Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
Eggs are great way to start a day and you can enjoy them hard boiled , scrambled , 
poached or in the omelet with veggies . Eat some breakfast veggies with eggs . 
Omelet with Leeks
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
Cook leeks in little coconut oil until they get soft and then mix the beaten eggs
in . 
Egg pizza crust
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 3 eggs
• 1 / 2 cup of coconut flour
• 1 cup of coconut milk
• 1 crushed garlic clove
Mix and make an omelet . 
Omelet with Superfoods veggies
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 2 large eggs
• Salt • Ground black pepper • 1 tsp . olive oil or cumin oil • 1 cup spinach , 
cherry tomatoes and 1 spoon of yogurt cheese • Crushed red pepper flakes and a
pinch of dill ( optional ) Instructions
Whisk 2 large eggs in a small bowl . Season with salt and ground black pepper
and set aside . Heat 1 tsp . olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat . Add
baby spinach , tomatoes , cheese and cook , tossing , until wilted ( Approx . 1
minute )  . Add eggs ; cook , stirring occasionally , until just set , about 1 minute . Stir
in cheese . Sprinkle with crushed red pepper flakes and dill . 
Egg Muffins
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
Serving : 8 muffins • 8 eggs
• 1 cup diced green bell pepper
• 1 cup diced onion
• 1 cup spinach
• 1 / 4 tsp . salt
• 1 / 8 tsp . ground black pepper
• 2 tbsp . water
Instructions
Heat the oven to 350 degrees F . Oil 8 muffin cups . Beat eggs together . Mix in
bell pepper , spinach , onion , salt , black pepper , and water . Pour the mixture into
muffin cups . Bake in the oven until muffins are done in the middle . 
Smoked Salmon Scrambled Eggs
Ingredients , serves 2 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 1 tsp coconut oil
• 4 eggs
• 1 Tbs water
• 4 oz smoked salmon , sliced
• 1 / 2 avocado
• ground black pepper , to taste
• 4 chives , minced ( or use 1 green onion , thinly sliced ) Instructions
Heat a skillet over medium heat . Add coconut oil to pan when hot . Meanwhile , 
scramble eggs . Add eggs to the hot skillet , along with smoked salmon . Stirring
continuously , cook eggs until soft and fluffy . Remove from heat . Top with
avocado , black pepper , and chives to serve . 
Steak and Eggs
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 1 / 2 lb boneless beef steak or pork tenderloin • 1 / 4 tsp ground black pepper
• 1 / 4 tsp sea salt ( optional ) 
• 2 tsp coconut oil
• 1 / 4 onion , diced
• 1 red bell pepper , diced
• 1 handful spinach or arugula
• 2 eggs
Instructions
Season sliced steak or pork tenderloin with sea salt and black pepper . Heat a
sauté pan over high heat . Add 1 tsp coconut oil , onions , and meat when pan is
hot , and sauté until steak is slightly cooked . Add spinach and red bell pepper , 
and cook until steak is done to your liking . Meanwhile , heat a small fry pan over
medium heat . Add remaining coconut oil , and fry two eggs . Top each steak with
a fried egg to serve . 

Egg Bake
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
Serves 6
• 2 cups chopped red peppers or spinach • 1 cup zucchini
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 cup sliced mushrooms
• 1 / 2 cup sliced green onions
• 8 eggs
• 1 cup coconut milk
• 1 / 2 cup almond flour • 2 tbsp . minced fresh parsley
• 1 / 2 tsp . dried basil
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 4 tsp . ground black pepper
Instructions
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F . Put coconut oil in a skillet . Heat it to medium
heat . Add mushrooms , onions , zucchini and red pepper ( or spinach ) until
vegetables are tender , about 5 minutes . Drain veggies and spread them over the
baking dish . 
Beat eggs in a bowl with milk , flour , parsley , basil , salt , and pepper . Pour egg
mixture into baking dish . 
Bake in preheated oven until the center is set ( approx . 35 to 40 minutes )  . 

Frittata
6 servings Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 2 tbsp . olive oil or avocado oil • 1 Zucchini , sliced • 1 cup torn fresh spinach
• 2 tbsp . sliced green onions
• 1 tsp . crushed garlic , salt and pepper to taste • 1 / 3 cup coconut milk
• 6 eggs
Instructions
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat . Add zucchini and cook until tender . 
Mix in spinach , green onions , and garlic . Season with salt and pepper . Continue
cooking until spinach is wilted . 
In a separate bowl , beat together eggs and coconut milk . Pour into the skillet
over the vegetables . Reduce heat to low , cover , and cook until eggs are firm ( 5 to
7 minutes )  . 
Superfoods Naan Pancakes Crepes
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 1 / 2 cup almond flour • 1 / 2 cup Tapioca Flour • 1 cup Coconut Milk • Salt
• coconut oil Instructions
Mix all the ingredients together . 
Heat a pan over medium heat and pour batter to desired thickness . Once the
batter looks firm , flip it over to cook the other side . 
If you want this to be a dessert crepe or pancake , then omit the salt . You can add
minced garlic or ginger in the batter if you want , or some spices . 
Zucchini Pancakes
Serves 3
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF
• 2 medium zucchini
• 2 tbsp . chopped onion
• 3 beaten eggs • 6 to 8 tbsp . almond flour • 1 tsp . salt
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground black pepper
• coconut oil Instructions
Heat the oven to 300 degrees F . 
Grate the zucchini into a bowl and stir in the onion and eggs . Stir in 6 tbsp . of
the flour , salt , and pepper . 
Heat a large sauté pan over medium heat and add coconut oil in the pan . When
the oil is hot , lower the heat to medium-low and add batter into the pan . Cook
the pancakes about 2 minutes on each side , until browned . Place the pancakes in
the oven . 
Savory Superfoods Pie Crust
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF
• 11 / 4 cups blanched almond flour • 1 / 3 cup tapioca flour
• 3 / 4 tsp . finely ground sea salt
• 3 / 4 tsp . paprika
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground cumin
• 1 / 8 tsp . ground white pepper
• 1 / 4 cup coconut oil • 1 large egg
Instructions
Instructions
Place almond flour , tapioca flour , sea salt , vanilla , egg and coconut
sugar ( if you use coconut sugar ) in the bowl of a food processor . 
Process 2-3 times to combine . Add oil and raw honey ( if you use raw
honey ) and pulse with several one-second pulses and then let the food
processor run until the mixture comes together . Move dough onto a
plastic wrap sheet . Wrap and then press the dough into a 9-inch disk . 
Refrigerate for 30 minutes . 
Remove plastic wrap . Press dough onto the bottom and up the sides of
a 9-inch buttered pie dish . Crimp a little bit the edges of crust . Cool in
the refrigerator for 20 minutes . Put the oven rack to middle position
and preheat oven to 375F . Put in the oven and bake until golden
brown . 

Quiche
Serves 2-3
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 1 Precooked and cooled Savory Superfoods Pie Crust
• 8 ounces organic spinach , cooked and drained
• 6 ounces cubed pork • 2 medium shallots , thinly sliced and sautéed
• 4 large eggs • 1 cup coconut milk • 3 / 4 tsp . salt • 1 / 4 tsp . freshly ground
black pepper
Instructions
Brown the pork in coconut oil and then add the spinach and shallots . Set aside
once done . 
Preheat oven to 350F . In a large bowl , combine eggs , milk , salt and pepper . 
Whisk until foamy . Add in about 3 / 4 of the drained filling mixture , reserving
the other 1 / 4 to " top " the quiche . Pour egg mixture into crust and place
remaining filling on top of the quiche . 
Place quiche in oven in the center of the middle rack and bake undisturbed for
45 to 50 minutes . 
Cottage Cheese Sesame Balls
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF
• 16 ounce farmers cheese or cottage cheese
• 1 cup finely chopped almonds
• 1and 1 / 2 cups oatmeal
In a large bowl , combine blended cottage cheese , almonds and
oatmeal . Make balls and roll in sesame seeds mix . 
Superfoods Smoothies
Put the liquid in first . Surrounded by tea or yogurt , the blender blades
can move freely . Next , add chunks of fruits or vegetables . Leafy
greens are going into the pitcher last . Preferred liquid is green tea , but
you can use almond or coconut milk or herbal tea . 
Start slow . If your blender has speeds , start it on low to break up big
pieces of fruit . Continue blending until you get a puree . If your
blender can pulse , pulse a few times before switching to a puree
mode . Once you have your liquid and fruit pureed , start adding
greens , very slowly . Wait until previous batch of greens has been
completely blended . 
Thicken ? Added too much tea or coconut milk ? Thicken your
smoothie by adding ice cubes , flax meal , chia seeds or oatmeal . Once
you get used to various tastes of smoothies , add any seaweed , 
spirulina , chlorella powder or ginger for additional kick . Experiment
with any Superfoods in powder form at this point . Think of adding
any nut butter or sesame paste too or some Superfoods oils . 
Rotate ! Rotate your greens ; don ’ t always drink the same smoothie ! At the
beginning try 2 different greens every week and later introduce third and fourth
one weekly . And keep rotating them . Don ’ t use spinach and kale all the time . 
Try beets greens , they have a pinch of pink in them and that add great color to
your smoothie . Here is the list of leafy green for you to try : spinach , 
kale , dandelion , chards , beet leaves , arugula , lettuce , collard greens , 
bok choy , cabbage , cilantro , parsley . 
Flavor ! Flavor smoothies with ground vanilla bean , cinnamon , raw honey , 
nutmeg , cloves , almond butter , cayenne pepper , ginger or just about any seeds or
chopped nuts combination . 
Not only are green smoothies high in nutrients , vitamins and fiber , they can also
make any vegetable you probably don ' t like ( be it kale , spinach or broccoli ) taste
great . The secret behind blending the perfect smoothie is using sweet fruits or
nuts or seeds to give your drink a unique taste . 
There ' s a reason kale and spinach seem to be the main ingredients in almost
every green smoothie . Not only do they give smoothies their verdant color , they
are also packed with calcium , protein and iron . 
Although blending alone increases the accessibility of carotenoids , since the
presence of fats is known to increase carotenoid absorption from leafy greens , it
is possible that coconut oil , nuts and seeds in a smoothie could increase
absorption further . 
If you can ’ t find some ingredient , replace it with the closest one . 
GREEN SMOOTHIES
Kale Kiwi Smoothie
• 1 cup Kale , chopped
• 2 Apples
• 3 Kiwis
• 1 tablespoon flax seeds
• 1 tablespoon royal jelly
• 1 cup crushed ice
Zucchini Apples Smoothie
• 1 / 2 cup zucchini
• 2 Apples
• 3 / 4 avocado
• 1 stalk Celery
• 1 Lemon
• 1 tbsp . Spirulina
• 1 1 / 2 cups crushed ice
Dandelion Smoothie
• 1 cup Dandelion greens
• 1 cup Spinach
• ½ cup tahini
• 1 Red Radish
• 1 tbsp . chia seeds
• 1 cup lavender tea
Fennel Honeydew Smoothie
• ½ cup fennel
• 1 cup Broccoli
• 1 tbsp . Cilantro
• 1 cup Honeydew
• 1 cup crushed ice
• 1 tbsp . Chlorella
Broccoli Apple Smoothie
• 1 Apple
• 1 cup Broccoli
• 1 tbsp . Cilantro
• 1 Celery stalk
• 1 cup crushed ice
• 1 tbsp . crushed Seaweed
Salad Smoothie
• 1 cup spinach
• ½ cucumber
• 1 / 2 small onion
• 2 tablespoons Parsley
• 2 tablespoons lemon juice
• 1 cup crushed ice
• 1 tbsp . olive oil or cumin oil
• ¼ cup Wheatgrass
Avocado Kale Smoothie
• 1 cup Kale
• ½ Avocado
• 1 cup Cucumber
• 1 Celery Stalk
• 1 tbsp . chia seeds
• 1 cup chamomile tea
• 1 tbsp . Spirulina
Watercress Smoothie
• 1 cup Watercress
• ½ cup almond butter
• 2 small cucumbers
• 1 cup coconut milk
• 1 tbsp . Chlorella
• 1 tbsp . Black cumin seeds – sprinkle on top and garnish with parsley
Beet Greens Smoothie
• 1 cup Beet Greens
• 2 tbsp . Pumpkin seeds butter
• 1 cup Strawberry
• 1 tbsp . Sesame seeds
• 1 tbsp . hemp seeds
• 1 cup chamomile tea
Broccoli Leeks Cucumber smoothie
• 1 cup Broccoli
• 2 tbsp . Cashew butter
• 2 Leeks
• 2 Cucumbers
• 1 Lime
• ½ cup Lettuce
• ½ cup Leaf Lettuce
• 1 tbsp . Matcha
• 1 cup crushed ice
Cacao Spinach Smoothie
• 2 cups spinach
• 1 cup blueberries , frozen
• 1 tablespoons dark cocoa powder
• ½ cup unsweetened almond milk
• 1 / 2 cup crushed ice
• 1 tsp raw honey
• 1 tbsp . Matcha powder
Flax Almond Butter Smoothie
• ½ cup plain yogurt
• 2 tablespoons almond butter
• 2 cups spinach
• 1 banana , frozen
• 3 strawberries
• 1 / 2 cup crushed ice
• 1 teaspoon flax seeds
Apple Kale Smoothie
• 1 cup kale
• ½ cup coconut milk
• 1 tbsp . Maca
• 1 banana , frozen
• ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
• 1 Apple
• Pinch of nutmeg
• 1 clove
• 3 ice cubes
Iceberg Peach Smoothie
• 1 cup Iceberg lettuce
• 1 Banana
• 1 peach
• 1 Brazil Nut
• 1 Mango
• 1 cup Kombucha
• Top with hemp seeds
Rainbow Smoothie
3 Colors Rainbow Smoothie
• Blend 1 Large beet with some crushed ice
• Blend 3 carrots with some crashed ice
• Blend 1 cucumber , 1 cup of leaf lettuce and ½ cup Wheatgrass
• Serve them separate to preserve the distinct color
Salad Dressings
Italian Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 tsp . olive oil or cumin oil
• lemon
• minced garlic
• salt
• 1 Tbsp . of Spirulina , Chlorella , Maca or Matcha ( optional ) 
Yogurt Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• half a cup of plain low-fat Greek yogurt or low-fat buttermilk • olive oil or
avocado oil • minced garlic
• salt • lemon Occasionally I would add a tsp . of mustard or some herbs like
basil , oregano , marjoram , chives , thyme , parsley , dill or mint . If you like spicy
hot food , add some cayenne in the dressing . It will speed up your metabolism
and have interesting hot spicy effect in cold yogurt or buttermilk . 
Salads
Large Fiber Loaded Salad with Italian Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 cup of spinach
• 1 cup of shredded cabbage , sauerkraut or lettuce . Cabbage has more substance . 
• Italian or Yogurt dressing
• Cayenne pepper ( optional ) 
• Few sprigs of cilantro ( optional ) 
• 2 spring ( green ) onions ( optional ) 
Large Fiber Loaded Salad with Yogurt Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 cup of spinach
• 1 cup of shredded cabbage or lettuce . Cabbage has more substance . 
• Italian or Yogurt dressing
• Cayenne pepper ( optional ) 
• Few sprigs of cilantro ( optional ) 
• 2 spring ( green ) onions ( optional ) 
Large Fiber Loaded Salad as a meal on its own – only 258 calories per
serving
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
This is what I eat every second evening and I can ’ t get enough of it !  !  ! This is the
real secret to lose weight while having full stomach with grade A ingredients !  ! 
• 1 cup of spinach
• 1 cup of shredded cabbage
• Yogurt dressing
• Cayenne pepper ( optional ) 
• Few sprigs of cilantro ( optional ) 
• 2 spring ( green ) onions
• 5 oz . low-fat farmers cheese
Pour yogurt dressing into the salad bowl . Add farmers ’ cheese and mix
thoroughly . Cut spring onions in small pieces and add to the cheese mixture and
mix . Add spinach and cabbage and mix thoroughly . Add spices ( optional )  . 

Greek Salad
Serves 4 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 head iceberg lettuce
• 1 head romaine lettuce
• 1 lb . plump tomatoes
• 6 oz . Greek or black olives , sliced
• 4 oz . sliced radishes
• 4 oz . low-fat feta or goat cheese
• 2 oz . anchovies ( optional ) 
Dressing : 
• 3 oz . olive oil or avocado oil
• 3 oz . fresh lemon juice
• 1 tsp . dried oregano
• 1 tsp . black pepper
• 1 tsp . salt
• 4 cloves garlic , minced
Wash and cut lettuce into pieces . Slice tomatoes in quarters . Combine
olives , lettuce , tomatoes , and radishes in large bowl . Mix dressing
ingredients together and toss with vegetables . Pour out into a shallow
serving bowl . Crumble feta / goat cheese over all , and arrange anchovy
fillets on top ( if desired )  . 
Cucumber , Cilantro , Quinoa Tabbouleh
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF , V
• 1 cup cooked quinoa mixed with 1 tbsp . sesame seeds
• 1 / 2 cup chopped tomato and green pepper
• 1 cup chopped cucumber
• 1 / 2 cup chopped cilantro Dressing : 
• 1 tbsp . olive oil or cumin oil
• 1 tbsp . fresh lemon juice
• pinch of black pepper
• pinch of sea salt
Instructions : Mix all ingredients . 

Almond , Quinoa , Red Peppers & Arugula Salad
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF , V
• 1 cup cooked quinoa mixed with 1 tbsp . pumpkin seeds
• 1 / 2 cup chopped almonds
• 1 cup chopped arugula
• 1 / 2 cup sliced red peppers Dressing : 
• 1 tbsp . olive oil or cumin oil
• 1 tbsp . fresh lemon juice
• pinch of black pepper
• pinch of sea salt
Instructions : Mix all ingredients . 

Asparagus , Quinoa & Red Peppers Salad
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF , V
• 1 cup cooked quinoa mixed with 1 tbsp . sunflower seeds
• 1 cup sliced red peppers
• 1 cup grilled asparagus
• Garnish with lime and parsley
Dressing : 
• 1 tbsp . olive oil or avocado oil
• 1 tbsp . fresh lemon juice
• pinch of black pepper
• pinch of sea salt
Instructions : Mix all ingredients . 

Chickpeas , Quinoa , Cucumber & Tomato Salad
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF , V
• 1 cup cooked quinoa mixed with 1 tbsp . sesame seeds
• 1 cup cooked chickpeas
• 1 cup chopped cucumber and green onions
• 1 / 2 cup chopped tomato Dressing : 
• 1 tbsp . olive oil or avocado oil
• 1 tbsp . fresh lemon juice
• pinch of black pepper
• pinch of sea salt
Instructions : Mix all ingredients . 

Strawberry Spinach Salad
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 2 tbsp . black sesame seeds
• 1 tbsp . poppy seeds
• 1 / 2 cup olive oil or avocado oil
• 1 / 4 cup lemon juice
• 1 / 4 tsp . paprika
• 1 bag fresh spinach - chopped , washed and dried
• 1 quart strawberries , sliced
• 1 / 4 cup toasted slivered almonds Instructions
Whisk together the sesame seeds , olive oil , poppy seeds , 
paprika , lemon juice and onion . Refrigerate . 
In a large bowl , combine the spinach , strawberries and almonds . Pour
dressing over salad . Toss and refrigerate 15 minutes before serving . 
Tuna Bean Salad
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Ingredients
• 1 can tuna in water , drained
• 1 / 3 cup four bean mix ( or just white or red beans )  , drained , rinsed • 1 tomato , 
deseeded , chopped
• 1 large celery stick , trimmed , finely chopped
• 1 / 2 small onion , halved , thinly sliced
• 1 / 2 cup flat-leaf parsley leaves , chopped
• 1 / 2 lemon , rind finely grated , juiced
• 1 garlic clove , crushed & 1 tbsp . extra-virgin olive oil Mix all ingredients and
serve . 

Quinoa Salad
Serves : 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF
For the salad • 2 cups cooked quinoa
• 2-3 cups frozen green peas
• 1 / 2 cup low-fat feta cheese
• 6oz . pork , cubed • 1 / 2 cup freshly chopped basil and cilantro
• 1 / 2 cup almonds , pulsed in a food processor until crushed For the
dressing
• 1 / 3 cup lemon juice ( 1-2 large juicy lemons ) 
• 1 / 3 cup olive oil or avocado oil • 1 / 4 tsp . salt ( more to taste ) 
• a few teaspoons raw honey , to taste Instructions
Bring a pot of water to boil and then lower the heat . Add the peas
and cook covered until bright green . In the meantime , brown pork
in a skillet . Toss the quinoa with the pork , peas , feta , herbs , and
almonds . 
Puree all the dressing ingredients in the food processor . Toss the
dressing with the salad ingredients . Season generously with salt and
pepper . Serve with baby spinach . 

Cauliflower & Eggs Salad
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , NF
• 1 cup chopped Cauliflower
• 2 hardboiled eggs - chopped , 
• 2 oz . shredded cheddar cheese , low-fat
• 1 red onion , celery , 
• 1 dill pickles , 
• 1 tbsp . yellow mustard . 
Mix all ingredients . 
Quinoa & almond Superfoods Tabbouleh
Serves 2-3
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF
• 2 cups cooked quinoa
• 1 bunch mint , leaves picked & 1 bunch flat leaf parsley • 1 / 2 small red onion , 
finely chopped
• 1 / 4 Cup lemon juice & 1 / 4 Cup extra virgin olive oil or avocado oil • 1 / 2 Cup
whole almonds & 1 / 2 cup chia or sunflower seeds • 1 Cup cherry tomatoes & 1
Avocado optional • 1 Cup chopped Kale or Dandelion
• Low fat yogurt , to serve , optional Instructions
Cook quinoa and let it cool . Chop off and discard half of the parsley stalks . 
Finely chop the remaining parsley bunch , mint and greens . Stir herbs in a salad
bowl and add onion to drained quinoa . Combine lemon juice and olive oil and
season well . Add other ingredients , mix and dress salad . 
Greek Cucumber Salad
Serves 2-3
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 2-3 cucumbers , sliced
• 2 teaspoons salt
• 3 tbsp . lemon juice
• 1 / 4 tsp . paprika
• 1 / 4 tsp . white pepper
• 1 / 2 clove garlic , minced
• 4 fresh green onions , diced
• 1 cup thick Greek Yogurt • 1 / 4 tsp . paprika Instructions
Slice cucumbers thinly , sprinkle with salt and mix . Set
aside for one hour . Mix lemon juice , water , garlic , paprika and white
pepper , and set aside . Squeeze liquid from cucumber slices a few at a
time , and place slices in the bowl . Discard liquid . Add lemon juice
mixture , green onions , and yogurt . Mix and sprinkle additional
paprika or dill over top . Chill for 1-2 hours . 
Mediterranean Salad
Serves 3-4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 medium head romaine lettuce , torn
• 3 small tomatoes , diced
• 1 medium cucumber , sliced
• 1 small green bell pepper , sliced
• 1 small onion , cut into rings
• 6 radishes , thinly sliced
• 1 / 2 cup flat leaf parsley , chopped
• 1 / 3 cup olive oil or avocado oil
• 3 tbsp . lemon juice
• 1 garlic clove , minced
• Salt & pepper
• 1 tsp . fresh mint , minced
Instructions
Combine lettuce , tomatoes , cucumber , pepper , onion , radishes 
& parsley in a salad bowl . Whisk together olive oil , lemon juice , 
garlic , salt , pepper & mint . Pour over salad & toss to coat . 
Pomegranate Avocado salad
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 1 cup mixed greens , spinach , arugula , red leaf lettuce • 1 ripe
avocado , cut into 1 / 2-inch pieces • 1 / 2 cup pomegranate seeds
• 1 / 4 cup pecan
• 1 / 4 cup blackberries
• 1 / 4 cup cherry tomatoes
• olive oil or avocado oil , salt , lemon juice
Instructions
Combine greens , pecan , cut avocado , tomatoes , pomegranates and
blackberries in a salad bowl . Whisk together salt , olive oil and lemon
juice and pour over salad . 
Superfoods Salad
Allergies : SF , GF
Typical superfoods salad should have : 1 part leafy greens - kale , 
spinach , dandelion and optional cilantro
1 part veggies -carrots , tomato , peppers , beets , broccoli , celery , and
some pungent veggies - shallots , ginger or garlic 1 part fruits -
pomegranates , avocado , blackberries , blueberries , sliced apple , 
grapefruit , raspberries , orange 1 / 2 part of nuts & seeds - almond , 
walnuts , chia , flax meal , sunflower seeds , pumpkin seeds
1 part protein - low-fat feta , yogurt , 2 boiled eggs or tuna
1 part cooked quinoa ( optional ) Make your own mix and use different
ingredient every time
Roasted Beet Salad
Serves 3-4
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
Toss 4 beets cut in half in a baking dish with olive oil , salt and pepper . Cover
and roast at 425 degrees F until tender ; let cool , then rub off the skins . Toss with
any juices from the baking dish , capers , chopped pickles , a dash each of hot
sauce , and chopped parsley or dill . 
Apple Coleslaw
Serves 1-2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 cup chopped cabbage ( various color ) 
• 1 tart apple chopped
• 1 celery , chopped
• 1 red pepper chopped
• 5 tsp . olive oil or avocado oil • juice of 1 lemon
• 2 Tbs raw honey ( optional ) • dash sea salt
Instructions Toss the cabbage , apple , celery , and pepper together in a
large bowl . In a smaller bowl , whisk remaining ingredients . Drizzle
over coleslaw and toss to coat . 
Appetizers
Deviled Eggs
Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
Make deviled eggs and optionally add some chopped green chilies , black olives , 
chili powder and cayenne . 
Hummus
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 2 cups cooked chickpeas ( garbanzo beans ) • 1 / 4 cup ( 59 ml ) fresh lemon juice , 
about 1 large lemon • 1 / 4 cup ( 59 ml ) tahini
• Half of a large garlic clove , minced
• 2 tbsp . olive oil or cumin oil , plus more for serving
• 1 / 2 to 1 tsp . salt
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground cumin
• 2 to 3 tbsp . water
• Dash of ground paprika for serving
Instructions
Combine tahini and lemon juice and blend for 1 minute . Add the olive oil , 
minced garlic , cumin and the salt to tahini and lemon mixture . Process for 30
seconds , scrape sides and then process 30 seconds more . 
Add half of the chickpeas to the food processor and process for 1 minute . Scrape
sides , add remaining chickpeas and process for 1 to 2 minutes . 
Transfer the hummus into a bowl then drizzle about 1 tbsp . of olive oil over the
top and sprinkle with paprika . 

Guacamole
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 4 ripe avocados
• 3 tbsp . freshly squeezed lemon juice ( 1 lemon ) • 8 dashes hot pepper sauce
• 1 / 2 cup diced onion
• 1 large garlic clove , minced
• 1 tsp . salt
• 1 tsp . ground black pepper
• 1 medium tomato , seeded , and small-diced Instructions
Cut the avocados in half , remove the pits , and scoop the flesh out . Immediately
add the lemon juice , hot pepper sauce , garlic , onion , salt , and pepper and toss
well . Dice avocados . Add the tomatoes . Mix well and taste for salt and pepper . 
Baba Ghanoush
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 large eggplant
• 1 / 4 cup tahini , plus more as needed
• 3 garlic cloves , minced
• 1 / 4 cup fresh lemon juice , plus more as needed • 1 pinch ground cumin
• salt , to taste
• 1 tbsp . extra-virgin olive oil or avocado oil • 1 tbsp . chopped flat-leaf parsley
• 1 / 4 cup brine-cured black olives , such as Kalamata Instructions : Grill eggplant
for 10 to 15 minutes . Heat the oven ( 375 F )  . 
Put the eggplant to a baking sheet and bake 15-20 minutes or until very soft . 
Remove from the oven , let cool , and peel off and discard the skin . Put the
eggplant flesh in a bowl . Using a fork , mash the eggplant to a paste . 
Add the 1 / 4 cup tahini , garlic , cumin , 1 / 4 cup lemon juice and mix well . Season
with salt to taste . Transfer the mixture to a serving bowl and spread with the
back of a spoon to form a shallow well . Drizzle the olive oil over the top and
sprinkle with the parsley . 
Serve at room temperature . 
Espinacase la Catalana
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 2 cups spinach
• 2 cloves garlic
• 3 tbsp cashews
• 3 tbsp dried currants
• olive oil or avocado oil Instructions
Wash the spinach and trim off the stems . Steam the spinach for few minutes . 
Peel and slice the garlic . Pour a few tablespoons of olive oil and cover the
bottom of a frying pan . Heat pan on medium and sauté garlic for 1-2 minutes . 
Add the cashews and the currants to the pan and continue to sauté for 1 minute . 
Add the spinach and mix well , coating with oil . Salt to taste . 
Tapenade
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 / 2 pound pitted mixed olives
• 2 anchovy fillets , rinsed
• 1 small clove garlic , minced
• 2 tbsp . capers
• 2 to 3 fresh basil leaves
• 1 tbsp . freshly squeezed lemon juice
• 2 tbsp . extra-virgin olive oil or cumin oil Instructions
Rinse the olives in cool water . Place all ingredients in the bowl of a food
processor . Process to combine , until it becomes a coarse paste . Transfer to a
bowl and serve
Red Pepper Dip
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 pound red peppers
• 1 cup farmers ’ cheese
• 1 / 4 cup virgin olive oil or avocado oil • 1 tbsp minced garlic
• Lemon juice , salt , basil , oregano , red pepper flakes to taste . 
Instructions
Roast the peppers . Cover them and cool for about 15 minutes . Peel the
peppers and remove the seeds and stems . Chop the peppers . 
Transfer the peppers and garlic to a food processor and process until
smooth . Add the farmers ’ cheese and garlic and process until smooth . 
With the machine running , add olive oil and lemon juice . Add the
basil , oregano , red pepper flakes , and 1 / 4 tsp . salt , and process until
smooth . Adjust the seasoning , to taste . Pour to a bowl and refrigerate . 

Roasted Garlic
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
Heat the oven to 350 F . 
Rub olive oil into the top of each garlic head and place it cut side
down on a foil-lined baking sheet . Bake until the cloves turn golden . 
Remove from the oven and let cool . Squeeze each head of garlic to
expel the cloves into a bowl . Mash into a paste . 
Eggplant and Yogurt
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
Mix 1 pound chopped eggplant , 3 unpeeled shallots and 3 unpeeled
garlic cloves with 1 / 4 cup olive oil , salt and pepper on a baking sheet . 
Roast at 400 degrees for half an hour . Cool and squeeze the shallots
and garlic from their skins and chop . Mix with the eggplant , almond , 
1 / 2 cup plain yogurt , dill and salt and pepper . 
Caponata
Serves 3-4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF
• coconut oil • 2 large eggplants , cut into large chunks • 1 tsp . dried oregano
• Sea salt • Freshly ground black pepper • 1 small onion , peeled and finely
chopped • 2 cloves garlic , peeled and finely sliced • 1 small bunch fresh flat-leaf
parsley , leaves picked and stalks finely chopped • 2 tbsp . salted capers , rinsed , 
soaked and drained • 1 handful green olives , stones removed • 2-3 tbsp . lemon
juice
• 5 large ripe tomatoes , roughly chopped • coconut oil
• 2 tbsp . slivered almonds , lightly toasted , optional Instructions
Heat coconut oil in a pan and add eggplant , oregano and salt . Cook on a high
heat for around 4 or 5 minutes . Add the onion , garlic and parsley stalks and
continue cooking for another few minutes . Add drained capers and the olives
and lemon juice . When all the juice has evaporated , add the tomatoes and
simmer until tender . 
Season with salt and olive oil to taste before serving . Sprinkle with almonds . 
Soups
Cream of Broccoli Soup
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 1 / 2 pounds broccoli , fresh
• 2 cups water
• 3 / 4 tsp . salt , pepper to taste
• 1 / 2 cup tapioca flour , mixed with 1 cup cold water
• 1 / 2 cup coconut cream • 1 / 2 cup low-fat farmers cheese
Steam or boil broccoli until it gets tender . 
Put 2 cups water and coconut cream in top of double boiler . 
Add salt , cheese and pepper . Heat until cheese gets melted . 
Add broccoli . Mix water and tapioca flour in a small bowl . 
Stir tapioca mixture into cheese mixture in double boiler and heat
until soup thickens . 
Lentil Soup
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 2 tbsp . olive oil or avocado oil
• 1 cup finely chopped onion
• 1 / 2 cup chopped carrot
• 1 / 2 cup chopped celery
• 2 teaspoons salt
• 1 pound lentils
• 1 cup chopped tomatoes
• 2 quarts chicken or vegetable broth
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground coriander & toasted cumin
Instructions
Place the olive oil into a large Dutch oven . Set over medium heat . 
Once hot , add the celery , onion , carrot and salt and do until the onions
are translucent . Add the lentils , tomatoes , cumin , broth and coriander
and stir to combine . Increase the heat and bring just to a boil . Reduce
the heat , cover and simmer at a low until the lentils are tender 
( approx . 35 to 40 minutes )  . Puree with a bender to your preferred
consistency ( optional )  . Serve immediately . 

Cold Cucumber Avocado Soup
Serves 2-3
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 cucumber peeled , seeded and cut into 2-inch chunks
• 1 avocado , peeled
• 2 chopped scallions
• 1 cup chicken broth
• 3 / 4 cup Greek low-fat yogurt
• 2 tbsp . lemon juice
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground pepper , or to taste
Garnish : 
• Chopped chives , dill , mint , scallions or cucumber
Instructions
Combine the cucumber , avocado and scallions in a blender . Pulse
until chopped . 
Add yogurt , broth and lemon juice and continue until smooth . 
Season with pepper and salt to taste and chill for 4 hours . 
Taste for seasoning and garnish . 
Bouillabaisse
Serves 6 . 
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 3 pounds of 3 different kinds of fish fillets
• 1 / 2 cup coconut oil • 1-2 pounds of Oysters , clams , or mussels
• 1 cup cooked shrimp , crab , or lobster meat , or rock lobster tails • 1
cup thinly sliced onions • 4 Shallots or the white parts of 2 or 3 leeks , 
thinly sliced
• 2 cloves garlic , crushed • 1 large tomato , chopped • 1 sweet red
pepper , chopped • 4 stalks celery , thinly sliced
• 2-inch slice of fennel or 1 tsp . of fennel seed
• 3 sprigs fresh thyme or 3 / 4 tsp . dried thyme
• 1 bay leaf • 2-3 whole cloves • Zest of half an orange • 1 / 2 tsp . 
saffron • 2 teaspoons salt • 1 / 4 tsp . ground black pepper
• 1 cup clam juice or fish broth
• 2 Tbps lemon juice • 2 / 3 cup white wine Instructions
In a large saucepan heat 1 / 4 cup of the coconut oil . When it is hot , add
onions and shallots ( or leeks )  . Sauté for a minute . Add crushed garlic , 
and sweet red pepper . Add celery , tomato , and fennel . Stir the
vegetables until well coated . Add another 1 / 4 cup of coconut oil , bay
leaf , thyme , cloves and the orange zest . Cook until the onion is
golden . Cut fish fillets into 2-inch pieces . Add 2 cups of water and the
pieces of fish to the vegetable mixture . Bring to a boil , then reduce
heat and let it simmer , uncovered , for about 10 minutes . Add clams , 
oysters or mussels ( optional ) and crabmeat , shrimp or lobster tails , cut
into pieces . Add salt , saffron and pepper . Add lemon juice , clam juice , 
and white wine . Bring to a simmer again and cook for 5 minutes
longer . 

Gaspacho
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 / 2 cup of flax seeds meal
• 1kg tomatoes , diced • 1 red pepper and 1 green pepper , diced
• 1 cucumber , peeled and diced
• 2 cloves of garlic , peeled and crushed
• 150ml extra virgin olive oil or avocado oil • 2tbsp lemon juice • Salt , 
to taste Instructions
Mix the peppers , tomatoes and cucumber with the crushed garlic and
olive oil in the bowl of a blender . Add flax meal to the mixture . Blend
until smooth . Add salt and lemon juice to taste and stir well . 
Refrigerate until well chilled . Serve with black olives , hard-boiled
egg , cilantro , mint or parsley . 
Italian Beef Soup
Serves 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 pound minced beef
• 1 clove garlic , minced
• 2 cups beef broth
• few large tomatoes
• 1 cup sliced carrots
• 2 cups cooked beans
• 2 small zucchini , cubed
• 2 cups spinach - rinsed and torn
• 1 / 4 tsp . black pepper
• 1 / 4 tsp . salt Brown beef with garlic in a stockpot . Stir in broth , carrots and
tomatoes . Season with salt and pepper . Reduce heat , cover , and simmer for 15
minutes . 
Stir in beans with liquid and zucchini . Cover , and simmer
until zucchini is tender . Remove from heat , add spinach and cover . Serve after 5
minutes . 
Creamy roasted mushroom
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 pound Portobello mushrooms , cut into 1inch pieces • 1 / 2 pound shiitake
mushrooms , stemmed
• 6 tbsp . olive oil or avocado oil • 2 cups vegetable broth
• 1 1 / 2 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 onion , chopped
• 3 garlic cloves , minced
• 3 tbsp . arrowroot flour
• 1 cup coconut cream
• 3 / 4 tsp . chopped thyme
Instructions
Heat oven to 400°F . Line one large baking sheets with foil . Spread mushrooms
and drizzle some olive oil on them . Season with salt and pepper and toss . Cover
with foil and bake them for half an hour . Uncover and continue baking 15
minutes more . Cool slightly . Mix one half of the mushrooms with one can of
broth in a blender . Set aside . 
Melt coconut oil in a large pot over high heat . Add onion and garlic and sauté
until onion is translucent . Add flour and stir 2 minutes . Add cream , broth , and
thyme . Stir in remaining cooked mushrooms and mushroom puree . Simmer over
low heat until thickened ( approx . 10 minutes )  . Season to taste with salt and
pepper . 

Black Bean Soup
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 / 4 cup coconut oil
• 1 / 4 cup Onion , Diced
• 1 / 4 cup Carrots , Diced
• 1 / 4 cup Green Bell Pepper , Diced
• 1 cup beef broth
• 3 pounds cooked Black Beans
• 1 tbsp . lemon juice
• 2 teaspoons Garlic
• 2 teaspoons Salt
• 1 / 2 tsp . Black Pepper , Ground
• 2 teaspoons Chili Powder
• 8 oz . pork
• 1 tbsp . tapioca flour
• 2 tbsp . Water Instructions
Place coconut oil , onion , carrot , and bell pepper in a stock pot . Cook
the veggies until tender . Bring broth to a boil . Add cooked beans , 
broth and the remaining ingredients ( except tapioca flour and 2 tbsp . 
water ) to the vegetables . Bring that mixture to a simmer and cook
approximately 15 minutes . Puree 1 quart of the soup in a blender and
put back into the pot . Combine the tapioca flour and 2 tbsp . water in a
separate bowl . Add the tapioca flour mixture to the bean soup and
bring to a boil for 1 minute . 

Ajoblanco con uvas - Almond and garlic soup-White Gazpacho
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 1 cup flax seeds meal • 200 g almonds , blanched and skinned • 3
cloves garlic • 150 ml extra virgin olive oil or avocado oil • 5 tbsp . 
lemon juice • 2 tsp salt • 1 liter water • 150 g grapes , seeded
Instructions
Put flax meal with the almonds and garlic in the blender . Blend to a
smooth paste . Add a little water if necessary . Add the oil in a slow
stream with the motor running . Add the lemon juice and salt too . Pour
the mixture into a pitcher and add the remaining water . Add salt or
lemon juice to taste . Chill the soup . Stir before serving and garnish
with grapes . 
Squash soup
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 Squash • 1 carrot , chopped • 1 onion ( diced ) • 3 / 4 – 1 cup coconut
milk • 1 / 4 – 1 / 2 cup water • olive oil or avocado oil • Salt • Pepper
• Cinnamon • Turmeric Instructions
Cut the squash and spoon out the seeds . Cut it into large pieces and
place on a baking sheet . Sprinkle with salt , olive oil , and pepper and
bake at 375 degrees F until soft ( approx . 1 hour )  . Let cool . 
In the meantime , sauté the onions in olive oil ( put it in a soup pot )  . 
Add the carrots . Add 3 / 4 cup coconut milk and 1 / 4 cup water after
few minutes and let simmer . Scoop the squash out of its skin . Add it
to the soup pot . Stir to combine the ingredients and let simmer a few
minutes . Add more milk or water if needed . Season to taste with the
salt , pepper and spices . Blend until smooth and creamy . 
Sprinkle it with toasted pumpkin seeds . 
Kale White Bean Pork Soup
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 2 tbsp . each extra-virgin olive oil or cumin oil and coconut oil • 3 tbsp . chili
powder
• 1 tbsp . jalapeno hot sauce
• 2 pounds bone-in pork chops
• Salt • 4 stalks celery , chopped
• 1 large white onion , chopped
• 3 cloves garlic , chopped
• 2 cups chicken broth
• 2 cups diced tomatoes
• 2 cups cooked white beans
• 6 cups packed Kale
Instructions
Preheat the broiler . Whisk hot sauce , 1 tbsp . olive oil and chili powder in a bowl . 
Season the pork chops with 1 / 2 tsp . salt . Rub chops with the spice mixture on
both sides and place them on a rack set over a baking sheet . Set aside . 
Heat 1 tbsp . coconut oil in a large pot over high heat . Add the celery , garlic , 
onion and the remaining 2 tbsp . chili powder . Cook until onions are translucent , 
stirring ( approx . 8 minutes )  . 
Add tomatoes and the chicken broth to the pot . Cook and stir occasionally until
reduced by about one-third ( approx . 7 minutes )  . Add the kale and the beans . 
Reduce the heat to medium , cover and cook until the kale is tender ( approx . 7
minutes )  . Add up to 1 / 2 cup water if the mixture looks dry and season with salt . 
In the meantime , broil the pork until browned ( approx . 4 to 6 minutes )  . Flip and
broil until cooked through . Serve with the kale and beans . 
Avgolemono – Greek lemon chicken soup
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 4 cups chicken broth • 1 / 4 cup uncooked quinoa
• salt and pepper • 3 eggs • 3 tbsp . lemon juice • Handful fresh dill 
( chopped ) • shredded roasted chicken ( optional ) Bring the broth to a
boil in a saucepan . Add the quinoa and cook until tender . Season with
the salt and pepper . Reduce heat to low and let simmer . In a separate
bowl , whisk lemon juice and the eggs until smooth . Add about 1 cup
of the hot broth into the egg / lemon mixture and whisk to combine . 
Add the mixture back to the saucepan . Stir until the soup becomes
opaque and thickens . Add dill , salt and pepper to taste and chicken if
you have it , and serve . 
Egg-Drop Soup
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 1 1 / 2 quarts chicken broth
• 2 tbsps . Tapioca flour , mixed in 1 / 4 cup cold water
• 2 eggs , slightly beaten with a fork
• 2 scallions , chopped , including green ends
Instructions
Bring broth to a boil . Slowly pour in the tapioca flour mixture
while stirring the broth . The broth should thicken . Reduce heat
and let it simmer . Mix in the eggs very slowly while stirring . As soon
as the last drop of egg is in , turn off the heat . Serve with chopped
scallions on top . 
Creamy Tomato Basil Soup
Serves 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 4 tomatoes - peeled , seeded and diced
• 4 cups tomato juice * 
• 14 leaves fresh basil
• 1 cup coconut cream
• salt to taste
• ground black pepper to taste Instructions
Combine tomatoes and tomato juice in stock pot . Simmer 30 minutes . 
Puree mixture with basil leaves in a processor . Put back in a stock pot
and add coconut cream . Add salt and pepper to taste . 
Minestrone
Serves 8-10
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 3 tbsp . coconut oil
• 3 cloves garlic , chopped
• 2 onions , chopped
• 2 cups chopped celery
• 5 carrots , sliced
• 2 cups chicken broth
• 2 cups water
• 4 cups tomato sauce
• 1 / 2 oz . red wine ( optional ) 
• 1 cup cooked kidney beans
• 2 cups green beans
• 2 cups baby spinach , rinsed
• 3 zucchinis , quartered and sliced
• 1 tbsp . chopped oregano
• 2 tbsp . chopped basil
• salt and pepper to taste
• 1 tbsp . olive oil or cumin oil Instructions
Heat coconut oil over medium heat in a stock pot , and sauté garlic for
few minutes . Add onion and sauté for few more minutes . Add celery
and carrots and sauté for 2 minutes . 
Add chicken broth , tomato sauce and water and bring to boil , stirring
frequently . Add red wine at this point . Reduce heat to low and add
kidney beans , zucchini , green beans , spinach leaves , oregano , basil , 
salt and pepper . Simmer for 30 to 40 minutes . 

Grilled Meats & Salad
Chicken and Large Fiber Loaded Salad with Italian Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 6oz . of Chicken ( or turkey )  , skinless , boneless grilled or prepared in the skillet . 
• Large mixed spinach and lettuce salad with Italian Dressing and half a tsp of
mustard . Salad can be as large as you want , but use half a cup of the dressing . 
• Salad with Yogurt Dressing would have 80 calories more ( 330 calories total ) 
Salmon with Large Fiber Loaded Salad with Italian Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 4oz . of Salmon grilled or prepared in the skillet . 
• Large mixed spinach and lettuce salad with “ Italian Dressing ” and some thyme
sprinkled on top of it . Salad can be as large as you want , but use the prescribed
amount of the dressing . 
Herb Crusted Salmon
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Rub some tarragon , chives and parsley over 4 oz . salmon and add some salt and
pepper . Heat the pan with 1 tsp of coconut oil to medium high and place the
salmon , skin-side up in the pan . Cook until golden brown on 1 side , about 4
minutes . Turn the fish over and cook until it feels firm to the touch . Salmon is
done when it flakes easily with a fork . Serve with a lemon wedge . 
• Large mixed spinach and lettuce salad with “ Italian Dressing ” and some thyme
sprinkled on top of it . Salad can be as large as you want , but use the prescribed
amount of the dressing . 
Ground Beef Patty with Large Fiber Loaded Salad
with Yogurt Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 5oz . lean ground beef patty grilled or prepared in the skillet . 
• Large mixed spinach and shredded cabbage salad with Yogurt Dressing . Salad
can be as large as you want , but use half a cup of a dressing . 

Lean Pork with Fiber Loaded Salad with Yogurt Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 5oz . of lean Pork Tenderloin grilled or prepared in the skillet . 
• Large mixed spinach and shredded cabbage salad with Yogurt Dressing and
half a tsp of mustard . Salad can be as large as you want , but use half a cup of the
dressing . 
Caribbean Chicken salad
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
2 boneless skinless chicken breasts Marinade
1 / 2 cup fish sauce
2 tomatoes ( seeded and chopped ) 
1 / 2 cup chopped onion
2 tsps . jalapeno chilies ( minced ) 
2 tsps . chopped cilantro fresh
Raw honey Lime Dressing : 
1 / 4 cup mustard
1 / 4 cup raw honey
1 tbsp coconut oil 1 1 / 2 tbsps . lemon juice
1 1 / 2 tsps . lime juice
3 / 4 lb mixed greens
Instructions
Blend all the marinade ingredients in a small bowl with a hand blender . Cover
and chill . Marinate the chicken for at least two hours in the fridge . Grill the
chicken for few minutes per side or until done . 
Serve the greens into 2 large salad bowls . 
Slice the chicken into thin strips . Divide among bowls . 
Pour the dressing aside and serve with the salads . 

Tuna with Large Fiber Loaded Salad with Italian Dressing
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 6 oz . can of Tuna , drained . 
• Large mixed spinach and green onion salad with Italian Dressing and half a tsp
of mustard . Salad can be as large as you want , but use only the prescribed
amount of dressing . You may use fish sauce instead of salt . 

Stews , Chilies and Curries
Stuffed Peppers with beans
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
2 large red or green bell peppers
1 cup stewed tomatoes
1 / 3 cup brown rice
2 tbsp . hot water
2 green onions
8 ounces cooked black beans
1 / 4 tsp . crushed red pepper flakes
Instructions
Discard seeds and membrane from peppers . Place cut-side down and
cover . Bake at 375F for 15 minutes . 
While the peppers are cooking , cook tomatoes , rice and water for 15
minutes . In the meantime , thinly slice green onions . 
Stir beans , green onions , and pepper flakes into tomato mixture . Cook
for 10 minutes more . Drain peppers . Turn cut-side up . Spoon beans
mixture evenly into peppers and bake in the oven for 5-10 minutes . 

Vegetarian Chili
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
1 tbsp . coconut oil
1 cup chopped onions
3 / 4 cup chopped carrots
3 cloves garlic , minced
1 cup chopped green bell pepper
1 cup chopped red bell pepper
3 / 4 cup chopped celery
1 tbsp . chili powder
1-1 / 2 cups chopped mushrooms
3 cups chopped tomatoes
2 cups cooked kidney beans
1 tbsp . ground cumin
1-1 / 2 teaspoons oregano
1-1 / 2 teaspoons crushed basil leaves Instructions
Heat coconut oil in a large saucepan and add onions , carrots and
garlic ; sauté until tender . Stir in green pepper , red pepper , celery and
chili powder . 
Cook , stirring often , until vegetables are tender , about 6 minutes . 
To the vegetables add mushrooms ; cook 4 minutes . Stir in tomatoes , 
kidney beans , corn , cumin , oregano and basil . Bring to a boil . Reduce
heat to medium . Cover and simmer for 20 minutes , stirring
occasionally . 

Lentil Stew
Recipe is for 4 servings , but you might want to adjust to 2 servings ( eat one , 
freeze one ) 
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 cup dry lentils
• 3 1 / 2 cups chicken broth
• few tomatoes
• 1 medium potato chopped + 1 / 2 cup chopped carrot • 1 / 2 cup chopped onion + 
1 / 2 cup chopped celery ( optional ) • few sprigs of parsley and basil + 1 garlic
clove ( minced ) • 1 pound of cubed lean pork or beef + pepper to taste
You can eat a salad of your choice with this stew . 
Braised Green Peas with Beef
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 cup fresh or frozen green peas
• 1 onion , finely chopped
• 2 cloves of garlic , thinly sliced and 1 / 2 inch of peeled / sliced fresh ginger ( if
you like ) 
• 1 / 2 tsp . red pepper flakes , or to taste
• 1 tomato , roughly chopped
• 1 chopped carrot
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 / 2 cup chicken broth
• 4 oz . cubed beef
• Salt and freshly ground black pepper
Heat the coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat . Sauté the onion , garlic and
ginger until they are soft . Add the red pepper , carrot , and tomatoes and sauté
until the tomato begins to soften . Add in the green peas . Add 4 oz . cubed lean
beef . Add in the broth and simmer over medium heat . Cover and cook until the
peas are tender . Season to taste with salt and pepper . 

White Chicken Chili
Serves : 5
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 4 large boneless , skinless chicken breasts
• 2 green bell peppers
• 1 large yellow onion
• 1 jalapeno • 1 / 2 cup diced green chilies ( optional ) 
• 1 / 2 cup of spring onions
• 1 . 5 tbsp . coconut oil • 3 cups cooked white beans
• 3 . 5 cups chicken or vegetable broth
• 1 tsp . ground cumin
• 1 / 4 tsp . cayenne pepper
• salt to taste
Instructions
Bring a pot of water to boil . Add the chicken breasts and cook until
cooked through . Drain water and allow chicken to cool . When cool , 
shred and set aside . 
Dice the bell peppers , jalapeno and onion . Melt the coconut oil in a
pot over high heat . Add the peppers and onions and sauté until soft , 
approx . 8-10 minutes . 
Add the broth , beans , chicken and spices to the pot . Stir and bring to a
low boil . Cover and simmer for 25-30 minutes . 
Simmer for 10 more minutes and stir occasionally . Remove from heat . 
Let stand for 10 minutes to thicken . Top with cilantro . 
Kale Pork
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 pound pork tenderloin , trimmed and cut into 1-inch pieces • 3 / 4 tsp . salt
• 1 medium onion , finely chopped
• 4 cloves garlic , minced
• 2 teaspoons paprika
• 1 / 4 tsp . crushed red pepper ( optional ) 
• 1 cup white wine
• 4 plum tomatoes , chopped
• 4 cups chicken broth
• 1 bunch kale , chopped
• 2 cups cooked white beans
Instructions
Heat coconut oil in a pot over medium heat . Add pork , season with salt and
cook until no longer pink . Transfer to a plate and leave juices in the pot . 
Add onion to the pot and cook until turns translucent . Add paprika , garlic and
crushed red pepper and cook about 30 seconds . Add tomatoes and wine , increase
heat and stir to scrape up any browned bits . Add broth . Bring to a boil . 
Add kale and stir until it wilts . Lower the heat and simmer , until the kale is
tender . Stir in beans , pork and pork juices . Simmer for 2 more minutes . 

30-Minute Squash Cauliflower and Green Peppers
Coconut Curry
Serves : 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• Curry Paste • 3 cups peeled , chopped squash • 2 cups thick coconut milk
• 3 tbsp . coconut oil • 2 tbsp . raw honey
• 2 pounds tomatoes • 1 and 1 / 4 cup brown rice , uncooked • 1 cup chopped
Cauliflower • 1 cup chopped Green Peppers • Cilantro for topping
Instructions
Cook brown rice . Set aside . 
Make Curry Paste . Pour the coconut milk into the skillet and mix the curry and
raw honey into the coconut milk . Add the cauliflower , squash , and green
peppers . Cover and simmer until squash is tender . Remove from heat and let
stand for 10 minutes . The sauce will thicken . 
Serve the curry over brown rice . Add chopped cilantro before serving . 
Crockpot Red Curry Lamb
Serves : 16
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 3 pounds cubed lamb meat
• Curry Paste * 
• 4 cups tomato paste
• 1 tsp . salt plus more to taste
• 1 / 2 cup coconut milk or cream
Instructions
Make the Curry Paste . Add lamb and the curry paste in a crockpot . 
Pour one cup of tomato paste over the lamb . Add 2 cups of water to
the crockpot . Stir , cover and cook on high for 2 hours or low for 4-5
hours . Taste and season with salt . 
Stir in the coconut milk and sprinkle with cilantro before serving . 
Serve over brown rice or naan bread . 
Easy Lentil Dhal
Serves : 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 2 1 / 2 cups lentils
• 5-6 cups of water
• Curry Paste * 
• 1 / 2 cup coconut milk
• 1 / 3 cup water
• 1 / 2 teaspoons salt + 1 / 4 tsp . black pepper • lime juice • Cilantro
and spring onions for garnish
Instructions
Bring the water to a boil in a large pot . Add lentils and cook
uncovered for 10 minutes , stirring frequently . Remove from heat . Stir
in remaining ingredients . Season with salt and herbs for garnish . 

Gumbo
8 servings Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 pound medium shrimp peeled
• 1 / 2 pound skinless , boneless chicken breasts , cut bite size • 1 / 2 cup coconut oil
• 3 / 4 cup almond flour • 2 cups chopped onions
• 1 cup chopped celery
• 1 cup chopped green pepper
• 1 tsp . ground cumin
• 1 tbsp . minced fresh garlic
• 1 tsp . fresh thyme chopped
• 1 / 2 tsp . red pepper
• 6 cups chicken broth
• 2 cups diced tomatoes
• 3 cups sliced okra
• 1 / 2 cup fresh parsley chopped
• 2 bay leaves
• 1 tsp . hot sauce
Instructions
Sauté ' chicken on high heat until brown in a large pot . Remove and set aside . 
Chop onions , celery , and green pepper and set aside . 
Place oil and flour in pot . Stir well and brown to make a roux . When roux is
done add chopped vegetables . Sauté on low heat for 10 minutes . 
Slowly add chicken broth stirring constantly . 
Add chicken and all other ingredients except the okra , shrimp and parsley , which
will be saved for the end . 
Cover and simmer on low for half an hour . Remove lid and cook for half an hour
more , stirring occasionally . 
Add shrimp , okra and parsley . Continue to cook on low heat uncovered for 15
minutes . 
Chickpea Curry
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• Curry Paste • 4 cups cooked chickpeas
• 1 cup chopped cilantro Instructions
Make Curry Paste . Mix in chickpeas and their liquid . Continue to
cook . Stir until all ingredients are blended . Remove from heat . Stir in
cilantro just before serving , reserving 1 tbsp . for garnish . 
Red Curry Chicken
Serves : 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 2 cups cubed chicken meat
• Curry Paste • 2 cups tomato paste
• 1 / 4 cup coconut milk or cream
• Cilantro for garnishing
• Brown rice for serving
Instructions
Make Curry Paste . Add the tomato paste ; stir and simmer until
smooth . Add the chicken and the cream . Stir to combine and simmer
for 15-20 minutes . Serve with brown rice and cilantro . 
Braised Green Beans with Pork
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1cup fresh or frozen green beans
• 1 onion , finely chopped
• 2 cloves of garlic , thinly sliced
• 1 / 2 inch of peeled / sliced fresh ginger
• 1 / 2 tsp . red pepper flakes , or to taste
• 1 tomato , roughly chopped
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 / 2 cup chicken broth
• Salt and ground black pepper
• 1 / 4 lemon , cut into wedges , to serve
• 5 oz . lean pork
Instructions
Cut each bean in half . Heat the coconut oil in a skillet over medium heat . Sauté
the onion , garlic and ginger over medium heat until they are soft . Add the red
pepper and tomatoes and sauté until the tomato begins to break down . Stir in the
green beans . Add 5 oz . cubed lean pork . Add broth and bring to a simmer over
medium heat . Cover and cook until the beans are tender . Season to taste with salt
and pepper . Serve with lemon wedge on the side . 

Ratatouille
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 2 large eggplants
• 3 medium zucchinis
• 2 medium onions
• 2 red or green peppers
• 4 large tomatoes
• 2 cloves garlic , crushed
• 4 tbsp . coconut oil • 1 tbsp . fresh basil
• Salt and freshly milled black pepper
Instructions
Cut eggplant and zucchini into 1 inch slices . Then cut each slice in half . Salt
them and leave them for one hour . The salt will draw out the bitterness . 
Chop peppers and onions . Skin the tomatoes by boiling them for few minutes . 
Then quarter them , take out the seeds and chop the flesh . Fry garlic and the
onions in the coconut oil in a saucepan for a 10 minutes . Add the peppers . Dry
the eggplant and zucchini and add them to the saucepan . Add the basil , salt and
pepper . Stir and simmer for half an hour . 
Add the tomato flesh , check the seasoning and cook for an additional 15 minutes
with the lid off . 

Barbecued Beef
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1-1 / 2 cups tomato paste
• 1 / 4 cup lemon juice
• 2 tbsp . mustard
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 chopped carrot
• 1 / 4 tsp . ground black pepper
• 1 / 2 tsp . minced garlic
• 4 pounds boneless chuck roast
Instructions
In a large bowl , combine tomato paste , lemon juice and mustard . Stir
in salt , pepper and garlic . 
Place chuck roast and carrot in a slow cooker . Pour tomato mixture
over chuck roast . Cover , and cook on low for 7 to 9 hours . 
Remove chuck roast from slow cooker , shred with a fork , and return
to the slow cooker . Stir meat to evenly coat with sauce . Continue
cooking approximately 1 hour . 
Beef Tenderloin with Roasted Shallots
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF
• 3 / 4 pound shallots , halved lengthwise and peeled
• 1-1 / 2 tbsp . olive oil or avocado oil
• salt and pepper to taste
• 3 cups beef broth
• 3 / 4 cup red wine
• 1-1 / 2 teaspoons tomato paste
• 2 pounds beef tenderloin roast , trimmed
• 1 tsp . dried thyme
• 3 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 tbsp . almond flour
Instructions
Heat oven to 375 degrees F . Toss shallots with olive oil to coat in a
baking pan and season with salt and pepper . Roast until shallots are
tender , stirring occasionally , about half an hour . 
Combine wine and beef broth in a sauce pan and bring to a boil . Cook
over high heat . Volume should be reduced by half . Add in tomato
paste . Set aside . 
Pat beef dry and sprinkle with salt and thyme and pepper . Add beef to
pan oiled with coconut oil . Brown on all sides over high heat . 
Put pan back to the oven . Roast beef about half an hour for medium
rare . Transfer beef to platter . Cover loosely with foil . 
Place pan on stove top and add broth mixture . Bring to boil and stir to
scrape up any browned bits . Transfer to a different saucepan , and
bring to simmer . Mix 1 1 / 2 tbsp . coconut oil and flour in small bowl
and mix . Whisk into broth , and simmer until sauce thickens . Stir in
roasted shallots . Season with salt and pepper . 
Cut beef into 1 / 2 inch thick slices . Spoon some sauce over . 
Chili
Serves 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil
• 2 onions , chopped
• 3 cloves garlic , minced
• 1 pound ground beef
• 3 / 4 pound beef sirloin , cubed
• 2cups diced tomatoes
• 1 cup strong brewed coffee
• 1cup tomato paste
• 2 cups beef broth
• 1 tbsp . cumin seeds
• 1 tbsp . unsweetened cocoa powder
• 1 tsp . dried oregano
• 1 tsp . ground cayenne pepper
• 1 tsp . ground coriander
• 1 tsp . salt
• 6 cups cooked kidney beans
• 4 fresh hot chili peppers , chopped Instructions
Heat oil in a saucepan over medium heat . Cook garlic , onions , sirloin
and ground beef in oil until the meat is browned and the onions are
translucent . 
Mix in the diced tomatoes , coffee , tomato paste and beef broth . 
Season with oregano , cumin , cocoa powder , cayenne pepper , 
coriander and salt . Stir in hot chile peppers and 3 cups of the beans . 
Reduce heat to low , and simmer for two hours . 
Stir in the 3 remaining cups of beans . Simmer for another 30 minutes . 

Glazed Meatloaf
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 1 / 2 cup tomato paste
• 1 / 4 cup lemon juice , divided
• 1 tsp . mustard powder
• 2 pounds ground beef
• 1 cup flax seeds meal • 1 / 4 cup chopped onion
• 1 egg , beaten
Instructions
Heat oven to 350 degrees F . Combine mustard , tomato paste , 1 tbsp . 
lemon juice in a small bowl . 
Combine onion , ground beef , flax , egg and remaining lemon juice in a
separate larger bowl . And add 1 / 3 of the tomato paste mixture from
the smaller bowl . Mix all well and place in a loaf pan . 
Bake at 350 degrees F for one hour . Drain any excess fat and coat
with remaining tomato paste mixture . Bake for 10 more minutes . 
Eggplant Lasagna
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , NF
• 2 large eggplants , peeled and sliced lengthwise into strips • coconut oil • salt
and pepper
Meat Sauce
• 1 1 / 2 lbs ground sirloin or 1 1 / 2 lbs turkey breast • 2 tbsp . coconut oil
• 2 onions , chopped
• 3 cloves chopped garlic
• 1 red pepper , chopped
• 1 ( 16 ounce ) package sliced mushrooms • 1 tbsp . of oregano , basil and thyme
each • 1 tsp . fennel seed ( optional ) 
• salt and pepper
• 1 tsp . red pepper flakes ( optional ) 
• 1 cup chopped spinach
• 2 cups tomato sauce
• 1 cup diced tomatoes
Cheese Mixture
• 2 cups low-fat farmers cheese
• 2 eggs
• 3 green onions , chopped
• 1 cup shredded low-fat mozzarella cheese ( optional ) Instructions
Heat oven to 425 degrees . 
Oil cookie sheet and arrange eggplant slice . Sprinkle with salt and pepper . Bake
slices 5 minutes on each side . Lower oven temp to 375 . 
Brown onion , meat and garlic in coconut oil for 5 minutes . Add mushrooms and
red pepper , and cook for 5 minutes . Add tomatoes , spinach and spices and
simmer for 5-10 minutes . 
Blend farmers ’ cheese , egg and onion mixture . Spread one third of meat sauce in
bottom of a glass pan . Layer one half of eggplant slices and one half farmers ’ 
cheese . Repeat . Add last layer of sauce and then mozzarella on top . 
Cover with foil . Bake at 375 degrees for one hour . Remove foil and bake until
cheese is browned . Let it rest 10 minutes before serving . 
Stuffed Eggplant
Serves – one half of eggplant per person
Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Rinse the eggplants . Cut off a slice from one end . Make a wide slit and salt
them . Deseed tomatoes . Chop them finely . Cut the onions in thin slices . Chop
the garlic cloves . Place them in a frying pan with coconut oil . Add the tomatoes , 
salt parsley , cumin , pepper , hot peppers and ground beef . Sauté for 10 minutes . 
Squeeze eggplants , so the bitter juice goes out . Fill the wide slit with the ground
beef mix . Pour the remaining mix over . Heat the oven to 375F in the meantime . 
Place eggplants a baking pan . Sprinkle them with olive oil , lemon juice and 1
cup of water . Cover the pan with a foil . 
Stuffed Red Peppers with Beef
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 6 red bell peppers
• salt to taste
• 1 pound ground beef
• 1 / 3 cup chopped onion
• salt and pepper to taste
• 2 cups chopped tomatoes
• 1 / 2 cup uncooked brown rice or quinoa
• 1 / 2 cup water
• 2 cups tomato soup
• water as needed Instructions
Bring a pot of salted water to a boil . Cut the tops off the peppers . 
Remove the seeds . Cook peppers in boiling water for 5 minutes and
drain . 
Sprinkle salt inside each pepper , and set aside . 
In a skillet , sauté onions and beef until beef is browned . Drain off
excess fat . Season with salt and pepper . Stir in rice , tomatoes and 1 / 2
cup water . Cover , and simmer until rice is tender . Remove from heat . 
Stir in the cheese . 
Heat the oven to 350 degrees F . Stuff each pepper with the rice and
beef mixture . Place peppers open side up in a baking dish . Combine
tomato soup with just enough water to make the soup a gravy
consistency in a separate bowl . Pour over the peppers . 
Bake covered for 25 to 35 minutes . 

Superfoods Goulash
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 3 cups cauliflower • 1 pound ground beef
• 1 medium onion , chopped
• salt to taste
• ground black pepper to taste
• garlic to taste
• 2 cups cooked kidney beans
• 1 cup tomato paste Brown the ground beef and onion in a skillet , 
over medium heat . Drain off the fat . Add garlic , salt and pepper to
taste . 
Stir in the cauliflower , kidney beans and tomato paste . Cook until
cauliflower is done . 
Frijoles Charros
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 pound dry pinto beans
• 5 cloves garlic , chopped
• 1 tsp . salt
• 1 / 2 pound pork , diced
• 1 onion , chopped & 2 fresh tomatoes , diced • few sliced sliced jalapeno
peppers
• 1 / 3 cup chopped cilantro
Instructions
Place pinto beans in a slow cooker . Cover with water . Mix in garlic and salt . 
Cover , and cook 1 hour on High . 
Cook the pork in a skillet over high heat until brown . Drain the fat . Place
onion in the skillet . Cook until tender . Mix in jalapenos and tomatoes . Cook
until heated through . Transfer to the slow cooker and stir into the beans . 
Continue cooking for 4 hours on Low . Mix in cilantro about half an hour
before the end of the cook time . 
Chicken Cacciatore
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 4 pounds of chicken thighs , with skin on
• 2 Tbsp . extra virgin olive oil or avocado oil • Salt • 1 sliced onion
• 1 / 3 cup red wine
• 1 sliced red or green bell pepper
• 8 ounces sliced cremini mushrooms
• 2 sliced garlic cloves
• 3 cups peeled and chopped tomatoes
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground black pepper
• 1 tsp . dry oregano
• 1 tsp . dry thyme
• 1 sprig fresh rosemary
• 1 tbsp . fresh parsley
Instructions
Pat the chicken on all sides with salt . Heat the olive oil in a skillet on
medium . Brown few chicken pieces skin side down in the pan ( don ' t
overcrowd ) for 5 minutes , then turn . Set aside . Make sure you have 2
tbsp . of the rendered fat left . 
Add the onions , mushrooms and bell peppers to the pan . Increase the
heat to medium high . Cook until the onions are tender , stirring , about
10 minutes . Add the garlic and cook a minute more . 
Add the wine . Scrape up any browned bits and simmer until the wine
is reduced by half . Add the tomatoes , pepper , oregano , thyme and a
tsp . of salt . Simmer uncovered for maybe 5 more minutes . Put the
chicken pieces on top of the tomatoes , skin side up . Lower the heat . 
Cover the skillet with the lid slightly ajar . 
Cook the chicken on a low simmer . Turning and baste from time to
time . Add rosemary and cook until the meat is tender , about 30 to 40
minutes . Garnish with parsley . 
Cabbage Stewed with Meat
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1-1 / 2 pounds ground beef
• 1 cup beef stock
• 1 chopped onion
• 1 bay leaf
• 1 / 4 tsp . pepper
• 2 sliced celery ribs
• 4 cups shredded cabbage
• 1 carrot , sliced
• 1 cup tomato paste
• 1 / 4 tsp . salt
Instructions
Brown ground meat in a pot . Add beef stock , onion , pepper and bay
leaf . Cover and simmer until tender ( approx .  . 30 minutes )  . Add celery , 
cabbage and carrot . 
Cover and simmer until vegetables are tender . Mix in tomato paste
and seasoning blend . Simmer uncovered for 20 minutes . 

Beef Stew with Peas and Carrots
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1-1 / 2 cups chopped carrots
• 1 cup chopped onions
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil • 1-1 / 2 cups green peas
• 4 cups beef stock
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 4 tsp . ground black pepper
• 1 / 2 tsp . minced garlic
• 4 pounds boneless chuck roast
Instructions
Cook the onions in coconut oil on medium until they are tender ( few
minutes )  . Add all other ingredients and stir . Cover and cook on low
heat for 2 hours . Mix almond flour with some cold water , add to the
stew and cook for another minute . 
Green Chicken Stew
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1-1 / 2 cups broccoli florets
• 1 cup chopped celery stalks
• 1 cup sliced leeks
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil • 1-1 / 2 cups green peas
• 2 cups chicken stock
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 4 tsp . ground black pepper
• 1 / 2 tsp . minced garlic
• 4 pounds boneless skinless chicken pieces
Instructions
Cook the leeks in coconut oil on medium until they are tender ( few
minutes )  . Add all other ingredients and stir . Cover and cook on low
heat for 1 hour . Mix almond flour with some cold water , add to the
stew and cook for another minute . 
Irish Stew
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 2 chopped onions
• 2 Tbsp . coconut oil • 1 sprig dried thyme
• 2 1 / 2 pounds chopped meat from lamb neck
• 6 chopped carrots
• 2 tbsp . brown rice
• 5 cups chicken stock
• Salt
• Ground black pepper
• 1 bouquet garni ( thyme , parsley and bay leaf ) 
• 2 chopped sweet potatoes
• 1 bunch chopped parsley
• 1 bunch chives
Instructions
Cook the onions in coconut oil on medium until they are tender . Add
the dried thyme and lamb and stir . Add brown rice , carrots and
chicken stock . Add salt , pepper and bouquet garni . Cover and cook on
low heat for 2 hours . Place sweet potatoes on top of the stew and cook
for 30 minutes until the meat is falling apart . 
Garnish with parsley and chives . 

Hungarian Pea Stew
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 6 cups green peas
• 1 pound cubed pork
• 2 tbsp olive oil or avocado oil • 3 1 / 2 tbsp almond flour • 2 tbsp chopped
parsley
• 1 cup water
• 1 / 2 tsp salt
• 1 cup coconut milk
• 1 tsp coconut sugar
Instructions
Simmer the pork and green peas in the olive oil over medium heat
until almost tender ( approx . 10 minutes ) Add salt , chopped parsley , 
coconut sugar and almond flour , and cook for another minute . 
Add water then milk and stir . 
Cook for another 4 minutes over low heat , stirring occasionally . 
Chicken Tikka Masala
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 5 pounds chicken pieces , skinless , bone in
3 tbsp . toasted paprika
3 tbsp . toasted ground cumin
1 tsp . cayenne pepper
2 tbsp . toasted ground coriander seed
2 tsp . ground turmeric
12 chopped cloves garlic
3 tbsp . chopped fresh ginger
2 cups yogurt
3 / 4 cup lemon juice ( 4 to 6 lemons ) 
1 tsp . sea salt
4 tbsp . coconut oil 1 sliced onion
4 cups chopped tomatoes
1 / 2 cup chopped cilantro
1 cup coconut cream
Instructions
Score chicken deeply at 1-inch intervals with a knife . Place chicken in
a large baking dish . 
Combine coriander , cumin , paprika , turmeric , and cayenne in a bowl
and mix . Set aside 3 tbsp . of this spice mixture . Combine remaining 6
tbsp . spice mixture with 8 cloves garlic garlic , yogurt , 2 tbsp . ginger , 
1 / 4 cup salt and 1 / 2 cup lemon juice in a large bowl and combine . 
Pour marinade over chicken pieces and coat every surface ( use
hands )  . Refrigerate and marinate between 4 and 8 hours , turning
occasionally . 
Heat coconut oil in a large pot over medium-high heat and add
remaining garlic and ginger . Add onions . Cook about 10 minutes , 
stirring occasionally . Add reserved spice mixture and cook until
fragrant , about half a minute . Scrape up any browned bits from
bottom of pan and add tomatoes and half of cilantro . Simmer for 15
minutes . Let cool slightly and puree . 
Stir in coconut cream and remaining one quarter cup lemon juice . 
Season to taste with salt and set aside until chicken is cooked . 
Cook chicken on a grill or under a broiler . 
Remove chicken from bone and cut into rough bite-sized chunks . Add
chicken chunks to pot of sauce . Bring to a simmer over medium heat
and cook about 10 minutes . 
Sprinkle with remaining cilantro and serve with brown rice or grilled
naan . 
Greek Beef Stew ( Stifado ) 
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 4 large pieces of veal or beef osso bucco
• 20 whole shallots , peeled
• 3 bay leaves
• 8 garlic cloves
• 3 sprigs rosemary
• 6 whole pimento • 5 whole cloves
• 1 / 2 tsp ground nutmeg
• 1 / 2 cup olive oil or avocado oil • 1 / 3 cup apple cider vinegar
• 1 tbsp . salt
• 2 cups tomato paste
• 1 / 4 tsp black pepper
Instructions
Mix vinegar and tomato paste and set aside . Place the meat , shallots , 
garlic and all spices in the pot . 
Add the tomato paste , oil and vinegar . Cover the pot , bring to low boil
and simmer on low for 2 hours . Do not open and stir , just shake the
pot occasionally . 
Serve with brown rice or maybe quinoa . 

Meat Stew with Red Beans
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 3 tbsp . olive oil or avocado oil • 1 / 2 chopped onion
• 1 lb lean cubed stewing beef
• 2 tsp . ground cumin
• 2 tsp . ground turmeric ( optional ) 
• 1 / 2 tsp . ground cinnamon ( optional ) 
• 2 1 / 2 cups water
• 5 tbsp . chopped fresh parsley
• 3 tbsp . snipped chives
• 2 cups cooked kidney beans
• 1 lemon , juice of
• 1 tbsp . almond flour • salt and black pepper
Instructions
Sauté the onion in a pan with two tablespoons of the ive oil until
tender . 
Add beef and cook until meat is browned on all sides . Stir in turmeric , 
cinnamon ( both optional ) and cumin and cook for one minute . Add
water and bring to a boil . 
Cover and simmer over low heat for 45 minutes . Stir occasionally . 
Sauté parsley and chives with the remaining 1 tbsp . of olive oil for
about 2 minutes and add this mixture to the beef . Add kidney beans
and lemon juice and season with salt and pepper . 
Stir in one tbsp . of almond flour mixed with a bit of water to thicken
the stew . Simmer uncovered for half an hour until meat gets tender . 
Serve with brown rice . 

Lamb and Sweet Potato Stew
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1-1 / 2 cups tomato paste
• 1 / 4 cup lemon juice
• 2 tbsp . mustard
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 4 tsp . ground black pepper
• 1 / 4 cup chunky almond butter
• 2 cubed sweet potatoes
• 1 / 2 tsp . minced garlic
• 4 pounds boneless chuck roast
Instructions
In a large bowl , combine tomato paste , lemon juice , almond butter and
mustard . Stir in salt , pepper , garlic and cubed sweet potato . 
Place chuck roast in a slow cooker . Pour tomato mixture over chuck
roast . Cover , and cook on low for 7 to 9 hours . 
Remove chuck roast from slow cooker , shred with a fork , and return
to the slow cooker . Stir meat to evenly coat with sauce . Continue
cooking approximately 1 hour . 
Brown Rice Dishes
Serves 4-6
Paella
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 onion , finely chopped
• 5 tbsp . coconut oil
• 2 chopped garlic clove
• 2 chopped tomatoes
• Salt • 1 tsp . sweet paprika
• A pinch of saffron
• 4 cleaned small squid , sliced
• 2 cups medium-grain brown rice
• 3 cups fish or chicken broth , plus more if needed • 1 cup dry white wine
• 12 jumbo shrimps
• 16 mussels , scrubbed and debearded
Instructions
Put the oil in a 16-inch paella pan and fry the onion until soft . Stir in the garlic
and tomatoes . Add salt to taste , paprika , and saffron , stir well , and cook until the
tomatoes get soft . Add the squid and the rice and stir well . 
Bring the wine and broth to a boil in a saucepan . Pour over the rice , bring to a
boil , and add salt . Spread the rice in the pan . Cook the rice over low heat for 20
minutes . Put the shrimp on top after 10 minutes . Once they become pin , turn
them . When the rice is done , turn off the heat and cover the pan . 
Steam the mussels and put them on top of the paella . 

Asparagus Mint Lemon Risotto
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
For the risotto base
• 1 liter vegetable or chicken broth
• 2 tbsp . olive oil or cumin oil
• 1 large onion , peeled and finely chopped
• 4-5 sticks celery , trimmed and finely chopped
• 600 g brown rice
• 250 ml dry white wine
For the risotto
• 2 bunches asparagus , woody ends removed and discarded
• 700 ml vegetable or chicken broth
• 50 g coconut oil • 1 bunch fresh mint , leaves picked and finely
chopped
• zest and juice of 2 lemons
• sea salt
• ground black pepper
• extra virgin olive oil or avocado oil Instructions
Chop asparagus discs , keeping the tips whole . Bring the broth to a
simmer in a saucepan . Put the olive oil in a separate pan , add the
celery and the onion and cook until soft . Add the rice and wine and
turn up the heat and keep stirring . 
Add the broth to the rice a ladle at a time , stir well and wait until it has
been absorbed . When it ’ s all absorbed , put to one side . 
Put a saucepan on high heat and pour in half the broth , followed by all
risotto base and the asparagus . Simmer until almost all the broth has
been absorbed . Add the rest of the broth in batches until the rice and
asparagus are cooked . Turn off the heat , add olive oil , mint , lemon
zest and all the juice . Check the seasoning and add salt and pepper if
needed . 
Stir Fries
Pork and Bok Choy / Celery Stir Fry
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
5 oz . Lean Pork Tenderloin and Bok Choy / Celery stir fry . Use as much veggies
as you want or replace Bok Choy with Kale . Season with fish sauce . 
Lemon Chicken Stir Fry
Serves 3-4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 lemon
• 1 / 2 cup chicken broth
• 3 tbsp . fish sauce
• 2 teaspoons arrowroot flour
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 pound boneless , skinless chicken breasts , trimmed and cut into 1-inch pieces
• 10 ounces mushrooms , halved or quartered • 2 cups snow peas , stems and
strings removed • 1 bunch scallions , cut into 1-inch pieces , white and green parts
divided • 1 tbsp . chopped garlic
Instructions
Grate 1 tsp . lemon zest . Juice the lemon and mix 3 tbsp . of the juice with
broth , fish sauce and arrowroot flour in a small bowl . 
Heat oil in a skillet over high heat . Add chicken and cook , stirring
occasionally , until just cooked through . Transfer to a plate . Add mushrooms to
the pan and cook until the mushrooms are tender . Add snow peas , garlic , scallion
whites and the lemon zest . Cook , stirring , around 30 seconds . Add the broth to
the pan and cook , stirring , 2 to 3 minutes . Add scallion greens and the chicken
and any accumulated juices and stir . 

Pan seared Brussels sprouts
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 6 oz . cubed pork
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 pound Brussels sprouts , halved
• 1 / 2 large onion , chopped
• Salt and ground black pepper
Instructions
Cook pork in a skillet over high heat . Remove to a plate and chop . In same pan
with pork fat , add coconut oil over high heat . Add onions and Brussels sprouts
and cook , stirring occasionally , until sprouts are golden brown . Season with salt
and pepper , to taste , and put pork back into pan . Serve immediately . 
Beef and Broccoli Stir Fry
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 5oz . of lean Beef and 1 cup broccoli stir fry . Use as much broccoli as you want
or replace Broccoli with Kale . 
Garbanzo Stir Fry
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 tbsp . oregano
• 1 tbsp . chopped basil
• 1 clove garlic , crushed
• ground black pepper to taste
• 2 cups cooked garbanzo beans • 1 large zucchini , halved and sliced
• 1 / 2 cup sliced mushrooms
• 1 tbsp . chopped cilantro
• 1 tomato , chopped Heat oil in a skillet over medium heat . Stir in
oregano , basil , 
garlic and pepper . Add the garbanzo beans and zucchini , stirring well
to coat with oil and herbs . Cook for 10 minutes , stirring occasionally . 
Stir in mushrooms and cilantro ; cook 10 minutes , stirring
occasionally . Place the chopped tomato on top of the mixture to
steam . Cover and cook 5 minutes more . 

Thai Basil Chicken
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
For the egg
• 1 egg
• 2 tbsp . of coconut oil for frying Basil chicken
• 1 chicken breast ( or any other cut of boneless chicken , about 200 grams ) • 5
cloves of garlic
• 4 Thai chilies
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil for frying • Fish sauce
• 1 handful of Thai holy basil leaves Instructions
First , fry the egg . 
Basil chicken
Cut the chicken into small pieces . Peel the garlic and chilies , and chop them
fine . Add basil leaves . 
Add about 1 tbsp . of oil to the pan . 
When the oil is hot , add the chilies and garlic . Stir fry for half a minute . 
Toss in your chicken and keep stir frying . Add fish sauce . 
Add basil into the pan , fold it into the chicken , and turn off the heat . 

Shrimp with Snow Peas
Serves 4 . 
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Marinade • 2 teaspoons arrowroot flour
• 1 Tbsp wine
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
Stir Fry • 1 pound shrimp , peeled and deveined
• 2 Tbsp coconut oil
• 1 Tbsp minced ginger
• 3 garlic cloves , sliced thinly
• 1 / 2 pound snow peas , strings removed
• 2 teaspoons fish sauce
• 1 / 4 cup chicken broth
• 4 green onions , white and light green parts , sliced diagonally • 2 teaspoons
dark roasted sesame oil
Instructions
Mix all the ingredients for the marinade in a bowl and then add the shrimp . Mix
to coat . Let it marinade 15 minutes while you prepare the peas , ginger , and
garlic . 
Add the coconut oil in the wok and let it get hot . Add the garlic and ginger and
combine . Stir-fry for about 30 seconds . 
Add the marinade to the wok , add the snow peas , fish sauce and chicken broth . 
Stir-fry until the shrimp turns pink . Add the green onions and stir-fry for one
more minute . Turn off the heat and add the sesame oil . Toss once more and
serve with steamed brown rice or soba gluten free noodles . 
Pork and Green Beans Stir Fry
Serves 1 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 6oz . of lean Pork
• 1 cup of Green Beans , snapped in half . Use as much veggies as you want or
replace Green beans with Kale . 
• 1 garlic clove , chopped
• 1 / 2 inch of peeled and chopped ginger
• Season with fish sauce . 
Cashew chicken
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 bunch scallions
• 1 pound skinless boneless chicken thighs • 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 4 tsp . black pepper
• 3 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 red bell pepper and 1 stalk of celery , chopped • 4 garlic cloves , finely
chopped
• 1 1 / 2 tbsp . finely chopped peeled fresh ginger • 1 / 4 tsp . dried hot red-pepper
flakes
• 3 / 4 cup chicken broth
• 1 1 / 2 tbsp . fish sauce
• 1 1 / 2 teaspoons arrowroot flour
• 1 / 2 cup salted roasted whole cashews
Instructions
Chop scallions and separate green and white parts . Pat chicken dry and cut into
3 / 4-inch pieces and season with salt and pepper . Heat a wok or a skillet over
high heat . Add oil and then stir-fry chicken until cooked through , 3 to 4 minutes . 
Transfer to a plate . Add garlic , bell pepper , celery , ginger , red-pepper flakes , and
scallion whites to wok and stir-fry until peppers are just tender , 4 to 5 minutes . 
Mix together broth , fish sauce and arrowroot flour , then stir into vegetables in
wok . Reduce heat and simmer , stirring occasionally , until thickened . Stir in
cashews , scallion greens , and chicken along with any juices . 

Meats
Baked Chicken Breast with Fresh Basil
Serves 10
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 10 boneless skinless chicken breast
• 3 / 4 cup low-fat yogurt
• 1 / 2 cup chopped basil
• 2 tsp . arrowroot flour
• 1 cup oatmeal coarsely ground
Instructions
Arrange chicken in a baking dish . Combine basil , yogurt and arrowroot flour ; 
mix well and spread over chicken . 
Mix oatmeal with salt and pepper to taste and sprinkle over chicken . 
Bake chicken in 375 degrees in the oven for half an hour . Makes 10 servings . 
Roast Chicken with Rosemary
Serves 6-8
• 1 ( 3 pound ) whole chicken , rinsed , skinned
• salt and pepper to taste
• 1 onion , quartered
• 1 / 4 cup chopped rosemary
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Heat the oven to 350F . Sprinkle salt and pepper on meat . Stuff with
the onion and rosemary . Place in a baking dish and bake in the
preheated oven until chicken is cooked through . Depending on the
size of the bird , cooking time will vary . 
Carne Asada
Serves 4-6 - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Marinade : 
Mix together the garlic , jalapeno , cilantro , salt , and pepper to make a
paste . Put the paste in a container . Add the oil , lime juice and orange
juice . Shake it up to combine . Use as a marinade for beef or as a table
condiment . 
Instructions
Put the flank steak in a baking dish and pour the marinade over it . 
Refrigerate up to 8 hours . 
Take the steak out of the marinade and season it on both sides with
salt and pepper . Grill ( or broil ) the steak for 7 to 10 minutes per side , 
turning once , until medium-rare . Put the steak on a cutting board and
allow the juices to settle ( 5 minutes )  . Thinly slice the steak across the
grain . 
Meatballs
Baked Beef Meatballs
This amount is for 4 servings . Adjust for 2 if you want , eat one serving , freeze
one or prepare it as is for 4 servings and then freeze 3 / 4 for some tasty casserole
recipes like “ Beef Meatballs Casserole with Green Beans ” or with “ Beef
Meatballs Casserole with Broccoli ”  . 
Allergies : SF , GF , NF
• 1 pound lean ground beef
• 2 tbsp . minced onion
• 1 / 2 tsp . minced garlic
• 1 tsp . parmesan cheese
• 2 eggs
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 4 tsp . pepper
Mix all of the ingredients in a large bowl using your fingers . Mix until the meat
no long feels slimy from the eggs . Shape in small egg size meatballs . Place on a
baking sheet . Bake at 375F for 20-25 minutes until the meatballs are cooked
through . Serve with large Fiber Loaded salad with Italian Dressing . 

Middle Eastern Meatballs
Makes about 20 meatballs - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Ingredients
• Ground lamb or beef , or a mixture of the two -- 2 pounds
• Onion , minced -- 1
• Fresh parsley or mint , finely chopped -- 1 / 2 bunch
• Ground cumin -- 1 tbsp . 
• Cinnamon -- 2 teaspoons • Allspice ( optional ) -- 1 tsp . 
• Salt and pepper -- to season • coconut oil -- 1 / 4 cup
Instructions
Place the ground beef or lamb , onion , herbs , spices , salt and pepper in a bowl
and knead well . Chill for 1-2 hours and let the flavors mingle . Form the meat
into patties or balls the size of a small egg . 
Bake in the oven on 350F . Serve with brown rice with tzatziki sauce . 
Variations
Experiment with different seasonings--coriander , cayenne , sesame seeds . 
Casseroles
Some recipes are for 1 person , adjust for 2 or more
Broccoli Chicken Casserole
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , NF
• 1 cup broccoli florets
• 6 oz . skinless , boneless chicken ( or turkey ) pieces ( breast or dark meat ) • 1 tsp
of flax seeds meal • Salt , pepper
• 1 egg - beaten
• Half a cup of Yogurt Dressing ( or coconut milk , if you don ’ t like the sourish
tang ) • 1 / 4 cup of chicken broth
• 2 tbsp of grated low-fat cheddar cheese Heat the oven to 400° . Cook broccoli
around 5 minutes . Take broccoli out and add chicken ( or turkey ) and simmer for
15 minutes . Cut chicken ( or turkey ) into cubes and add it to the broccoli . 
Combine broth , flax , salt and pepper in a pan and mix . Bring to a boil over high
heat and cook 1 minute , stirring constantly . Remove from heat . Add yogurt
dressing , beaten egg and then half of the cheese , stirring until well combined . 
Add sauce to broccoli mixture ; and stir gently until combined . 
Put mixture in a small casserole dish oiled with some coconut oil . Put remaining
cheese on top , sprinkle . Bake at 400° for 50 minutes or until mixture bubbles at
the edges and cheese begins to brown . Remove from oven and let cool for 5
minutes . 
Beef Meatballs Broccoli Casserole
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF
• 1 cup broccoli florets
• 4 oz . beef meatballs ( see separate recipe ) • 1 tsp of almond flour • Salt , pepper
• 1 egg - beaten
• Half a cup of Yogurt Dressing
• 1 / 4 cup of chicken broth
• 2 tbsp of grated low-fat cheddar cheese Instructions
Heat oven to 400F . Cook broccoli around 5 minutes . Prepare beef meatballs as
in the recipe above . Combine broth , flour , salt and pepper in a saucepan , stirring
with a whisk until smooth . Bring to a boil over medium-high heat ; cook 1
minute , stirring constantly . Remove from heat . Add yogurt dressing , beaten egg
and then half of the cheese , stirring until well combined . Add sauce to broccoli
mixture ; and stir gently until combined . 
Put mixture in a small casserole dish oiled with some coconut oil . Sprinkle with
remaining cheese . Bake at 400° for 50 minutes or until mixture bubbles at the
edges and cheese begins to brown . Remove from oven and let cool for 5
minutes . Serve with large Fiber Loaded Salad with Italian Dressing . 

Beef Meatballs Cauliflower Casserole
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF
• 1 cup cauliflower florets
• 4 oz . beef meatballs ( see separate recipe ) • 1 tsp of almond flour • Salt , pepper
• 1 egg - beaten
• Half a cup of Yogurt Dressing
• 1 / 4 cup of chicken broth
• 2 tbsp of grated low-fat cheddar cheese Instructions
Heat oven to 400° . 
Cook cauliflower around 5 minutes . Prepare beef meatballs as in the recipe
above . Combine soup , flour , salt and pepper in a saucepan , stirring with a whisk
until smooth . Bring to a boil over medium-high heat ; cook 1 minute , stirring
constantly . Remove from heat . Add yogurt dressing , beaten egg and then half of
the cheese , stirring until well combined . Add sauce to cauliflower mixture ; and
stir gently until combined . 
Put mixture in a small casserole dish oiled with some coconut oil . Sprinkle with
remaining cheese . Bake at 400° for 50 minutes or until mixture bubbles at the
edges and cheese begins to brown . Remove from oven and let cool for 5
minutes . Serve with large Fiber Loaded Salad with Italian Dressing . 

Cabbage Roll Casserole
Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
2 pounds ground beef
1 cup chopped onion
1 liter tomato sauce
3 1 / 2 pounds cabbage or sauerkraut leaves
1 cup uncooked brown rice
1 tsp . salt
2 cups beef broth
Instructions
Heat oven to 350F . 
Brown beef in coconut oil in a skillet over medium high heat until
through . In a large mixing bowl combine the onion , rice and salt . Add
meat and mix all together . Roll mixture into cabbage leaves and
arrange them in a casserole dish . Pour broth and tomato sauce over
rolls and bake in the preheated oven , covered , for 1 hour . 

Pork Chop Casserole
Serves 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 3 cups vegetable broth
• 1 cup brown rice
• 5 ounce mushrooms
• salt and pepper to taste
• 6 ( 3 / 4 inch ) thick pork chops Instructions
Heat oven to 350F . Pour broth into a baking dish . Add rice and
mushrooms and mix . Salt and pepper to taste . Add pork chops in a
single layer on that mixture and push them down into mixture and
make sure they are covered with it . 
Cover baking dish with aluminum foil and bake for 1 hour . 
Mushrooms Casserole
Instructions – serves 4 - Allergies : SF , GF , NF
• 3 pounds sliced mushrooms ( shiitake preferably ) • 1 pound sliced leeks
• Salt and freshly ground black pepper
• 1 tbsp . chopped parsley
• 2 beaten eggs
• 1 cup of low-fat Greek yogurt
• 1 / 2 cup of shredded cheddar cheese , low-fat • 1 pound cubed skinless boneless
chicken ( or turkey ) breasts Instructions
Heat oven to 375 degrees F . Mix beaten eggs and low-fat yogurt in a separate
dish . In a casserole , place 1 layer of mushrooms , leeks and chicken cubes and
season with salt , pepper , and parsley . Cover with 1 / 2 of a cup of eggs / yogurt
mixture . Repeat process 2 more times and cover with shredded cheese . Bake
until mushrooms and chicken is tender and crust is golden brown . Serve with
Large Fiber Loaded salad with Italian Dressing . 

Chicken Eggplant Casserole
Ingredients – serves 4 - Allergies : SF , GF , NF
• 3 pounds Eggplant
• Salt and ground black pepper
• 1 tbsp . chopped parsley
• 2 beaten eggs
• 1 cup of low-fat Greek yogurt
• 1 / 2 cup of shredded cheddar cheese , low-fat • 1 pound cubed skinless boneless
chicken ( or turkey ) breasts Instructions
Preheat oven to 375 degrees F . Mix beaten eggs and low-fat yogurt in a separate
dish . In a casserole , place 1 layer of eggplant and meat cubes . Sprinkle with salt , 
pepper , and parsley . Cover with 1 / 2 of a cup of eggs / yogurt mixture . Repeat
process 2 more times and cover with shredded cheese . Bake until eggplant and
chicken are tender and crust is golden brown , about 20 minutes . Serve with
Large Fiber Loaded salad with Italian Dressing . 

Beef Meatballs Green Beans Casserole
Serves 1
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF
• 1 cup green beans florets
• 5 oz . beef meatballs ( see separate recipe ) • 1 tsp of almond flour • Salt , pepper
• 1 egg - beaten
Half a cup of Yogurt Dressing • 1 / 4 cup of chicken broth
• 2 tbsp . of grated low-fat cheddar cheese Instructions
Heat oven to 400° . 
Cook green beans around 5 minutes . Prepare beef meatballs as in the recipe
above . Combine soup , flour , salt and pepper in a saucepan , stirring with a whisk
until smooth . Bring to a boil over medium-high heat ; cook 1 minute , stirring
constantly . Remove from heat . Add yogurt dressing , beaten egg and then half of
the cheese , stirring until well combined . Add sauce to green beans mixture ; and
stir gently until combined . 
Put mixture in a small casserole dish oiled with some coconut oil . Sprinkle with
remaining cheese . Bake at 400° for 50 minutes or until mixture bubbles at the
edges and cheese begins to brown . Remove from oven and let cool for 5
minutes . Serve with large Fiber Loaded Salad with Italian Dressing .  
 
 “ Breaded ”  “ fried ” food
Breaded Tilapia
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
Recipe is for 4 servings . 
• 1 cup coconut meal for breading
• 1 / 2 tsp . pepper
• 1 / 2 tsp . minced garlic
• 1 / 2 tsp . paprika
• 1 / 4 tsp . salt
• 2 large egg whites ( or whole eggs )  , beaten • 1 pound tilapia fillets , cut into 1 / 2-
by-3-inch strips Instructions
Heat oven to 400°F . Set a wire rack on a baking sheet and coat with some
coconut oil . 
Place coconut , pepper , garlic , paprika and salt in a blender and process until
finely ground . Transfer to a shallow dish . 
Place egg whites in a second dish . Dip every piece of fish in the egg and then
coat all sides with the coconut breading mixture . Place on the prepared rack . 
Sprinkle some drops of olive oil over each piece . 
Bake until the fish is cooked through . Breading should be golden brown . Serve
with large Fiber loaded salad . 

Breaded Chicken
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
Recipe is for 4 servings . 
• 1 cup flax seeds meal for breading
• 1 / 2 tsp . pepper
• 1 / 2 tsp . minced garlic
• 1 / 2 tsp . paprika
• 1 / 4 tsp . salt
• 2 large egg whites ( or whole eggs )  , beaten • 1 pound skinless , boneless
chicken pieces Instructions
Heat oven to 400°F . Set a wire rack on a baking sheet ; coat with some coconut
oil . 
Place flax , pepper , garlic , paprika and salt in a food processor or blender and
process until finely ground . Transfer to a shallow dish . 
Place egg whites in a second dish . Dip every piece of chicken in the egg and
then coat all sides with the flax breading mixture . Place on the prepared rack . 
Sprinkle some drops of olive oil over each piece . 
Bake until the chicken is cooked through and the breading is golden brown and
crisp , about 8 minutes each side . Serve with large Fiber loaded salad . 

Lemon Pork with Asparagus
Serves : 3-4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 lb . pork chops
• 1 / 4 cup buckwheat flour
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil • Pepper • 1 cup chopped asparagus
• 2 lemons , sliced
Instructions
Place the flour and salt in a dish and gently toss each chop in the dish
to coat . Melt the coconut oil in a large skillet over medium high heat . 
Add the chicken and sauté until golden brown on each side . Sprinkle
each side with the pepper directly in the pan . 
When the chops are cooked through , transfer them to a plate . Add the
lemon slices and asparagus to the pan . When the asparagus and the
lemons are done , add the chops back to the pan . 

Pizza
Meat Pizza
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , EF , NF
• 1 cup cooked and minced chicken breast
• 1 cup low-fat cheddar , shredded
• 1 tbsp . minced onion & few basil leaves • 1 tsp garlic minced
Instructions
Preheat oven to 425 degrees Fahrenheit . Process chicken , onion and garlic
together . Mixture will be a dense crumb consistency . Press chicken mixture on
parchment paper on a cookie sheet . Bake for 12 minutes . Let cool for five
minutes . 
Top with 1 / 4 cup of tomato sauce , a handful of low-fat cheese , basil and
mushrooms ( shiitake )  . Bake for 6-8 minutes more , or until toppings are melted . 
Let cool for five minutes . Slice and serve . Alternatively , you may want to try
cauliflower crust version : 
Grate half of the large cauliflower and steam it for 15 minutes . Squeeze the
excess water out and let cool . Mix in 2 eggs , one cup low-fat mozzarella , and
salt and pepper . Pat into a 10-inch round on the prepared cookie sheet . Brush
with oil and bake until golden . Add the topping as above . 
Side dishes
Green Superfoods Rice
Serves : 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 cup spinach or any other leafy greens • 1 cup leeks • 1 / 2 cup or
more cilantro leaves or parsley • 1 jalapeno or serrano pepper • 2
cloves garlic • 1 / 4 cup coconut oil • 1 cup brown rice • 1 cup quinoa
• 3 tbsp flax seeds meal • 3 cups water • 1 / 2 tsp . salt ( more to taste ) 
Instructions Pulse the spinach , leeks , cilantro , pepper , and garlic in
a food processor . Do it until they become very finely chopped . 
Heat the oil in a pot over high heat . Add the rice and quinoa and stir
continuously for 5-8 minutes , until the rice is starting to turn light
golden brown . Add the water , salt . Cover and boil for 5 minutes . Stir , 
and lower the heat to simmer for another 10 minutes . Stir in the green
paste from the step 1 and cook until the rice is fluffy . Serve with
additional salt , cilantro leaves , and lime if desired . 
Roasted curried cauliflower
Serves 10
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 12 cups cauliflower florets
• 1 chopped large onion
• 1 tsp . coriander seeds
• 1 tsp . cumin seeds
• 3 / 4 cup olive oil or avocado oil • 1 / 2 cup lemon juice
• 3 1 / 2 teaspoons curry paste
• 1 tbsp . hot paprika
• 1 3 / 4 teaspoons salt
• 1 / 4 cup chopped cilantro
Instructions
Heat oven to 450°F . Place cauliflower florets in large roasting pan . Add onions
to cauliflower . Dry toast coriander and cumin seeds in a skillet over medium
heat until slightly browned , about 5 minutes . Crush in mortar with pestle . Place
seeds in bowl . Whisk in oil , lemon juice , curry paste , paprika , and salt . Pour
dressing over vegetables and toss to coat . Spread vegetables in single layer and
sprinkle with pepper . 
Roast vegetables until tender , stirring occasionally , about 35 minutes . 
Sprinkle cilantro and serve warm . 

Roasted cauliflower with Tahini sauce
Serves 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 / 4 cup extra-virgin olive oil or avocado oil
• 4 tsp . ground cumin
• 2 heads cauliflower , cored and cut into 1 1 / 2 '  ' florets
• Salt and ground black pepper
• 1 / 2 cup tahini
• 3 cloves garlic , smashed and minced into a paste
• Juice of 1 lemon
Instructions
Roast cauliflower like in the previous recipe . 
Meanwhile , combine tahini , lemon juice , garlic , and 1 / 2 cup water in a bowl and
season with salt . Serve cauliflower hot or at room temperature with tahini sauce . 
Baked Sweet Potatoes
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 2 medium sweet potatoes
Instructions
Heat oven to 425 degrees F . Quarter sweet potatoes and place them in
a casserole with a lid . Bake until tender when pierced with a fork ( 40
minutes approx .  )  . 
Asparagus with mushrooms and hazelnuts
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 2 tbsp . lemon juice • 1 / 4 tsp sea salt • Ground black pepper , to taste
• 1 pound fresh asparagus , ends trimmed • 2 tbsp . coconut oil • 6 cups
mushrooms • 1 / 2 cup green onions , sliced • 2 tbsp . hazelnuts , toasted
and finely chopped Instructions
Add the lemon juice , 1 tbsp . of the oil , salt , and pepper in a small
bowl . Boil water in a pan and add the asparagus . Boil for few
minutes . Heat the remaining 1 tbsp . oil in a pan on high heat . Add
mushrooms and cook them until they are soft . Add green onions and
sauté 1 more minute . Add the asparagus , and cook another 3 minutes . 
Remove from the heat and slowly add in the lemon juice mixture . Add
the toasted hazelnuts over the top . 
Chard and Cashew Sauté
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 bunch Swiss chard • 1 / 2 cup cashews • 1 tbsp . coconut oil • Sea salt 
( optional ) • Ground black pepper Instructions
Wash Swiss chard and remove tough stems . Heat a skillet over
medium heat , and add oil when hot . Chop Swiss chard into thin strips . 
Add Swiss chard to the hot skillet , along with cashews . Sauté only 1
minute . Season with sea salt and ground black pepper to taste and
serve warm . 
Cauliflower rice side dish
Serves 2
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 1 head cauliflower • 2 Tbs coconut oil
• Sea salt , garlic , ginger or ground black pepper ( optional seasonings ) 
Instructions
Place the cauliflower into a food processor and pulse it until a grainy
rice-like consistency . Season with sea salt and ground black pepper . 
Meanwhile , heat a large sauté pan over high heat . Add coconut oil
when hot . Sauté cauliflower in a pan with oil and any additional
seasonings if desired . 
Crockpot
Slow Cooker Pepper Steak
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 2 pounds beef sirloin , cut into 2 inch strips
• 1 tbsp . minced garlic
• 3 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 cup Beef Broth
• 1 tbsp . tapioca flour
• 1 / 2 cup chopped onion
• 2 cups carrots
• 1 cup chopped tomatoes
• 1 tsp . salt Instructions
Sprinkle beef with minced garlic . Heat the coconut oil in a skillet and
brown the seasoned beef sirloin strips . Transfer to a slow cooker . 
Mix in tapioca flour in broth until dissolved . Pour broth into the slow
cooker with meat . Add carrots , onion , chopped tomatoes and salt . 
Cover and cook on high for 3 to 4 hours , or on low for 6 to 8 hours . 
Pork Tenderloin with peppers and onions
Serves 3-4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 pound pork loin • 1 tbsp . caraway seeds • 1 / 2 tsp sea salt • 1 / 4 tsp ground
black pepper • 1 red onion , thinly sliced • 2 red bell peppers , sliced • 4 cloves of
garlic , minced • 1 / 4-1 / 3 cup chicken broth Instructions
Wash and chop vegetables . Slice pork loin , and season with black pepper , 
caraway seeds and sea salt . Heat a pan over medium heat . Add coconut oil when
hot . Add pork loin and brown slightly . Add onions and mushrooms , and
continue to sauté until onions are translucent . Add peppers , garlic and chicken
broth . Simmer until vegetables are tender and pork is fully cooked . 
Beef Bourguinon
Serves 8-10
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF
• 4 pounds cubed lean beef
• 1 cup red wine
• 1 / 3 cup coconut oil
• 1 tsp . thyme
• 1 tsp . black pepper
• 2 cloves garlic , crushed
• 1 onion , diced
• 1 pound mushrooms , sliced
• 1 / 3 cup almond flour Instructions
Marinate beef in wine , oil , thyme and pepper for few hours at room
temperature or 6-8 hours in the fridge . Cook garlic and onion in a pan
until soft . Add mushrooms . Cook until they are browned . Drain beef
liquid . Place beef in slow cooker . Sprinkle flour over the beef and stir
to coat . Add mushroom mixture on top . Pour reserved marinade over
all . Cook on low for 7-9 hrs . 
Italian Chicken
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF
• 1 skinless chicken , cut into pieces
• 1 / 4 cup almond flour
• 1 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 8 tsp . pepper
• 1 / 2 cup chicken broth
• 1 cup sliced mushrooms
• 1 / 2 tsp . paprika
• 1 zucchini , sliced into medium pieces
• ground black pepper
• parsley to garnish
Instructions
Season chicken with 1 tsp . salt . Combine flour , pepper , remaining
salt , and paprika . Coat chicken pieces with this mixture . Place
zucchini first in a crockpot . Pour broth over zucchini . Arrange chicken
on top . Cover and cook on low for 6 to 8 hours or until tender . Turn
control to high , add mushrooms , cover , and cook on high for
additional 10-15 minutes . Garnish with parsley and ground black
pepper . 

Slow Cook Jambalaya
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 Bell pepper , chopped
• 1 Onion , chopped
• 2 Medium tomatoes , chopped
• 1 cup Chopped celery
• 1 Clove garlic , crushed
• 2 tbsp . minced parsley
• 2 tbsp . Chopped thyme leaves
• 2 tbsp . chopped Oregano leaves
• 1 / 8 tsp . Cayenne & 1 / 2 tsp . Salt
• 4 ounces pork , chopped
• 8 ounces Chicken breast , chopped
• 2 cups Beef broth
• 1 / 2 pound Cooked shelled shrimp
• 1 cup Cooked brown rice
Instructions
Shell shrimp and halve lengthwise . Combine all ingredients except
shrimp & rice in a slow cooker . Cover & cook on low 9-10 hours . 
Turn slow cooker on high , add cooked shrimp & cooked rice . Cover ; 
cook on high 20-30 minutes . 

Ropa Vieja
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
6 servings
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil • 2 pounds beef flank steak
• 1 cup beef broth • 1 cup tomato sauce
• 1 small onion , sliced
• 1 green bell pepper sliced into strips
• 2 cloves garlic , chopped
• 1 / 2 cup tomato paste
• 1 tsp . ground cumin
• 1 tsp . chopped cilantro
• 1 tbsp . olive oil & 1 tbsp . lemon juice Instructions
Heat oil in a skillet over high heat . Brown the flank steak on each side ( 4
minutes per side )  . Move the beef to a slow cooker . Add in the beef broth and
tomato sauce , then add the onion , bell pepper , garlic , tomato paste , cumin , 
cilantro , olive oil and lemon juice . Stir until blended . Cover , and cook on high
for 4 hours , or on Low for up to 8 hours . When ready to serve , shred meat and
serve with brown rice or quinoa and salad . 

Lemon Roast Chicken
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1 whole skinless chicken
• 1 dash Salt
• 1 dash Pepper
• 1 tsp . Oregano
• 2 cloves minced garlic
• 2 tbsp . coconut oil
• 1 / 4 cup Water
• 3 tbsp . Lemon juice • Rosemary Instructions
Wash chicken and season with salt and pepper . Sprinkle half of
oregano and garlic inside chicken cavity . Add coconut oil to a frying
pan . Brown chicken on all sides and transfer to crock pot . Sprinkle
with oregano and garlic . Add water to fry pan and stir to loosen brown
bits . Pour into crock pot and cover . Cook on low 7 hours . Add lemon
juice when cooking is done . Transfer chicken to cutting board and
carve chicken . Skim fat . Pour juice into sauce bowl . Serve with
rosemary and some juice over chicken . 
Fall Lamb and Vegetable Stew
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 2 pounds Lamb stew meat
• 2 chopped Tomatoes
• 1 Summer squash
• 1 Zucchini
• 1 cup Mushrooms , sliced
• 1 / 2 cup Bell peppers , chopped
• 1 cup Onions , chopped
• 2 teaspoons Salt
• 1 Garlic cloves , crushed
• 1 / 2 tsp . Thyme leaves
• 1 Bay leaves
• 2 cups chicken broth
Instructions
Cut squash and zucchini . Place vegetables and lamb in crockpot . Mix
salt , garlic , thyme , and bay leaf into broth and pour over lamb and
vegetables . Cover and cook on low for 7 hours . Serve over brown
rice . 

Slow cooker pork loin
Serves 4-6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 1-1 / 2 lb pork loin • 1 cup tomato sauce • 2 zucchinis , sliced • 1 head
cauliflower , separated into medium florets • 1-2 Tbs dried basil • 1 / 4
tsp ground black pepper • 1 / 2 tsp sea salt ( optional ) Instructions
Add all of the ingredients to a crock pot . 
Cook on high for 3-4 hours or low 7-8 hours . 
Sauerbraten
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
Marinade • Water -- 2 cups • Lemon juice – 1 / 2 cup • Red wine -- 1
cup • Peppercorns -- 1 tbsp . 
• Juniper berries -- 8
• Whole cloves -- 4
• Bay leaves -- 2
Roast • Beef rump or round -- 3 to 4 pounds • Salt and pepper -- to
season • coconut oil -- 3 tbsp . 
• Onion , thinly sliced -- 1
• Carrot , cut into thin rounds -- 2
• Celery , thinly chopped -- 1 stalk Instructions
Place the marinade ingredients ( except lemon juice ) into a pot and bring to a
boil . Boil for 5 minutes then remove and cool to room temperature . Add
lemon juice . 
Place the beef in a large glass dish and pour the marinade . Make sure that
beef is covered with the marinade . 
Set the roast and its marinade in the fridge and marinade for at least few
hours . Turn the beef once or twice daily . 
Remove the roast from the marinade and season with salt and pepper . Brown
the roast well on all sides and set aside . 
Add the celery , onion and carrot to the pot and sauté until the onion is cooked
translucent . Put the roast to the pot and add in the marinade . Bring to a boil , 
then reduce heat to medium-low . Cover the pot and simmer until the roast is
fork tender . 
Remove the roast and set it aside . Strain the sauce and discard the solids and
return the liquid to the pot . Bring to a simmer and add in the salt and pepper
and simmer for few minutes more . 
Variations
• Meats : Pork , lamb or venison . 
• Marinade Variations : Nutmeg , ginger , thyme and coriander . 
Fish
Cioppino
Serves 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 3 / 4 cup coconut oil
• 2 onions , chopped
• 2 cloves garlic , minced
• 1 bunch fresh parsley , chopped
• 1 , 5 cups stewed tomatoes
• 1 , 5 cups chicken broth
• 2 bay leaves
• 1 tbsp . dried basil
• 1 / 2 tsp . dried thyme
• 1 / 2 tsp . dried oregano
• 1 cup water
• 1-1 / 2 cups white wine
• 1-1 / 2 pounds peeled and deveined large shrimp
• 1-1 / 2 pounds bay scallops
• 18 small clams
• 18 cleaned and debearded mussels
• 1-1 / 2 cups crabmeat
• 1-1 / 2 pounds cod fillets , cubed
Instructions
Over medium heat melt coconut oil in a large stockpot and add
onions , parsley and garlic . Cook slowly , stirring occasionally until
onions are soft . Add tomatoes to the pot . Add chicken broth , oregano , 
bay leaves , basil , thyme , water and wine . Mix well . Cover and simmer
30 minutes . 
Stir in the shrimp , scallops , clams , mussels and crabmeat . Stir in fish . 
Bring to boil . Lower heat , cover and simmer until clams open . 

Flounder with Orange Coconut Oil
Serves 6
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 31 / 2 lbs . flounder
• 3 tbsp . white wine
• 3 tbsp . lemon juice
• 3 tbsp . coconut oil
• 3 tbsp . parsley
• 1 tsp . black pepper
• 2 tbsp . orange zest
• 1 / 2 tsp . salt
• 1 / 2 cup chopped scallions Instructions
Preheat oven to 325F . Sprinkle fish with pepper and salt . 
Place fish in the baking dish . Sprinkle orange zest on top of the fish . 
Melt remaining coconut oil and add the parsley and scallions to the
coconut oil and pour over flounder . Then add in the white wine . 
Place in oven and bake for 15 minutes . Serve fish with extra juice on a
side . 
Grilled Salmon
Serves 4
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , NF
• 4 ( 4 ounce ) filets salmon
• 1 / 4 cup coconut oil
• 2 tbsp . fish sauce
• 2 tbsp . lemon juice
• 2 tbsp . thinly sliced green onion
• 1 clove garlic , minced & 3 / 4 tsp . ground ginger
• 1 / 2 tsp . crushed red pepper flakes
• 1 / 2 tsp . sesame oil
• 1 / 8 tsp . salt Instructions
Whisk together coconut oil , fish sauce , garlic , ginger , red chili flakes , 
lemon juice , green onions , sesame oil , and salt . Put fish in a glass
dish , and pour marinade over . Cover and refrigerate for 4 hours . 
Preheat grill . Place salmon on grill . Grill until fish becomes tender . 
Turn halfway during cooking . 
Crab Cakes
Serves 6-8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 3 lbs . crabmeat
• 3 beaten eggs
• 3 cups flax seeds meal
• 3 tbsp . mustard
• 2 tbsp . grated horseradish
• 1 / 2 cup coconut oil
• 1 tsp . lemon rind
• 3 tbsp . lemon juice
• 2 tbsp . parsley
• 1 / 2 tsp . cayenne pepper
• 2 tsp . fish sauce
Instructions
In medium bowl combine all ingredients except oil . Shape in to
smallish hamburgers . In fry pan heat oil and cook patties for 3-4
minutes on each side or until golden brown . Optionally , bake them in
the oven . 
Serve as appetizers or as main course with large fiber salad . 

Sweets
Sweet Superfoods pie crust
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF
• 11 / 3 cups blanched almond flour • 1 / 3 cup tapioca flour • 1 / 2 tsp . sea salt • 1
large egg • 1 / 4 cup coconut oil • 2 tbsp . coconut sugar or raw honey
• 1 tsp of ground vanilla bean
Instructions
Place almond flour , tapioca flour , sea salt , vanilla , egg and coconut
sugar ( if you use coconut sugar ) in the bowl of a food processor . 
Process 2-3 times to combine . Add oil and raw honey ( if you use raw
honey ) and pulse with several one-second pulses and then let the food
processor run until the mixture comes together . Pour dough onto a
sheet of plastic wrap . Wrap and then press the dough into a 9-inch
disk . Refrigerate for 30 minutes . 
Remove plastic wrap . Press dough onto the bottom and up the sides of
a 9-inch buttered pie dish . Crimp a little bit the edges of crust . Cool in
the refrigerator for 20 minutes . Put the oven rack to middle position
and preheat oven to 375F . Put in the oven and bake until golden
brown . 
Apple Pie
Serving Size : Serves 8
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF
For the Crust : See previous recipe For the Apple Filling : • 2 tbsp . coconut oil • 9
sour apples , peeled , cored and cut into 1 / 4-inch thick slices • 1 / 4 cup coconut
sugar or raw honey
• 1 / 2 tsp . cinnamon • 1 / 8 tsp . sea salt • 1 / 2 cup coconut milk For the Topping : 
• 1 cup ground nuts and seeds Instructions
Filling : Melt coconut oil in a large pot over medium heat . Add apples , 
coconut sugar or raw honey , cinnamon and sea salt . Increase heat to
medium-high and cook , stirring occasionally , until apples release their
moisture and sugar is melted . Pour coconut milk or cream over apples
and continue to cook until apples are soft and liquid has thickened , 
about 5 minutes , stirring occasionally . 
Pour the filling into the crust and then top with topping . Place a pie
shield over the edges of the crust to avoid burning . Bake until topping
is just turning golden brown . Cool and serve . 
Superfoods Dark Chocolate
Instructions - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
Mix 1 / 4 cup of coconut oil with 1 / 4 to 1 / 2 cup of cocoa powder ( unsweetened , 
ideally organic and unprocessed ) and some raw honey to taste . You really should
experiment with cocoa and honey amount . Maybe start with equal amount of
coconut oil , cocoa and honey , mix it and then increase amount of cocoa to your
taste . Form balls or put in the ice cube tray . Put it in the fridge and 1 hour later
you ’ ll have great homemade Superfoods chocolate ! 
Fruits dipped in Superfoods chocolate
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 2 apples or 2 bananas or a bowl of strawberries or any fruit that can be
dipped in melted chocolate • 1 / 2 cup of melted superfoods chocolate ( see earlier
recipe ) • 2 tbsp . chopped nuts ( almond , walnut , Brazil nuts ) or seeds ( hemp , 
chia , sesame , flax seeds meal ) Instructions
Cut apple in wedges or cut banana in quarters . Melt the chocolate and chop the
nuts . Dip fruit in chocolate , sprinkle with nuts or seeds and lay on tray . Transfer
the tray to the fridge so the chocolate can harden ; serve . If you don ’ t want
chocolate , cover fruits with almond or sunflower butter and sprinkle with chia or
hemp seeds and cut it into chunks and serve . 
Superfoods No-Bake Cookies
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 1 / 2 cup coconut milk
• 1 / 2 cup cocoa powder
• 1 / 2 cup coconut oil • 1 / 2 cup raw honey
• 2 cups finely shredded coconut
• 1 cup large flake coconut
• 2 tsp of ground vanilla bean • 1 / 2 cup chopped almonds or chia seeds 
( optional ) 
• 1 / 2 cup almond butter ( optional ) Instructions
Combine the coconut milk , coconut oil and cacao powder in a saucepan . Cook
the mixture over medium heat , stirring until it comes to a boil and then boil for 1
minute . Remove the mixture from the heat and stir in the shredded coconut , 
large flake coconut , raw honey and the vanilla . Add additional ingredients if you
want . Spoon the mixture to a parchment lined baking sheet to cool . 
Raw Brownies
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 1 1 / 2 cups walnuts
• 1 cup pitted dates
• 1 1 / 2 tsp . ground vanilla bean • 1 / 3 cup unsweetened cocoa powder
• 1 / 3 cup almond butter Instructions
Add walnuts and salt to a food processor or blender . Mix until finely ground . 
Add the vanilla , dates , and cocoa powder to the blender . Mix well and
optionally add a couple drops of water at a time to make the mixture stick
together . 
Transfer the mixture into a pan and top with almond butter . 
Superfoods Ice cream
Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
Freeze a banana cut into chunks and process it in blender once frozen and add
half a tsp . of cinnamon or 1 tsp . of cocoa or both and eat it as ice-cream . 
Other option would be to add one spoon of almond butter and mix it with
mashed banana , it ’ s also a delicious ice cream . 
Apple Spice Cookies
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 1 cup unsweetened almond butter • 1 / 2 cup raw honey
• 1 egg & 1 / 2 tsp salt
• 1 apple , diced • 1 tsp cinnamon • 1 / 4 tsp ground cloves • 1 / 8 tsp
nutmeg • 1 tsp fresh ginger , grated Instructions
Heat oven to 350 degrees F . Combine almond butter , egg , raw honey
and salt in a bowl . Add apple , spices , and ginger and stir . Spoon batter
onto a baking sheet 1 inches apart . Bake until set . Remove cookies
and allow to cool on a cooling rack . 
Superfoods Macaroons
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 3 egg whites • 1 / 2 cup coconut sugar • 1 / 4 tsp . salt • 1 cup unsweetened flaked
coconut
• 1 / 2 cup soft dried apricots , coarsely chopped ( 3 ounces ) Heat the oven to 325
degrees . Whisk together egg whites , sugar , and salt in a bowl until frothy . Add
apricots and coconut and mix to combine . 
Shape mixture into mounds with hands and place one inch apart on baking sheet . 
Bake until lightly golden , 35 to 40 minutes . Rotate sheet halfway through . You
can cover them with Superfoods Dark Chocolate . 
Superfoods Stuffed Apples
Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
Core 10 apples , fill them with Superfoods No Bake Balls mix and bake them in
the oven for 25-30 minutes . 
Whipped Coconut cream
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• 4 cups of any fresh berries
• 2 lemons
• 1 can full fat coconut milk ( 14 oz .  )  , refrigerated overnight
• 1 tsp of ground vanilla bean
• 2 Tbsp . raw honey
• Dash of cardamom , nutmeg and clove ( optional ) 
Instructions
Separate coconut cream from the milk by putting it overnight in the fridge . Don ’ t
shake it before opening . 
Open the can of coconut milk and scrape out the cream into a bowl . Use the
saved milk for smoothies or other recipes . 
Add cardamom , raw honey and vanilla . Whip the cream with a hand mixer until
fluffy . Put in the fridge . 
Wash berries and place in serving bowls or glasses . Squeeze the lemon over the
berries . Place a big scoop of cream on top of the berries and serve . 

Granola Mix
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V
• 10 Cup Rolled Oats
• 1 / 2 Pound Shredded Coconut
• 2 Cup Raw Sunflower Seeds
• 1 Cup Sesame Seeds or chia seeds
• 3 Cup Chopped Nuts
• 1-1 / 2 Cup -Water
• 1-1 / 2 Cup coconut oil
• 1 Cup raw honey
• 1-1 / 2 Tsp . Salt
• 2 Tsp . Cinnamon
• 1 tbsp . of ground vanilla bean • Dried cranberries Instructions
Turn the oven on and heat oven to 300F . Combine oats , coconut , 
sunflower seeds , sesame seed , cranberries and nuts ( can include
almonds , pecans , walnuts , or a combination of all of them )  . Blend
well . 
Combine water , oil , raw honey , salt , cinnamon and vanilla in a large
pan . Heat until raw honey is dissolved , but don ’ t boil . 
Pour the honey over the dry ingredients and stir well . Spread onto
cookie sheets . Bake 25 to 30 minutes , and stir occasionally . Let it
cool . Store in a cool dry place . 

Pumpkin pie
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , NF
• 11 / 2 cup homemade pumpkin puree
• 3 eggs • 1 / 2 cup coconut milk
• 1 / 2 cup raw honey
• 1 tbsp . ground cinnamon
• 1 tsp . nutmeg • ⅛ tsp . sea salt
• 1 Superfoods Sweet Pie Crust , unbaked
Instructions
In a food processor combine pumpkin puree , and eggs . Pulse in cinnamon , 
nutmeg , coconut milk , raw honey , and salt . Pour filling into Superfoods Sweet
Pie Crust and bake at 350° for 45 minutes . Allow the pie to cool and then
refrigerate for 2 hours . 
Blueberry Cream Pie
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF , EF , V , NF
• Sweet Superfoods pie crust
Filling : • 2 Teaspoons plant-based gelatin , dissolved in 2 Tbsp . hot water • 1 / 3
cup lemon juice
• 1 / 3 cup raw honey
• 1 can coconut milk , chilled
• 4 cups blueberries for serving
Instructions Mix the gelatin and water together . Stir to dissolve and add the
lemon juice . Whip coconut milk and raw honey with electric mixer about 15
minutes . Add the gelatin to the whipped cream . Pour the filling into the crust . 
Filling will set up in the refrigerator . 
Chill for at 4 hours until set , and serve with lots of berries . 
Upside down Apple Cake
Ingredients - Allergies : SF , GF , DF
Bottom Fruit Layer : • 2 tbsp . coconut oil , melted • 1 apple , sliced , or 1 / 4 cup
blueberries , plums , banana etc . 
• 2 tbsp . walnut chunks • 2 tbsp . coconut sugar
• 1 tsp ground cinnamon . 
Top Cake Layer : • 2 eggs , beaten . 
• 1 / 3 cup raw honey
• 1 / 4 cup unsweetened coconut milk , or unsweetened almond milk . 
• 1 tsp ground vanilla bean • 1 tsp lemon juice . 
• 1 banana , mashed , or 1 / 4 cup blueberries
• 1 / 3 cup coconut flour
Instructions
Heat the oven ( 350 F )  , and grease a 9 inch cake pan . 
Place 2 tbsps . coconut oil into cake pan , and put pan into preheating
oven for a couple minutes to melt oil . Make sure oil is evenly
distributed all over the bottom of the pan . 
Sprinkle 2 tbsps . coconut sugar all over the oil . 
Sprinkle 1 tsp cinnamon on top of sweetened layer . 
Layer apple slices or blueberries on top of sweetened layer . Add
optional walnut pieces to fruit layer . Set aside . 
Combine all the “ top cake layer ” ingredients in a large mixing bowl
except for the coconut flour . Mix and add the coconut flour and mix
well . 
Spoon batter on top of fruit layer and spread evenly . 
Bake until center is set . 
Remove from oven and let cool . 
Slide a butter knife between cake and edge of pan to loosen cake . 
Turn cake pan upside down onto a large plate or serving platter . Cake
should fall onto plate . If not , use spatula to take the cake out . 
Raw Vegan Reese ’ s Cups 
 “ Peanut ” Butter Filling
• 1 / 2 cup sunflower seeds butter • 1 / 2 cup almond butter • 1 Tbsp . raw honey
• 2 Tbsp . melted coconut oil Superfoods Chocolate Part : 
• 1 / 2 cup cacao powder • 2 Tbsp . raw honey
• 1 / 3 cup coconut oil ( melted ) Instructions
Mix the " Peanut " butter filling ingredients . Put a spoonful of the mixture into
each muffin cup . 
Refrigerate . Mix Superfoods chocolate ingredients . Put a spoonful of the
Superfoods chocolate mixture over the " peanut " butter mixture . Freeze ! 

Raw Vegan Coffee Cashew Cream Cake
Coffee Cashew Cream
• 2 cups raw cashews
• 1 tsp . of ground vanilla bean • 3 tablespoons melted coconut oil
• 1 / 4 cup raw honey
• 1 / 3 cup very strong coffee or triple espresso shot Crust
See recipe for Raw Walnuts Pie Crust Instructions
Blend all ingredients for the cream , pour it onto the crust and refrigerate . 
Garnish with coffee beans . 
Raw Vegan Chocolate Cashew Truffles
Ingredients
• 1 cup ground cashews
• 1 tsp . of ground vanilla bean • 1 / 2 cup coconut oil • 1 / 4 cup raw honey
• 2 tbsp . flax seeds meal • 2 tbsp . hemp hearts • 2 tbsp . cacao powder
Instructions
Mix all ingredients and make truffles . Sprinkle coconut flakes on top . 
Raw Vegan Double Almond Raw Chocolate Tart
Ingredients
• 1½ cups raw almonds • ¼ cup coconut oil , melted • 1 tablespoon raw honey or
royal jelly • 8 ounces dark chocolate , chopped • 1 cup coconut milk • 1 / 2 cup
unsweetened shredded coconut Instructions
Crust
Ground almonds and add melted coconut oil , raw honey and combine . Using a
spatula , spread this mixture into the tart or pie pan . 
Filling
Put chopped chocolate in a bowl , heat coconut milk and pour over chocolate and
whisk together . Pour filling into tart shell . Refrigerate . Toast almond slivers
chips and sprinkle over tart . 
Raw Vegan Bounty Bars 
 “ Peanut ” Butter Filling
• 2 cups desiccated coconut • 3 Tbsp . coconut oil - melted • 1 cup coconut cream
- full fat • 4 Tbsp . of raw honey
• 1 Tsp . ground vanilla bean • pinch of sea salt Superfoods Chocolate Part : 
• 1 / 2 cup cacao powder • 2 Tbsp . raw honey
• 1 / 3 cup coconut oil ( melted ) Instructions
Mix coconut oil , coconut cream , honey , vanilla and salt . Pour over desiccated
coconut and mix well . Mold coconut mixture into balls , small bars similar to
bounty and freeze . Or pour whole mixture into a tray , freeze and cut into small
bars . 
Make Superfoods Chocolate mixture , warm it up and dip frozen coconut into
chocolate and put on a tray and freeze again . 

Raw Vegan Tartlets with Coconut Cream
Crust : See recipe for Raw Walnuts Pie Crust . Make tartlets . 
Pudding : • 1 avocado • 2 tablespoons coconut oil • 2 tablespoons raw honey
• 2 tablespoons cacao powder • 1 teaspoon ground vanilla bean
• Pinch of salt • 1 / 4 cup Almond milk , as needed Coconut cream : See recipe for 
 “ Whipped Coconut Cream ”  . Add 1 / 2 tsp . cinnamon and whip again . 
To make the pudding : blend all the ingredients in the food processor until
smooth and thick . Spread evenly into tartlet crusts . Optionally , put some goji
berries on top of the pudding layer . 
Make the coconut cream , spread it on top of the pudding layer , and put back in
the fridge overnight . Serve with one blueberry on top of each tartlet . 
Raw Vegan " Peanut " Butter Truffles
Ingredients
• 5 tbsp . sunflower seed butter
• 1 tbsp . coconut oil • 1 tbsp . raw honey
• 1 teaspoons ground vanilla bean • 3 / 4 cup almond flour • 1 tbsp . flax seeds
meal • pinch of salt • 1 tbsp . cacao butter
• hemp hearts ( optional ) •1 / 4 cup Superfoods Chocolate
Instructions
Add sunflower seed butter , coconut oil , raw honey , vanilla , almond flour , 
flaxseed meal and salt to a large bowl . 
Mix until all ingredients are incorporated . 
Roll the dough into 1-inch balls , place them on parchment paper and refrigerate
for half an hour ( yield about 14 truffles ) Dip each truffle in the melted
Superfoods Chocolate , one at the time , and place them back on the pan with
parchment paper or coat them in cocoa powder or coconut flakes . 
Raw Vegan Chocolate Pie
Crust
• 2 cups almonds , soaked overnight and drained
• 1 cup pitted dates , soaked overnight and drained • 1 cup chopped dried apricots
• 1 1 / 2 tsp . ground vanilla bean • 2 tsp . chia seeds • 1 banana Filling
• 4 Tbsp . raw cacao powder • 3 Tbsp . raw honey
• 2 ripe avocados • 2 Tbsp . organic coconut oil • 2 Tbsp . almond milk ( if needed , 
check for consistency first ) 
Instructions
Add almonds and banana to a food processor or blender . Mix until it forms a
thick ball . Add the vanilla , dates , and apricot chunks to the blender . Mix well
and optionally add a couple drops of water at a time to make the mixture stick
together . 
Spread in a 10 inch dis . 
Mix filling ingredients in a blender and add almond milk if necessary . Add
filling to the crust and refrigerate . 

Raw Vegan Chocolate Walnut Truffles
Ingredients
• 1 cup ground walnuts
• 1 tsp . cinnamon • 1 / 2 cup coconut oil • 1 / 4 cup raw honey
• 2 tbsp . chia seeds • 2 tbsp . cacao powder
Instructions
Mix all ingredients and make truffles . Coat with cinnamon , coconut flakes or
chopped almonds . 
Superfoods Reference Book
Unfortunately , I had to take out the whole Superfoods Reference Book out of all
of my books because parts of that book are featured on my blog . I joined Kindle
Direct Publishing Select program which allows me to have all my books free for
5 days every 3 months . Unfortunately , KDP Select program also means that all
my books have to have unique content that is not available in any other online
store or on the Internet ( including my blog )  . I didn ’ t want to remove parts of
Superfoods Reference book that is already on my blog because I want that all
people have free access to that information . I also wanted to be part of KDP
Select program because that is an option to give my book for free to anyone . So , 
some sections of my Superfoods Reference Book can be found on my blog , 
under Superfoods menu on my blog . Complete Reference book is available for
subscribers to my Superfoods Today Newsletter . Subscribers to my Newsletter
will also get information whenever any of my books becomes free on Amazon . I
will not offer any product pitches or anything similar to my subscribers , only
Superfoods related information , recipes and weight loss and fitness tips . So , 
subscribe to my newsletter , download Superfoods Today Desserts free eBook
which has complete Superfood Reference book included and have the
opportunity to get all of my future books for free . 
REFERENCES : 
Russell VA1 , Zigmond MJ , Dimatelis JJ , Daniels WM , Mabandla MV . The
interaction between stress and exercise , and its impact on brain function . Metab
Brain Dis . 2014 Jan 8 .  [ Epub ahead of print ] 
El-Bahnasawy MM1 , Mohammad Ael-H , Morsy TA . Arsenic pesticides and
environmental pollution : exposure , poisoning , hazards and recommendations . J
Egypt Soc Parasitol . 2013 Aug ; 43 ( 2 )  : 493-508 . 
Morelli SA1 , Torre JB , Eisenberger NI . The neural bases of feeling understood
and not understood . Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci . 2014 Feb 14 .  [ Epub ahead of
print ] 
Oschman JL . Can electrons act as antioxidants ? A review and commentary . J
Altern Complement Med . 2007 Nov ; 13 ( 9 )  : 955-67 . 
Ye L1 , Guo J1 , Ge RS2 . Environmental pollutants and hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenases . Vitam Horm . 2014 ; 94 : 349-90 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978-0-12-
800095-3 . 00013-4 . 
Albuquerque TG1 , Costa HS , Sanches-Silva A , Santos M , Trichopoulou A , 
D ’ Antuono F , Alexieva I , Boyko N , Costea C , Fedosova K , Karpenko D , 
Kilasonia Z , Koçaoglu B , Finglas P . Traditional foods from the Black Sea region
as a potential source of minerals . J Sci Food Agric . 2013 Nov ; 93 ( 14 )  : 3535-44 . 
doi : 10 . 1002 / jsfa . 6164 . Epub 2013 May 10 . 
Ali M1 , Thomson M , Afzal M . Garlic and onions : their effect on eicosanoid
metabolism and its clinical relevance . Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids . 
2000 Feb ; 62 ( 2 )  : 55-73 . 
Bornhoeft J1 , Castaneda D , Nemoseck T , Wang P , Henning SM , Hong MY . The
protective effects of green tea polyphenols : lipid profile , inflammation , and
antioxidant capacity in rats fed an atherogenic diet and dextran sodium sulfate . J
Med Food . 2012 Aug ; 15 ( 8 )  : 726-32 . doi : 10 . 1089 / jmf . 2011 . 0258 . Epub 2012 Jun
25 . 
Ceylon Med J . 2014 Mar ; 59 ( 1 )  : 4-8 . doi : 10 . 4038 / cmj . v59i1 . 6731 . 
Senadheera SP1 , Ekanayake S , Wanigatunge C . Antioxidant potential of green
leafy porridges . 
Gülçin İ . Antioxidant activity of food constituents : an overview . Arch Toxicol . 
2012 Mar ; 86 ( 3 )  : 345-91 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00204-011-0774-2 . Epub 2011 Nov 20 . 
Heim KC1 , Angers P , Léonhart S , Ritz BW . Anti-inflammatory and neuroactive
properties of selected fruit extracts . J Med Food . 2012 Sep ; 15 ( 9 )  : 851-4 . doi : 
10 . 1089 / jmf . 2011 . 0265 . Epub 2012 Aug 7 . 
Meral O1 , Alpay M , Kismali G , Kosova F , Cakir DU , Pekcan M , Yigit S , Sel T . 
Capsaicin inhibits cell proliferation by cytochrome c release in gastric cancer
cells . Tumour Biol . 2014 Mar 30 . 
Moon JK1 , Shibamoto T . Antioxidant assays for plant and food components . J
Agric Food Chem . 2009 Mar 11 ; 57 ( 5 )  : 1655-66 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jf803537k . 
Nagaraja P1 , Aradhana N , Suma A , Shivakumar A , Chamaraja NA . 
Quantification of antioxidants by using chlorpromazine hydrochloride : 
application of the method to food and medicinal plant samples . Anal Sci . 
2014 ; 30 ( 2 )  : 251-6 . 
Johnston C . Functional Foods as Modifiers of Cardiovascular Disease . Am J
Lifestyle Med . 2009 Jul ; 3 ( 1 Suppl )  : 39S-43S . 
Hernández-Ortega M1 , Ortiz-Moreno A , Hernández-Navarro MD , ChamorroCevallos G , Dorantes-Alvarez L , Necoechea-Mondragón H . Antioxidant , 
antinociceptive , and anti-inflammatory effects of carotenoids extracted from
dried pepper ( Capsicum annuum L .  )  . J Biomed Biotechnol . 2012 ; 2012 : 524019 . 
doi : 10 . 1155 / 2012 / 524019 . Epub 2012 Oct 2 . 
Nicod N1 , Chiva-Blanch G , Giordano E , Dávalos A , Parker RS , Visioli F . Green
Tea , Cocoa , and Red Wine Polyphenols Moderately Modulate Intestinal
Inflammation and Do Not Increase High-Density Lipoprotein ( HDL ) Production . 
J Agric Food Chem . 2014 Mar 12 ; 62 ( 10 )  : 2228-32 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jf500348u . 
Epub 2014 Mar 4 . 
Ownby SL , Fortuno LV , Au AY , Grzanna MW , Rashmir-Raven AM , Frondoza
CG .  ( 2014 )  . Expression of pro-inflammatory mediators is inhibited by an
avocado / soybean unsaponifiables and epigallocatechin gallate combination . J
Inflamm ( Lond )  . 2014 Mar 28 ; 11 ( 1 )  : 8 . 
Pastrana-Bonilla E1 , Akoh CC , Sellappan S , Krewer G . Phenolic content and
antioxidant capacity of muscadine grapes . J Agric Food Chem . 2003 Aug
27 ; 51 ( 18 )  : 5497-503 . 
Podsędek A1 , Redzynia M1 , Klewicka E2 , Koziołkiewicz M1 . Matrix effects on
the stability and antioxidant activity of red cabbage anthocyanins under
simulated gastrointestinal digestion . Biomed Res Int . 2014 ; 2014 : 365738 . doi : 
10 . 1155 / 2014 / 365738 . Epub 2014 Jan 19 . 
Seeram NP . Berry fruits : compositional elements , biochemical activities , and the
impact of their intake on human health , performance , and disease . J Agric Food
Chem . 2008 Feb 13 ; 56 ( 3 )  : 627-9 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jf071988k . Epub 2008 Jan 23 . 
Seeram NP1 , Adams LS , Zhang Y , Lee R , Sand D , Scheuller HS , Heber D . 
Blackberry , black raspberry , blueberry , cranberry , red raspberry , and strawberry
extracts inhibit growth and stimulate apoptosis of human cancer cells in vitro . J
Agric Food Chem . 2006 Dec 13 ; 54 ( 25 )  : 9329-39 . 
Sharmin H1 , Nazma S , Mohiduzzaman M , Cadi PB . Antioxidant capacity and
total phenol content of commonly consumed selected vegetables of Bangladesh . 
Malays J Nutr . 2011 Dec ; 17 ( 3 )  : 377-83 . 
Thomson SJ1 , Rippon P , Butts C , Olsen S , Shaw M , Joyce NI , Eady CC . 
Inhibition of platelet activation by lachrymatory factor synthase ( LFS ) -silenced 
( tearless ) onion juice . J Agric Food Chem . 2013 Nov 6 ; 61 ( 44 )  : 10574-81 . doi : 
10 . 1021 / jf4030213 . Epub 2013 Oct 22 . 
Your Free Gift
As a way of saying thanks for your purchase , I ’ m offering you my FREE
eBook that is exclusive to my book and blog readers . 
Superfoods Cookbook Book Two has over 70 Superfoods recipes and
complements Superfoods Cookbook Book One and it contains Superfoods
Salads , Superfoods Smoothies and Superfoods Deserts with ultra-healthy nonrefined ingredients . All ingredients are 100% Superfoods . 
It also contains Superfoods Reference book which is organized by
Superfoods ( more than 60 of them , with the list of their benefits )  , Superfoods
spices , all vitamins , minerals and antioxidants . Superfoods Reference Book lists
Superfoods that can help with 12 diseases and 9 types of cancer . 

Other Books from this Author
Superfoods Today Diet is a Kindle Superfoods Diet book that gives you 4 week
Superfoods Diet meal plan as well as 2 weeks maintenance meal plan and
recipes for weight loss success . It is an extension of Detox book and it ’ s written
for people who want to switch to Superfoods lifestyle . 
Superfoods Today Body Care is a Kindle book with over 50 Natural Recipes for
beautiful skin and hair . It has body scrubs , facial masks and hair care recipes
made with the best Superfoods like avocado honey , coconut , olive oil , oatmeal , 
yogurt , banana and Superfoods herbs like lavender , rosemary , mint , sage , 
hibiscus , rose . 
Superfoods Today Cookbook is a Kindle book that contains over 160
Superfoods recipes created with 100% Superfoods ingredients . Most of the
meals can be prepared in under 30 minutes and some are really quick ones that
can be done in 10 minutes only . Each recipe combines Superfoods ingredients
that deliver astonishing amounts of antioxidants , essential fatty acids ( like
omega-3 )  , minerals , vitamins , and more . 
Superfoods Today Smoothies is a Kindle Superfoods Smoothies book with over
70 + 100% Superfoods smoothies . Featured are Red , Purple , Green and Yellow
Smoothies
Superfoods Today Salads is a Kindle book that contains over 60 Superfoods
Salads recipes created with 100% Superfoods ingredients . Most of the salads can
be prepared in 10 minutes and most are measured for two . Each recipe combines
Superfoods ingredients that deliver astonishing amounts of antioxidants , 
essential fatty acids ( like omega-3 )  , minerals , vitamins , and more . 
Superfoods Today Kettlebells is a Kindle Kettlebells beginner ’ s book aimed at
30 + office workers who want to improve their health and build stronger body
without fat . 
Superfoods Today Red Smoothies is a Kindle Superfoods Smoothies book with
more than 40 Red Smoothies . 
Superfoods Today 14 Days Detox is a Kindle Superfoods Detox book that gives
you 2 week Superfoods Detox meal plan and recipes for Detox success . 
Superfoods Today Yellow Smoothies is a Kindle Superfoods Smoothies book
with more than 40 Yellow Smoothies . 
Superfoods Today Green Smoothies is a Kindle Superfoods Smoothies book
with more than 35 Green Smoothies . 
Superfoods Today Purple Smoothies is a Kindle Superfoods Smoothies book
with more than 40 Purple Smoothies . 
Superfoods Cooking For Two is a Kindle book that contains over 150
Superfoods recipes for two created with 100% Superfoods ingredients . 
Nighttime Eater is a Kindle book that deals with Nighttime Eating Syndrome 
( NES )  . Don Orwell is a life-long Nighttime Eater that has lost his weight with
Superfoods and engineered a solution around Nighttime Eating problem . Don
still eats at nightJ . Don ’ t fight your nature , you can continue to eat at night , be
binge free and maintain low weight . 
Superfoods Today Smart Carbs 20 Days Detox is a Kindle Superfoods book
that will teach you how to detox your body and start losing weight with Smart
Carbs . The book has over 470 + pages with over 160 + 100% Superfoods recipes . 
Superfoods Today Vegetarian Salads is a Kindle book that contains over 40
Superfoods Vegetarian Salads recipes created with 100% Superfoods
ingredients . Most of the salads can be prepared in 10 minutes and most are
measured for two . 
Superfoods Today Vegan Salads is a Kindle book that contains over 30
Superfoods Vegan Salads recipes created with 100% Superfoods ingredients . 
Most of the salads can be prepared in 10 minutes and most are measured for two . 
Superfoods Today Soups & Stews is a Kindle book that contains over 70
Superfoods Soups and Stews recipes created with 100% Superfoods ingredients . 
Superfoods Desserts is a Kindle Superfoods Desserts book with more than 60
Superfoods Recipes . 
Smoothies for Diabetics is a Kindle book that contains over 70 Superfoods
Smoothies adjusted for diabetics . 
50 Shades of Superfoods for Two is a Kindle book that contains over 150
Superfoods recipes for two created with 100% Superfoods ingredients . 
50 Shades of Smoothies is a Kindle book that contains over 70 Superfoods
Smoothies . 
50 Shades of Superfoods Salads is a Kindle book that contains over 60
Superfoods Salads recipes created with 100% Superfoods ingredients . Most of
the salads can be prepared in 10 minutes and most are measured for two . Each
recipe combines Superfoods ingredients that deliver astonishing amounts of
antioxidants , essential fatty acids ( like omega-3 )  , minerals , vitamins , and more . 
Superfoods Vegan Desserts is a Kindle Vegan Dessert book with 100% Vegan
Superfoods Recipes . 
Desserts for Two is a Kindle Superfoods Desserts book with more than 40
Superfoods Desserts Recipes for two . 
Superfoods Paleo Cookbook is a Kindle Paleo book with more than 150 100%
Superfoods Paleo Recipes . 
Superfoods Breakfasts is a Kindle Superfoods book with more than 40 100%
Superfoods Breakfasts Recipes . 
Superfoods Dump Dinners is a Kindle Superfoods book with Superfoods Dump
Dinners Recipes . 
Healthy Desserts is a Kindle Desserts book with more than 50 100% Superfoods
Healthy Desserts Recipes . 
Superfoods Salads in a Jar is a Kindle Salads in a Jar book with more than 35
100% Superfoods Salads Recipes . 
Smoothies for Kids is a Kindle Smoothies book with more than 80 100%
Superfoods Smoothies for Kids Recipes . 
Vegan Cookbook for Beginners is a Kindle Vegan book with more than 75
100% Superfoods Vegan Recipes . 
Vegetarian Cooking for Beginners is a Kindle Vegetarian book with more than
150 100% Superfoods Paleo Recipes . 
Foods for Diabetics is a Kindle book with more than 170 100% Superfoods
Diabetics Recipes