A Brief History of Barbecue

Getty Images
BY CLAIRE SUDDATH JULY 3 , 2009 12 : 26 PM EDT
This Fourth of July weekend , millions of Americans will huddle around outdoor pits , ovens and grills to slowly cook themselves meaty , patriotic dishes slathered in sauce . Barbecue is about as red , white and blue as American cuisine gets , and for true carnivores , the only real question is how to save room for seconds . 

Let ’ s first get one thing straight : merely throwing meat on a grill is not barbecue — at least not in the traditional sense . While novices ( and Yankees ) may believe that anything covered in KC Masterpiece counts as barbecue , the real thing is cooked over indirect heat — usually a wood fire — for a reallylong time ( sometimes for as many as 18 hours )  . The resulting flavor is a combination of smoke , meat juices , fat and whatever spices or rub have been added . 


No one is really sure where the term barbecue originated . The conventional wisdom is that the Spanish , upon landing in the Caribbean , used the wordbarbacoa to refer to the natives ’ method of slow-cooking meat over a wooden platform . By the 19th century , the culinary technique was well established in the American South , and because pigs were prevalent in the region , pork became the primary meat at barbecues . Corn bread emerged as the side dish of choice , owing largely to the fact that in humid Southern climates , corn grew better than wheat ( which was prone to fungal infections )  . Barbecue allowed an abundance of food to be cooked at once and quickly became the go-to menu item for large gatherings like church festivals and neighborhood picnics . 

Barbecue varies by region , with the four main styles named after their place of origin : Memphis , Tenn .  ; North Carolina ; Kansas City ; and Texas . Memphis is renowned for pulled pork-shoulder doused in sweet tomato-based sauce ( eaten on its own or as a sandwich )  . North Carolina smokes the whole hog in a vinegar-based sauce . Kansas City natives prefers ribs cooked in a dry rub , and Texans … well , Texans dig beef . Eastern Texas ’ relative proximity to Tennessee puts it in the pulled-pork camp , but in the western segment of the Lone Star State , you ’ re likely to find mesquite-grilled “ cowboy-style ” brisket . Locals defend their region ’ s cooking style with the sort of fierce loyalty usually reserved for die-hard sports fans . Just as you ’ re better off not mentioning the Yankees to a Red Sox fan , it ’ s probably best not to proclaim your love for Texas beef to anyone from Tennessee . 

Because barbecue doesn ’ t require expensive cuts of meat — why bother when you ’ re just going to slather it in sauce and cook it ’ til it falls off the bone ? — it became a dietary staple for impoverished Southern blacks , who frequently paired it with vegetables like fried okra and sweet potatoes . The first half of the 20th century saw a mass migration of African Americans from the rural South to Northern cities , and as they moved , they took their recipes with them . By the 1950s , black-owned barbecue joints had sprouted in nearly every city in America . Along with fried chicken , corn bread and hush puppies , barbecue came to be known as a “ soul food ” dish . To this day , there is a strong connection between the cuisine and the African-American community . 


Other countries barbecue in their own style . Korean barbecue features thin slices of beef or pork cooked and served with rice . Argentina has asado , or marinade-free meat cooked in a smokeless pit . And of course , there ’ s Mongolian barbecue , which is neither barbecue nor of Mongolian origin but rather a type of stir-fry recently invented in Taiwan . But true barbecue is distinctly American . So this Fourth of July , when the parades have ended and the sun starts to go down , throw some meat on the grill and cook yourself a true American classic . Patriotism never tasted so delicious . 