This Moroccan winery is bringing the flavours of the Rhone Valley to North Africa
This vineyard is bringing the flavours of the Rhone Valley to Morocco . 
This vineyard is bringing the flavours of the Rhone Valley to Morocco .  - Copyright Domaine du Val D ’ Argan
By James Clark • Updated : 19 / 02 / 2022
I visited the Moroccan port town of Essaouira with many expectations from the walled city and medina . My imagination was filled with images of souks and cafes . But alcohol , and in particular wine , did not feature in my pre-Moroccan trip fantasy . 

I was not aware that wine was served in the country until I sat down for dinner at Umia , one of Essaouira ’ s upmarket restaurants . This is where my journey into Moroccan wine began . 

While enjoying the local seafood on the menu , I asked the waiter about the freshness of the tipple in my glass . He explained that the organic Perle white I was drinking was produced locally at a winery called Domaine Val D ’ Argan . I couldn ’ t believe what I was hearing . The waiter had my attention . 

Fortunately , I was visiting Essaouira at the same time as my friend Linda Brumfitt from So Morocco . We had plans to meet straight after dinner in the medina where we were going to explore the buzzing alleyways filled with art galleries , shops and stalls selling crafts , and courtyard riads converted into hotels and cafes . 

After asking her about Morocco ’ s wines , she planned for me to visit the Domaine du Val D ’ Argan winery the following day . 

Take a sip of vintage Mallorca and explore its rugged peaks
This country just won the award for world ' s best wine , three years in a row
Ready to unplug ? Here ' s 11 unusual cabins , hobbit holes and private islands without WiFi
A taste of the Rhone Valley in Morocco
The next morning , I hopped in a taxi at my hotel on the outskirts of Essaouira and headed to the vineyard . About halfway through the 20-minute drive , the traffic and people walking along the dusty roads faded to be replaced by groups of goats settling in the surrounding Argan trees . 

As I waved goodbye to my driver , I was met by Rony Tjamack , a guide at Domaine du Val D ’ Argan . Walking through the rows of grapevines , Rony began to tell me the story behind the winery . 


In 1994 Charles Mélia decided to leave behind his life in France as a Châteauneuf-du-Pape wine producer in pursuit of adventure . He was a man with a vision because the land he purchased had no access to everyday essentials such as electricity and running water . 


It took Charles four years to clear rocks and foliage from the land , build the winery , cellar , restaurant and guest house , and plant 12 hectares of land with grapes . Today , the vineyard has grown to 52 hectares . 

Not only was he was determined to adopt traditional Moroccan methods and produce organically farmed wines - Charles also wanted to bring a taste of France to the region . He planted grapes known throughout the Rhone valley including Ugni Blanc , Grenache Blanc and Clairette for the whites alongside Mourvèdre , Syrah , Grenache and Marselan for the red and rose varieties . 

Mother nature also has her hand in the business . The winds from the Atlantic Ocean keep the region cooler than other parts of Morocco during the summer months . A wind and drought-tolerant crop called sorghum protect the grapes from over sun exposure . 

No better place for Moroccan wine
Domaine du Val D ’ Argan ’ s cellar has a traditional cuverie which in simpler terms is a building attached to the vineyard . This is where the winemaking magic happens , and where it is stored and matured . A powerful system of thermoregulation makes sure that the precious liquid is vinified at the optimum temperature . 

The vineyard produces around 200 , 000 bottles every year that are available across restaurants and wine shops throughout Morocco . Just ten per cent of the wine leaves the North African nation . 

So with no better place to taste what the country has to offer , we sat down to sample some of the wines . 

Domaine du Val D ’ Argan
The winery has a traditional cuverie attached to the main building . Domaine du Val D ’ Argan
The Orion white was aromatic with fruits , gingerbread and just a hint of tobacco while its red counterpart managed a powerful and smooth taste with a blend of mocha , leather , and overripe fig . 

I also tried the Gazelle rose with fresh notes of raspberry , currant and citrus . The Gazelle black , with aromas of citrus , perfectly complimented the Moroccan vegetables and chickpeas tagine , couscous , and succulent barbecued meats . 

Travelling alone ? Here are seven of the best cities for solo backpackers
Morocco reopens to tourists : Everything you need to know to plan a last-minute trip
Get a taste of Hollywood with these Airbnb properties from the big screen
A night among the vines
As our conversation continued into the evening , Rory reminded me that the winery also had a three bedroomed guesthouse . I spoke to a friendly member of the team in the restaurant and quickly made the decision to stay for the night in one of Domaine du Val D ’ Argan ’ s guesthouses . 

Domaine du Val D ’ Argan
The vineyards use traditional organic winemaking techniques . Domaine du Val D ’ Argan
I woke the following morning in a charming and peaceful bedroom overlooking the swimming pool . I could not resist a quick walk around the garden interrupted only by the gentle sound of birdsong and the rustle of the wind in the trees . Despite being just a short journey from Essaouira , it felt worlds away from the hustle and bustle of the city . 

With breakfast out of the way , I took a quick swim in the winery ’ s pool before heading back to Essaouira to meet Linda for lunch . I couldn ’ t wait to tell her all about my wine adventures over another glass of Perle white . 