1. INTRODUCTION
NDIA IS A land of stark contrasts and startling paradoxes,
and a culture with the kind of complexity, mystique and
intrigue that develops only with a long, eventful and, at times,
colorful history.
Many historians believe that Indian history and its cuisine
are as old as humankind itself, evolving over the ages under the
influences of travelers and invaders from all corners of the
world, and from the emergence of various religions, rulers and
cultures internally.
Despite this, Indian cuisine has not lost its original identity.
It has instead become richer and more diverse, while managing
to retain the core principle that everything we eat should be
pure and balanced. Onions, garlic, ginger and spices, integral
to Indian cuisine, have proven health-giving properties. Cook
your curries with healthy oils such as olive, sunflower and
safflower, using ghee, butter and cream in moderation, and
you will have a diet that is not only compatible with a healthy
lifestyle but one that contributes to it.
Indian cuisine is wonderfully rich and varied. The regional
variations reflect the historical influences, contrasting
demographics, culture and ethnicity of this vast and exotic
subcontinent. With a multitude of vibrant dishes flavored with
aromatic spice blends (masalas) and fresh fragrant herbs, it is
not hard to understand why Indian food has become a firm
favorite all over the Western world.
Traditional Indian cuisine is split into four categories: north
Indian, south Indian, east Indian and west Indian. However,
ask for a chicken tikka masala anywhere in India, and it is likely
that all you will get is a blank look. Going out for curry is not
an Indian pastime, but in the West, and Britain in particular, it
is a ritual that many people relish with gusto. Chicken tikka
masala is reportedly the most frequently consumed dish in
Britain and is even more popular than fish and chips.
The cuisine of Indian restaurants, loved by millions, does
not fit into any of the traditional Indian cuisine categories, but
it embraces some aspect of each, becoming in itself quite
unique. It is this cuisine that holds the uncompromising,
tantalizing allure for the vast majority of curry lovers in the
West. The traditional recipes, as wonderful as they are, simply
don’t “have it” when your tastebuds are crying out for the
distinct, deep “curryish” flavor and aroma of restaurant
curries.
Indian restaurant cuisine has its origins in the period of the
British Raj. Indian cooks, pressed by their British masters to
prepare meals that were more acceptable to the British palate,
produced modified traditional dishes for which the British
rapidly acquired a taste. So much so, that the first Indian
restaurants were opened in the affluent parts of London so that
British officers returning home from their duties in India were
not deprived of their favorite foods. This was the beginning of
a new cuisine.
The second phase in the evolution of this new cuisine took
place in the mid-1900s as families from Bangladesh, migrating
to England to make their fortune, opened Indian restaurants in
the East End of London, an area still famous for this cuisine.
A number of anglicized Indian dishes were created during
that early period, including the well-known and loved chicken
tikka masala. Later in the century there was a rapid
proliferation of balti houses serving delicately spiced curries,
freshly cooked in a woklike pan. Beginning in Birmingham this
new phenomenon rapidly spread to other parts of the country.
The balti dishes served in Indian restaurants are descendants of
this cooking style and remain popular to this day.
In fact, Indian restaurant food has continued to grow in
popularity all over the world. The United States’ Immigration
Act of 1965 saw an influx of Asian immigration to the U.S. and
with it a surge of Indian restaurants, especially in San
Francisco, Los Angeles, Houston, Chicago and New York. Allyou-can-eat buffets with an array of standard dishes are
common in many Indian restaurants in the United States,
catering for a growing appetite for Indian food among the
locals.
Indian restaurants are also common throughout Canada,
particularly in Toronto and Vancouver where large numbers of
Indian nationals have settled since 1970. The cuisine of South
Africa also boasts several dishes of Indian origin; some have
evolved over time to become unique to South Africa while
many others are recognizably traditional Indian preparations
modified with local spices.
In Australia the popularity of Indian food has increased
considerably in the last 20 years, resulting in a rapid growth in
the availability of Indian food and ingredients. Nearly all
Australian towns and cities now enjoy the existence of several
good Indian restaurants and eateries, and more are opening
each month.
There has emerged an avid and enthusiastic demand for
dishes that challenge the modern Western palate, rather than
pander to the tastes of yesteryear when recipes were adapted to
create milder dishes like chicken korma and chicken tikka
masala that were gentler on the tastebuds. Indian food is now
integral to the Western diet and restaurateurs have responded
by creating more authentic dishes with a “no-holds barred”
approach to the use of more pungent spices and herbs.
There has also been a period of culinary evolution around
the globe with a growing homogenization or mixing of cooking
styles and techniques. Worldwide, professional chefs have
sought to develop and promote the intermingling of a variety
of popular cuisines, resulting in what has become widely
known as “fusion” food. Indian chefs too have embraced these
developments and Indian spring rolls, dhal soup and murgh
(chicken) Ceylon are now commonplace on the Indian
restaurant menu. While the favorites of the past decades
remain popular, these elements of change have seen many
more inventive restaurateurs create new and vibrant dishes.
In this book I seek to provide curry lovers with the knowhow for creating these new and exquisite restaurant dishes. The
New Curry Secret will show you how you can create the
delicious restaurant curries of today, simply and easily. I have
included all the closely held secrets, the special spice blends and
tricks of the trade employed by Indian chefs, plus some laborsaving tips and ideas to make it even easier when cooking
Indian restaurant food at home.
The New Curry Secret will help you take your cooking to the
next level. Not only does it give you a plethora of delicious
recipes and cooking ideas, it goes a step further. It shows you
what makes a good cook great; how you can transform good
dishes into mouthwatering delights that are a feast for the
senses just by using a few simple techniques.
In this book you will discover the closely guarded secrets of
Indian chefs. You will be surprised, delighted and amazed to
learn how you too can easily produce delicious restaurant
curries at home; curries that are as good, if not better, than the
ones you enjoy in your favorite Indian restaurant.
THE “NO SMELL” CURRY SAUCE
It is the curry sauce that, more than anything else, influences
the flavor, appearance and texture of the typical restaurant
curry and differentiates it from the traditional homemade one.
It is also the curry sauce that enables you to cook one or more
fabulous restaurant curries in next to no time. Have a quantity
of this sauce on hand and you can put together an array of
delicious, authentic restaurant curries in a matter of minutes.
However, there is no such thing as a free lunch — the smell
of boiling onions drives everyone out of the house for hours!
Well, not any more! The new curry sauce will have them
staying right where they are; it actually smells good while it’s
cooking.
By making a few changes to the way the curry sauce is made,
the unpleasant smell that emanated from the saucepan during
the boiling stage has been eliminated. If you don’t like the
smell when making the curry sauce as outlined in other Indian
cookbooks, you will love the new recipe.
Kris Dhillon
W
2. WHAT MAKES A GOOD COOK GREAT?
HAT IS IT that makes a good cook great? What enables
some cooks to take an ordinary, everyday dish and lift it
to another dimension? The answer, as to most seemingly
difficult questions, is a simple one — the best and the freshest
ingredients available, and a passion for food. Many people
believe that poor-quality meat and stale vegetables can be
disguised by putting them in a curry. This is completely
inaccurate. A good Indian dish is a balance of spicy flavors
around fresh, tasty vegetables and good-quality meat or fish.
No amount of sugar and spice can disguise tasteless, stale or
out-of-season ingredients.
I’m not sure what kindled my own passion for food, but
whatever it was, it saw me standing on a stool so that I could
reach the stove at the tender age of 7 to make my first chapati
— under the watchful eye of my mother, of course.
My family moved from India to England in the late 1950s
when I was just 5, and food always played an important part in
our lives. It was difficult to buy many of the exotic ingredients
that are so readily available today, so my parents grew whatever
they could in their garden. Meat was somewhat scarce and
expensive in the years after the Second World War and, even
though it was eaten only once or twice a week, it was common
for those early migrants to buy cheaper, tougher cuts of meat
and chicken, and they developed inventive and clever methods
of cooking them.
With my emerging interest in food and cooking I loved to
watch my father cook the weekly meat curry. He would throw
pieces of mutton, cheaper cuts of pork or portions of chicken
into a large aluminum pot together with a quantity of chopped
onions and some salt. The pot was placed on a gentle heat and
cooked slowly for up to three hours until the onions had
melted and the meat was beautifully tender. He would then
add generous amounts of ghee (clarified butter), ripe tomatoes,
garlic, ginger, turmeric and freshly ground spices (which my
mother had painstakingly ground to a fine powder with a
pestle and mortar) until the colorless simmering mass was a
fragrant, rich, golden red.
Just when you thought it couldn’t get any better, in would
go the spring onions plucked straight from the garden. Fresh
green fenugreek leaves, again picked just before using, were
roughly chopped and stirred in. Occasionally, if they were
growing in the garden, my father would add sliced turnips or
carrots or even spinach leaves, harvested at the last minute of
course, and simmer them with the meat during the last hour or
so of cooking. Finally, a generous sprinkling of freshly picked
cilantro would complete the culinary exercise. The aromas
made your mouth water.
The fresh, aromatic vibrancy of those last few ingredients
added so much to the character, flavor and appearance of these
dishes that they were transformed from being just good to
being absolutely sublime.
My growing passion was further kindled when my mother
decided to take me back to India for the first time since I had
left the country some 12 years earlier. Expecting to be bored
with and alienated by a country I had little memory of and
possibly little in common with, I instead landed in a place that
so fascinated me I tingled with excitement. The land that my
parents farmed before they left for England had been well
looked after and traditionally (organically) farmed by our
extended family. The fields were full of corn, sugarcane,
spinach, mustard greens, chilies, radishes, turnips, carrots,
squash, eggplants, spring onions, garlic and herbs and edible,
exotic plants that I had never seen or heard of before. The
people were different too: solid, pragmatic, salt-of-the-earth
type individuals who were clearly in harmony with their
environment and all its inhabitants.
Mealtimes were an absolute delight. My young cousins and I
would rise early in the morning to make the short journey to
the fields to pick the vegetables — eggplants, zucchini, tender
green chickpeas, turnips or carrots, chilies — and herbs for
making breakfast, the meal consisting of a vegetable bhaji or
dhal, buttery parathas, yogurt that had been made overnight,
homemade green mango or lime achar (pickle) and lassi
(buttermilk — a light, fresh-tasting liquid that remains after
yogurt is churned to make butter, done early each morning).
Chai, flavored with cardamom, made with fresh buffalo milk
obtained that morning and sweetened with rich, sweet, raw
cane sugar (jaggery), followed shortly after.
When lunch-and dinnertime came around, the vegetables
and herbs collected earlier were “stale.” “Feed them to the
cattle,” my aunt would say, “and go pick some more.” A few
hours old, and they were no longer considered fresh enough
for human consumption. Leftover yogurt from the day before
was no longer eaten with meals as a side dish, but soured and
thickened with chickpea flour (besan), flavored with green
fenugreek, whole spices, cilantro and lots of fresh green chilies
and made into a delicious curry. Any milk left over from the
previous day was not fresh enough to drink and was either
made into dessert using rice, sago or vermicelli, or curdled and
made into paneer for cooking with ginger, garlic, tomatoes,
chilies and peas to make mattar paneer. Vegetables were so
fresh that you didn’t need to add water to make a sauce; their
juices were copious enough.
Yet there was still more to come; I was fortunate enough to
be in India at the time of year that sugarcane is harvested and
milled to squeeze out the juice. What a wonderful experience. I
would eagerly arise at the chilly crack of dawn and make my
way down to the mill, jug in hand. I had only a little memory
of drinking freshly squeezed sugarcane juice (ras) and what a
heavenly delight it was when I tasted it again for the first time.
The cool, fresh sweetness of it was extraordinary.
These experiences were a revelation to me of how good food
should be, but there is one particular incident that somehow
transcended all of this and crystallized for me the sheer essence
of fresh food. I loved to walk barefoot through the cool
channels of water as they irrigated the fields, taking in this
pure, bountiful countryside that they call the Punjab. During
one such excursion, I leaned over and pulled a carrot out of the
ground, shook it around in the water to wash off the soil and
bit into it. The depth of flavor, the freshness of the aroma, the
sweet, juicy “carroty” taste were so pure and intense, it made
me stop in my tracks and savor its stunning uniqueness. I had
never tasted such true flavor before. It was as though my
tastebuds came truly alive only at that moment. This
experience made such an impression on me that I have
recounted it many times. It was only a carrot, but I had never
tasted anything like it, and the experience has shaped my
relationship with food to this day.
The days were filled with delightful, mouthwatering
episodes at every turn, beginning early with a long, cool,
delicious glass of ras and ending quite late with fresh cobs of
corn roasted in the embers of a dying fire followed by a glass of
warm milk sweetened with raw cane sugar. I thought this must
be paradise. I took great delight in learning to make new and
complex dishes from my grandmother and aunts who were
wonderful and creative cooks.
I became enthralled and enchanted by this mystical land, its
people and the rich and sustainable lives they lived. They used
no chemicals or foreign substances on the land. They looked
after their animals, feeding them wholesome crops, linseeds
and herbs. They used and reused everything. The remnants of
harvested corn and milled sugarcane were fed to the cattle or
used as compost. Cattle and buffalo manure was used on the
land or made into patties, dried and used as fuel for cooking
and heating. Even the ashes that remained after the patties were
burned were used for scouring pots and pans. There was no
packaging, no waste and no landfill. Practices the West thought
of as primitive then are now, with our awareness of climate
change, seen to be environmentally friendly and ecologically
sound.
I reluctantly returned to England after several months, but
the essence of this magical country lives inside me to this day.
TIPS ON BUYING AND USING FRESH INGREDIENTS
If you want to cook great Indian food, it is important that you
obtain fresh, top-quality ingredients, preferably organically
produced. Just as you cannot make a silk purse out of a sow’s
ear, you cannot create a culinary masterpiece from stale,
tasteless produce.
▪ Buy seasonal fruit and vegetables. It is possible nowadays to
buy just about every type of fruit and vegetable at any time of
year, but at what cost to your tastebuds and your wallet? Outof-season fruit is generally tasteless and vegetables are bland
and sometimes even bitter. Produce that is in season will taste a
lot better and cost significantly less.
▪ Buy local produce. Local markets and farmers’ markets are
good places to buy seasonal, fresh produce. You will be helping
to save the planet too as the food has not traveled so far.
▪ Buy the more exotic ingredients from Indian grocers. You
will find the quality is top-notch and the prices are lower.
▪ When buying fruit and vegetables, pick them up, examine
them and smell them. If they are fresh, they should be plump
with smooth skins, feel heavy for their size and have a distinct
aroma. Bunches of herbs should not be tired and wilting.
▪ Buy organically grown produce when you can or grow some
of your own. The appearance, feel and scent of really fresh
produce, especially fresh herbs, are truly wonderful.
A little goes a long way to adding that touch of magic to your
dishes. Try some of the following:
▪ Homegrown cilantro (also referred to as coriander), for
example, is so much more vibrant and aromatic than anything
you can buy. Just a little sprinkled on the dish transforms it
into something special, and you can grow it in a tiny area of
your garden or even in a pot. During the warmer months, just
sprinkle some coriander seeds from your pantry onto the
garden or onto some potting mix in a pot, sprinkle some soil
or potting mix on top, water and keep moist. It’s that easy.
Fresh cilantro is a delicate herb. Use it toward the end of
cooking and as a garnish.
▪ Next time you have some garlic cloves or onions that are
beginning to sprout, plant them in the garden. They will grow
healthy green shoots in no time. Use the green tops, roughly
chopped, next time you make a curry or savory snack, and you
will add an extra dimension of flavor, color and aroma to the
dish. Both of these ingredients need to be cooked so use them
at the beginning of making a dish. (Note: much of the garlic
available nowadays is imported and treated with a gas that
effectively kills it, so it will not sprout. Buy organic garlic bulbs
if you wish it to sprout and it will grow beautifully.)
▪ Throw some fenugreek seeds (again the same fenugreek
seeds you use for cooking) onto a small area in the garden or
into a pot and within a couple of weeks you will have fresh,
green fenugreek leaves. Add a handful, chopped, to curries,
bhajis, pakoras or really just about any savory dish to impart a
robust flavor to the dish. Fresh fenugreek requires cooking, so
use it at the beginning.
▪ A few fresh mint leaves shredded and sprinkled onto a salad
or stirred into yogurt or even a curry add liveliness, color and
flavor. Mint grows easily and is a perennial. Ask a friend who
has some growing in the garden to pull out a few roots, and put
them into a pot or straight into your garden. You will have
fresh mint from late spring to early winter every year.
▪ If you have a handful of sweet, ripe cherry tomatoes, stir
them whole or sliced in half into the dish at the last minute and
you will introduce additional color, texture and taste. The
appearance of the dish is beautifully enhanced. Remember you
feast with your eyes before your mouth.
Throughout the book, I have included suggestions for the
use of one or more optional ingredients such as those above,
and given instructions on how best to use them in your
cooking. Please remember, though, you can make perfectly
good dishes by following the basic recipes; these suggestions
are an optional extra for those times when you are in the mood
to create something extraordinary.
T
3. WHAT’S IN SEASON?
HERE ARE many good reasons why we should eat food
that is produced locally and in season: ▪ Locally sourced,
in-season food is fresher, tastier, more nutritious and less
expensive.
▪ Due to the fewer “food miles” that local produce travels,
there is a lower consumption of energy and therefore less CO2
emission.
▪ The more you buy locally, the more you support your local
community.
Clearly not all fruit and vegetables can be grown in all
climates, and when local produce is scarce it is better to source
food from neighboring countries rather than those on the
other side of the planet. The following list is a brief guide of
what is best each season:
WINTER
Vegetables — Artichokes, beets, brussels sprouts, cauliflowers,
kale, leeks, parsnips, potatoes, pumpkins, rhubarb, rutabaga,
turnips, winter squash Fruit — Apples, bananas, clementines,
cranberries, kiwi fruit, lemons, oranges, blood oranges, pears,
pineapples
SPRING
Vegetables — Asparagus, broccoli, carrots, cauliflowers,
eggplant, leeks, new potatoes, radishes, spinach, spring greens,
spring onions Fruit — Apples, bananas, kiwi fruit, lemons,
oranges, blood oranges, pomegranates
SUMMER
Vegetables — Broad beans, runner beans, carrots, chard,
cucumbers, eggplant, fennel, garlic, okra, onions, peas, sweet
peppers, potatoes, radishes, spring onions, summer squash,
sweet corn, zucchini Fruit — Apricots, blackberries,
blueberries, cherries, gooseberries, grapes, kiwi fruit, mangoes,
melons, peaches, raspberries, strawberries, tomatoes
AUTUMN
Vegetables — Broccoli, butternut squash, carrots, celery,
chard, eggplant, garlic, wild mushrooms, onions, parsnips,
sweet peppers, potatoes, rutabaga, summer squash, sweet corn,
turnips, zucchini Fruit — Apples, blackberries, clementines,
figs, grapes, melons, nectarines, peaches, pears, pineapples,
plums, quince
E
4. COMMONLY USED INGREDIENTS
WITH INDIAN AND ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS
VERY region of India brings its own unique influence and
subtle variations to the popular dishes you enjoy in your
favorite Indian restaurants. Spices that are fragrant, pungent,
sharp, spicy, earthy and warm, and expertly blended are the
essence of Indian cuisine. It is said that the flavors are as varied
as the climate of India and as exotic as the people.
HINDI/PUNJABI ENGLISH
achar pickle — sour
adrak ginger
aloo potato
amb mango
balti* karahi dish
bengan/brinjal eggplant
bhaji vegetable
bhindi okra
chai tea
chana chickpeas
chatani chutney or pickle
chawal rice
dahi yogurt
dalchini cinnamon
dhal pulses
dhanya cilantro
dudh milk
elaichi cardamom
faal fruit
gajar carrot
garam masala spice mix
ghee clarified butter
gobhi cauliflower
haldi turmeric
hari dal green mung beans
hing asafetida
imli tamarind
jaggery/goor raw cane sugar/molasses
jaifal nutmeg
jangli dalchini cassia bark/chinese cinnamon
jeera/zeera cumin
jinga shrimp
kali elaichi black cardamom
kali mirch pepper
kalonjii onion seeds
karahi woklike pan or serving dish
*In Hindi and Punjabi balti actually means “bucket.” The word
has taken on a new meaning within the context of the
restaurant menu.
HINDI/PUNJABI ENGLISH
keema minced meat
kela banana
kesar saffron
kulfi ice cream made with condensed milk
kumbh/khumba mushrooms
lasan garlic
lassi yogurt drink
lowng cloves
machli fish
maki corn
malai cream
marss meat
masala blend of spices
masoor lentils
mattar peas
methi fenugreek
mirch chilies, pepper
mirch chilies, pepper
murghi chicken
namak/loorn salt
nariyal coconut
nimbu lemon
paani water
palak spinach
paneer cheese
piaz onions
pootna mint
raai mustard seed
raita spiced vegetable yogurt
rajma red kidney beans
ras juice
roti chapati
saag pureed spinach and green leafy vegetables
sabji vegetables
sakara/kand sugar
sarson/saron mustard greens
saunf fennel
shev apple
shorba soup, gravy
suwa dill
takrai lemongrass
tamatar tomato
tandoor clay oven
tandoor clay oven
tava hot plate for cooking
tej patta bay leaf
til sesame seed
tulsi basil
tur (toovar) pigeon peas
zafrani saffron
S
5. GETTING STARTED
PICES are integral to Indian food. They add warmth,
pungency, heat and the distinct aroma and flavor of Indian
dishes. Creative chefs may use a dozen or more spices in one
dish, but most cooks will do fine with a quantity of garam
masala and one or two additional ingredients. You may want
to keep other spices handy for particular dishes.
ESSENTIAL SPICES AND HERBS
Essential ingredients
▪ green cardamom pods
▪ black cardamom pods
▪ coriander seeds
▪ black peppercorns
▪ cinnamon
▪ cumin seeds
▪ cloves
▪ nutmeg
▪ bay leaves
▪ mustard seeds
▪ turmeric powder
▪ chili powder
You will require the first nine ingredients in the list above to
make garam masala.
Other useful ingredients
▪ fennel seeds
▪ fenugreek seeds
▪ paprika
▪ onion seeds
▪ green mango powder (ambchoor)
▪ tamarind
▪ dried fenugreek leaves (methi)
▪ carom or ajowan seeds (ajwain)
▪ chat masala
HOW TO MAKE YOGURT
Bring 35 fl oz (2.1 US pints/1 L) of organic milk to a boil and cool until
warm. Transfer the milk to a bowl or other container with a lid and stir
in 2 tablespoons of live plain yogurt. Wrap the container in a tea towel
and put in a warm place for 4–5 hours until set. Refrigerate.
HOW TO MAKE PANEER
Bring 70 fl oz (4.2 US pints/2 L) of organic milk to a boil, turn down the
heat and stir in the juice of a lemon. Continue to stir until the milk
solids separate from the whey — add a few drops of vinegar if it
doesn’t completely separate. Strain the milk through a colander lined
with muslin. Allow to drain for a few minutes, then take up the muslin
and squeeze out excess moisture. Gently shape the paneer still in the
muslin so that it is about ½ inch (1.5 cm) thick. Place on a hard surface
and put a large saucepan filled with water or other heavy object on top
to help squeeze out all the moisture. Leave for an hour and cut the
paneer into cubes.
HOW TO CLARIFY BUTTER TO MAKE GHEE
Gently heat 1 lb 2 oz (500 g) of organic butter in a small saucepan until
completely melted. Continue to heat for 15–20 minutes until the solids
sink to the bottom. Skim the surface, allow to cool a little, and strain
the ghee into a suitable dish.
Buying and storing spices
Spices are at their best when used within three months or so of
purchase. Buy spices from an Indian grocer rather than a
supermarket. Prices will be lower and the quality a lot better.
To ensure maximum freshness and taste, buy whole spices
rather than powders, and grind only in quantities that are likely
to be used up within three or four weeks.
Store spices in glass, stainless steel or ceramic containers
with tightly fitting lids, in a cool, dark and dry place.
OTHER KEY INGREDIENTS
Every region has its favorite ingredients and Indian restaurant
cuisine embraces and reflects the flavors and diversity of
various regions and cultures throughout India.
Foods of north India
North Indian cuisine possibly influences Indian restaurant
cuisine more than any other. A region that enjoys a temperate
climate and rich fertile soils, its cuisine is the product of
Punjabi and Mughal influences, characterized by the daily
consumption of dairy foods: milk, paneer, ghee, cream (malai)
and yogurt.
North Indian cuisine is recognized by the use of the tava (a
cast-iron griddle) for cooking flat breads like roti and paratha,
made from locally grown wheat and sometimes corn (maize)
and eaten with every meal. Rice is not easily grown in the
climate of the region.
Northern India is also home to the tandoor. Used for baking
breads such as tandoori roti, naan and kulcha and cooking
meat dishes like tandoori chicken and seekh kebab, it has
become a trademark of Indian restaurants. Other breads like
poori and bhatoora are deep-fried in ghee or oil and are
common at festive occasions and street stalls. The population
of the region is largely vegetarian but goat and lamb are
consumed by a relatively small number of nonvegetarians.
The samosa is a north Indian favorite and now common in
other parts of India, Asia and the Middle East, and generally
served as an appetizer in Indian restaurants. The original
samosa was filled with boiled, fried or mashed potato and
spices, but other tasty fillings have evolved and now include
minced lamb or vegetables. Growing up I can remember
making mountains of samosas from scratch for parties and
festive occasions — no mean feat by any stretch of the
imagination. Now you can buy them freshly cooked in any
quantity from Indian stores and cafés. Generally, they are not
as good as homemade but I am probably more pedantic than
most.
Foods of south India
South Indian cooking boasts the value and versatility of rice as
a staple food. The foods of southern India are often more fiery
and pungent due to the liberal use of hot red chilies and
souring ingredients like tamarind, kokum and lime. Coconut
and curry leaves are also used liberally in this region and
emerge in various tasteful guises at almost every meal. Cooks in
this part of India tend to use spice pastes, moistened with water
or oil, while in the north dishes are more often based on dry
spice mixes such as garam masala. Some popular dishes
include a varied range of biryanis and pilafs made with locally
produced rice.
Foods of west India
Western India has three or four quite distinct food styles, the
best known of which is probably Goan, a fusion of local and
Portuguese cuisine. The Portuguese, who lived in the area for
nearly 500 years, are the major influencers of the cuisine
enjoyed up and down the west coast of India. The chili, which
has become synonymous with Indian cuisine, was first
introduced to India by the Portuguese. Rice is the staple grain
and there is abundant use of fresh coconut and seafood
flavored with fresh herbs and spice mixtures. Other regions in
western India rely more on wheat, corn and maize for staples
and use groundnut instead of coconut to add texture and
thickness to dishes. To the north of the region, the
predominantly vegetarian cuisine of Gujerat has its own
distinctive character. Jaggery (boiled-down sugarcane juice) is
often used to add sweetness and balance to the pungently spicy
staples such as chili-flecked lentils, and tamarind is used to add
a sour tang to vegetable dishes. Turmeric, chilies, cumin and
cilantro are typically grown in the Gujerat.
Foods of east India
East Indian cuisine is famous for its desserts (mathai),
particularly milk-based desserts such as the luscious gulab
jamon, rasgulla and chumchum. Many of the desserts now
popular in northern India originated in this region.
Cashew-nut, mustard-seed or poppy-seed pastes are used
for thickening and are definitive of savory dishes in this part of
India, whereas in other regions onions, ginger and garlic
mixtures are used to flavor and thicken curry sauces. Fish and
seafood are abundant and popular in the coastal states. Smaller
fish are made into delicious, spicy soups or deep-fried and
eaten with spicy pickles, sauces and chutneys. Larger fish are
smothered and marinated with fragrant spice pastes before
being lightly steamed or panfried.
▪ Coriander leaves — Coriander leaves (also called cilantro)
and coriander seeds are quite dissimilar in taste, although if
you pick the seeds while still green they have an intense
coriander flavor. The distinct flavor of fresh leaves is
incomparable for flavor and aroma. Fresh coriander leaves
ground to a paste alone or with mint leaves are a popular base
for fresh chutneys. Buy coriander from Indian grocers for a
better-quality, less-expensive product, or grow your own for
maximum flavor and freshness. Coriander leaves will be
referred to as cilantro for this book.
▪ Curry leaves — Bright green, aromatic leaves that impart a
“curryish” flavor to dishes. Use fresh or dried. Available from
ethnic grocers, curry leaves freeze really well.
▪ Fenugreek leaves — Much more robust in flavor and aroma
than coriander, fenugreek leaves are a tasty addition to bhajis,
pakoras and curries. Fresh fenugreek leaves are readily available
from Indian grocers, or can easily be grown from seed. Kasoori
methi is sun-dried fenugreek and is a good substitute when
fresh fenugreek is not available.
▪ Fresh ginger — Although dried ground ginger is used in a
few traditional Indian dishes, it’s more usual to cook with fresh
gingerroot. Look for firm, unwrinkled roots.
▪ Chilies — Chilies come in many shapes, sizes and colors,
and vary in heat from quite mild to extremely hot. Generally,
the smaller the chili, the hotter it will be. Indian cooks and
chefs mostly use fresh green chilies, the red ones being reserved
for pickling or drying and pounding to chili powder. Chilies
are easy to grow. Handle cut chilies carefully as the irritant in
them causes a burning sensation on contact with the skin.
▪ Chat masala — The most popular and commonly used
spice mix for Indian refreshments and snacks, this is a mix of
roasted cumin and coriander seeds, chili, ground black
peppercorns, ambchoor, salt and black salt (sanchal). Available
in small packs from Indian grocers.
▪ Ghee — Ghee is clarified butter. It can be heated to a high
temperature without burning and was traditionally prized and
used for all cooking, sweet and savory. Nowadays it is generally
used only at special celebrations such as wedding feasts and
religious occasions. Vegetable ghee is often used by Indian
restaurant chefs but lacks the flavor of the real thing. At home,
sunflower, olive or non-genetically modified canola oil is the
preferred cooking medium for everyday meals, and is a
healthier option.
▪ Chickpea flour (besan) — Chickpea flour is used for bhajis,
pakoras, yogurt-based curries and sweetmeats (confections or
candies). Best purchased from Indian grocers.
▪ Jaggery — Raw, unrefined sugar with a distinctive taste
made from cooked-down sugarcane juice. Muscovado sugar or
even dark brown sugar is fine as an alternative.
▪ Saffron — Dried stigmas of crocus flowers, noted for its
deep orange color and sweet, delicate aroma. Traditionally
used in biryanis and other rice dishes. Needs to be soaked in
water or milk before use.
▪ Tamarind — A tart fruit used as a souring agent. Available
in pods, blocks or as a concentrate. The concentrate is the most
convenient but doesn’t have the flavor and texture of the pods
and blocks. If you plan to do a lot of cooking using tamarind,
buy the block and soak in a little hot water for 20 minutes or so
and squeeze out the pulp.
▪ Yogurt — A cooling contrast to spicy dishes, and excellent
for cleansing the palate after a hot curry. Homemade yogurt is
superior in flavor to store-bought and is very easy to make.
Recipe page 24.
▪ Atta — Chapati flour is a finely ground, soft wheat flour
with varying amounts of wheat bran, from dark wholemeal
containing 100 percent of the bran to the lighter flours with
large amounts of the bran removed. Canadian Gold, a new
addition to the varieties of atta now available from Indian
grocers, is a finely ground flour made from durum wheat and
has a pale yellow tinge. The dough made from this flour
doesn’t need resting, so it is very convenient, but the chapatis
don’t keep as well. The lighter flours are generally used by
restaurant chefs but I prefer the wholemeal for flavor and
nutritional value.
▪ Basmati rice — Basmati is the king of rice and Pakistani
basmati rice considered to be the best. It has a nutty flavor and
aroma and retains its “bite” when cooked. Use for savory and
sweet dishes.
▪ Food coloring — Red, yellow and green food coloring is
used liberally by Indian chefs. Buy powdered colorings if you
wish to use them or substitute with turmeric and paprika. You
won’t get the deep color of some of the restaurant dishes, but
the flavor will not be affected.
▪ Oils — Mustard-seed oil is widely used in India (and has
been for centuries) for deep-frying and other cooking uses. The
use of good-quality “healthy” oils, such as olive, safflower and
non-genetically modified canola, will ensure that the food you
enjoy is also contributing to good health. I use olive oil in most
of my savory recipes as it has a fairly high cooking temperature
and adds a nice taste, but this is a matter of personal choice.
USEFUL UTENSILS
There are a few items of kitchen hardware that make preparing
Indian restaurant food easier, less time consuming and more
authentic:
▪ A deep, heavy-bottomed frying pan or two needs to be at the
top of your list. This enables the curries to be cooked quickly
without burning and with even evaporation for thickening the
sauces. It can also be used for making chapatis and parathas
instead of using a tava (cast-iron griddle).
▪ An upright blender is essential if you intend to make the
curry sauce on a regular basis. A hand blender will suffice for
small quantities although the sauce will not be quite as smooth.
▪ A coffee grinder for grinding spices is also a good idea,
unless you are skilled with a pestle and mortar.
▪ A small pestle and mortar is useful for crushing whole spices
such as whole cardamoms or coriander seeds.
▪ A sizzle plate or two is a must if you like the tandoori dishes
served sizzling at the table. You can make do with a cast-iron
frying pan if you already have one and if you don’t need to
impress at the table.
▪ A couple of balti dishes will add to the authenticity if you
like balti curries.
▪ A karahi or wok is useful, particularly if you want to cut
down on the amount of oil used. Because of the pan’s small
base, the cooking oil sits in a small pool at the bottom, so you
can use a lot less. It is also a good utensil for deep-frying foods
such as samosas, pakoras, pooris and bhatooras (breads).
HANDY TIPS, USEFUL SHORTCUTS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
▪ If you don’t use up the fresh ginger, chilies and garlic that
you have bought, place them all in your blender or food
processor and process until fine. Freeze the mixture in ice-cube
trays. Use a cube or two straight from the freezer when
required.
▪ Fresh green fenugreek left over from a bunch or a good
harvest does not have to be wasted. Wash and dry well, chop
and freeze in freezer bags or plastic containers. It doesn’t turn
into a solid mass, and you can use a little or a lot whenever you
want, straight from the freezer.
▪ Making samosas and don’t want to take the time making
and rolling the dough? Use wonton wrappers, spring-roll
wrappers or even ready-made puff pastry instead. The result
will not be authentic but it is a quick and tasty alternative.
▪ Buy ready-made paneer or try tofu as a substitute. Both are
available in blocks from supermarkets and health food stores.
▪ Make a double quantity of chapati or naan dough, let it rest
for 10–15 minutes and freeze half. Defrost in the fridge
overnight when needed, and it will be as good as new.
▪ Save time by precooking diced vegetables such as carrots
and potatoes in boiling salted water or the microwave for a few
minutes, until almost tender. Use to make a speedy vegetable
bhaji.
▪ Buy cauliflower when it is in season and cheap, break into
florets and wash and drain. Blanch the florets in a large pot of
boiling salted water for 2 minutes, drain and immediately
immerse in ice cold water to stop the cooking process and
maintain a nice color. Freeze in freezer bags. You can make
aloo gobi or pakoras in a matter of minutes whenever you
want. Restaurant chefs often use frozen cauliflower for speed
and convenience.
▪ Save a little of your tandoori marinade and stir a tablespoon
or so into your curries during the last minute or two of
cooking for extra flavor and color.
▪ “Dry” popadoms, after frying in hot oil, upright (in a toast
rack or metal colander) in a warm oven for a crisp, nongreasy
result.
▪ Freeze quantities of the curry sauce, chicken and meat,
cooked as suggested, and you can put your favorite curries
together in minutes whenever you feel like having Indian food.
GET READY — IN SUMMARY
a) Make a small quantity of garam masala.
b) Prepare ground coriander and cumin.
c) Prepare garlic, ginger and chilies.
d) Have quantities of other essential and key ingredients to
hand.
e) Make a quantity of curry sauce (page 32) and freeze it.
GARAM MASALA
Makes about 3 tablespoons
1 tbsp coriander seeds
1 tbsp cumin
1 tsp green cardamoms
1 tsp cloves
1 tsp black peppercorns
2 sticks of cinnamon, about 2 inches (5 cm) in length
2 bay leaves
½ small nutmeg
4 black cardamoms
4 black cardamoms
Place all the ingredients into an electric coffee grinder and grind to a
fine powder. Carefully remove the lid and test by rubbing a little of the
mixture between your forefinger and thumb. Finely ground spices
should not feel gritty. If necessary, grind for another few seconds.
Alternatively, grind to a fine powder in a pestle and mortar.
Store the ground spices in a small noncorrosive, airtight container and
remember to label it.
a) Garam masala
Garam means “hot” and masala a “mixture of spices.”
According to the Ayurvedic concept of health, food items have
differing effects on our bodies and our health due to our
constitution or tri-dosha. The heat from this “hot” spice mix is
not a heat that you taste as with chilies, but one that warms the
body. Spices such as cloves, cinnamon, black cardamoms and
nutmeg are the garam constituents of this aromatic mixture.
b) Prepare ground coriander and cumin
Many recipes call for the use of coriander and cumin powder.
Having the spices ground and ready to use makes life a lot
easier.
Place 2 or 3 tablespoons of coriander seeds into the bowl of
a coffee grinder and grind to a fine powder. Store in a small
airtight container and label. Repeat with 2 or 3 tablespoons of
cumin seeds.
c) Prepare garlic, ginger and chilies
Many of the dishes in this book require the use of finely
chopped garlic, ginger and green chilies. If you plan to do
much Indian cooking, it is helpful to have a quantity of these
ready prepared so that you can put a meal together with the
maximum of ease.
GARLIC, GINGER AND CHILIES
Separate the cloves from 2 bulbs of garlic and peel.
Peel 11 oz (300 g) fresh ginger and roughly chop.
Place the garlic cloves and ginger in a food processor or blender and
process until finely chopped.
Take an ice-cube tray and put 2 teaspoons of the mixture into each
section.
Freeze until solid.
Remove the cubes of mix and place in a freezer bag or plastic container
and store in the freezer.
One cube is approximately equivalent to 2 cloves of garlic and a 1-inch
(2.5 cm) piece of ginger, the quantity and proportions used in most
recipes, and can be used straight from the freezer or thawed in the
microwave.
Green chilies — Repeat the above process with a quantity of green
chilies. You probably require only half a cube of chilies for most recipes,
but how much you use will depend on how hot the chilies are. Start
with less, and add more if you want more heat.
d) Have quantities of the other essential and key ingredients
to hand
Ingredients such as turmeric, chili powder, paprika, cardamom
pods, cinnamon and cloves are common items in Indian
restaurant cooking. Have small amounts available at all times
to make preparing your favorite dishes easy.
e) Make a quantity of curry sauce and freeze it
The basis for many of the curries in this book, the curry sauce
makes preparing curries simplicity itself. See page 32 for this
no-smell curry sauce.
B
6. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
OTH IMPERIAL and metric measurements have been given
in this book with the imperial measures having been
rounded up or down to the nearest unit. Remember to use one
or the other and not to combine imperial and metric
measurements in one recipe.
All spoon measurements throughout the book are slightly
rounded spoonfuls unless specified as being level.
Fluid ounces refer to the British fluid ounce, which is
slightly smaller than the US equivalent. This difference is not
significant for the recipes in this book.
Cup size is half a US pint or the metric cup (250 mL).
Some conversions are given in the tables below:

T
7. THE NEW CURRY SAUCE
HIS IS the foundation of many of the curries served in
Indian restaurants and is prepared in abundance and
regularity by Indian chefs. Its recipe and method of preparation
is also the most closely guarded secret of restaurant cooking.
Indian cooking does not employ thickeners such as flour or
cornstarch; it instead relies upon onions, ginger and garlic to
give the sauce its substance, flavor and texture.
If you have purchased preparations of curry sauces from
supermarkets or grocers and have been grossly disappointed
with the end result, this recipe will be manna from heaven. This
is the real thing. Have some of this curry sauce on hand, and you
can prepare a delicious Indian meal in minutes, just like the
experts.
The curry sauce is simple to make, and this method of
making it, although different from the way it is made in many
restaurants, smells pleasant during cooking. It keeps for up to
four days in the fridge and can be frozen in serving-size portions
for ultimate convenience.
These quantities make enough curry sauce for about eight
main-course dishes.
Preparation and cooking time: about 11/2 hours
4 tbsp olive oil
2 lb 4 oz (1 kg) onions, sliced
1 tsp salt
about 2 oz (50 g) fresh ginger, coarsely chopped
2 oz (50 g) garlic, coarsely chopped
53 fl oz/3 US pints (1.5 L) water
1 can (8 oz/225 g) tomatoes
1 tsp tomato paste
1 tsp turmeric
1 tsp paprika
Step 1
▪ Heat all but 1 tablespoon of the oil in a large saucepan with
a tight-fitting lid, and add the sliced onions. Stir on high heat
for a minute or two and then turn the heat down a little.
Continue to cook the onion, stirring frequently, for about 10
minutes until the onion is transparent and beginning to brown
at the edges.
▪ Add the salt, stir well and turn the heat down to as low as
you can. Cover the pan and continue to cook the onion for
about 20 minutes, stirring three or four times during that
period.
The addition of salt will prevent the onion from browning and
help it soften and break down, but be careful it does not stick
to the bottom of the pan.
▪ Add the ginger and garlic to the onion. Turn the heat up a
little and cook for a minute or two, until aromatic.
▪ Add the water and bring to a boil. Turn the heat down and
simmer the mixture, partly covered, for 20–25 minutes.
▪ Leave to cool.
Step 2
▪ Once cooled, ladle half the mixture into a blender and blend
until smooth. To ensure that the sauce is really smooth, blend
for about 2 minutes. Pour the blended onion mixture into a
clean bowl and repeat with the other half of the onion
mixture.
▪ Wash and dry the saucepan. Reserve about 4 tablespoons of
the sauce at this point to use for cooking the meat, as detailed
in many of the recipes in this book.
Freezing: Freeze at this stage if you want to keep the sauce for
up to 2 months. You can freeze the finished sauce for up to 1
month.
Step 3
▪ Place the contents of the can of tomatoes into the rinsed
blender and blend until smooth, about 2 minutes.
▪ Place the cleaned saucepan onto medium heat and heat the
remaining oil. Add the tomato paste, turmeric and paprika and
cook for about 30 seconds. Add the blended tomatoes and
bring to a boil. Turn down the heat and cook, stirring
occasionally, for about 10 minutes.
▪ Add the blended onion mixture to the tomatoes and bring
to a boil again. Turn down the heat so that the sauce simmers
gently.
▪ As the sauce simmers, you will notice froth rises to the
surface. This needs to be skimmed off. Continue to simmer,
skimming as necessary, for 20–25 minutes.
▪ Use immediately or cool and refrigerate for up to 4 days.
Freeze for up to 1 month.
TIP
If you wish to speed things up a little, you can eliminate step 3. Simply
add the spices, tomato paste and canned tomatoes to the onions in step 1,
just before adding the water. Simmer for about 10 minutes before adding
the water and proceed as suggested. Beware, though, that your blender
will take on the yellow color of the turmeric. This will wash off more
easily if you use a little dishwasher powder or laundry detergent dissolved
in hot water.
T
8. APPETIZERS AND LIGHT LUNCHES
HE RICHNESS and diversity of Indian food are no more
adequately reflected than in the enormous array of snacks,
appetizers, hors d’oeuvres and tasty little tidbits enjoyed by
millions of Indians every day. Each region of India has its own
local specialities, but they are all tantalizingly spicy, delicious,
inexpensive and readily available.
A variety of particularly common and popular snacks eaten
throughout India are referred to as chats. Chana chat masala,
chicken chat and aloo chat are all chats served in Indian
restaurants, but there are many more varieties. They offer a hot,
tangy and sweet mix of tastes that once acquired is forever
desired.
The majority of traditional snacks are potato based. The aloo
ki tikki for example, one of the oldest Indian snacks recorded in
history, is made from mashed, spiced potatoes.
THE SAMOSA
Another popular snack, and one reportedly enjoyed by the
British during the Raj, is the ubiquitous spicy little pastry
triangle know as the samosa. It is believed that the samosa
originated in central Asia before the 10th century and made its
way to India via ancient trade routes such as the Old Silk Road.
The samosa is now a popular snack all over the world.
Traditionally, samosas were made with potatoes, spices and
vegetables. Modern-day Indian cuisine incorporates meat, fish
and cheese into some of the original samosa recipes.
MAKING SAMOSAS FROM SCRATCH
A common practice not all that long ago, it is now a rarity to
make samosas at home. And it’s no wonder: it’s a time-and
effort-consuming task, particularly when making large amounts.
Recipes and methods of preparation vary slightly from one
household to another but all require the following steps:
▪ preparing and cooking the potato or meat filling ▪ preparing
the pastry dough
▪ rolling the pastry
▪ filling the pastry
▪ deep-frying
Freshly made samosas are available readily and cheaply from
Indian snack and sweet stores, and the vast majority of people,
including many restaurant chefs, take the route of least
inconvenience and buy them ready-made. However, the quality
can be inconsistent. Homemade samosas are generally the best.
SERVING INDIAN SNACKS AND APPETIZERS
Traditionally, there is no proper or right way to serve Indian
food, although in Indian restaurants in the West it is common to
eat two or more “courses.” The dishes on the next pages can be
served as appetizers if you wish to introduce a little formality
into your occasion, or may form part of the main meal with a
selection of dishes on the table at the same time. They also make
delicious snacks at any time of the day. The important thing is to
cook good food and enjoy it with family and friends.

NONVEGETARIAN APPETIZERS
LAMB BOTI
Chunks of tender lamb marinated in a mix of fresh ginger,
garlic, chili and lemon juice.
MEAT SAMOSA WITH KASHMIRI CHAT
Spicy minced lamb wrapped in a crisp light pastry served with
chickpeas in a tamarind sauce.
SPICY LAMB CUTLETS
Garlicky, spicy lamb cutlets marinated in fresh herbs and grilled
until sizzling.
KASHMIRI LAMB CUTLETS
Meltingly tender lamb cutlets wrapped in a crisp, spicy golden
coating.
MURGH SEEKH KEBAB
Minced chicken combined with fresh cilantro, spring onions,
herbs and spices.
MURGH TIKKA HARIYALI
Tender breast pieces marinated in mint, green chilies and spices.
CHICKEN DOSAI
Mustard-flavored shredded chicken wrapped in thin golden rice
pancakes.
FISH PAKORA
Pieces of fresh fish dipped in a chickpea-flour batter flavored
with spices and herbs.
AJWAINI JUMBO SHRIMP
Jumbo shrimp tossed with carom seeds, cilantro and cumin
served with chargrilled orange slices.
LAMB BOTI
Traditionally, this dish uses cubed leg of lamb, marinated in spices and
yogurt that tenderize and flavor the meat. It is then skewered and
cooked over hot coals (or in the tandoor), creating lovely crispy pieces
on the outside of the meat while the inside is deliciously moist and
tender. You can achieve similar results on a barbecue, or failing that, a
really hot oven or grill will be fine.
SERVES 4 Preparation and cooking time: 25–30 minutes (meat requires
marinating overnight) 12 oz (350 g) lean lamb taken from the leg
2 cloves of garlic, minced or finely chopped
small piece of ginger, grated (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix, page
30, thawed) 1 tbsp chopped cilantro
1/2 tsp turmeric
1/2 tsp ground coriander
1/2 tsp ground cumin
1/2 tsp garam masala
1 tsp chili powder
juice of half a lemon or lime
2 tbsp yogurt
1 tbsp oil
1 tsp salt
▪ Cut the lamb into 1-inch (2.5 cm) chunks, place in a deep bowl and
sprinkle on all the remaining ingredients except the yogurt, oil and
salt.
▪ Stir and turn the meat pieces until evenly coated with herbs and
spices. Add the yogurt and oil and mix well. Cover and marinate the
meat overnight in the fridge.
▪ If you are using the oven, preheat it to 450°F (230°C). You may
also consider using the barbecue or grill. Remove the meat from the
fridge about 30 minutes before cooking.
▪ Sprinkle the salt onto the meat and mix well. Thread the meat
onto metal skewers (or presoaked wooden skewers), keeping the
meat pieces about 1/2 inch (1 cm) apart. Reserve the marinade.
▪ Cook the lamb in the oven for about 20–25 minutes, or on the
barbecue or under the grill for about 15 minutes, turning once and
brushing with the marinade halfway through cooking.
▪ Serve with a crisp green salad and Yogurt Mint Sauce (page 40).
MEAT SAMOSA WITH KASHMIRI CHAT
This can be served as a hearty appetizer, a tasty snack with drinks or a
light lunch. The fresh-tasting Kashmiri Chat incorporates sweet, hot
and sour flavors and goes particularly well with these spicy samosas.
MAKES 12 SAMOSAS
Preparation and cooking time: 45 minutes (with ready-prepared filling)
5 oz (150 g) plain flour
1/2 tsp salt
1 tbsp olive oil
about 4 fl oz (120 mL) water
1 quantity of Karahi Keema (page 96)
oil for deep-frying
▪ To make the pastry dough, sift the flour and salt into a bowl.
Make a well in the center of the flour and add the oil.
▪ Add the water, a little at a time starting at the center to
incorporate the oil, and mix, bringing the flour together until you
have a soft, pliable dough.
▪ Knead gently for a minute or two. Cover and leave to rest for
about 10 minutes.
▪ Divide the mixture into 6 portions. Take one portion and roll
between floured hands to make a ball. Flatten slightly and roll into a
circle about 8 inches (20 cm) in diameter.
▪ Cut each circle in half, and then taking the two corners of one
half, bring the cut sides together, slightly overlapping, to make a
hollow cone. Seal by pressing the cut sides together. You may need
to dampen the edges with a little water.
▪ Fill about three-quarters full with the Karahi Keema mixture,
being careful not to overfill. Pinch the open ends together firmly to
close. Set aside and repeat with remaining dough.
▪ Deep-fry in batches and drain on a wire rack. Keep warm in a low
oven while cooking the remaining samosas.
KASHMIRI CHAT
1 heaped tsp tamarind paste
about 3 fl oz (100 mL) water
1 can (15 oz/425 g) chickpeas, drained
1 small red onion, finely diced
1 tomato, deseeded and the flesh diced
1 green chili, finely chopped
1 tsp Kashmiri chili powder, or 1/2 tsp red chili powder
1 tsp Kashmiri chili powder, or 1/2 tsp red chili powder
1/2 tsp garam masala
1 tsp chat masala
1 tsp salt
1 tbsp ketchup
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
Dissolve the tamarind in the water and place all the other ingredients in a
bowl. Mix well.
If you are using a block of tamarind for the Kashmiri Chat, soak a golf-ballsized piece in 4 fl oz (120 mL) of hot water for 20–30 minutes. Squeeze out
the pulp and discard solids and seeds.
Note: Kashmiri chili powder is redder but milder than ordinary chili
powder.
TIP
Make the chat the day before and allow the flavors to develop.
SPICY LAMB CUTLETS
These lamb cutlets are so succulent and tasty you will have everyone
coming back for more. The cutlets come from the rib and contain the
tender fillet attached to the rib bone which makes them ideal as a
finger food for informal gatherings.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: approximately 30 minutes (plus 2–3 hours
marinating time)
8 lamb cutlets
2 tbsp finely chopped mint leaves (or 2 heaped tsp mint jelly out of a jar)
1 tsp chili powder
1 tsp paprika
3 cloves of garlic, minced or finely chopped
1 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
juice of half a lemon
juice of half a lemon
1 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp mint jelly
1 tsp salt
▪ Trim the cutlets and scrape the bone ends to remove fat and
gristle.
▪ Mix all the remaining ingredients except the salt in a bowl, and
add the lamb cutlets. Using your hands, rub the herb-and-spice
mixture onto the meat ensuring each cutlet is evenly coated. Cover
and leave to marinate in the fridge for at least 2 hours or overnight.
▪ Remove the lamb from the fridge about half an hour before
cooking.
▪ Heat a heavy-based frying pan, capable of holding the cutlets
without overcrowding, until very hot.
▪ Sprinkle some salt onto each cutlet. Cook the cutlets for about
11/2 minutes each side.
▪ Serve hot with Yogurt Mint Sauce.
YOGURT MINT SAUCE
5 fl oz (150 mL) plain yogurt
1 tsp mint sauce
1/2 level tsp salt
1/4 tsp chili powder
1/4 tsp garam masala
1/4 tsp green mango powder
1/2 tsp finely granulated sugar
2 tsp chopped fresh mint (optional)
Place all the ingredients in a bowl and mix well.
Place all the ingredients in a bowl and mix well.
TIPS
The mint jelly is the secret ingredient in this dish. The hint of sweetness
balances the lemon juice and spices beautifully.
Ready-prepared garlic, usually preserved in lemon juice, is also a good shortcut
for marinades requiring lots of garlic.
KASHMIRI LAMB CUTLETS
This is an unusual but absolutely delicious dish of precooked, tender
lamb cutlets, wrapped in a golden, crispy batter.
SERVES 4 Preparation and cooking time: 45–50 minutes
8 lamb cutlets
7 fl oz (200 mL) milk
1/2 tsp garam masala
3 cloves
6 cardamom pods
1 tsp grated ginger
1 tbsp chopped onion
sprinkling of salt
3 tbsp chickpea flour (besan)
1 tbsp rice flour
1 tsp chili powder
1/2 tsp paprika
1/2 tsp salt
1/2 tsp turmeric
1/4 tsp ground fenugreek leaves (optional)
oil for deep-frying
Step 1
▪ Trim the cutlets and scrape the bone end of each cutlet. Place the
milk, garam masala, cloves, cardamoms, ginger and onion in a pan
large enough to hold the cutlets in a single layer, and bring to a boil.
▪ Add the cutlets, bring the milk back to a boil, turn down the heat
and simmer gently for about 20 minutes, turning once or twice, until
the cutlets are tender and all the liquid has evaporated.
▪ Sprinkle the cutlets with a little salt on each side, remove from the
pan and cool.
▪ Cutlets can be prepared to this stage up to 24 hours ahead.
Step 2
▪ Combine the chickpea flour, rice flour, chili powder, paprika, salt,
turmeric and fenugreek leaves (if you are using them) in a bowl. Add
enough water to make a thickish batter. Allow to stand for at least
10 minutes.
▪ Dip the lamb cutlets in the batter, shaking off the excess, and fry
in hot oil until crisp and golden.
▪ Drain on paper towels and serve with spicy Peach Chutney (page
172) or Yogurt Mint Sauce (page 40).
TIP
The rice flour helps to make the batter crispier but it is not essential. Use extra
chickpea flour if you don’t have it.
MURGH SEEKH KEBAB
Made with lean minced chicken and fresh herbs, these tasty kebabs
make a nice change from the traditional lamb seekh kebabs.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
2 spring onions, finely sliced
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
2 green chilies, finely chopped
2 tsp fresh ginger, grated
3 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
8 oz (225 g) minced chicken
1 tsp salt
1 tsp garam masala
juice of half a lemon
1 egg, lightly beaten
▪ Preheat the oven to its maximum temperature, or turn on the grill
to heat. Place all the ingredients into a large bowl, and using your
hands mix thoroughly.
▪ Divide the mixture into 8 equal parts, and using oiled hands form
into sausage shapes about 4 inches (10 cm) in length.
▪ Place these on a rack in a shallow baking tray and cook near the
top of the oven for 10–12 minutes, or under a very hot grill for 8–10
minutes, turning once.
▪ Serve sizzling with a green salad, Yogurt Mint Sauce (page 40) and
a wedge of lemon.
BE A SIZZLER
• Heat a sizzle plate on a gas flame for about 5 minutes until very hot.
• Turn down the heat and place some sliced onion onto the dish.
• Immediately place the cooked food on top of the onion.
• Drizzle a little oil onto the side of the dish and tilt it slightly so the oil runs across
the dish. It will start sizzling.
• Now move some of the food aside and drizzle some lemon juice onto the onions.
This produces even more sizzling and a delicious aroma.
• Finally, sprinkle with chopped cilantro, and serve.
TIP
Place the first five ingredients, roughly chopped, into the bowl of a small food
processor and process for a few seconds until finely chopped. Combine with the
remaining ingredients and proceed as above.
MURGH TIKKA HARIYALI
Chicken tikka with fresh green (hariyali) herbs appears to be a Bengali
dish, although the Punjabis also claim it as their own. Beautifully
spiced, aromatic with fresh herbs, it will stimulate your tastebuds and
your appetite. It’s easy to prepare and very tasty.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes (plus marinating time of 2–3 hours
or overnight) 3 chicken fillets
juice of half a lemon or lime
1 tsp salt
3 tbsp cilantro
3 tbsp mint leaves
4 or 5 fresh curry leaves
3 or 4 green garlic tops (optional)
2 green chilies
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, roughly chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, roughly chopped
2 cloves of garlic, roughly chopped
1 tsp garam masala
2 tbsp yogurt
1 tbsp oil plus extra for basting
▪ Rinse the chicken fillets, pat dry with paper towels, and cut into
11/2-inch (4 cm) chunks. Sprinkle the lemon or lime juice and salt
onto the chicken, stir well and set aside.
▪ Place the herbs, chilies, ginger, garlic, garam masala, yogurt and
oil into a blender or food processor and process to a coarse paste.
▪ Add the herb paste to the chicken, mix well and refrigerate for 2–
3 hours or overnight to marinate.
▪ Remove the chicken from the fridge at least half an hour before
cooking and insert onto metal or presoaked wooden skewers.
▪ Heat the grill or barbecue and cook the chicken skewers for 12–15
minutes, basting once or twice with a little oil and turning frequently
until cooked through.
▪ Serve hot with Mango Chutney (page 171) and lemon wedges.
TIP
You can brown the chicken pieces in a very hot frying pan, then, using kitchen
tongs, skewer them and bake in a hot oven at 425°F (220°C) for 15 minutes.
CHICKEN DOSAI
The dosai, or dosa as it is commonly known in the West, originates
from south India although it is popular all over the country. Dosai are
made from a batter of soaked, ground and fermented rice and urad
dhal, which is poured onto a tava (cast-iron griddle) and fried in oil or
ghee, rather like a pancake or crepe. Traditionally dosai are served
with a variety of chutneys and eaten for breakfast. In the West it is
more usual to eat dosai stuffed with spicy potato or meat fillings, more
commonly referred to as masala dosai.
Making the dosai batter at home is a lengthy and laborious process.
The quick and convenient way is to buy the ready-prepared mix,
which is very good and available from Indian grocers. Simply add the
filling of your choice. Making dosai takes a little practice, so be
prepared to throw the first couple away. Starting with a warm rather
than hot pan makes it easier, and practice makes perfect.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: approximately 45 minutes
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp black mustard seeds
2 onions, sliced
4 or 5 curry leaves, fresh or dried
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2–3 green chilies, finely sliced
1 tsp salt
1/2 tsp turmeric
8 oz (225 g) chicken, thinly sliced
1 tsp garam masala
1 tbsp cilantro
1 pkt of dosai mix
about 2 tbsp oil extra
▪ Heat the oil in a medium saucepan. When hot, throw in the
mustard seeds, shake the pan for 2 or 3 seconds until they pop and
quickly add the onions followed by the curry leaves.
▪ Cook on medium to high heat until the onions are translucent and
add the garlic, ginger and chilies. Stir-fry for a minute or two.
▪ Add the salt and turmeric, stir and add in the chicken. Continue
stirring on medium to high heat until the chicken begins to color.
▪ Add 4 tablespoons of water, cover the pan, turn down the heat
and cook for 10 minutes, stirring occasionally.
▪ Remove the lid and cook on low heat for another 5 minutes until
the mixture is dry and the chicken cooked.
▪ Stir in the garam masala and cilantro.
▪ For dosai, follow instructions on the packet to make the batter
and allow to stand for 5 minutes. Set the oven to warm.
▪ Warm a frying pan that is about 20–25cm (8–10 inches) in
diameter and generously brush or spray with oil.
▪ Pour a little batter into the pan and, using a circular motion,
spread it around with the back of a spoon.
▪ Cook on medium heat and, while the dosai cooks, sprinkle or
spray some more oil onto the top and around the edges so that it
seeps under the dosai. It will take around 4 minutes to cook.
▪ When the edges start to brown, carefully lift the dosai onto an
ovenproof platter. Place some filling along the center of the dosa,
and fold over one side and then the other. Hold down for a few
seconds to set the dosai in shape.
▪ Place in the oven to keep warm while making more dosai.
▪ Serve warm with Coconut and Mint Chutney (page 173) and
Sambhar.
SAMBHAR
1/2 tsp fenugreek seeds
1/2 tsp coriander seeds
1/2 tsp cumin seeds
1/2 tsp black peppercorns
6 dried red chilies
3 tsp tamarind paste
7 fl oz (200 mL) warm water
7 oz (200 g) red lentils
7 oz (200 g) chopped mixed vegetables
1/2 tsp turmeric
1/2 tsp turmeric
18 fl oz (500 mL) cold water
1 tbsp oil
1/2 tsp black mustard seeds
8 curry leaves
1 medium onion, chopped
pinch asafetida (optional)
1 ripe tomato, chopped
2 tsp salt (or to taste)
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
In a small pan dry-roast the fenugreek, coriander, cumin, peppercorns and chilies
until aromatic. Remove from the pan, cool and grind to a powder.
Dissolve the tamarind in about 7 fl oz (200 mL) of warm water. Set aside.
Meanwhile, wash and drain the lentils and combine with the vegetables, turmeric
and 18 fl oz (500 mL) of water. Bring to a boil, skim the froth off the top and simmer
for 30 minutes, stirring now and then.
In a separate pan, heat the oil and add the mustard seeds and curry leaves. Cook for
a minute and stir in the onion (and asafetida, if you are using it).
Stir-fry the onion until it starts to color and add the tamarind water. Bring to a boil
and simmer for 5 minutes.
Add the onion mixture to the dhal (pulses) and vegetables with the tomato, salt and
roasted spice mix. Bring back to a boil and simmer for another 5 minutes.
Stir in the cilantro and serve with dosai.
TIP
Have two pans going at the same time, so that you have a cooler one for starting
each dosai. Take your time spreading the batter and don’t worry if your dosai
has large holes or spaces in it. The edges of these holes will get nice and crisp
and make it taste even better.
FISH PAKORA
Succulent, creamy chunks of fish wrapped in spicy, crisp, golden
batter; equally at home as a snack with ketchup or as an elegant
appetizer with baby salad leaves, sweet chili sauce and a wedge of lime.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 25–30 minutes
4 oz (120 g) chickpea flour (besan)
1 oz (30 g) rice flour
1 tsp salt
1 green chili, finely chopped
1/2 tsp chili powder
1 heaped tsp mint sauce
1/2 tsp garam masala
1/2 tsp ground fenugreek leaves (optional)
8–10 oz (225–280 g) piece of firm white fish
1 tbsp finely chopped cilantro
oil for deep-frying
▪ Sift the chickpea flour, rice flour and salt into a large bowl. Add
enough water to make into a thick batter.
▪ Stir in the salt, chili and chili powder, mint sauce, garam masala
and fenugreek leaves, if you are using them. Allow the batter to
stand while preparing the fish.
▪ Rinse the fish, pat dry with paper towels, and cut into large
chunks about 2 inches (5 cm) in size.
▪ Stir the cilantro into the batter, followed by the fish pieces. Stir
the fish around in the batter until each piece is well coated.
▪ Shake off excess batter, and deep-fry the fish pieces in hot oil for
3–4 minutes until the coating is a rich golden brown and the fish is
cooked through.
▪ Serve hot.
TIPS
Use any leftover batter to make vegetable pakora. Simply dip bite-sized pieces of
cauliflower, potato, mushroom or eggplant into the batter and deep-fry until
crisp. Or stir in some sliced onion or spinach, and drop spoonfuls into hot oil.
If you have some fresh fenugreek, stir it into the batter with the spices; it is
wonderful in this dish.
AJWAINI JUMBO SHRIMP
Jumbo shrimp are fished from various warm waters around the world
and are available precooked, and “green” (raw) if you are fortunate
enough to live close to fish markets. If buying frozen shrimp, allow
plenty of time for defrosting. The best way of defrosting them is slowly
in the fridge.
This is an impressive dish that is bursting with flavor. It is delicately
yet distinctly spiced with the unique flavor of carom seeds (or ajowan
seeds) and the tangy sweetness of the orange.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes including marinating time
16 jumbo shrimp
1 tsp carom seeds (ajwain)
1 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
1 tsp ground coriander
1/2 tsp turmeric
1 green chili, finely chopped
1 tbsp finely chopped cilantro
1 tsp olive oil
zest of half an orange
1 tsp salt
1 orange, sliced
▪ If using fresh shrimp, shell and devein them, leaving the tail intact.
Rinse under cold water, drain and pat dry with paper towels.
▪ Mix all the remaining ingredients, except for the salt and the
sliced orange, in a noncorrosive bowl and add the shrimp. Stir to coat
and leave to marinate for 15 minutes.
▪ Heat a heavy-based frying pan large enough to take the shrimp in
a single layer. Stir the salt into the shrimp, cook them over medium
heat for about 5 minutes, turning once or twice.
▪ Meanwhile, chargrill the orange slices on a griddle pan, a minute
each side.
▪ Serve the shrimp, sizzling if you like (see page 42), with a green
salad, the chargrilled orange slices and Cilantro and Mint Drizzle.
CILANTRO AND MINT DRIZZLE
Take a handful of fresh cilantro and mint, one or two green chilies, juice of a lemon,
1 teaspoon of finely granulated sugar, and salt and pepper to taste, and place in a
blender. Blend until smooth.
VEGETARIAN APPETIZERS
SPINACH BHAJI
Shredded spinach combined with chickpea flour, herbs and
spices, deep-fried until golden.
VEGETARIAN SAMOSA
Spicy, tangy potatoes wrapped in a light, crisp pastry.
VEGETARIAN DOSAI
Thin, golden rice pancakes filled with spiced mustard potatoes,
served with a coconut (nariyal) and mint chutney.
PANEER SHASHLIK
Cubes of homemade cheese marinated with a blend of herbs and
spices, cooked with onions and sweet peppers.
SPRING ROLLS
Spring-roll pastry filled with finely diced vegetables and paneer,
lightly spiced and deep-fried until golden.
ALOO KI TIKKI
Crisp, golden potato patties, lightly spiced and flavored with
fresh herbs. Served with a tamarind sauce.
DHAL SOUP
A combination of vegetables and lentils in a mildly spiced soup.
SPINACH BHAJI
Spinach Bhaji, or palak pakorah as it is referred to in India, is just one
of the many types of spicy snacks made with chickpea (besan) flour. It
is quick, easy and tasty and in fact quite nutritious. A good appetizer
or snack for vegetarians and nonvegetarians alike.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
8 oz (225 g) chickpea flour (besan)
2 tsp salt
1 tsp garam masala
1 or 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared chilies, page 30)
2 tbsp tomato puree (optional)
1 bunch (about 7 oz/200 g) spinach leaves
oil for deep-frying
▪ Place all the ingredients except the spinach in a bowl and add
enough water to make a thick batter. Cover and leave to stand while
preparing the spinach.
▪ Wash the spinach leaves in plenty of water, squeeze out excess
water and shred the leaves finely. Add to the batter and stir well.
▪ Deep-fry tablespoons of the mixture in hot oil. Do not overcrowd
the pan. Press the bhaji lightly while it is frying to squeeze the
uncooked mixture to the outside and ensure thorough cooking.
▪ Drain on paper towels and serve hot with sauce or chutney of
choice.
TIP
Use frozen, thawed spinach for added convenience.
VEGETARIAN SAMOSA
The ubiquitous samosa is a popular snack throughout India and
famous around the world. A delightful crisp, deep-fried triangle with a
delicious spicy filling, it is versatile enough for a quick snack on the
run or as part of a prestigious banquet.
The carrots used in this recipe give the filling added flavor and
texture, but you can omit them and make up the quantity with more
potato.
MAKES 12 SAMOSAS
Preparation and cooking time: filling: 25–30 minutes, pastry and remaining
process: 40–45 minutes Filling
2 oz (50 g) diced carrot
5 oz (150 g) diced potato
2 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, finely sliced
1-inch (2 cm) piece of ginger, grated or finely chopped
1 or 2 green chilies, finely chopped
1/2 tsp turmeric
1/2 tsp cumin seeds
1 tsp salt
3 tbsp frozen peas
1 tsp green mango powder or juice of half a lemon
1/2 tsp garam masala
Pastry
Pastry
5 oz (150 g) plain flour
1/2 tsp salt
1 tbsp olive oil
4 fl oz (120 mL) water
oil for deep-frying
▪ Make the filling first. Boil the carrot in salted water for 5 minutes
and add the potato. Cook until the vegetables are tender but not
breaking apart. Drain.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the oil in a heavy-based saucepan and add the
onion. Fry for a few minutes over medium heat until the onion is
beginning to color around the edges.
▪ Add the ginger, chilies, turmeric, cumin and salt and stir-fry for 2
minutes. Stir in the cooked vegetables, peas, green mango powder
and garam masala. Mix well over low heat for a few minutes so that
the vegetables absorb the spices.
▪ Turn off the heat and allow the filling to cool while making the
pastry.
▪ To make the pastry dough, sift the flour and salt into a bowl.
Make a well in the center of the flour and add the oil. Add about 4 fl
oz (120 mL) of water, a little at a time starting at the center to
incorporate the oil, and mix, bringing the flour together until you
have a soft, pliable dough. Knead gently for a minute or two until
smooth.
▪ Cover and leave to rest for about 10 minutes.
▪ With floured hands, divide the mixture into 6 portions. Take one
portion and roll between floured hands to make a ball. Flatten
slightly and roll into a thin circle about 8 inches (20 cm) in diameter.
▪ Cut each circle in half and, taking the two corners of one half,
bring the cut sides together, slightly overlapping, to make a hollow
cone. Seal by pressing the cut sides together. You may need to
dampen the edges with a little water.
▪ Fill about three-quarters full with the potato mixture, being
careful not to overfill. Pinch the open ends together firmly to enclose
the filling. Set aside and repeat with the remaining dough.
▪ Deep-fry in batches and drain on a wire rack. Keep warm in a low
oven while cooking the remaining samosas.
▪ Serve piping hot with Tamarind Sauce, Kashmiri Chat (page 39) or
ketchup.
TAMARIND SAUCE
2 tsp tamarind paste
7 fl oz (200 mL) warm water
1/2 tsp salt
1/2 tsp chili powder
1/2 tsp garam masala
1/2 tsp green mango powder
1 tbsp ketchup
1 carrot, grated
1 tbsp diced red onion
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
Dissolve the tamarind paste in the water.
Add the remaining ingredients and mix to combine.
VEGETARIAN DOSAI
This is a delicious and quite substantial dish with a lovely combination
of textures and flavors: crispy pancake, moist filling, a fresh-tasting
chutney and an earthy, tangy Sambhar (page 45). For some tips on
making the dosai, see the Chicken Dosai recipe (page 44).
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 45 minutes
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp black mustard seeds
1 onion, sliced
4–5 curry leaves, fresh, frozen or dried
2 green chilies, finely chopped
1/2 tsp ground cumin
1/2 tsp ground coriander
1/2 tsp turmeric
11/2 tsp salt
11 oz (300 g) diced potato
1 pkt of dosai mix
▪ Heat the oil in a heavy-based pan and add the mustard seeds.
Shake the pan over the heat for a couple of seconds until the seeds
pop and immediately add the onion and curry leaves.
▪ Cook, stirring over medium to high heat, until the onion is
translucent, about 5 minutes. Add the chilies, cumin, coriander,
turmeric and salt. Stir for a few seconds until aromatic and add the
potato.
▪ Stir-fry the potato in the oil-and-spice mix for 3–4 minutes and
add 3 tablespoons of water. Stir again, cover and allow to cook over
low heat for about 10–15 minutes until the potato pieces are tender.
▪ For the dosai, follow instructions on the packet to make the batter
and allow to stand for 5 minutes. Set the oven to warm.
▪ Gently warm a frying pan about 8–10 inches (20–25 cm) in
diameter and generously brush or spray with oil. Pour a little batter
into the pan and, using a circular motion, spread it around with the
back of a spoon.
▪ Cook on medium heat for about 4 minutes. While the dosai cooks,
sprinkle or spray some oil onto the top and around the edges so that
it seeps under the dosai.
▪ When the edges start to brown, carefully lift the dosai onto an
ovenproof plate. Place some filling along the center of the dosai, and
fold over one side and then the other. Hold down for a few seconds
and it will hold its shape.
▪ Keep warm while making more dosai. Serve warm with Coconut
and Mint Chutney (page 173) and Sambhar (page 45).
TIP
Have two pans going at the same time, so that you have a cool one for starting
each dosai.
PANEER SHASHLIK
Paneer or curd is used for a variety of Indian dishes both sweet and
savory, particularly in northern India. It is rich in protein, making it a
good substitute for meat in vegetarian meals. This dish is a tasty and
colorful appetizer.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes (marinating time 2–3 hours)
8 oz (225 g) paneer (recipe page 24)
1 green pepper
1 red pepper
1 onion
2 firm tomatoes
5 fl oz (150 mL) plain yogurt
1/2 tsp salt
1 tsp turmeric
1 tsp turmeric
2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared chilies, page 30) 1/2
tsp ground cumin
1/2 tsp ground black pepper
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
1 tbsp chopped mint
juice of half a lemon
2 tbsp olive oil
▪ Cut the paneer into even-sized chunks about 1 x 1 inch (2.5 x 2.5
cm). Cut the peppers into squares and the onion and tomatoes into
large chunks, about the same size as the paneer.
▪ Thread the paneer and vegetables onto 8 skewers (presoaked if
you are using wooden ones), dividing the ingredients equally. Place
in a shallow, nonmetallic dish that will hold the skewers in a single
layer.
▪ Place all the remaining ingredients and half the oil into a bowl
and mix until combined. Pour the marinade over the skewers, turning
each skewer until the paneer and vegetables are well coated with
the marinade. Cover and refrigerate for 2 or 3 hours.
▪ Remove the skewers from the fridge about half an hour before
cooking and heat the grill or barbecue. Brush or spray the skewered
ingredients with oil, and grill or barbecue on all sides for 3–4 minutes
until the paneer and vegetables are charred around the edges.
▪ Serve hot with a spicy salad and naan or chapati.
SPRING ROLLS
Although the filling is a little different, Indian spring rolls are similar
to Chinese spring rolls in appearance, texture and taste, only much
spicier. This is quite an easy recipe that is even easier if you use readymade spring-roll pastry available from Asian grocers and
supermarkets.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 35–40 minutes
Filling
2 tbsp olive oil
2 cloves of garlic, minced or finely chopped
small piece of ginger, grated (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix, page
30, thawed) 1 carrot, grated
1 green pepper, cut into thin strips
2 oz (50 g) cabbage, thinly sliced
2 oz (50 g) paneer (page 24), cut into small cubes
1½ tbsp soy sauce
Pastry
3 oz (100 g) plain flour
2 oz (50 g) cornstarch
1 small egg, beaten
oil for deep-frying
▪ Heat the oil in a karahi or saucepan and add the garlic and ginger.
Stir-fry for a minute or two and add all the remaining ingredients for
the filling except for the paneer and soy sauce, and mix well.
▪ Continue to stir-fry on medium heat for 5–6 minutes until the
vegetables are tender crisp. Add a little water if required to prevent
them from burning. Turn off the heat and stir in the paneer and soy
sauce. Allow the vegetables to cool while making the pastry.
▪ Sift the flour and cornstarch into a medium bowl; add the beaten
egg and enough water to make a thickish batter. Do not overmix.
▪ Heat a pancake pan, or nonstick frying pan, and brush or spray
with a little oil. Pour in about 2 tablespoons of batter and spread
thinly over the pan to make a thin pancake. Turn when the underside
is lightly brown and brown the other side. Repeat with the remaining
batter.
▪ Place a pancake on a flat surface in front of you. Put about a
tablespoon of vegetable filling onto the half nearest to you, about 1
inch (2.5 cm) from the edge. Fold this edge over the filling, fold over
once more, then bring in the sides. Continue to roll tightly until you
have a neat roll. Secure with a toothpick if necessary.
▪ Repeat with the remaining filling and pancakes.
▪ Deep-fry the rolls in hot oil until crisp and golden. Drain and serve
with a sauce of your choice. Tamarind Sauce (page 50) or the Cilantro
and Mint Drizzle (page 47) is delicious with these rolls.
ALOO KI TIKKI
A delicious snack any time of the day, Aloo Ki Tikki is a popular
vegetarian appetizer in Indian restaurants. It is a tasty, spicy potato
tikki (patty), panfried until golden and crispy. Serve it with an
assortment of chutneys and sweet, sour or spicy sauces.
There are as many recipes for making these lovely little potato cakes
as there are cooks. The one below is quick and easy.
SERVES 4–6 (MAKES 12 PATTIES)
Preparation and cooking time: 35–40 minutes
8 oz (225 g) potatoes, peeled and cut into large chunks
pat of butter
3 tbsp frozen peas
1/2 onion, finely chopped
1 tsp salt
1 tsp turmeric
1 tsp green mango powder
1 tsp green mango powder
2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared chilies, page 30) 1
tbsp chopped cilantro
1 tsp garam masala
oil for pan frying
▪ Cook the potatoes in boiling salted water for about 15 minutes
until tender. Drain well and return to the hot saucepan to dry off
completely.
▪ Add the butter and mash the potato until smooth.
▪ Microwave or boil the peas until just cooked and add to the
mashed potato with all the remaining ingredients except the oil. Mix
well.
▪ Take about a tablespoon of mixture and, with oiled hands, roll
first into a ball and then flatten slightly to make a patty. Repeat with
the remaining potato mixture.
▪ Heat a heavy-based, nonstick frying pan and pour in enough oil to
cover the base. Add the potato patties to the pan in batches and
cook over low to medium heat for about 5 minutes each side until
golden and crisp. Add a little more oil as required.
▪ Serve hot with Kashmiri Chat (page 39), Mango Chutney (page
171) or Tamarind Sauce (page 50).
TIP
For a lower-fat version, spray tikkies lightly with oil and bake in a hot oven at
425°F (220°C) for 20–25 minutes.
DHAL SOUP
A simple example of “fusion” cooking, this warming soup is simple to
prepare and delicious to eat. You can use practically any combination
of vegetables that are in season.
SERVES 6–8
Preparation and cooking time: 1 hour 15 minutes
1 cob of sweet corn
1 onion
1 medium potato
1 medium carrot
1 stick of celery
approx. 7 oz (200 g) butternut squash
2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
1 tsp ground coriander
1 tsp chili powder
3 tbsp red lentils, washed
70 fl oz/4.2 US pints (2 L) water
1 vegetable stock cube
2 tsp salt or to taste
juice of a lime
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Remove husk and hairs from the corn and discard. Using a sharp
knife, slice off the kernels. Peel and coarsely chop the remaining
vegetables.
▪ Place all the vegetables in the bowl of a food processor and
process briefly, or chop finely.
▪ Heat the oil in a large heavy-based saucepan and add the spices.
Fry for a few seconds and stir in the vegetables.
▪ Stir-fry for about 2 minutes and add the lentils, water, stock cube
(crumbled) and salt. Bring to a boil. Turn down the heat and skim the
froth off the surface.
▪ Partly cover and simmer for about an hour, stirring once or twice.
Stir in the lime juice and cilantro, and serve.
W
9. TANDOORI COOKING
HO CAN possibly resist the delicious morsels of
succulently tender meat and hot, puffy naan breads
emerging from the flaming hot coals? With its origins in the
north of India, the tandoor has taken up permanent residence in
the West!
Used widely throughout Asia and the Middle East, there is
evidence that the tandoor has been around for a very long time
and was used by ancient civilizations since before the birth of
Christ. It is constructed from clay and has a unique shape; wide
at the bottom and narrowing to about a third of its width at the
top.
The somewhat potbellied shape of the tandoor is sometimes
referred to disparagingly by Indians to describe someone
roundly obese or “tandoorlike.”
The heat from the red-hot embers at the base of the tandoor
is intensified by the narrowing shape and temperatures can
reach as high as 896°F (480°C). The intense heat cooks food
quickly, crisping it on the outside while maintaining a tender
succulence on the inside. Meat and fish are skewered on seekhs
(long metal skewers) and cooked by lowering the seekhs into the
oven from the top and leaving them in the hot interior for a few
minutes, the hooked ends of the seekhs hanging from bars
placed at the mouth of the tandoor; breads are cooked by
slapping them onto the inside wall. The tandoor is traditionally
fired with charcoal although some of the modern ovens use
electricity or gas.
The tandoor shares some similarities with the Italian woodfired oven and the common barbecue, but its shape and the
cooking techniques employed in its use make it unique. The
extremely hot temperatures, the charcoal that fires it, and the
flame-grilled flavor and crispness it imparts to cooked foods are
difficult to replicate at home. Nevertheless good results can be
achieved using a very hot oven, an effective grill or, if weather
permits, a barbecue.
TANDOORI MARINADE
Apart from a tandoor, a good marinade and time are the key elements
required for producing good “tandoori” dishes.
Makes approximately 11 fl oz (300 mL) Preparation time: 5 minutes 10 fl oz
(275 mL) plain yogurt
2 green chilies, roughly chopped 2 tsp grated ginger
3 cloves of garlic
11/2 tsp salt
1 tsp red chili powder
1 tsp black cumin
11/2 tsp garam masala
2 tsp vinegar
2 tbsp olive oil
1/2 tsp red food coloring or 2 tsp paprika 1/2 tsp yellow food coloring or 2 tsp
turmeric Combine the yogurt, green chilies, ginger and garlic in a blender
until smooth.
Empty into a bowl and add all the remaining ingredients. Mix until well
combined.
TANDOORI DISHES
TANDOORI CHICKEN
Buy small birds no more than 2 lb 8 oz (1.2 kg) in size. Divide
into portions, skin and pierce the flesh. Marinate overnight for
best results. Cook in a very hot oven for about 20 minutes or
under a very hot grill, turning two or three times, for about 15
minutes. Works well on a barbecue too.
CHICKEN TIKKA
The majority of restaurants use thigh fillets for this dish but you
might like to try breast meat for a change. Marinate for a
minimum of 6 hours or overnight for even better flavor. This is
great cooked on the barbecue. Or you might like to put the
chunks of meat onto skewers and cook under a very hot grill for
10–15 minutes until cooked through.
LAMB TIKKA AND LAMB CHOPS
The meat for Lamb Tikka needs to be tender and lean. Use meat
from the leg, or try lamb fillets. Trim the fat from the lamb
chops. Marinate the meat overnight for best results.
TANDOORI BEEF OR PORK
Marinate diced pork fillet or rump steak overnight. Place onto
skewers and cook under a hot grill or over a barbecue.
SEAFOOD
Fish and shrimp are delicious cooked in the tandoori way. Use
fish with firm flesh and green (uncooked) shrimp if you can get
them. Experiment with different varieties of fish such as trout or
salmon; you really can’t go wrong. Marinate seafood for 15–30
minutes only.
PANEER
Marinated and grilled cubes of paneer are delicious and
nutritious if you prefer a vegetarian dish. Marinate for 2–3
hours, skewer and cook under a hot grill for a few minutes until
crisp and golden. Alternate the pieces of paneer with marinated
vegetables for a change.
VEGETABLES
Mushrooms are a good “meaty” vegetable and excellent done
this way. Buy even-sized button mushrooms or the fullerflavored field mushrooms. Wipe with a damp cloth (do not
wash) and marinate for 3–4 hours. Baste with oil and cook
under a very hot grill, turning once.
Serve your tandoori dishes sizzling (see page 42) with a sauce of
your choice, a crisp green salad, and rice, naan bread or both.
M
10. CHICKEN DISHES
EAT AND poultry are not generally consumed daily in
India, with some populations existing happily on a varied
and nutritious diet consisting exclusively of grains, lentils, beans,
vegetables and dairy foods. Chicken is a popular choice for
nonvegetarian meals and is served in a myriad of tantalizing
ways according to the style of cooking of the region or the styles
adopted by restaurant chefs to create varied and tasty dishes for
the restaurant menu.
Most of the curries served in Indian restaurants are made
using chicken prepared and precooked every couple of days or
so by the restaurant chef. Combined with a selection of spices,
herbs and the curry sauce, they allow your meal to be served to
you within minutes of you placing your order.
These preparation and cooking techniques, unique to
restaurant cooking, also serve to differentiate the flavor and
texture of Indian restaurant food from traditionally made dishes.
Using the method outlined here, you can precook the
chicken, refrigerate or freeze it, and, together with some curry
sauce, prepare one or more of the delicious curry recipes
detailed in the following pages within about 20–25 minutes.
PREPARING CHICKEN
Preparation and cooking time: 25 minutes. For 6–8 people you will require: 5
large chicken breast fillets, preferably free-range (approximately 2 lb/900 g
large chicken breast fillets, preferably free-range (approximately 2 lb/900 g
with skin and bone removed) 6 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp turmeric
4 tbsp reserved curry sauce, prepared to the end of step 2 (page 33) With a
sharp knife remove all fat and sinew from the chicken fillets, rinse and pat dry
with paper towels. Cut each fillet into 8 equal-sized pieces, about 1 inch (2.5
cm) wide. Place the oil, turmeric and curry sauce into a large saucepan and
mix well. Cook on medium heat, stirring continuously, until the sauce starts to
darken in color (approximately 4–5 minutes).
Add the chicken and stir until all the pieces are well coated with the sauce.
Turn down the heat, cover and continue cooking for 15–20 minutes, or until
the chicken is tender, stirring frequently.
Remove the chicken pieces with a slotted spoon (leaving behind the remaining
sauce) and place them in a clean container.
Use immediately or cool and refrigerate for up to 4 days.
Freezing: Freeze for up to 2 months.
TIP
If you don’t have any reserved curry sauce, use 2 tablespoons of very
finely chopped onion.
CHICKEN DISHES
CHICKEN METHIWALLA
Marinated chunks of chicken grilled and braised in a tasty,
peppery, sun-dried fenugreek masala base.
CHICKEN YOGURT CURRY
Tender pieces of chicken breast in a lightly tangy yogurt-based
sauce, robustly spiced.
MUGHLAI CASHEW JHOOL
Mildly spiced, opulently rich with cashew-nut paste and finished
with cream.
CHICKEN AND CHICKPEA CURRY
A satisfying combination of tender chicken breast, chickpeas and
mushrooms in a mildly spiced coconut-milk sauce.
CHICKEN CHETTINAD
A stunning south Indian speciality with coconut and a fragrant
blend of lightly roast spices, tomatoes and curry leaves.
MURGH HARIYALI MASALA
Tender breast pieces marinated in fresh herbs, green chilies and
spices. A fresh and flavorsome dish.
CHICKEN TIKKA MASALA
The all-time favorite, marinated chunks of chicken grilled and
braised in a creamy sauce.
PARSI CHICKEN WITH APRICOTS
Boneless chicken stir-fried in an aromatic spice blend and
simmered in a thick sauce with fresh, fruity flavors.
GOAN COCONUT CHICKEN
Chicken pieces in a delicious, generously spiced, tamarindflavored creamy coconut sauce.
CHICKEN METHIWALLA
Methi is the Indian name for fenugreek leaves, which have a distinctly
aromatic “curryish” smell and flavor. This dish is inspired by northern
India, where methi is used much like spinach in meat and vegetable
curries and snacks. Unlike spinach, it adds a lot of delicious flavor.
Fenugreek leaves can be purchased in bunches, much like cilantro,
from Indian markets and supermarkets and are also easily grown (see
page 18). Sun-dried methi is available in small packs and is generally
of good quality. It can be used in place of fresh leaves if these are not
available, but fresh is definitely best.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
1 bunch (about 5 oz/150 g) fenugreek leaves, and chopped (or 2 oz/50 g dried
leaves) 15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1/2 tsp salt
1/2 tsp chili powder
1/2 tsp chili powder
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken fillets (page 59) 1 tsp garam masala
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and add the
fenugreek leaves. If you are using fresh leaves, cook on low heat for
about 10 minutes. If you are using dried leaves, stir in hot oil for a
few seconds only.
▪ Add the curry sauce, salt and chili powder and bring to a boil.
Cook on high heat for about 5 minutes until the sauce is thick and
the oil floats to the surface.
▪ Add the chicken and bring to a boil. Stir in the garam masala and
simmer for about 5 minutes, stirring frequently. Serve.
CHICKEN YOGURT CURRY
This is a lovely creamy dish but without the calories of cream,
combining a modified version of an authentic Indian food (the yogurt
curry) with tender morsels of chicken. For best results use fresh
homemade yogurt (page 24) or buy the freshest, best-quality plain
yogurt you can find. No curry sauce is required for this dish.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
9 fl oz (250 mL) plain yogurt
1 tbsp chickpea flour (besan)
1 tsp salt
7 fl oz (200 mL) cold water
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp black mustard seeds
1 tsp whole cumin seeds
1 onion, finely chopped
2 cloves of garlic
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger (or a portion of prepared garlic and ginger mix,
page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared
chilies, page 30) 1 tsp turmeric
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken fillets (page 59) 1 tsp garam masala
1 tbsp finely chopped cilantro
▪ In a large bowl, whisk together the yogurt, chickpea flour, salt
and water. Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan, and add
the mustard and cumin seeds. Fry for a few seconds on medium heat
until they start to pop.
▪ Add the onion and fry for about 5 minutes. Stir in the garlic,
ginger and chilies and stir-fry for a couple of minutes longer.
▪ Sprinkle on the turmeric, stir, and add the yogurt mixture. Bring to
a boil stirring continuously and turn down the heat. Simmer, stirring
frequently, for about 20 minutes.
▪ Add the chicken and gently bring back to a simmer. Simmer for 5
minutes. Stir in the garam masala and cilantro. Serve.
MUGHLAI CASHEW JHOOL
Dishes thickened with rich nut pastes were first introduced to India by
the Mughals who settled in the north of the country in 1525. The
Mughal emperors brought with them opulence formerly unknown to
the region. Money was no object to the extravagant settlers, and their
imagination was boundless. Their favorite foods — almonds, cream
and dried fruits — were lavishly incorporated into the traditional
cuisine. This beautifully spiced, deliciously creamy dish reflects some
of the grandeur of that bygone era.
SERVES 3–4
Preparation and cooking time: 20 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
1/2 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
6 green cardamom pods, crushed
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp Kashmiri chili powder or 1/2 tsp
chili powder and 1/2 tsp paprika 1 tsp salt
4 tbsp thick cream
2 oz (50 g) raw cashew nuts, processed until fine. Note: Ground almonds
may be used instead of cashews.
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken fillets (page 59)
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and add the cumin,
coriander and cardamom and fry for a few seconds. Add the curry
sauce and bring to a boil.
▪ Stir in the chili powder, paprika (if you are using it) and salt.
Simmer for about 5 minutes and stir in the cream and ground nuts.
▪ Simmer for another 5 minutes and stir in the chicken. Continue to
cook on low heat for another 5 minutes, stirring often. Serve.
CHICKEN AND CHICKPEA CURRY
This delicious and unusual chicken curry is thought to originate on
the southwest coast of India. It has distinct Goan and south Indian
influences. The chickpeas and mushrooms make this curry almost a
one-pot dish that is tasty, satisfying and nutritious.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp black mustard seeds
2 cloves of garlic, sliced
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, julienned
9 oz (250 g) mushrooms, sliced thickly
4 bay leaves, roughly torn
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of cinnamon
4 cardamom pods, crushed
1 tsp ground coriander
1 tsp ground cumin
1/2 tsp chili powder
1/2 tsp turmeric
14 oz (400 g) can cooked chickpeas
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce, page 32
1/2 tsp paprika
1 tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken fillets (page 59) 9 fl oz (250 mL) coconut milk
1 red chili, deseeded and sliced
1 red chili, deseeded and sliced
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the
mustard seeds. Shake the pan over the heat for a few seconds until
the seeds start to pop, and add the garlic, ginger and mushrooms.
▪ Stir-fry for 3 minutes and add the bay leaves, cinnamon,
cardamoms, coriander, cumin, chili and turmeric. Fry for a minute
and stir in the chickpeas, curry sauce, paprika and salt.
▪ Bring to a boil, and cook on high for 5 minutes until the sauce
thickens. Add the chicken and coconut milk, bring back to a boil and
simmer for 10 minutes.
▪ Stir through the red chili and serve sprinkled with cilantro.
CHICKEN CHETTINAD
Chettinad, a prosperous region in Tamil Nadu, southern India, is
renowned for its spice concoctions. Historically a trading region,
spices were one of the main commodities traded. It is thought that this
is why there is such an abundant use of spices in its cuisine. Therefore,
this recipe does require a number of different spices, but once you
smell the beautiful aroma of the roasted spices, I think you will feel it’s
worth it. Fresh coconut will produce the best results, but dried,
shredded coconut is fine.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 25–30 minutes
Spice mix
2 tsp olive oil
1 tsp poppy seeds
1/2 tsp fennel seeds
1/2 tsp coriander seeds
1/2 tsp black peppercorns
3–4 dried red chilies
just under 1-inch (2 cm) piece of cinnamon,
broken into small pieces
5 green cardamom pods
2 cloves
1 tbsp grated coconut (or shredded coconut)
Remaining ingredients
2 tbsp olive oil
4 curry leaves
1 ripe tomato, chopped
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1/2 tsp salt
1/2 tsp chili powder
1 tsp paprika
1/2 tsp turmeric
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken fillets (page 59) 4 cherry tomatoes, halved, or a
large tomato sliced into 8 pieces juice of half a lime
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a small pan and roast the spices and coconut on
low heat for about a minute until aromatic. Cool and grind to a fine
powder in a pestle and mortar or electric grinder.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and add
the curry leaves, stir for a few seconds and add the chopped tomato.
Stir-fry for 3 or 4 minutes until pulpy and add the spice mix. Fry on
low heat for about 5 minutes, until the mixture starts releasing the
oil.
▪ Add the curry sauce, salt, chili powder, paprika and turmeric and
bring to a boil. Simmer for about 5 minutes. The sauce will be quite
thick because of the spice mix. Add a little water if required.
▪ Add the chicken, bring back to a simmer and cook for 3 minutes.
Stir in the tomatoes, lime juice and cilantro, and serve.
MURGH HARIYALI MASALA
This is absolutely delicious and so simple and quick to prepare. It is
essential to use fresh herbs though; they are the backbone of this
spectacular dish. Curry sauce is not required for this dish.
SERVES 3–4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes (plus marinating time) 3 chicken
fillets (about 1 lb or 450 g)
1 tsp salt
4 tbsp cilantro
4 tbsp mint leaves
4 fresh curry leaves
4 green garlic tops (optional)
4 spring onions
4 spring onions
2–3 green chilies
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, roughly chopped
2 cloves of garlic, roughly chopped
1 tsp garam masala
6 tbsp yogurt
2 tbsp olive oil
3 tbsp thick cream
1 tsp chickpea flour (besan)
3 fl oz (100 mL) hot water
▪ Wash the chicken fillets, pat dry with paper towels, and cut into 1-
inch (2.5 cm) chunks. Place in a large bowl.
▪ Put the salt, herbs, spring onions, chilies, ginger, garlic, garam
masala, yogurt and 1 tablespoon of the oil into the blender or food
processor and process to a paste.
▪ Add the herb paste to the chicken, mix well and refrigerate for 2–
3 hours or overnight.
▪ Remove from the fridge about half an hour before cooking and
stir in the cream and chickpea flour.
▪ Heat a wide, heavy-based (preferably nonstick) frying pan and add
the remaining oil. Add the chicken and all the marinade to the pan
and stir-fry on high heat until the chicken is opaque.
▪ Turn down the heat a little, and continue to cook, stirring and
turning the chicken pieces, until the sauce is quite dry, at which point
it will release the oil (about 6–7 minutes).
▪ Continue cooking for a few minutes longer until the chicken
pieces start to brown slightly. Now add the water and stir in to create
a thick, creamy sauce.
▪ Simmer gently for 3 or 4 minutes. Add more water if you want a
little more sauce.
▪ Serve.
Note: The chickpea flour is important as it prevents the sauce from
spitting.
CHICKEN TIKKA MASALA
No Indian restaurant cookbook could be complete without a recipe
for the famous Chicken Tikka Masala.
Chicken Tikka Masala is probably, more than any other restaurant
dish, a hybrid of Indian and Western tastes: tikka is a morsel of roasted
meat, traditionally eaten without curry sauce or gravy, a practice
seemingly unattractive to Western palates. The masala part of the dish
is the Western touch that possibly came about in Glasgow in the 1960s
when a long-suffering Indian chef mixed some spices and yogurt into
canned tomato soup and presented his ever-complaining customers
with the sauce they demanded. The rest, as they say, is history.
With a few enhancements since that fateful time, the dish has
become an icon of Indian restaurant cuisine. Indeed, in 2001, Britain’s
foreign minister Robin Cook declared it to be Britain’s “national dish”
and the British consume vast amounts of it each week. It is, in fact,
even more popular than fish and chips.
There are many recipes for Chicken Tikka Masala. This one is easy
to prepare and quite delicious.
SERVES 3–4
Preparation and cooking time: 15 minutes
4 tbsp olive oil
1/2 tsp ground cumin
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp paprika
1 tsp salt
1 level tsp chili powder
pinch of red food coloring (optional)
1 tsp garam masala
3 chicken fillets, freshly made into chicken tikka (page 58) 6 tbsp light cream
1 tbsp finely chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a large, deep frying pan, and stir in the cumin. Fry
for a few seconds and add the curry sauce. Bring the sauce to a boil.
▪ Add the paprika, salt, chili powder and food coloring (if you are
using it), and continue to cook on high heat, stirring frequently, for
about 5 minutes or until the sauce thickens.
▪ Turn down the heat and stir in the garam masala. Simmer for
about 3 minutes.
▪ Meanwhile, slice each piece of chicken tikka in two and add to the
sauce. Stir in the cream and simmer for another 2–3 minutes.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the cilantro.
TIP
If you have a little Tandoori Marinade (page 57) left over, stir a couple of
teaspoons of it into the sauce just before the cream. It adds extra color and
flavor.
PARSI CHICKEN WITH APRICOTS
This delicious Parsi dish has a lovely balance of sweet and sour flavors
derived from juicy apricots, soft brown sugar and vinegar. Lamb can
be used instead of chicken for a change.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
2 tbsp olive oil
2 tsp tomato paste
1/2 tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1/2 tsp salt
1 tsp chili powder
1 tsp paprika
1 tsp paprika
6 dried apricots, quartered
1 tsp soft brown sugar
1 tbsp vinegar
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken fillets (page 59) 1 tbsp thick cream
1 tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and add the
tomato paste and turmeric. Stir-fry for a minute.
▪ Add the curry sauce, salt, chili powder, paprika, apricots, sugar
and vinegar. Bring to a boil and simmer for 5 minutes.
▪ Stir in the chicken, bring back to a boil and simmer, stirring often,
for 5 minutes.
▪ Stir in the cream and garam masala. Simmer for a minute. Serve
sprinkled with cilantro.
GOAN COCONUT CHICKEN
Nowhere is the Portuguese influence more evident than in the
delicious and colorful cuisine of Goa. Although seafood and rice are
the staples, this chicken recipe encompasses all that is good about
Goan food. It has lots of tasty sauce to eat with rice and bread.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
Spice mix
1/2 tsp fennel seeds
1/2 tsp fenugreek seeds
1/2 tsp black peppercorns
1 tsp coriander seeds
1 tsp cumin seeds
4 green cardamoms
4 cloves
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of cinnamon
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of cinnamon
Remaining ingredients
3 tbsp olive oil
1/2 tsp turmeric
12 fl oz (325 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
1 tsp chili powder
1 tsp paprika
11 fl oz (300 mL) coconut cream
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken fillets (page 59) 2 tsp tamarind paste dissolved in
2 tbsp warm water
▪ Grind all the spices for the spice mix to a fine powder in a pestle
and mortar or electric grinder.
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and add the spice
mix. Fry on medium heat for about a minute until aromatic.
▪ Stir in the turmeric, curry sauce, salt, chili powder and paprika.
Bring to a boil and cook on high heat for about 3 minutes until
thickened slightly. Turn down the heat.
▪ Add the coconut cream and bring slowly to a simmer. Add the
chicken to the sauce and mix well. Simmer for about 5 minutes.
▪ Stir in the tamarind and serve.
T
11. LAMB DISHES
HROUGHOUT its long history, India has been invaded by
foreign armies of traders and settlers from all over the
world, beginning with the Greeks, led by Alexander the Great, as
far back as 326 BCE, followed by many others from various
destinations over the ages. The culinary influence of Greek,
Middle Eastern, Portuguese and English invaders is clearly
evident in Indian cuisine.
The rich and opulent Mughal settlers of the 16th century
introduced meat dishes to the Indian nation, whose people had
existed for centuries on grains, pulses, nuts, fruits and dairy
products. Although goat is the preferred meat for the nonMuslim population, lamb is widely consumed throughout India.
Precooked lamb pieces are always in the restaurant fridge,
ready to be combined with various herbs and spices according to
the dish that is being prepared. Tender, good-quality meat is
essential for most of the curries served in Indian restaurants, the
tougher cuts being reserved for any traditional, slow-cooked
dishes that may be on the menu.
Leg of lamb is the cut of choice for the majority of restaurant
curries. Have a butcher remove the bone and trim the fat and
gristle from the meat. Cut the remaining lean meat into 1-inch
(2.5 cm) cubes and prepare as shown here. If you wish to use
cuts with the bone in, increase the quantities accordingly.
Note: The meat has a tendency to dry out when refrigerated. Spoon
some of the oil left in the pan onto the meat, coating each piece to
keep it moist.
PREPARING LAMB
Serves 6–8
2 lb (900 g) boned, diced lamb
8 tbsp vegetable oil
1 tsp turmeric
4 tbsp reserved curry sauce, prepared to the end of step 2 (page 33) Wash the
meat and pat dry with paper towels. Place the oil, turmeric and curry sauce in
a large saucepan and mix well. Cook on medium heat, stirring continuously
until the sauce begins to darken in color (4–5 minutes).
Add the meat and stir until all the pieces are well coated. Turn down the heat
and cook, covered, for 30–40 minutes or until the meat is tender. Add a little
water to prevent the meat from sticking to the bottom of the pan and burning,
and stir frequently.
Remove the lamb pieces using a slotted spoon, leaving behind the remaining
sauce, and place in a clean container.
Use immediately, or cool and refrigerate for up to 4 days.
Freezing: Freeze for up to 2 months.
LAMB DISHES
PARSI LAMB CURRY
Boned, diced leg of lamb simmered in a tangy, aromatic spice
mixture with garlic, ginger and tomatoes, served with crispy
potato straws.
LAMB KALIA
Tender diced lamb and crisp potato chunks, in a lightly spiced
sauce.
BHINDI GHOST
Lamb and okra curry. A fragrant mix of fresh okra, diced lamb
and roasted spices in a tasty masala base.
TAMATAR GHOST
Boneless diced lamb, braised with vine-ripened tomatoes, fresh
herbs and spices.
BADAMI LAMB PASANDA
Marinated, tender strips of lamb fillet in a mildly spiced,
lusciously creamy and aromatically flavorful sauce.
KALI MIRCH KA GHOST
Tender lamb pieces simmered in a spicy sauce flavored with
gently roasted black peppercorns.
MUGHAL LAMB WITH TURNIPS
Succulent pieces of lamb, in a rich, dark sauce with sweet, juicy
turnips. Inspired by the decadent Mughal era.
ROGAN JOSH
Tender pieces of lamb in a delicious thick sauce flavored with an
aromatic spice blend. An old favorite.
PARSI LAMB CURRY
The unique fruity, spicy flavors of this dish are inspired by the Parsi
style of cooking, which, in turn, is a combination of Gujerati and
Iranian cuisine. The crispy fried potato straws, sali, add a lovely
crunch to the dish.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
4 cardamom pods
6 curry leaves
1 tbsp tomato paste
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tbsp vinegar
2 tsp soft brown sugar
1 tsp chili powder
1/2 tsp turmeric
1/2 tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71) 1 tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
Sali, to serve (optional)
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the
cinnamon, cardamoms and curry leaves. Stir for a few seconds and
add the tomato paste. Stir-fry for about a minute.
▪ Stir in the curry sauce, vinegar, sugar, chili powder, turmeric and
salt and bring to a boil. Cook the sauce on high heat for about 3
minutes until thickened slightly.
▪ Add the lamb to the sauce and bring back to a boil. Stir in the
garam masala and simmer gently for 5 minutes. Stir in the cilantro
and ladle into a serving dish.
▪ Sprinkle on the Sali (if it is being used) and serve.
SALI
(CRISPY POTATO STRAWS)
Grate or julienne 2 large peeled potatoes and soak in salted, chilled water for a few
minutes.
Drain the potato well and spread on a tea towel until dry.
Deep-fry potato in hot oil until golden brown. Drain and serve with Parsi Lamb Curry.
LAMB KALIA
This dish of tender lamb and fried potatoes is based on the Kashmiri
dish kalia. Kalia is traditionally made with mutton marinated in
yogurt and ginger (to tenderize it), followed by long simmering, but
the restaurant version is, by comparison, quick and easy to prepare.
Sometimes fried cauliflower is also added to the dish with the
potatoes.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 25–30 minutes
2 medium-sized potatoes, peeled
1 tsp salt, plus a little extra
4 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, sliced
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, grated
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix,
page 30, thawed) 7 fl oz (200 mL) plain yogurt
1 tsp chili powder
1/2 tsp paprika
1/2 tsp turmeric
1 tsp ground coriander
14 fl oz (400 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71)
1/2 tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Cut the potatoes into approximately 1-inch (2.5 cm) chunks and
cook in boiling, salted water for about 5 minutes or until just tender.
Drain well and sprinkle lightly with a little salt.
▪ While the potatoes are boiling, heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a
heavy-based frying pan and fry the onion slices until lightly browned.
Set aside.
▪ Combine the ginger, garlic, yogurt, chili powder, paprika,
turmeric, salt and coriander in a small bowl.
▪ Heat 2 tablespoons of the oil in the same pan used for the onions
and add the yogurt mixture. Stir-fry for 3 minutes and add the curry
sauce. Bring to a boil and simmer for 10 minutes until the sauce is
thick and the oil rises to the surface.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the remaining oil in another frying pan and fry
the potato on medium heat, turning until all sides are golden.
▪ Add the meat to the yogurt and curry sauce mixture and bring
back to a boil. Add the garam masala and simmer for 5 minutes.
▪ Stir half the potato chunks and half the cilantro into the onion
mixture. Reheat for a minute. Serve sprinkled with the remaining
crispy potato chunks and remaining cilantro.
BHINDI GHOST
The bhindi, also called okra or ladies’ fingers, add an extra dimension
to this dish by helping to thicken and flavor the sauce. Be careful not
to cook the bhindi for more than the specified time as they have a
tendency to become slimy. It is important to wash and dry the bhindi
before slicing them for the same reason.
SERVES 4–5
Preparation and cooking time: 25–30 minutes
Spice mix
8 black peppercorns
3 cloves
1 tsp cumin seeds
1 tsp cumin seeds
1 tsp coriander seeds
4 green cardamom pods
Remaining ingredients
9 oz (250 g) bhindi (okra)
3 tbsp olive oil
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix,
page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared
chili, page 30) 2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
1 tsp salt
1 tsp turmeric
½ tsp chili powder
18 fl oz (525 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71) ½
tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ In a small dry pan, roast the peppercorns, cloves, cumin, coriander
and cardamoms for about 2 minutes over medium heat. Remove the
spices from the hot pan as soon as they become aromatic. Cool, and
grind in a pestle and mortar or electric grinder.
▪ Meanwhile, wash the bhindi whole, drain well and pat dry with
paper towels or a clean tea towel until quite dry. Slice into 2-inch (5
cm) pieces.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and fry the ginger
and garlic for about a minute. Add the green chilies and fry for
another minute.
▪ Stir in the tomatoes, salt and turmeric and cook over low heat for
a few minutes until the tomatoes are soft and pulpy.
▪ Add the bhindi to the pan, sprinkle the chili powder and roast
spices onto the mixture. Stir-fry on medium heat for 4 or 5 minutes.
▪ Add the curry sauce and bring to a boil, cook on medium heat for
about 5 minutes, stirring frequently, until thickened.
▪ Add the meat, bring back to a boil and simmer for another 5
minutes. Stir in the garam masala and cilantro, and serve.
TAMATAR GHOST
Fresh ripe tomatoes add color, freshness and flavor to this simple lamb
curry. High-quality, flavorful tomatoes are a must for a really tasty
dish.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 25-30 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp ground cumin
2 tsp ground coriander
2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
½ tsp salt
½ tsp turmeric
½ tsp chili powder
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71) ½
tsp garam masala
½ tsp dried ground fenugreek leaves
6 cherry tomatoes, halved
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the cumin
and coriander. Stir-fry for a few seconds and add the tomatoes, salt,
turmeric and chili powder.
▪ Stir-fry on high heat for a couple of minutes then turn down the
heat and simmer the tomatoes on low heat, stirring frequently, until
the mixture is pulpy, dark red and releasing the oil. This will take
about 10 minutes.
▪ Add the curry sauce and bring to a boil. Boil on high for about 5
minutes until the sauce has thickened.
▪ Stir in the lamb and bring back to a boil. Add the garam masala
and fenugreek leaves, and simmer for 5 minutes.
▪ Stir through the cherry tomatoes and half the cilantro. Heat for
about a minute.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the remaining cilantro.
BADAMI LAMB PASANDA
Pasanda is a popular north Indian and Pakistani dish with its origins
in the royal courts of the Mughal emperors. It is a deliciously fragrant
and satisfying dish that is usually made with lamb but can be made
with any meat, vegetable or with paneer. The lamb fillets used in this
recipe cook really quickly and are beautifully tender, but leg meat
works just as well with longer cooking.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes (plus marinating time of 15–30
minutes) 1 lb 2 oz (500 g) lamb fillets
2 cloves of garlic, minced or finely chopped
small piece of ginger, grated (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix, page
30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared chili,
page 30) 1 tbsp finely chopped mint leaves
3 tbsp plain yogurt
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp ground coriander
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
½ tsp paprika
4 tbsp half-and-half cream
1 tbsp ground almonds
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp rose water (optional)
▪ Trim the lamb fillets, and using a meat mallet or rolling pin,
flatten until just over ¼ inch (0.5 cm) thick. Cut into slices about 1½
inches (3.5 cm) long and just over ½ inch (1 cm) wide.
▪ Combine the garlic, ginger, chili, mint and yogurt in a medium
bowl and add the meat. Stir well to coat the meat slices with the
marinade. Leave to marinate for 15–30 minutes.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and carefully (it will
splutter) add the meat and marinade. Stir-fry for about 3 minutes on
medium-high heat or until most of the liquid evaporates.
▪ Add the coriander, cumin and turmeric and stir-fry for a minute.
Stir in the curry sauce and salt and bring to a boil. Turn down the
heat and simmer for 10 minutes, stirring often, until the sauce
thickens.
▪ Stir in the paprika, cream and ground almonds and simmer for
another 5 minutes, stirring regularly. Add the garam masala and heat
through for a minute.
▪ Remove from the heat and stir in the rose water, if you are using
it. Serve.
KALI MIRCH KA GHOST
This dish of tender lamb pieces has a delicious peppery bite to it. Use
whole black peppercorns, crushed, and don’t be tempted to use
ground black pepper.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 15–20 minutes
1 tsp whole black peppercorns, crushed
3 tbsp olive oil
2 tsp ground coriander
1 tbsp tomato paste
½ tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) ½ tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71) 4 whole green chilies, slit lengthwise
½ tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Dry-roast the peppercorns in a small pan over medium heat for a
minute or two until aromatic. Remove from the pan and set aside.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the
ground coriander. Stir-fry for a few seconds and stir in the tomato
paste and turmeric.
▪ Cook on medium heat for 2 minutes and add the curry sauce and
salt. Bring to a boil and cook on high heat, stirring often, until the
sauce is really thick and the oil rises to the surface. This will take
about 4–5 minutes.
▪ Add the lamb, roasted peppercorns and chilies. Bring back to a
boil, stir in the garam masala and simmer gently, stirring often, for 5
minutes to allow the meat to absorb the flavors. Stir in half the
cilantro.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the remaining cilantro.
MUGHAL LAMB WITH TURNIPS
The Mughals didn’t do anything by halves and this dish is testament to
that — this is a dish that in times of old would have been served in the
royal palaces. Richly spiced, but not chilihot, this is a dish to make
when young, sweet turnips are in season.
If you can, use larger lamb pieces as prepared for Balti Meat (page
90) for more authenticity.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 25–30 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
2 tsp ground coriander
1 tsp ground cumin
3 green cardamom pods, crushed
1 tbsp tomato paste
½ tsp turmeric
2 green chilies, finely chopped (or a half portion of prepared chilli, page 30) 9 oz
(250 g) turnips, cut into chunks
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp paprika
1 tsp salt
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) precooked lamb (page 71) or prepared as for balti meat (page
90) ½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp thick cream
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the
coriander, cumin and cardamom. Stir-fry for a few seconds and add
the tomato paste, turmeric and green chilies.
▪ Fry for 1 minute and stir in the turnips. Stir-fry on medium heat
for 2 minutes and add the curry sauce, paprika and salt. Bring to a
boil and simmer for 10 minutes.
▪ Add the lamb and bring back to a boil and simmer again for 8–10
minutes or until the turnips are tender, the sauce has almost
completely reduced and the oil has separated from the sauce.
▪ Stir in the garam masala and cream, and cook for a minute longer.
Serve.
ROGAN JOSH
Although there are many recipes available for Rogan Josh, it is such an
old favorite I thought I would include it in this book as well. I have
made some alterations to the classic recipe in keeping with changing
tastes and demands.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 15–20 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
3 cloves
4 green cardamom pods
1 tsp ground coriander
½ tsp ground cumin
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 2 tsp paprika
1 tsp chili powder
½ tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71) ½ tsp garam masala
4 tbsp plain yogurt
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the
cinnamon stick, cloves, cardamoms, coriander and cumin. Stir-fry for
a few seconds.
▪ Add the curry sauce, paprika, chili powder and salt, and bring to a
boil. Continue to cook on high heat stirring often, for about 5
minutes or until the sauce has thickened.
▪ Add the meat and bring back to a boil. Turn down the heat and
add the garam masala. Simmer for 5 minutes.
▪ Stir in the yogurt, 1 tablespoon at a time, waiting until each
addition is completely incorporated before adding the next. Simmer
and continue stirring for a minute after all the yogurt has been
added.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the cilantro.
S
12. BALTI DISHES
ELL THE sizzle, not the steak? In the case of these dishes, it
may be more accurate to say sell the sizzle before the steak.
First you hear the sizzle, and an instant later the delicious
aroma arouses your senses and tickles your tastebuds as you wait
in anticipation for the dish making its way to your table. And it
does not disappoint. Generous quantities of succulent meats,
tasty vegetables, fresh herbs and spices combined with thick
flavorful sauces make these dishes quite memorable.
The origins of the balti dish can be traced back several
centuries to a place called Baltistan, an area now located in the
far north of Pakistan. It was introduced to England in the 1960s
with the opening of the first “balti house” in Birmingham. The
freshly cooked, wonderfully aromatic, gently spiced curries were
such a hit with the British that within a few years hundreds of
balti houses sprung up all over the UK. Balti refers to the people
of Baltistan, the origins of the dish and the woklike utensil in
which it is served.
The Indian balti (utensil), also known as karahi, and the
Chinese wok are very much the same in shape and structure,
though which came first is impossible to determine. China had
long had an association with India through its trading routes
with the inevitable influences on the two ancient cultures and
their cuisines. The influence of the spicy dishes of Szechuan is
subtly evident in the balti curry.
In terms of Indian restaurant cooking, the balti and karahi
essentially started life as the same thing, though the dishes they
now represent have evolved to take on slightly differing
characteristics. The balti dishes retain their original concept and
favor more subtle combinations and flavors while the karahi
dishes have been designed to deliver a more authentic taste with
stronger spice and herb mixes.
To get the sizzle that is synonymous with these dishes, heat
your balti or karahi until very hot and carefully (it will splutter
and splash) transfer the simmering curry into it. Serve
immediately.
BALTI CURRIES
BALTI CHICKEN
A sumptuous dish with succulent chicken pieces, stir-fried with
whole spices, tomatoes, sweet peppers and onions, served
sizzling.
BALTI FISH
Fish pieces, served in the balti style, subtly spiced in a delicious
creamy sauce.
BALTI SUBZI
A delicious combination of cauliflower, carrots, sweet peppers,
potatoes and fresh cilantro.
BALTI MEAT
Tender pieces of lamb, beef or goat meat in a thick, tasty sauce
with spices, sweet peppers, onions and tomatoes.
BALTI CHICKEN
This is a popular dish dating back to the original balti houses in
Birmingham. I have used chicken breast fillets in this recipe, but you
can use chicken portions on the bone if you wish for a more
traditional dish. Allow an extra 15 minutes or so cooking time for
chicken on the bone.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
3–4 chicken fillets (about 1 lb 2 oz or 500 g)
4 tbsp olive oil
2–3 green garlic tops, chopped (optional)
½ tsp cumin seeds
½ tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
4 green cardamoms
½ tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
½ tsp chili powder
½ tsp paprika
1 medium-sized onion
1 green pepper
1 tomato
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Wash the chicken fillets and pat dry with paper towels. Trim off
fat and sinew and slice each fillet into 4 pieces.
▪ Heat 3 tablespoons of the oil in a large, deep frying pan, add the
chopped garlic tops (if you are using them) and stir-fry for 3 or 4
minutes.
▪ Add the cumin, coriander, cinnamon, cardamoms and turmeric.
Stir for a few seconds until aromatic and add the chicken pieces.
▪ Stir-fry the chicken for about 5 minutes on medium to high heat
and add the curry sauce, salt, chili powder and paprika. Bring to a
boil, stir and turn down the heat. Leave to simmer for about 15
minutes, stirring now and then.
▪ Meanwhile, peel and quarter the onion. Slice each quarter into
two. Slice the green pepper in half and deseed. Cut into
approximately 1-inch (2.5 cm) squares. Quarter the tomato.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a clean pan and add the onion and
green pepper. Stir-fry on high heat for 3 or 4 minutes until the onion
just starts to color at the edges. Add the tomato and stir.
▪ Add the onion, green pepper and tomato to the chicken and
sprinkle on the garam masala. Continue to simmer for another 5
minutes or so, by which time the sauce should be thick and the oil
should be separating from the sauce.
▪ While the chicken is simmering, heat balti dishes on medium heat
for about a minute. Carefully spoon the hot curry into the dishes,
sprinkle on the cilantro and serve.
BALTI FISH
Use any firm fish, including salmon if you like. Jumbo shrimp are
fantastic for this dish, or try a combination of seafood.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) fish fillets or jumbo shrimp
3 tbsp olive oil
½ tsp turmeric
½ tsp chili powder
2 spring onions, chopped
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground coriander
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
½ tsp paprika
1 medium-sized onion
1 green pepper
1 tomato
½ tsp garam masala
juice of half a lemon
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Wash the fish fillets or shrimp (shell and devein if you are using
whole shrimp). Pat dry with paper towels. Cut the fish into large
chunks about 2 inches (5 cm) in size.
▪ Place the fish with about a tablespoon of the oil in a bowl.
Sprinkle on a little of the turmeric and chili powder, and cover while
preparing the sauce.
▪ Heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a large, deep frying pan, add the
spring onions and stir-fry for 2 minutes.
▪ Add the cumin, coriander and remaining turmeric. Stir for a few
seconds until aromatic and add the curry sauce, salt, remaining chili
powder and paprika. Bring to a boil, stir and turn down the heat.
Leave the sauce to simmer and reduce for about 10 minutes, stirring
now and then.
▪ Meanwhile, peel and quarter the onion. Slice each quarter into
two. Slice the green pepper in half and deseed. Cut into
approximately 1-inch (2.5 cm) squares. Quarter the tomato.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a clean pan and add the onion and
green pepper. Stir-fry on high heat for 3 or 4 minutes until the onion
just starts to color at the edges. Add the tomato and stir.
▪ Stir the onion, green pepper and tomato into the sauce with the
garam masala. Simmer.
▪ Wipe clean and heat the pan used to fry the vegetables. Add the
fish chunks or shrimp to the pan and cook on medium to high heat
until beginning to color. Sprinkle on the lemon juice.
▪ Add the fish to the sauce and vegetables and stir through carefully
to avoid breaking the fish pieces. Simmer until the fish is cooked
through, about 5 minutes. Fish will flake easily when it is cooked,
shrimp will be opaque.
▪ Meanwhile heat balti dishes on medium heat for about a minute.
Carefully spoon the curry into the dishes, sprinkle on the cilantro and
serve with rice and breads.
BALTI SUBZI
This recipe uses a combination of cauliflower, carrots, sweet peppers
and potatoes but you can use a combination of peas, mushrooms,
green beans, eggplant, cabbage or any other vegetables that are in
season and at their best.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30–35 minutes
approx. 8 oz (225 g) fresh cauliflower florets
1 large potato, peeled and cut into large chunks
2 carrots, peeled and diced
4 tbsp olive oil
4 tbsp olive oil
2 spring onions, chopped
2–3 green garlic tops (optional)
1 small green pepper, deseeded and cut into squares
1 small red pepper, deseeded and cut into squares
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground coriander
½ tsp turmeric
2 ripe tomatoes, cut into small dice
11 fl oz (300 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
½ tsp chili powder
½ tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Boil or steam the cauliflower, potato and carrots until almost
tender.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large, deep frying pan, add the spring
onions and garlic tops (if you are using them), and stir-fry for 2 or 3
minutes. Add the red and green peppers and stir-fry for another 2 or
3 minutes.
▪ Stir in the cumin, coriander and turmeric. Stir for a few seconds
until aromatic and add the tomatoes. Stir-fry for a minute or two
until the tomatoes are pulpy. Stir in the precooked cauliflower,
carrots and potato.
▪ Add the curry sauce to the vegetables with the salt and chili
powder. Bring to a boil.
▪ Turn down the heat and simmer the vegetables on low heat for
about 15 minutes until the liquid has almost evaporated. There
should just be a thick sauce clinging to the vegetables.
▪ Stir the garam masala and half the fresh cilantro into the curry.
▪ Heat balti dishes on medium heat for about a minute. Carefully
spoon the curry into the dishes, sprinkle on the remaining cilantro
and serve.
BALTI MEAT
Traditionally, the fresh goat, beef or lamb used for balti curries would
be simmered over low fires for several hours. Obviously this is not
practical for restaurant cuisine, and apart from chicken fillets and fish,
which cook in minutes, the meat for the balti dish below needs to be
preprepared to the stage where, with the addition of a few spices and
fresh herbs, you can have a delicious and authentic balti curry ready in
minutes. Prepare the meat as indicated for lamb curries (page 71), but
cut it into larger chunks.
You can use any meat of your choice. Lamb is the preferred meat in
most Indian restaurants, but the dish works just as well with beef.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
4 tbsp olive oil
2–3 green garlic tops, chopped (optional)
½ tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
½ tsp turmeric
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) lamb or other meat prepared as on page 71
18 fl oz/1 US pint (500 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
½ tsp chili powder
½ tsp paprika
1 medium-sized onion
1 green pepper
1 tomato
1 tomato
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a large, deep frying pan, add the
chopped garlic tops (if you are using them) and stir-fry for 3 or 4
minutes. Add the cumin, coriander and turmeric. Stir for a few
seconds until aromatic and add the cooked meat.
▪ Stir-fry for a minute or so and add the curry sauce, salt, chili
powder and paprika. Bring to a boil, stir and turn down the heat.
Leave to simmer for about 15 minutes, stirring now and then.
▪ Meanwhile, peel and quarter the onion. Slice each quarter into
two. Slice the green pepper in half and deseed. Cut into
approximately 1-inch (2.5 cm) squares. Quarter the tomato.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a clean pan and add the onion and
green pepper. Stir-fry on high heat for 3 or 4 minutes until the onion
just starts to color at the edges. Add the tomato and stir.
▪ Add the onion, green pepper and tomato to the meat and
sprinkle on the garam masala. Continue to simmer for another 5
minutes or so, by which time the sauce should be thick and the oil
should be separating from the sauce.
▪ While the meat is simmering, heat balti dishes on medium heat for
about a minute. Carefully spoon the hot curry into the dishes,
sprinkle on the cilantro and serve.
P
13. KARAHI AND OTHER TRADITIONAL
DISHES
OPULAR restaurant dishes like chicken tikka masala evolved
from modifications of traditional dishes adapted to be
gentler on unsuspecting Western tastebuds. As the Western
palate has become accustomed to Indian cuisine, tastes have
changed and there is now a significant demand for more
pungent flavors. To satisfy this demand, Indian restaurants are
serving more authentic dishes. This chapter shows you how to
make some of the most popular of these dishes with the same
ease and convenience as the other restaurant curries.
KAHARI DISHES
The Indian karahi is the same utensil as the balti; however, the
karahi curries served in Indian restaurants are spicier
adaptations of the traditional balti dishes. These and the other
traditional dishes in this section are wonderful if you are a curry
fanatic who loves the robust flavor of Indian spice and herb
combinations.

KARAHI CURRIES
KARAHI SUBZI
A mix of fresh seasonal vegetables in a dry, spicy and aromatic
sauce.
KARAHI CHICKEN
Pieces of chicken on the bone cooked with ginger, garlic and
chilies in a thick, spicy sauce, served sizzling.
KARAHI KEEMA
Minced lamb richly flavored with ginger, garlic and chilies.
KARAHI MEAT
Generous pieces of lamb on the bone in a rich, pungently
aromatic and spicy sauce.
KARAHI SUBZI
You can use whatever vegetables are in season for this dish. I have used
eggplants cooked with onions. This delicious recipe is generous with
the oil as eggplants soak it up, making them lovely and silky.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
6 small long eggplants (approx. 12 oz or 350 g)
6 tbsp of olive oil
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 3 green chilies, finely sliced (or a portion of
prepared chili, page 30) 2 large onions, sliced
6 spring onions, white part only
1 tsp fennel seeds
1 tsp fennel seeds
1 tsp cumin seeds
1 tsp fenugreek seeds
1 tsp onion seeds
1 tsp turmeric
1 tsp chili powder
2 tsp salt
5 fl oz (150 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
6 cherry tomatoes (optional)
1 tsp garam masala
▪ Wash and wipe the eggplants. Slice in half and cut each half into 2
slices.
▪ Heat the oil in a karahi or large, heavy-based frying pan and add
the garlic, ginger and chilies. Fry for a minute.
▪ Add the eggplant and both types of onion to the pan and stir-fry
on high heat until the vegetables begin to brown, about 5 minutes.
▪ Pull the vegetables towards the edges of the pan and let the oil
pool in the middle. Place all the seeds into the hot oil and stir them
around for a minute or two on medium heat, and then stir them into
the vegetables.
▪ Sprinkle the turmeric, chili powder and salt on top, and cook for a
minute longer before stirring in the curry sauce.
▪ Bring to a boil, turn down the heat and simmer for about 5
minutes, stirring now and then. Add the tomatoes if you are using
them and simmer for another 5 minutes. Stir through the garam
masala and cook for a minute more.
▪ Meanwhile, heat karahi dishes for about a minute on medium to
high heat. Carefully transfer the curry to the hot karahis and serve
sizzling.
KARAHI CHICKEN
Traditionally, the bone is left in providing extra flavor and richness to
the sauce, but chicken fillets can be used instead. You can also use the
chicken prepared as for chicken curries (page 59) to speed up the
preparation, but, if you have time, it is worth trying this dish the
traditional way.
SERVES 6–8
Preparation and cooking time: Step 1: 45 minutes (30 minutes if using fillets)
Step 1: Preparing the chicken
1 chicken approx. 4 lb (1.8 kg), preferably free-range
2 tbsp olive oil
1 red onion, finely sliced
2 cloves of garlic, ground to a paste
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, ground to a paste (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or a portion
of prepared chilies, page 30) 2 tsp salt
2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
▪ Have a butcher skin the chicken, separate the wings and
drumsticks and chop the rest of the chicken into 8 pieces. Rinse the
chicken portions well and drain.
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add the onion.
Stir around for a minute or two and add the garlic, ginger and
chilies. Stir-fry for 2 or 3 minutes until aromatic.
▪ Add the chicken and stir to coat in the oil, then add the salt and
tomatoes. Stir-fry until sizzling. Stir in 2 tablespoons of water.
▪ Turn down the heat and simmer, covered, for about 30 minutes
(10–15 minutes if you are using sliced chicken fillets), stirring
occasionally until the chicken is just cooked through and most of the
liquid has evaporated.
▪ Use immediately or cool and refrigerate or freeze for later use.
Preparation and cooking time: Step 2: 20–25 minutes
Step 2: Preparing the curry
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp turmeric
2 tsp garam masala
1–2 tsp chili powder to taste
18 fl oz/1 US pint (500 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan or saucepan, and
add the turmeric, half the garam masala and the chili powder. Cook,
while stirring, for a minute or so until aromatic.
▪ Add the cooked chicken and juices and stir to coat in the spices.
Once it is bubbling, turn down the heat and simmer, covered, for
about 10 minutes, stirring frequently to allow the chicken to absorb
the flavors. There should be very little liquid at this stage so that
everything is gently frying in the oil.
▪ Add the curry sauce and bring back to a boil. Turn down the heat
and simmer for another 8–10 minutes until the sauce is thick and the
oil has separated from the sauce. Stir in the remaining garam masala
and half the cilantro.
▪ Meanwhile, heat karahi dishes for about a minute on medium
heat, carefully pour in the curry, sprinkle with the remaining cilantro
and serve.
KARAHI KEEMA
Similar to Keema Peas but spicier, this is a delicious dish eaten with
chapatis, spiced yogurt and pickles (achar).
SERVES 4–5
Preparation and cooking time: Step 1: 45 minutes
Step 1: Preparing the meat
2 tbsp olive oil
2 red onions, sliced
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) lean minced lamb
1½ tsp salt
1½ tsp salt
1 tsp turmeric
1 can (14 oz or 400 g) of chopped tomatoes
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan, and add the onions.
Stir around for 2 or 3 minutes over high heat and add the meat.
▪ Stir-fry the meat and onions over high heat, breaking up any
lumps, until the meat changes color, about 3 or 4 minutes. Turn
down the heat, stir in the salt, turmeric and tomatoes.
▪ Bring to a boil and turn down the heat. Simmer, uncovered, over
low heat for about 30–35 minutes, stirring now and then, until all the
liquid has evaporated.
▪ Use immediately or cool and refrigerate or freeze for later use.
Preparation and cooking time: Step 2: 15–20 minutes
Step 2: Preparing the curry
2 tbsp olive oil
6 curry leaves (optional)
4 cloves of garlic, ground to a paste
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, ground to a paste (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2 tsp julienned ginger (optional)
2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared chilies, page 30,
thawed) 1 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp paprika
1 tsp chili powder
9 fl oz (250 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
7 oz (200 g) frozen peas
1 tsp garam masala
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and add the curry
leaves (if you are using them), and fry for a few seconds.
▪ Add the garlic, ginger, chilies and cumin, and stir-fry for a couple
of minutes until aromatic. Stir in the paprika and chili powder.
▪ Add the meat to the pan and stir-fry until sizzling. Stir in the curry
sauce and bring to a boil. Add the peas and bring to a boil again.
▪ Turn down the heat and simmer for 10–15 minutes until quite dry.
Stir in the garam masala and cook for a minute to allow the meat to
absorb the spices.
▪ Meanwhile heat karahi dishes for a minute on medium to high
heat and carefully ladle in the meat. Serve.
KARAHI MEAT
Shoulder of lamb is superb for this recipe because it lends itself to
long, slow cooking after which the meat is deliciously spiced and
tender and almost falling off the bone. You can use leg of lamb cut
into 2-inch (5 cm) chunks if you prefer.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: Step 1: 2–2½ hours
Step 1: Preparing the meat
2 lb 4 oz (1 kg) lamb shoulder, cut into large pieces
2 tbsp olive oil
2 red onions, finely sliced
2 cloves of garlic, ground to a paste
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, ground to a paste (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or a portion
of prepared chilies, page 30) 2 tsp salt
2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
▪ Rinse the meat, drain well and pat dry with paper towels (wet
meat will not brown).
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add the onions.
Stir around for a minute or two on high heat and add the lamb
pieces. Stir around in the hot oil until the meat colors, about 5
minutes.
▪ Add the garlic, ginger and chilies to the meat, stir-fry for a minute
or two and add the salt. Stir and turn down the heat. Cook covered,
stirring occasionally, for 1 hour.
▪ Stir in the tomatoes and cook for another 45 minutes to an hour
until the meat is tender and a rich, dark brown.
▪ Skim off any excess fat and either use immediately, or cool and
refrigerate or freeze for later use.
Preparation and cooking time: Step 2: 30 minutes
Step 2: Preparing the curry
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp ground cumin
2 tsp turmeric
2 tsp garam masala
1–2 tsp chili powder to taste
1 tbsp tomato paste
1 tsp dried ground fenugreek leaves
18 fl oz (500 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan or saucepan, and
add the cumin, turmeric, half the garam masala, chili powder and
tomato paste.
▪ Cook, stirring, for a few seconds, then add the cooked meat and
juices and stir to coat in the spices.
▪ Once it is bubbling, turn down the heat and simmer, covered, for
about 10 minutes, stirring now and then to allow the meat to absorb
the flavors. There should be very little liquid so that everything is
gently frying in an oily masala. Sprinkle on the fenugreek leaves.
▪ Add the curry sauce and bring back to a boil. Turn down the heat
and simmer for 8–10 minutes until the sauce is thick and the oil
begins to separate from it.
▪ Stir in the remaining garam masala and half the cilantro.
▪ Meanwhile, heat karahi dishes for about a minute on medium to
high heat, carefully pour in the curry, sprinkle with the remaining
cilantro and serve.
OTHER TRADITIONAL DISHES
DHAL MAKHANI
A deliciously earthy, creamy dhal of mixed lentils and pulses
flavored with ginger, garlic and onions.
CHICKEN JHOL
Chicken pieces cooked with a traditional mix of onions, garlic
and ginger and spiced with mustard seeds, cloves, cinnamon and
pepper, and a touch of vinegar.
DHESI CHICKEN
Punjabi fare with succulent pieces of chicken, onions, ginger,
garlic, chilies and fresh herbs. A superb balance of authentic
tastes in a delicious sauce.
DHESI-STYLE SAAG
A traditional dish, this is a mix of greens, simmered until tender,
pureed and flavored with ginger, garlic and chilies.
DHABA-STYLE LAMB CURRY
Lamb Punjabi style. Boneless lamb in a rich, thick sauce flavored
with lamb bones, onions, ginger, garlic, green chilies and fresh
herbs.
YOGURT CURRY
A tangy, hot and flavorsome mix of potatoes, onions, whole
spices and fresh and dried herbs simmered in a yogurt sauce
thickened with chickpea flour.
ACHARI GHOST
Lamb simmered in pickling spices — fennel, onion and mustard
seeds; a dish with delicious and robust flavors.
PUNJABI CABBAGE
From the rich terrain of northern India, freshly sliced cabbage
stir-fried with whole cumin, ginger and spices.
SHIKARI GHOST
Lamb with the bone in, cooked in the traditional way of the
Indian hunters.
DHAL MAKHANI
For something so simple, this is quite a sumptuous dish — thick,
creamy and satisfying. You can use 100 percent urad dhal or a mix of
dhals (pulses) as I have. Traditionally made with generous amounts of
ghee and homemade butter (makhan), this recipe uses olive oil and a
little cream.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 2 hours (or 30 minutes if you are using a
pressure cooker) 5 oz (150g) urad dhal (black gram)
2 oz (50 g) moong dhal (mung bean)
2 oz (50 g) yellow split chana
35 fl oz/2.1 US pints (1 L) cold water
4 tbsp olive oil
1 small onion, finely chopped
1 small onion, finely chopped
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a
portion of prepared chilies, page 30) 1 tsp dried ground fenugreek leaves
(optional)
2 tsp salt
1 tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
2 tbsp thick cream
▪ Mix all three dhals in a bowl and wash well. Drain and place the
dhals in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add the water.
▪ Bring to a boil, turn down the heat and cover the pan. Simmer
gently for about 2 hours, stirring now and then, until the mixture is
thick and creamy, adding a little more water if required. Or bring the
pressure cooker to maximum pressure and cook for about 25
minutes.
Note: The dhal can be cooled and refrigerated at this stage for later
use. It will keep well in the fridge for up to 3 days.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the oil in a frying pan or small saucepan and fry
the onion until beginning to brown at the edges.
▪ Add the garlic, ginger and chilies and fry for a couple of minutes
until aromatic. Stir in the fenugreek leaves if you are using them.
▪ Add the onion mixture, salt, garam masala and cilantro to the
dhal and mix well. Simmer for a minute.
▪ Stir in the cream and serve.
CHICKEN JHOL
This is a delicious chicken curry with robust flavors. It is typical of the
flavors of eastern India. For those who have savored its delicious taste,
it invokes memories such as this, as shared on the Indian cuisine blog,
Hesel Ghor.
Remember those hurried meals put together at the end of a
hard day’s travel at dimly lit circuit houses or government dakbungalows. Thrown together by the chowkidar-caretaker-cook,
the taste still lingers on. Probably the wonder of childhood,
when things were so much more mysterious and the whole
world was waiting to be discovered was the magic of the dish.
SERVES 3–4
Preparation and cooking time: 30–35 minutes
3 chicken fillets (about 1 lb or 450 g)
3 tbsp olive oil
2-inch (5 cm) stick of cinnamon
1 tsp black peppercorns
6 cardamoms
6 cloves
1 tsp black mustard seeds
2 tsp ground coriander
1 tsp ground cumin
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlic-
and-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) ½ tsp turmeric
1 tsp tomato paste
2 tsp vinegar
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
1 tsp salt
1–2 tsp chili powder
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Rinse the chicken fillets and pat dry with paper towels. Trim off
fat and sinew and slice each fillet into 1-inch (2.5 cm) chunks.
▪ Heat the oil in a large, deep frying pan, add the cinnamon,
peppercorns, cardamoms, cloves, mustard seeds, coriander and
cumin, and stir-fry for a few seconds until the seeds start to pop.
▪ Add the garlic and ginger, and fry for about a minute until
aromatic. Stir in the turmeric, tomato paste and vinegar.
▪ Add the chicken pieces and mix well to coat with the spices. Stirfry the chicken on medium-high heat for about 5 minutes.
▪ Add the curry sauce, salt and chili powder, and bring to a boil.
Turn down the heat and simmer for about 15–20 minutes until the
chicken is tender and the sauce is thick.
▪ Stir in the chopped cilantro and serve.
DHESI CHICKEN
This is a beautiful, full-flavored dish with big, tender pieces of chicken
on the bone and lots of lovely sauce. Traditionally it was made with
older, tougher birds that required long, slow cooking, which enhanced
the flavor as well as tenderizing the meat. I recommend using goodquality free-range chicken and fresh herbs to experience the best of
this dish.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 40-45 minutes with preprepared meat
3 tbsp olive oil
6 spring onions, chopped
6 green garlic tops, chopped (optional)
3 oz (100 g) fenugreek leaves, chopped (or 1 tsp dried ground fenugreek)
2 cloves of garlic, ground to a paste
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, ground to a paste (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 3–4 green chilies, finely chopped (or a
portion of prepared chilies, page 30, thawed) 1 tsp turmeric
2 tsp garam masala
1 tsp chili powder
1 chicken approx. 4 lb (1.8 kg), prepared and cooked as for Karahi Chicken (page
94) 2 potatoes, peeled and cut into large chunks
18 fl oz/1 US pint (500 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
9 fl oz (250 mL) boiling water
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add the spring
onions and garlic tops, if you are using them. Stir-fry on medium heat
for 4–5 minutes. Add the fenugreek leaves and continue to stir-fry
for 5 minutes.
▪ Add the garlic, ginger and chilies. Stir-fry on medium heat for 2 or
3 minutes and add the turmeric, half the garam masala and the chili
powder. Cook, while stirring, for a minute or so until aromatic.
▪ Add the cooked chicken, including the juices, and stir to coat in
the spices. Once it is bubbling, turn down the heat and simmer,
covered, for about 10 minutes, stirring frequently to allow the
chicken to absorb the flavors.
▪ Meanwhile, boil the potatoes in salted water for 8–10 minutes
until just tender. Drain.
▪ Add the curry sauce to the chicken and bring back to a boil. Stir in
the cooked potato, turn down the heat and simmer for another 8–10
minutes, stirring now and then, until the sauce is thick and the oil has
separated from the sauce.
▪ Add the water and simmer for 2 minutes. Stir in the remaining
garam masala and the cilantro, and serve.
DHESI-STYLE SAAG
Paneer, lamb, chicken and potato dishes made with pureed spinach
(saag) are popular in Indian restaurants, but saag is rarely if ever
served on its own. The tinned, pureed spinach used in restaurants is
convenient and quite good when incorporated into other flavorful
ingredients, but it does not compare with the saag made with fresh,
leafy greens that is cooked in Indian households and eaten as a dish in
its own right with cornmeal chapatis (rotis), yogurt and pickles. Meat
and vegetarian dishes made with this saag are superb.
It is time consuming to make but you can cook a large batch and
freeze it in serving-size portions that will be ready to use whenever you
wish. You will need a large saucepan for this.
SERVES 8–10
Preparation and cooking time: 3 hours 30 minutes (or 1 hour 30 minutes if you
are using a pressure cooker) 14 oz (400 g) spring greens, mustard greens or
purple sprouting broccoli
1 bunch of spinach (approx. 14 oz or 400 g)
9 oz (250 g) brussels sprouts
1 large head of broccoli (approx. 11 oz or 300 g)
approx. 40 fl oz/3.2 US pints (1.5 L) cold water
3 tsp salt
4 cloves of garlic, ground to a paste (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger
mix, page 30, thawed) 2-inch (5 cm) piece of ginger, ground to a paste
2–3 green chilies, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared chilies, page 30) 5 oz
(150 g) cornmeal (fine polenta)
▪ Wash the greens and spinach two or three times in plenty of cold
water to remove all grit and soil, then drain. Remove any tough
stalks from the spinach. Remove the outer leaves of the brussels
sprouts and rinse well. Rinse the broccoli.
▪ Shred the greens and spinach, roughly chop the sprouts and
broccoli, or process in a food processor until roughly chopped, and
place in a saucepan.
▪ Add the water and salt, and bring to a boil. If you are using a
pressure cooker, cook on maximum pressure for 45 minutes.
Otherwise simmer, uncovered, for about 30 minutes (it has a
tendency to boil over if covered in the early stages), stirring now and
then.
▪ Once the mixture has settled down, cover the saucepan and
simmer for 2 hours 30 minutes. Stir every half hour or so and add a
little more water if the mixture dries out.
▪ There should only be enough water left at the end of the cooking
to make the mixture into a thickish puree.
▪ Keeping the saucepan on the heat, stir in the garlic, ginger and
chilies followed by the polenta and continue to cook for 4–5 minutes.
Turn off the heat.
▪ The mixture now needs to be turned into a coarse puree. As the
greens will be very soft, it is possible to puree them by stirring
vigorously with a large wooden spoon. If you have a hand blender, it
is even easier. Insert the blender into the mixture and switch on
briefly. Move the blender around in the pan until all the mixture is
pureed. Don’t worry if it is a little runny, as the saag will thicken on
cooling.
▪ Cool the saag, divide into portions and freeze if desired.
Note: If you can’t buy spring greens, mustard greens or purple
sprouting broccoli, increase the quantities of the other ingredients or
try Swiss chard, kale or cabbage.
DHABA-STYLE LAMB CURRY
Dhaba is the Indian word for a Punjabi family restaurant. The Dhaba
curry is the basic traditional nonvegetarian curry of north India and is
usually made with goat meat. It includes diced meat simmered until
meltingly tender along with pieces of bone. Diners can be seen
enthusiastically sucking on the bones at these Dhabas. I have provided
the traditional recipe which requires some lamb pieces with bone left
in, but you can use meat cooked as for lamb curries (page 71) along
with some lamb or beef stock if you want to save time.
SERVES 6
Preparation and cooking time: Step 1: 1½–1¾ hours
Step 1: Preparing the meat
2 tbsp olive oil
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) leg of lamb with bone in, cut into approx. 2-inch (5 cm) pieces
1 lb (450 g) boned leg of lamb, cut slightly larger than 1-inch (2.5 cm) chunks
2 red onions, sliced
2 tsp salt
1 can (14 oz or 400 g) of chopped tomatoes
▪ Heat half the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add half
the meat. Stir-fry until brown. Remove and repeat with the
remainder of the meat.
▪ Return the browned meat to the pan and add the onions. Stir-fry
on high heat for about 5 minutes. Turn down the heat, mix in the
salt and add the tomatoes. Bring to a boil, cover the pan and simmer
on low heat for about 1 hour and 15 minutes or until the meat is
tender and the onions have dissolved.
▪ Use immediately, or cool and refrigerate or freeze for later use.
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
Step 2: Preparing the curry
2 tbsp olive oil
4 cloves of garlic
2-inch (5 cm) piece of ginger (or 2 portions of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix,
page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared
green chilies, page 30) 1 tsp chili powder
½ tsp turmeric
1 tsp cumin powder
1 tsp coriander powder
2 tsp ground ginger
1 tsp paprika
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
2 tsp garam masala
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add the garlic,
ginger and chilies. Stir-fry for a minute and add the remaining spices
(except for the paprika and garam masala), mix well and stir-fry for a
minute.
▪ Add the cooked meat and juices and stir well to coat with spices.
Stir-fry on medium to high heat for about 5 minutes. Cover and allow
the meat to simmer in the spices for 5-6 minutes on very low heat.
▪ Add the paprika and the curry sauce and bring to a boil. Simmer,
uncovered, for 10 minutes. Stir in the garam masala and serve.
YOGURT CURRY
It may be hard to imagine a curry made from yogurt, but this is in fact
quite a substantial (and incredibly tasty) dish popular throughout
India. In more recent times it has been making an appearance in
Indian restaurants, though generally as a “sauce” with chicken, fish or
vegetables. Try it with rice or chapatis; it is quite delicious and simple
to make.
If you can, leave the yogurt out of the fridge overnight to sour
slightly. You won’t need to use any lemon juice if you do that.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 1 hour
13 fl oz (350 mL) plain yogurt
3 tbsp chickpea flour (besan)
2 tsp salt
25 fl oz/1½ US pints (700 mL) cold water
25 fl oz/1½ US pints (700 mL) cold water
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp fenugreek seeds
1 tsp whole black peppercorns
1 tsp whole cumin seeds
6 curry leaves (optional)
1 onion, sliced
4 spring onions, chopped
4 green garlic tops, chopped (optional)
2 cloves of garlic
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix,
page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a portion of prepared
chilies, page 30) 2 tsp turmeric
1 potato, cut into chunks
4 whole green chilies
1 tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
juice of half a lemon
▪ In a large bowl, whisk together the yogurt, chickpea flour, salt
and water.
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan, and add the
fenugreek seeds, peppercorns, cumin seeds and curry leaves if you
are using them. Fry for a few seconds until the seeds start to pop.
▪ Add the onion, spring onions and garlic tops if you are using
them, and fry on medium heat for 3 minutes. Stir in the garlic, ginger
and chilies, and stir-fry for a couple of minutes.
▪ Stir in the turmeric and add the potato and whole chilies. Stir
around for a minute and pour in the yogurt mixture. Bring to a boil
and simmer over low heat for about 30–35 minutes, stirring
frequently, until the potato is cooked through.
▪ Stir in the garam masala, cilantro and lemon juice if you are using
it. Serve with rice or chapati (roti).
TIP
For a variation, add onion, spinach (palak) or vegetable pakoras (see tips, page
46) to the finished yogurt curry.
ACHARI GHOST
Strong and spicy flavors are the keynotes of this dish. It is traditionally
made with mutton simmered long and slow, but this recipe uses
precooked lamb, making it a quick and simple dish.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
4 whole red chilies
1 tsp cumin seeds
½ tsp black mustard seeds
½ tsp onion seeds
½ tsp fenugreek seeds
½ tsp fennel seeds
½ tsp turmeric
1 tsp chili powder
4 tbsp plain yogurt
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
½ tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71)
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and stir in the
chilies and all the spice seeds. Cook for a few seconds on high heat
until the seeds start to pop, and add the turmeric and chili powder.
▪ Stir in the yogurt and continue to stir on high heat for a minute or
two until the yogurt bubbles and reduces.
▪ Add the curry sauce and salt, bring to a boil and stir in the cooked
lamb.
▪ Turn down the heat and simmer for 10–15 minutes until the sauce
is thick and the oil has separated to the surface.
▪ Serve simmering hot with rice.
PUNJABI CABBAGE
Fresh and spicy, this dish is a favorite in northern India. An excellent
accompaniment to rich meat curries, yogurt and chapatis, it is simple
to make and delicious served hot or cold. Make sure you use goodquality, fresh cabbage.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
4 tbsp olive oil
1 small onion, sliced
1 tsp cumin seeds
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or a portion
of prepared chilies, page 30) 1 tsp turmeric
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) cabbage, sliced
1½ tsp salt
1 tsp garam masala
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan or wok and add the
onion. Fry for a few minutes while stirring until the onion is
transparent.
▪ Stir in the cumin seeds and fry for a minute. Add the garlic, ginger
and chilies, and stir-fry for a minute or two until aromatic.
▪ Stir in the turmeric, followed by the cabbage. Stir-fry the cabbage
on medium to high heat for 2 or 3 minutes and add in about 2
tablespoons of water and the salt.
▪ Turn down the heat a little and cook the cabbage for another 15
minutes, stirring frequently and adding a little more water if
required to prevent it sticking to the bottom of the pan and burning.
▪ Stir in the garam masala and serve.
SHIKARI GHOST
Shikari is the Indian word for hunter and this easy-to-cook dish from
the Raj era is based on the cooking style of the shikaris when on a
hunt. In its simplest form it is large pieces of fresh meat, rubbed with
lime juice and hot spices, browned in ghee and simmered in salt and
water until tender. The restaurant version includes some onion-based
sauce and fresh herbs.
Cook this dish on a day when you have some time to putter around
the kitchen because, although it is simple to make, the meat takes a bit
of time to cook and it does not freeze well.
SERVES 6–8
Preparation and cooking time: Step 1: 2–2½ hours
Step 1: Preparing the meat
1 tsp cumin seeds
1 tsp coriander seeds
1 tsp cardamom
1 tsp cloves
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
2 lb 4 oz (1 kg) lamb shoulder, cut into large pieces
2 tbsp lime juice
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp ground ginger
2 tsp chili powder
14 fl oz (400 mL) boiling water
2 tsp salt
2 tsp salt
▪ Grind the whole spices to a fine powder in an electric grinder or
with a pestle and mortar.
▪ Rinse the meat and drain well. Add the lime juice, 1 tablespoon of
the oil and all the spices, and, using your hands, rub well into the
meat. Allow to stand for about 10 minutes.
▪ Heat another tablespoon of oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan
and add half the meat. Stir-fry on high heat until well browned.
Remove from the pan and repeat with the remaining oil and meat.
▪ Return all the meat to the pan, add the water and salt and bring
to a boil. Simmer, stirring occasionally, for about 2 hours until the
meat is tender. Most of the liquid should have evaporated.
▪ Skim off excess fat, and use immediately or cool and refrigerate
for up to 24 hours. For best results, do not freeze as the lovely spice
flavors dull with freezing.
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
Step 2: Preparing the curry
1 tbsp olive oil
33 fl oz/2 US pints (950 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp chopped cilantro
▪ Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan and stir in the curry
sauce. Bring to a boil and add the meat and juices.
▪ Simmer gently for 15–20 minutes until the sauce is very thick. Stir
in the cilantro and serve.
I
14. PORK AND BEEF DISHES
N THE HINDU world of 900 million followers the cow is
sacred; a divine creature to be esteemed and revered, not
butchered and eaten. Even some of the Muslim kings who ruled
India in long-ago times prohibited their subjects from eating
beef as it was considered offensive to the Hindus. Later, the
newly emerging Sikh religion adopted the Hindu belief on the
same basis and Sikhs too regard the cow as holy.
Mahatma Gandhi once wrote: “If someone were to ask me
what the most important outward manifestation of Hinduism
was, I would suggest that it was the idea of cow protection.”
From a source of milk to a provider of labor and religious
inspiration, cows have played a pivotal role in the Indian way of
life for many centuries. Indeed, in India a citizen can be sent to
jail for killing or injuring a cow.
There are also religious restrictions on the consumption of
pork. Islamic dietary laws forbid the eating of pork, believing it
to be “unclean,” a harbinger of a multitude of diseases and a
degrader of the character, morality and spirituality of the
consumer.
There are, nevertheless, states in India that breed, sell and eat
both pork and beef. Goa and Kerala on the west coast, supported
by a high level of religious tolerance, readily consume pork and
beef cooked in traditional vindaloos and bafaths as well as in
European-style dishes.
Throughout the West, Sikhs and Hindus consume pork and
pork products and Muslims beef. Understandably, Indian
restaurants in the West generally have few, if any, pork or beef
dishes on the menu. Here are a few traditional and tasty dishes
to try at home.
PREPARING BEEF
Tougher cuts of meat require longer cooking but are tastier. suggest using
braising or stewing steak for these recipes but you can use rump if desired.
2 tbsp olive oil
2 lb 4 oz (1 kg) braising beef cut into approx. 2-inch (5 cm) pieces 2 onions,
sliced
2 tsp salt
Heat half the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add half the meat. Stirfry until brown. Remove and repeat with the remainder of the meat.
Return the browned meat to the pan and add the onions. Stir-fry on high heat
for about five minutes. Turn down the heat and stir in the salt.
Cover the pan with a tight-fitting lid and simmer on low heat for about 1½
hours or until the meat is tender and the onions have dissolved.
Use immediately, or cool and refrigerate or freeze for later use.
BEEF DISHES
MASSAMAN CURRY
Slow-cooked chunks of beef in a rich, creamy sauce, mildly
spiced.
BEEF VINDALOO
The fabulously fiery flavors of the old Portuguese settlement of
Goa. Hot and tangy, this dish is a delicious balance of pungent
and aromatic spices.
BOMBAY BEEF
Street food of Bombay (now Mumbai), this combination of
diced beef and potatoes is cooked in a sauce enriched with
coconut milk and flavored with spices.
BEEF BADAMI
Mild beef curry with tender chunks of meat combined with
aromatic spices and almonds, finished with a touch of cream.
MASSAMAN CURRY
This is a dish more common in Thai restaurants, but I’ve included it
because it originated with the Muslim community in India and
because it is absolutely delicious. Unlike neighboring countries,
Thailand managed to remain free from colonization by European
powers and, as a result, its food has limited outside influences. The
Thais have, however, borrowed cooking styles from other countries
such as China, India and Malaysia, and Massaman Curry is a stunning
example of this.
Massaman curry paste is readily available from supermarkets and
Asian grocers and is relatively good. If you would like to go a step
further, I have included the recipe so you can make your own.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
2 tbsp olive oil
2 tsp grated ginger
½ tsp ground cumin
4 tbsp Massaman paste
6 green cardamom pods, crushed
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
3 oz (100 g) peanuts
18 fl oz/1 US pint (500 mL) coconut cream
18 fl oz/1 US pint (500 mL) coconut milk
1 tbsp palm sugar or soft brown sugar
3 tbsp fish sauce
3 tbsp fish sauce
2 tsp tamarind paste dissolved in 2 tbsp warm water
1 lb (450 g) precooked beef (page 111)
▪ Heat the oil in a wok or heavy-based saucepan and add the ginger
and cumin. Stir-fry for a few seconds and add the Massaman paste,
cardamoms, cinnamon and peanuts. Stir-fry for 2 minutes.
▪ Stir in half the coconut cream and bring to a simmer. Cook on
medium heat, stirring often, until the cream is completely absorbed
into the paste and the oil starts to separate from the mixture. Repeat
with the remaining coconut cream.
▪ Stir in the coconut milk and bring to a simmer. Simmer, stirring
often, for about 10 minutes until the sauce has reduced.
▪ Stir in the sugar, fish sauce, tamarind and meat. Bring back to
simmer and cook on low heat for another 10 minutes. Do not boil
vigorously as the coconut sauce may separate.
▪ Serve with rice and chapatis.
MAKE YOUR OWN MASSAMAN PASTE
12 dried chilies, deseeded and soaked
1 whole garlic bulb, cloves peeled
2 oz (60 g) sliced shallots 1 tbsp ground coriander
1 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground pepper
1 tsp lemongrass, chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of galangal, peeled, chopped
1 tsp kaffir lime zest
1 tbsp scraped, chopped cilantro roots
3 tsp salt
1 tsp shrimp paste (belacan)
2 tbsp olive oil
2 tbsp olive oil
Grind or process all the ingredients until you have a fairly smooth paste. Place in a
clean jar, pour a little oil over the top and keep in the fridge for up to a week.
BEEF VINDALOO
Vindaloo is the Portuguese name for vinegar and garlic. Perhaps it
should be vinegar and chili because vindaloo is notorious for being
hot, hot, hot, and for some, the hotter the better. However, for a good
vindaloo, the heat should be balanced with other spicy flavors.
Traditionally, a combination of clear and dark vinegars is often
used to make vindaloo. The clear vinegar is made from coconut and
the dark from molasses. Balsamic vinegar works well.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20 minutes
4 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, grated or julienned
2 green chilies, finely sliced (or half a portion of prepared chili, page 30) 1½ tsp
garam masala
½ tsp turmeric
1 tsp chili powder or to taste
2 tbsp dark balsamic vinegar
3 tbsp olive oil
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) ½ tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked beef (page 111) ½ tsp dried ground fenugreek leaves
(optional)
▪ In a small bowl, mix together the garlic, ginger, chilies, 1 teaspoon
of the garam masala, turmeric, chili powder and vinegar.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the spice
mix. Stir-fry for about a minute or until aromatic.
▪ Add the curry sauce and salt and bring to a boil. Cook on high for
about 5 minutes until thickened.
▪ Add the meat and bring back to a simmer. Stir in the remainder of
the garam masala and fenugreek leaves, if you are using them.
Simmer for 5 minutes or until the oil separates from the sauce.
▪ Serve.
BOMBAY BEEF
From the streets of Bombay (officially Mumbai, since 1995) comes this
delicious combination of tender beef and potato in a beautifully spiced
sauce made silky smooth by the addition of a little coconut milk. If
you don’t have coconut milk in the pantry, evaporated light milk or a
little cream will work well.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20 minutes
1 large or 2 small potatoes, peeled and cut into chunks 3 tbsp olive oil
2 tsp tomato paste
½ tsp turmeric
½ tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 lb (450 g) precooked beef (page 111)
½ tsp salt
1 tsp chili powder
4 tbsp coconut milk
1 tsp garam masala
1 tsp tamarind dissolved in 1 tbsp warm water
▪ Cook the potato in boiling salted water for about 10 minutes until
just tender. Drain.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and stir
in the tomato paste and turmeric. Stir around in the hot oil for 10
seconds and add the curry sauce.
▪ Bring to a boil and cook on high for about 5 minutes until the
sauce is thick and starting to release the oil.
▪ Stir in the beef, salt, chili powder, cooked potato and coconut
milk. Bring back to a boil and simmer gently for about 10 minutes,
stirring often.
▪ Add the garam masala and tamarind, simmer for a minute, and
serve.
BEEF BADAMI
A mildly spiced but flavorsome dish, Beef Badami is inspired by rich
Mughal influences. The ground almonds and cream make for a
deliciously creamy sauce while the lightly toasted flaked almonds add a
contrasting crunch. A tasty and impressive dish fit for a king.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
2 tbsp olive oil
4 cardamom pods
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
3 cloves
½ tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) ½ tsp salt
½ tsp chili powder
½ tsp chili powder
1 lb (450 g) precooked beef (page 111) 1 oz (30 g) almonds, ground to a fine
powder
5 fl oz (150 mL) light cream
1 tbsp sliced or slivered almonds, toasted
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the
cardamom, cinnamon and cloves. Stir-fry on medium heat for a
minute, add the cumin and coriander, and fry for a few seconds
more.
▪ Add the curry sauce, salt and chili powder, and bring to a boil.
Cook on high heat, stirring, for about 5 minutes until the sauce
thickens.
▪ Stir in the beef and ground almonds. Bring back to a boil and
simmer for 5 or 6 minutes, stirring often. Add the cream and simmer
for another 3 minutes.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the sliced or slivered toasted almonds.
PORK DISHES
PORK TIKKA
Marinated chunks of pork fillet, encrusted with toasty spices on
the outside and tender and juicy on the inside.
MANGALOREAN-STYLE PORK BAFATH
Boneless pork in an aromatic mix of roasted spices, south Indian
style.
PORK AND SPROUTS
A tasty combination of tender pork fillet and fresh brussels
sprouts simmered in a spicy sauce until they melt in the mouth.
CHILI PORK
Juicy strips of pork with green and red chilies in a tangy,
flavorsome sauce.
PORK TIKKA
Another Punjabi delicacy regularly enjoyed at Punjabi roadside
restaurants (or Dhabas), this dish has little in common with the
chicken dish of the same name. It is robustly spiced, though not too
hot, very easy to cook and extremely good. Pork Tikka can be served
as a main course with a yogurt dish to temper the spices, or as an
appetizer with a crisp salad.
SERVES 3–4 as a main course and 6–8 as an appetizer
Preparation and cooking time: 22 minutes (plus marinating time) Marinade
1 onion
4 cloves of garlic
4 cloves of garlic
2-inch (5 cm) piece of ginger
2 green chilies
1 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
5 fl oz (150 mL) plain yogurt
1 tbsp olive oil
1 lb (450 g) pork fillet
4 tbsp olive oil
½ tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp paprika
1 tsp salt
3 tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Process or finely chop the onion, garlic, ginger and chilies and
combine with the remaining marinade ingredients.
▪ Trim the pork fillet and slice into 1-inch (2.5 cm) chunks. Place in a
bowl with the marinade, cover and refrigerate for about 2 hours or
overnight. Remove from the fridge about 30 minutes before using.
▪ Heat half the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan, add the
turmeric, stir once and add the curry sauce. Bring to a boil and cook
for about 5 minutes until thick.
▪ Turn down the heat, stir in the paprika and salt, and simmer
gently while cooking the pork.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a karahi or large frying pan, and add the
meat and marinade. Stir-fry on high for 3–4 minutes until the liquid
has evaporated and the meat is starting to brown.
▪ Add the meat mixture to the sauce, scraping out all the crusty
pieces that will have stuck to the pan. Stir-fry again on high for 3–4
minutes.
▪ Turn down the heat and simmer, stirring often, for about 15
minutes or until all the liquid has evaporated and the mixture is rich
and dark.
▪ Stir in the garam masala and stir-fry on low heat for a minute or
two. Serve sprinkled with the cilantro.
MANGALOREAN-STYLE PORK BAFATH
Mangalore is an Indian coastal state south of Goa. Its cuisine is a
product of many influences, including those of Goa, Portugal and the
Middle East. This dish is based on the Mangalorean style of cooking
with the abundant use of roasted spices for aroma and flavor, and the
use of tamarind and vinegar for balance and a tasty tang. It doesn’t
have the heat of the Goan vindaloos, so the flavor of the spices really
shines through.
SERVES 3–4
Preparation and cooking time: 35–40 minutes
Spice mix for roasting
1 tsp coriander seeds
½ tsp cumin seeds
4 dried red chilies
6 black peppercorns
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
2 cloves
½ tsp turmeric
2 black cardamom pods (optional)
Remaining ingredients
1 lb (450 g) pork fillet
4 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp tamarind paste dissolved in 1 tbsp warm water
1 onion, thinly sliced
1 onion, thinly sliced
1 clove garlic, thinly sliced
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
1 tsp paprika
2 tsp dark balsamic vinegar
1 green chili, finely sliced
▪ Roast the spices in a small pan over medium heat for about a
minute or until aromatic. Remove from the pan and cool. Grind to a
fine powder in a pestle and mortar or electric grinder.
▪ Trim the pork fillet and slice into large chunks about 1¼-inch (3
cm) in size. Combine the pork with 1 tablespoon of the oil, the spice
mix, tamarind, onion and garlic.
▪ Heat the rest of the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add
the curry sauce, salt and paprika. Bring to a boil and cook on high
heat for about 5 minutes until thick and starting to release the oil.
Lower the heat and simmer gently while cooking the meat.
▪ Heat a karahi or frying pan and stir-fry the meat mixture for about
3 minutes until browned. Add the meat to the thickened sauce,
scraping the karahi to remove all the crusty pieces, and stir in the
vinegar and roast spices.
▪ Cover and simmer gently for 10 minutes, stirring once or twice.
Remove the lid and simmer for another 10 minutes until the meat is
cooked through. Add a little water if the mixture becomes too dry or
sticks to the bottom of the pan during this time.
▪ Stir in the green chili and serve.
PORK AND BRUSSELS SPROUTS
A Punjabi innovation, this dish combines the richness of pork with the
freshness of brussels sprouts, and it is a combination that is incredibly
good. Traditionally, the dish would be made with pork shoulder or
rib, with lots of bone and fat to “roast” the spices and add plenty of
flavor. This recipe uses pork fillet, making it a healthier option, and is
quick and easy to prepare. It is only worth making this dish around
winter when fresh, sweet brussels sprouts are in season. At other times
of the year, try a variation with shredded cabbage or spinach.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
14 oz (400 g) pork fillet
4 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp turmeric
2 green chilies, finely sliced (or half a portion of prepared chili, page 30) 2 cloves
of garlic, finely sliced
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely sliced (or a portion of prepared garlic-andginger mix, page 30, thawed) 9 oz (250 g) brussels sprouts
2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
1 tsp salt
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp garam masala
▪ Trim the pork fillet and slice into 1-inch (2.5 cm) pieces. Place in a
bowl with 1 tablespoon of the oil, half the turmeric, the chilies, garlic
and ginger. Mix well and set aside.
▪ Slice off the exposed end of the stalks and remove outer leaves
from the brussels sprouts. Rinse under cold water and cut into
quarters. Place in a microwave-proof container with 2 tablespoons of
water, and microwave on high for 3 minutes.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add
the tomatoes, salt and remaining turmeric. Cook, stirring for 2 or 3
minutes until the tomato is pulpy.
▪ Stir in the pork and stir-fry on medium to high heat for 3 minutes.
Add the curry sauce and brussels sprouts to the pan, and bring to a
boil, stirring often. Cover the pan and simmer for 10–12 minutes.
▪ Remove the lid and simmer for another 5 minutes, stirring often,
until the liquid has evaporated.
▪ Stir in the garam masala, heat for a minute and serve.
CHILI PORK
A colorful and tasty dish, Chili Pork is inspired by Chinese influences
and will appeal to those who relish the flavor and aroma of fresh
chilies. By using the larger (often called Thai) chilies, the color and
flavor are achieved without the extra heat. Use a combination of hot
and mild chilies if you prefer a hotter dish.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
lb 2 oz (500 g) pork fillet, sliced into strips
2 cloves of garlic, finely sliced
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely sliced (or a portion of prepared garlic-andginger mix, page 30, thawed) ½ tsp turmeric
4 tbsp olive oil
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) ½ tsp chili powder or to taste
1 tsp salt
4 large, mild green chilies, deseeded and sliced into thin strips 4 large, mild red
chilies, deseeded and sliced into thin strips ½ red pepper, thinly sliced
1 ripe tomato, sliced into 8 wedges
1½ tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Combine the pork, garlic, ginger, turmeric and 1 tablespoon of the
oil in a bowl.
▪ Heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan
and add the pork. Stir-fry the meat for 3 minutes on high. Add the
curry sauce, chili powder and salt, and simmer for 10 minutes.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the remaining oil in a separate pan and add the
sliced chilies and red pepper. Stir-fry on medium heat for 3 minutes
until starting to color.
▪ Stir the fried chilies and red pepper into the pork mixture and
simmer for another 5 minutes before adding the tomato and garam
masala.
▪ Simmer gently for 5 minutes. The sauce should be very thick and
the oil should be separating from the sauce.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the cilantro.
F
15. SEAFOOD DISHES
ISH AND seafood dishes are prominent in the coastal states
of India, where the Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal and Indian
Ocean yield their rich bounties of fish and shellfish. The entire
west coast of India is renowned for its seafood dishes. For people
living along the Indian coastline, fried, steamed, curried and
even pickled seafood is a firm favorite. Families rise early to
reach the fish markets in anticipation of the catch of the day.
SEAFOOD DISHES
SHRIMP BAADSHA WITH POORI
Jumbo shrimp sautéed with spring onions, sweet peppers and
spices, served with a hot, creamy sauce with fried Indian bread
(poori).
FISH MASALA
Juicy fish fillets, marinated and pan-fried, served with a tangy,
hot sauce flavored with a touch of yogurt, tomatoes and fresh
herbs.
FISH AMBOTIK
Marinated fillets of fish cooked in a sweet-and-sour sauce
flavored with cloves, tamarind and whole red chilies.
SHRIMP MALABAR
Fresh shrimp cooked with sautéed onions, sweet peppers,
tomatoes and coconut, finished with a touch of cream.
PALAK FISH
Chunks of fresh fish, spinach leaves and fresh fenugreek, sautéed
with onions, tomatoes, cumin seeds and green chili.
SALMON KALIA
A Bengali speciality — whole fillets of fried fish served in a spicy
sauce with a touch of yogurt.
GOAN FISH CURRY
Marinated fish chunks flavored with mustard seeds, curry leaves
and whole red chilies, served in a thick coconut sauce.
SHRIMP BAADSHA WITH POORI
This is a special-occasion dish that is beautiful to look at and
sensational to eat. A delectable dish that was once served in the royal
palaces to the reigning kings and princes (baadshas), it reflects the
flamboyance and decadence of a bygone era. It has a lovely
combination of flavors in a deliciously creamy sauce.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20 minutes
24 jumbo shrimp
2 spring onions, chopped
2 green garlic tops, chopped (optional)
½ red pepper, sliced into strips
1 tsp turmeric
2 green chilies, finely chopped
2 green chilies, finely chopped
½ tsp fennel seeds
1 tsp ground coriander
3 tbsp olive oil
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
4 tbsp yogurt
4 tbsp thick cream
2 tbsp ground almonds
½ tsp chili powder
½ tsp garam masala
1 ripe tomato, sliced into 8 wedges
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Shell and devein the shrimp. Rinse, drain and pat dry with paper
towels. Combine with the spring onions, garlic tops (if you are using
them), red pepper, half the turmeric, chilies, fennel seeds, coriander
and 1 tablespoon of the oil. Set aside.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add
the cinnamon stick and stir for a few seconds. Add the shrimp
mixture and stir-fry for about a minute.
▪ Stir in the curry sauce and salt, and bring to a boil. Cook on
medium heat for about 3 minutes until the sauce thickens slightly.
Turn down to a simmer.
▪ Stir in the yogurt, cream, almonds and chili powder. Simmer
gently for 5 minutes. Stir through the garam masala, tomatoes and
half the cilantro. Simmer for a minute.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the remaining cilantro accompanied by Poori
(page 160).
FISH MASALA
This dish is really quick and easy to prepare and has a lovely creamy
and colorful sauce. The key to a really good Fish Masala is to buy the
freshest fish you can.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20 minutes
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) fish fillets (any firm-fleshed white fish) 1 tsp salt
1 tsp turmeric
½ tsp chili powder
3 tbsp olive oil
2 spring onions, sliced
2 green garlic tops, sliced (optional)
2 tsp tomato paste
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 green chili, finely sliced
2 tbsp plain yogurt
4 cherry tomatoes, halved
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp thick cream
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Rinse the fish fillets and pat dry with paper towels. Slice into large
chunks.
▪ Combine half the salt, half the turmeric, the chili powder and 1
tablespoon of the oil with the fish pieces, and set aside.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add
the spring onions and garlic tops (if you are using them). Stir-fry for 3
minutes. Stir in the tomato paste and cook for a minute more.
▪ Add the curry sauce with the remaining salt and turmeric, and
bring to a boil. Cook the sauce on high for about 5 minutes until
thickened.
▪ Stir the chili and yogurt into the sauce and cook, stirring until
completely incorporated. Lower the heat and simmer gently while
cooking the fish.
▪ Heat a separate frying pan or karahi and stir-fry the fish on high
heat for a minute or two until lightly browned. Add the fish to the
sauce and simmer for 5 minutes.
▪ Stir in the tomatoes, garam masala, cream and half the cilantro.
Simmer for a minute and serve sprinkled with the remaining cilantro.
FISH AMBOTIK
This is another south Indian delicacy thought to have originated in
Goa that has been modified over time by the Mangaloreans and other
southern states. The delicious sauce has the robust flavors of garlic and
mustard seeds, and the sour tamarind is balanced by the addition of
sugar and a generous amount of chili.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
lb 2 oz (500 g) firm white fish fillets
2 tsp tamarind paste dissolved in 3 fl oz (100 mL) warm water 2 tsp soft brown
sugar
1 tsp chili powder
3 tbsp olive oil
½ tsp black mustard seeds
½ tsp black mustard seeds
4 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 tsp ground cumin
½ tsp salt
½ tsp turmeric
1 ripe tomato, chopped
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 4 whole red chilies
▪ Rinse the fish, pat dry with paper towels and cut into chunks.
Combine the fish, tamarind, sugar and chili powder in a bowl, and
set aside.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the
mustard seeds. Stir for a few seconds, then add the garlic. Stir-fry for
a minute or two and add the cumin, salt and turmeric.
▪ Stir in the tomato, cook for a minute and stir in the curry sauce.
Bring to a boil and simmer for 5 minutes until thickened slightly.
▪ Add the fish and marinade, bring back to a boil and simmer the
fish in the sauce for about 5 minutes, stirring carefully, until the fish
is cooked through. The sauce should be quite thin.
▪ Serve topped with the whole red chilies.
SHRIMP MALABAR
Although Malabar is a region in the southern state of India where food
is generally more fiery and pungent, Malabar cuisine is noted for its
mild flavors and gentle cooking styles such as steaming or baking. The
subtle spicing in this dish is ideally suited to the delicate flavor of fresh
shrimp. If you are using frozen shrimp, thaw in the fridge overnight
and pat dry before using.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
Spice mix
1 tbsp coriander seeds
1 tbsp poppy seeds
1 tbsp grated coconut (or shredded coconut)
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
2 cloves
4 green cardamom pods
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) shelled fresh or frozen shrimp
3 tbsp olive oil
2 tbsp sliced onion
½ red pepper, sliced
½ tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
6 cherry tomatoes, halved
1 green chili, finely sliced
1 tbsp thick cream
1 tbsp thick cream
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Grind the spices and coconut to a fine powder in a pestle and
mortar or electric grinder. Combine with the shrimp and 1
tablespoon of oil. Set aside.
▪ Heat the remaining oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add
the onion and red pepper. Stir-fry for 3 minutes until soft and add
the turmeric, curry sauce and salt.
▪ Bring to a boil and cook on high for 5 minutes until thickened.
Turn down the heat and let the sauce simmer very gently.
▪ Meanwhile, heat a separate pan or karahi and stir-fry the shrimp
on medium heat for about 2 minutes. Add to the sauce and simmer
for 2 minutes. Stir in the tomatoes and simmer for another 3 or 4
minutes.
▪ Finally, stir in the green chili and cream. Cook gently for another 2
minutes and serve, sprinkled with the cilantro.
PALAK FISH
This is a tasty dish originating in the north of India where fresh
fenugreek is used in abundance. The distinct “curryish” flavor of the
fenugreek beautifully enhances the relatively mild flavor of the fish
and spinach in this dish.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) firm-fleshed white fish
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp cumin seeds
1 onion, sliced
2 cloves of garlic, finely sliced
2 ripe tomatoes, sliced
4 oz (125 g) spinach leaves, shredded
4 oz (125 g) fresh fenugreek leaves, shredded
7 fl oz (200 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
2 green chilies, finely sliced
▪ Rinse the fish fillets, pat dry with paper towels and cut into large
chunks.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the cumin
seeds. Stir-fry for a few seconds and add the onion and garlic. Fry on
high heat for 2–3 minutes until soft.
▪ Add half the tomatoes and stir around in the hot oil for about a
minute before adding the spinach and fenugreek.
▪ Stir-fry on high heat for about 3 minutes. Turn down the heat and
cook for another 5 minutes, stirring now and then, until the mixture
is quite dry.
▪ Add the curry sauce and salt and bring to a boil. Simmer for 5
minutes.
▪ Stir in the fish and chilies and simmer, uncovered, for another 10–
12 minutes, stirring carefully, until the fish is cooked through and the
liquid has almost evaporated.
▪ Stir through the remaining tomatoes and serve.
SALMON KALIA
This is a wonderful Bengali delicacy traditionally made with a carplike
fish called katla. The delicious aromatically spiced sauce is flavored
with a special spice blend called panch phoran (five spices), which
complements the oily fish beautifully. Salmon is an excellent substitute
for the traditional katla but other varieties of fish can also be used.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
Spice blend
½ tsp fenugreek seeds
1 tsp black mustard seeds
1 tsp black mustard seeds
1 tsp onion seeds
1 tsp fennel seeds
2 tsp cumin seeds
Remaining ingredients
1 tsp turmeric
1½ tsp salt
4 salmon cutlets or fillets about 7 oz (200 g) each 2 tbsp olive oil
1 clove of garlic, finely sliced
2 tsp tomato paste
20 fl oz (600 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp paprika
3 tbsp plain yogurt
1 ripe tomato, sliced into 8 wedges (or 4 cherry tomatoes, halved) 2 hot red
chilies, deseeded and sliced
½ tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Combine all the spices for the spice blend and set aside. Mix half
the turmeric with half the salt and rub over the fish. Set aside.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the spice
blend. Stir around in the hot oil for about 20 seconds until the seeds
start to pop, then add the garlic. Fry for another few seconds and stir
in the tomato paste and remaining turmeric.
▪ Stir-fry for a minute and add the curry sauce, paprika and the
remaining salt. Bring to a boil and cook on high for 2 minutes until
slightly thickened. Turn down the heat and stir in the yogurt. Simmer
while preparing the fish.
▪ Heat a separate pan capable of holding all the fish in a single
layer. Cook on high heat for a minute each side or until lightly
browned.
▪ Transfer the fish to the sauce and turn the pieces in the sauce until
each piece is completely coated.
▪ Bring to a boil and turn down the heat. Cover and simmer for 10–
15 minutes, turning once. Stir in the tomato halfway through.
▪ Transfer to a serving platter or plates, sprinkle with the red chilies,
garam masala Note: This dish needs the extra sauce to
counterbalance the richness of the fish.
GOAN FISH CURRY
A traditional fish curry from Goa that like most Goan food, is colorful,
hot and delicious. This is a quick and easy recipe that doesn’t require
any curry sauce — the spice mix and coconut milk combine to make a
delicious thick sauce. Reduce the number of chilies if you don’t want it
too hot.
Use any fish of your choice. Tuna and salmon work well with this
dish, as does any firm-fleshed white fish.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 20–25 minutes
Bengali Panch Phoran (Bengali five-spice mix)
8 dried red chilies
2 tsp cumin seeds
3 tsp coriander seeds
1 tsp black mustard seeds
1 tsp fenugreek seeds
Remaining ingredients
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) fish, cut into large chunks
2 tsp tamarind dissolved in 2 tbsp warm water
1 tsp salt
1 tsp turmeric
2 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, sliced
4 curry leaves
4 curry leaves
2 cloves garlic, ground to a paste
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger (or a portion of prepared garlic-and-ginger mix,
page 30, thawed) 1 ripe tomato, chopped
½ tsp paprika
10 fl oz (300 mL) coconut milk
3 fl oz (100 mL) coconut cream
4 red chilies, slit and deseeded
½ tsp garam masala
▪ Combine the spices for the spice mix and grind to a fine powder in
a pestle and mortar or electric grinder. Set aside.
▪ Combine the fish with the tamarind, half the salt and half the
turmeric, and set aside.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the sliced
onion. Stir-fry for 4–5 minutes until lightly browned and stir in the
curry leaves, spice mix, remaining salt and turmeric. Fry for a few
seconds.
▪ Add the garlic and ginger. Stir-fry for a minute until aromatic and
add the tomato. Cook the tomato for a couple of minutes until pulpy
and stir in the paprika, coconut milk and cream.
▪ Bring to a boil and simmer for about 5 minutes until thickened
slightly. Stir in the red chilies, fish and marinade, bring back to a
simmer and cook for 10 minutes, stirring once or twice until the fish
is cooked through.
▪ Serve sprinkled with garam masala.
I
16. VEGETABLE AND DHAL DISHES
T IS VIRTUALLY impossible for a Westerner to imagine sitting
down to a good meal without a generous portion of meat,
chicken or fish. Yet 70 percent of the population of the Indian
subcontinent is vegetarian and does just that.
Historically, Indian cuisine has been shaped by many
influences, the most significant of which is probably
vegetarianism, largely brought about by strong religious beliefs
beginning with Buddhism and Jainism, which came to India
around 600 BCE. Although these are no longer major religions
in India they had the effect of pervading Indian culture and
converting its people to a way of life where consuming flesh is
strictly against their faith (dharam).
There is some scientific evidence to suggest that non-meateating populations have a lower life expectancy, although there
is little to support this in areas where food is fresh and plentiful
and poverty and famine do not play a role. Indian vegetarian
food is so varied and diverse that it is easy to get sufficient
nutrients, protein and fiber without high levels of fat, a balance
often lacking in modern Western diets. Fresh, homemade yogurt
or curd is eaten at every meal, providing good quality protein
and plenty of vitamins and minerals. Pulses, lentils or chickpeas
feature daily and, eaten with bread or rice, provide complete
proteins and lots of fiber. The addition of fresh or sun-dried
herbs and spices gives further nutritional value to the dishes.
Even snacks and desserts, often made with besan (chickpea
flour) and milk, are nutritious. Indian vegetarian food is also
delicious due to the myriad of spices, pickles, chutneys and
relishes that are consumed at each meal. With this wonderful
cuisine it is possible to eat vegetarian dishes every day and not
miss eating meat. Indeed, India is quite a paradise for
vegetarians.
Even if you are not vegetarian, the following dishes are good
accompaniments that add variety and interest to the meat dishes
in the preceding chapters.
VEGETABLE AND DHAL DISHES
CAULIFLOWER KEEMA
Minced cauliflower cooked with fennel seeds, garlic, ginger and
peas. A deliciously “meaty” dish.
ALOO SOY “BARI”
Potato and meaty soy chunks in a deliciously spicy gravy
flavored with fresh herbs.
BENGAN KA BHARTA
Roasted, skinless eggplant, finely chopped into a coarse puree
and sautéed with onions, tomatoes, spices and herbs.
PALAK PANEER KASOORI
Indian cheese cubes, panfried until crisp and tossed with
spinach, sun-dried fenugreek leaves, onions, ginger and cumin.
SHABNAM CURRY
Mushrooms, potatoes, peas and cashew nuts cooked in an
authentic combination of garlic, ginger and onion flavored with
fresh cilantro.
HATHO BRINJAL
A spicy combination of eggplant, potatoes and peas, cooked with
fresh tomatoes and shredded coconut.
TARKA DHAL
A quick-cook version of this popular dhal, lightly spiced and
generously flavored with fresh herbs.
CAULIFLOWER KEEMA
This is a quick and simple recipe, good as a main dish, or as a side dish
with a dhal or meat curry. As with most recipes, fresh cauliflower that
is in season will produce the best results. If you can get it, try it with
organic cauliflower — it is even better.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
1 small cauliflower
3 tbsp olive oil
½ tsp fennel seeds
1 ripe tomato, chopped
1 tsp salt
½ tsp turmeric
1 green chili, finely sliced
1 green chili, finely sliced
13 fl oz (350 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
5 oz (150 g) frozen peas
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Break the cauliflower into florets. Rinse and drain well. Place into
a food processor and process on slow speed until coarsely minced.
Alternatively, grate or chop finely.
▪ Heat the oil in a heavy-based pan and add the fennel seeds,
tomato, salt and turmeric. Cook on medium heat for about 2 minutes
and stir in the green chili.
▪ Cook for about a minute before adding the cauliflower. Stir for 3–
4 minutes on medium heat and add the curry sauce.
▪ Bring to a boil and simmer for 15 minutes, stirring occasionally,
until the liquid has almost evaporated and the cauliflower is tender.
▪ Stir in the peas and garam masala, and cook for another 5
minutes, stirring often.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the cilantro.
ALOO SOY “BARI”
This has become a popular dish among Indian vegetarian populations
in recent years. Textured vegetable protein (TVP; also known as soy
chunks or nuggets) is highly nutritious and is an excellent substitute
for meat. Because it readily absorbs the flavors of the sauce, it becomes
very tasty too. It is quite unlike the traditional bari which can be
described as a spicy, sun-dried “cake” of fermented ground mung
dahl, but it is a convenient and delicious alternative. TVP is available
from Indian grocers, health food stores and some supermarkets.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
11 oz (300 g) TVP
2 medium potatoes
3 tbsp olive oil
2 spring onions, chopped
1 tbsp chopped fenugreek leaves (optional)
2 green chilies, finely chopped
½ tsp cumin seeds
½ tsp turmeric
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
1 tsp salt
14 fl oz (400 mL) hot water
1 tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Soak the TVP in enough hot water to cover. Set aside.
▪ Peel the potatoes and slice each one into 6 or 8 evenly sized
chunks. Boil in salted water for about 10 minutes until just tender
but not breaking apart. Drain.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and fry
the spring onion (and fenugreek leaves if you are using them) for
about 2 minutes.
▪ Add the chilies, cumin seeds and turmeric, fry for 30 seconds and
stir in the curry sauce and salt. Bring to a boil and cook on medium to
high heat for about 5 minutes, stirring frequently until the sauce is
thick.
▪ Add the drained TVP and about 14 fl oz (400 mL) of hot water.
Bring to a boil and simmer partly covered for 10 minutes.
▪ Add the potatoes and garam masala, and simmer for another 5
minutes. Stir in the chopped cilantro and serve.
BENGAN KA BHARTA
Native to India, the eggplant (bengan or brinjal) is used widely in
Indian cuisine. Its incredible versatility allows it to be used in a huge
variety of different ways from pickles to curries. Bengan Ka Bharta is
another delicious example of the versatility of this king of vegetables.
Traditionally, the eggplants would be roasted in the dying embers of
the cooking fire, but microwaving is a quick option.
For this dish, choose large eggplants with a smooth, shiny skin and
bright green stalks.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 40 minutes
2 large eggplants (they should weigh about 1 lb 12 oz or 800 g in total)
4 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, finely chopped
1 tsp cumin seeds
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or a portion
of prepared chili, page 30) 2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
1½ tsp salt
½ tsp turmeric
1 tsp garam masala
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Make 3 or 4 large slits along the length of the eggplants and
microwave on high for 3 minutes. Turn the eggplants over and
microwave again for 2 or 3 minutes or until the vegetables are quite
soft. Remember they will continue cooking once the microwave is
off. Alternatively, roast in a hot oven at 425°F (220°C) for about 35
minutes. Allow to stand until cool enough to handle.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and fry
the onion and cumin for 3 or 4 minutes until the onion softens.
▪ Add the garlic, ginger and chilies, and stir-fry for a minute. Add
the tomatoes, salt and turmeric, and cook over low heat for about 10
minutes until the tomatoes are pulpy and the oil starts to separate
from the mixture.
▪ Meanwhile, peel the eggplants and slice the pulp finely. Add to
the pan and mix well over low heat for 3 or 4 minutes.
▪ Stir in the garam masala, cook for a minute and add in half the
cilantro. Serve sprinkled with the remaining cilantro.
PALAK PANEER KASOORI
This is a wonderfully satisfying, substantial and tasty north Indian
vegetarian dish. The paneer (Indian cheese) combines beautifully with
the robust flavors of fenugreek.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
3 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, sliced
1 tsp ground cumin
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, grated
1 green chili, finely sliced
9 oz (250 g) shredded spinach
7 oz (200 g) fresh fenugreek leaves or 2 oz (50 g) dried fenugreek leaves, rinsed
7 fl oz (200 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
1 tsp salt
1 quantity of paneer (page 24)
▪ Heat 2 tablespoons of the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan,
and fry the onion until starting to color. Stir in the cumin, ginger and
green chili. Fry for a minute until aromatic.
▪ Add the spinach and fenugreek, and stir-fry on medium heat for 3
minutes. Add the curry sauce and salt, and bring to a boil. Turn down
the heat and simmer for 15 minutes, stirring occasionally until all the
liquid has evaporated.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the remainder of the oil in a separate frying pan
and fry the paneer until golden brown on all sides.
▪ Add the paneer to the vegetables and cook for another 5 minutes,
stirring often.
▪ Serve.
SHABNAM CURRY
This is another northern Indian dish contributed to Indian cuisine by
the Mughals. It has a thick, dryish sauce and a mild, but delicious,
flavor.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
1 large or 2 small potatoes
3 tbsp olive oil
2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
1 tsp salt
1 tsp ground coriander
½ tsp turmeric
9 oz (250 g) button mushrooms, halved
4 oz (125 g) fresh or frozen peas
11 fl oz (300 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
½ tsp chili powder
2 tbsp cashew nuts, ground to a paste
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Peel the potato and cut into 1-inch (2.5 cm) chunks. Cook in
boiling salted water until just tender. Drain.
▪ Meanwhile, heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and
add the tomatoes and salt. Stir-fry for 4–5 minutes until the tomatoes
are pulpy and the oil has separated from the mixture.
▪ Stir in the coriander and turmeric and fry for a minute. Add the
mushrooms and peas and stir-fry on medium heat for 5 minutes.
▪ Add the curry sauce, chili powder and potato and bring to a boil.
Turn down the heat and simmer gently for 5 minutes, stirring now
and then.
▪ Stir in the cashew nut paste and garam masala, and simmer for
another 5 minutes, stirring often.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the cilantro.
HATHO BRINJAL
Eggplant is a common and popular vegetable in Indian cooking. Easy
to grow and nutritious, it is incredibly versatile. It can be fried,
roasted, stuffed, mashed, pickled and anything in between!
Good on its own, it also marries well with potatoes as in this south
Indian dish.
SERVES 4–6
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
4 small eggplants (approx. 9 oz or 250 g)
1 large or 2 small potatoes
1 large or 2 small potatoes
4 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
2 ripe tomatoes, chopped
1 tsp salt
1 tsp turmeric
2 tbsp grated coconut (or shredded coconut)
13 fl oz (350 mL) curry sauce (page 32)
1 tsp chili powder
3 oz (100 g) frozen peas
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Slice each eggplant in half and each half into 3 or 4 thick slices
depending on the size of the eggplant. Peel the potatoes and cut
into slices a little smaller than the eggplant.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan, add the cumin and
coriander and fry for a few seconds.
▪ Stir in the tomatoes and salt and cook for 2–3 minutes, then add
the turmeric and coconut. Stir-fry for a minute and add the potato
and eggplant.
▪ Stir-fry for about 3 minutes on medium heat and add the curry
sauce and chili powder. Bring to a boil, cover and simmer for 15
minutes, stirring once or twice until the vegetables are tender. Add a
little water if the sauce is becoming too dry.
▪ Add the peas and simmer, uncovered, for another 5 minutes until
the liquid has evaporated.
▪ Stir in the garam masala and simmer for a minute. Serve sprinkled
with cilantro.
TARKA DHAL
This easy-cook, one-pot recipe is a godsend when you need something
quick and simple as a side dish. It goes well with any meat or vegetable
curry and is also great with tandoori meats to make a complete meal.
Leaving the salt until the end helps the lentils cook a lot quicker.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 35–40 minutes
4 heaped tbsp good-quality red split lentils
15 fl oz (425 mL) water
1 small onion, chopped
3 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
2 tbsp olive oil
¼ tsp turmeric
1 ripe tomato, chopped
1 green chili, finely chopped
1 level tsp salt
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp finely chopped cilantro
▪ Rinse the lentils several times and place in a pan with all the other
ingredients except the salt, garam masala and cilantro.
▪ Bring to a boil and simmer, uncovered, for about 10 minutes,
stirring now and then. Cover the pan and simmer for another 20
minutes, stirring two or three times. Add a little more water if the
dhal looks too thick.
▪ Stir in the salt, garam masala and half the cilantro. Serve sprinkled
with the remaining cilantro.
B
17. BIRYANIS
IRYANI is to India what risotto is to Italy and the paella is to
Spain, only more so. Among Indians there is an intense
patriotism about this sumptuous dish; a sense of pride and
splendor. In many parts of India, no lavish feast could lay claim
to that status without the presence of biryani.
The true biryani is indeed a magnificent dish; the best
basmati rice layered with succulent meats in delicious sauces,
flavored with exquisite “sweet” spices such as saffron,
cardamom, cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg, gently baked in
sealed pots until the aromas and flavors permeate the layers and,
finally, adorned with expensive ingredients like almonds,
pistachios, cashews and dried fruits braised in pure ghee
(clarified butter).
Its attraction is legendary. One tale has it that biryani was
created by the beautiful Mumtaz Mahal, the queen of King Shah
Jehan (the famous Taj Mahal was built by the king as her tomb
after she died during childbirth), as a means of providing a
complete meal to feed their army.
With such a lavish concoction, the princely Mughals
inevitably played a significant part in the creation of the biryani.
Food historians believe that the dish originated in Persia and was
introduced to India by the extravagant, food-loving Mughals
during the early part of the 16th century. Indeed, the word
biryani is derived from the Persian word birian, which means
“fried or roasted before cooking.”
The popularity and importance of biryani quickly spread
throughout the Middle East, South Asia and Southeast Asia, and
an enormous variety of biryanis have been developed, many
taking on the name of the region or the ruler of the time. So high
was the status granted to this dish, there are claims that the
earlier Punjabi nawabs (provincial governors or viceroys of
regions during the Mughal era) wore a particular turban for each
variety of biryani popular in the region.
Traditionally, goat meat was used to make biryani, but
nowadays it is common to use lamb, chicken, fish and vegetables
of all types. The common threads are the layers of cooked rice
between the meat and vegetables, the sealed-pot (dum) style of
cooking, and the unfading importance still attached to this
fabulous dish.
PREPARATION FOR BIRYANIS
A good biryani should be spicy with lots of sweet and savory
aromas, but never hot. Traditional biryanis, like many other
traditional Indian dishes, incorporate a dozen or more spices
and take hours of preparation and cooking, with each variety of
biryani differing in the combination of spices used according to
the style of cooking of the region.
Restaurant methods simplify the process by the prior
preparation of meat, sauces and basic spice blends, adding
specific ingredients as required for a particular recipe. You can
use chicken as prepared for chicken curries (page 59) or lamb as
prepared for lamb curries (page 71).
You will also need to prepare a small quantity of the
following Biryani Spice Blend.
ACCOMPANIMENTS TO BIRYANI
A good biryani is full of flavor and aroma, but it is quite a dry
dish. Traditionally it is served with yogurt, pickles, spicy salads
and chutneys, and does not require a sauce or gravy. However,
restaurant biryanis generally come with a curry sauce on the side
to satisfy the Western penchant for sauce. I have included
recipes for traditional and modern accompaniments to the
biryani.
BIRYANI SPICE BLEND
1 tsp green cardamom pods
1 tsp cloves
1 tsp fennel seeds
1 tsp mace
2 tsp cumin seeds
two 1-inch (2.5 cm) sticks of cinnamon 1 nutmeg, crushed
Grind all the ingredients to a fine powder in an electric grinder or pestle and
mortar. Place in a small jar, label and store in a cool, dark place for no more
than 6 weeks for best results.
ULLI SURKA (ONION AND CHILI SALAD)
1 red onion, sliced
2 green chilies, deseeded and sliced
3 tbsp water
½ tsp salt flakes
Combine all the ingredients in a small bowl, crushing the chilies with the back
of a spoon to release the flavors. Allow to stand for about 30 minutes before
serving.
BIRYANI CHAMMANTHI
6 tbsp grated fresh coconut
2 green chilies, coarsely chopped
2 tsp grated ginger
handful of mint leaves
handful of cilantro
4 fl oz (120 mL) yogurt
½ tsp salt
Grind the coconut, chilies, ginger, mint and cilantro to a coarse paste.
Combine with the yogurt and salt.
YOGURT CHUTNEY
9 fl oz (250 mL) plain yogurt
6 tbsp shredded cilantro
3 tbsp shredded mint leaves
2 green chilies, finely sliced
1 clove of garlic, finely sliced
½ tsp green mango powder
½ tsp salt
Combine all the ingredients in a small bowl. Allow to stand for 30 minutes
before serving.
CURRY SAUCE
18 fl oz/1 US pint (500 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp chili powder
½ tsp paprika
½ tsp salt
½ tsp garam masala
In a clean pan, bring the curry sauce to a boil and simmer for 5 minutes until
slightly thickened. Stir in the remaining ingredients. Simmer for a minute and
serve.
serve.
BIRYANI DISHES
MALABAR SHRIMP BIRYANI
Gentle spice aromas with succulent shrimp.
KOZHIKODE CHICKEN BIRYANI
Chicken pieces with fresh herbs and aromatic spices.
SHAHI BIRYANI
A sumptuous lamb dish cooked in the lavish style of the grand
Mughal emperors.
HYDERABADI VEGETABLE BIRYANI
A vegetarian dish that combines the rich, creamy style of north
Indian cuisine and the pungent, sharp flavors of the south.
MALABAR SHRIMP BIRYANI
Malabar is a region of southern India nestling along the southwest
coast of the Indian peninsula. Its cuisine is generally milder and
gentler than that of its immediate neighbors. The Malabar region is
synonymous with biryani, and seafood, such as the shrimp in this
recipe, is a common ingredient in many of its dishes.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 35 minutes 4 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, sliced
4 bay leaves, fresh or dried
1 tsp biryani spice blend (page 144) 1 green chili, finely sliced
1 lb (450 g) raw shrimp
1 1 fl oz (300 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 3 fl oz (100 mL) coconut milk
2 tsp lemon juice
1 tsp salt
1 lb 12 oz (800 g) saffron pilau rice (page 166) 1 tbsp grated coconut
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
▪ Preheat the oven to 400°F (200°C).
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the onion.
Fry on medium heat for about 3 minutes until translucent.
▪ Add the bay leaves, spice blend and chili, and fry for another
minute. Stir in the shrimp and stir-fry for 2 minutes.
▪ Add the curry sauce, coconut milk, lemon juice and salt. Bring to a
boil and simmer for 5 minutes.
▪ Meanwhile, microwave the rice on high for 2 minutes. Fluff up the
rice gently with a fork and place half in a deep ovenproof dish with a
tight-fitting lid.
▪ Spoon the shrimp mixture over the rice layer and cover with the
remaining rice. Put the lid firmly on the dish and place in the oven
for 20 minutes.
▪ Serve sprinkled with the grated coconut and cilantro, and with
accompaniments of choice.
KOZHIKODE CHICKEN BIRYANI
Kozhikode is a city in the southern Indian coastal state of Kerala. Its
cuisine has been described as one of the world’s earliest fusion cuisines
with influences from the Tamils, Arabs, East Asians, Sinhalese and
even the Mughals.
Kozhikode is famous for its biryanis, typically served with vinegary
pickles and popadoms.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 35 minutes 3 tbsp olive oil
6 curry leaves, fresh or frozen
2 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
1-inch (2.5 cm) piece of ginger, finely chopped (or a portion of prepared garlicand-ginger mix, page 30, thawed) 2 green chilies, finely chopped (or half a
portion of prepared chilies, page 30) ½ tsp turmeric
1 tsp biryani spice blend (page 144) 1 tsp poppy seeds, ground to a paste
15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) ½ tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked chicken (page 59) 7 fl oz (200 mL) plain yogurt
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
2 tbsp chopped mint leaves
1 tbsp lime juice
1 lb 12 oz (800 g) pilau rice (page 163) 2 tbsp melted ghee (clarified butter, page
24) 1 tbsp raw cashew nuts
1 tbsp sultana raisins
1 hard-boiled egg, sliced
▪ Preheat the oven to 400°F (200°C).
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the curry
leaves, garlic, ginger and chilies. Fry for a minute or two on medium
heat and add the turmeric, spice blend and poppy-seed paste. Cook
for another minute.
▪ Stir in the curry sauce and salt and bring to a boil. Boil for 5
minutes, then add the chicken and yogurt.
▪ Bring back to a boil and simmer for 3 minutes. Turn off the heat
and stir in the cilantro, mint and lime juice.
▪ Meanwhile, microwave the rice on high for 2 minutes. Fluff up the
rice gently with a fork and place half in a deep ovenproof dish with a
tight-fitting lid.
▪ Spoon the chicken mixture over the rice layer and cover with the
remaining rice. Put the lid firmly on the dish and place in the oven
for 20 minutes.
▪ Heat the ghee in a small pan and gently braise the cashew nuts
and raisins until the nuts turn a pale golden brown and the raisins
plump up.
▪ Serve the biryani garnished with the egg slices and sprinkled with
the nuts and raisins.
SHAHI BIRYANI
Mughlai cuisine, so named because it originates from the era of the
grand Mughals, is renowned for being rich and lavish. Among the
many and varied cuisines that were to become native to India, this one
has been at the forefront of shaping the way Indians cook and eat
today. This delicious dish is testament to that magnificent era.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 45 minutes 4 tbsp melted ghee (clarified butter,
page 24) 2 tbsp almonds, blanched
2 tbsp golden raisins
1 tsp saffron
4 tbsp milk, warmed
3 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, sliced
2 cloves of garlic, finely sliced
1½ tsp biryani spice blend (page 144) 15 fl oz (425 mL) curry sauce (page 32) ½
tsp chili powder ½ tsp salt
1 lb (450 g) precooked lamb (page 71) 3 fl oz (100 mL) plain yogurt
3 fl oz (100 mL) light cream
½ tsp garam masala
1 tbsp chopped cilantro
1 lb 12 oz (800 g) saffron pilau rice (page 166)
▪ Preheat the oven to 400°F (200°C).
▪ Heat the ghee in a small pan and gently braise the almonds and
raisins until the nuts have turned a pale golden brown, and the
raisins have plumped up. Set aside.
▪ Add the saffron to the warmed milk, stir and set aside.
▪ Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add the onion.
Stir-fry on medium heat until crisp. Remove with a slotted spoon and
set aside.
▪ Add the garlic to the oil remaining in the pan and stir-fry for a
few seconds. Stir in the spice blend and cook for another few seconds
until aromatic.
▪ Add the curry sauce, chili powder and salt, and bring to a boil.
Cook on high heat for 5 minutes until the sauce is thick.
▪ Stir in the lamb and yogurt, and bring back to a boil. Simmer for 5
minutes, then stir in the cream. Bring back to a gentle simmer and
simmer for another 5 minutes before stirring in the garam masala
and cilantro.
▪ Meanwhile, microwave the rice on high for 2 minutes. Fluff up the
rice gently with a fork and place half in a deep ovenproof dish with a
tight-fitting lid. Sprinkle half the onion, almonds, raisins, melted
ghee and saffron milk over the rice.
▪ Spoon the lamb mixture over the rice layer and cover with the
remaining rice. Sprinkle the remaining onion, almonds, raisins,
melted ghee and saffron milk over the rice.
▪ Put the lid firmly on the dish and place in the oven for 20 minutes.
Serve with accompaniments of choice.
HYDERABADI VEGETABLE BIRYANI
Another famous biryani created from a melding of the rich, creamy
aromatic dishes of northern India and the sharp, piquant and pungent
flavors of the south.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 45 minutes 6 tbsp light cream, warmed
1 tsp saffron
4 tbsp ghee (clarified butter, page 24) or olive oil 3 green chilies, finely chopped
(or half a portion of prepared chilies, page 30) ½ tsp turmeric
1 tsp biryani spice blend (page 144) 1 large potato, peeled and diced
3 carrots, peeled and diced
1 tbsp cashew nuts
1 tbsp sultana raisins
14 fl oz (400 mL) curry sauce (page 32) 1 tsp salt
½ tsp chili powder
3 fl oz (100 mL) plain yogurt
2 tbsp chopped mint
2 tbsp chopped cilantro
1 tbsp almonds, blanched
1 lime, juiced
1 lb 12 oz (800 g) pilau rice (page 163)
▪ Combine the warm cream and saffron, and set aside.
▪ Heat the ghee or oil in a deep, heavy-based frying pan and add
the chilies, turmeric and spice blend. Stir for a few seconds and add
the vegetables.
▪ Stir-fry on gentle heat for 3 minutes and add the nuts, raisins,
curry sauce, salt and chili powder. Bring to a boil, cover and simmer
for 10–15 minutes until the vegetables are just tender.
▪ Stir in the yogurt and half the saffron cream, and simmer for
another 5 minutes before stirring in the mint and cilantro.
▪ Meanwhile, microwave the rice on high for 2 minutes. Fluff up the
rice gently with a fork and place half in a deep ovenproof dish with a
tight-fitting lid. Sprinkle half the lime juice over the mixture.
▪ Spoon the vegetable mixture over the rice layer and cover with
the remaining rice. Sprinkle the remaining lime juice and saffron
cream over the dish.
▪ Put the lid firmly on the dish and place in the oven for 20 minutes.
Serve hot with accompaniments of choice.
B
18. BREADS
READ OF SOME type or another, referred to as roti, is
essential for a complete meal for most Indians. Wheat has
been cultivated on the Indian subcontinent for over 8,000 years
and the majority of Indian bread is made from wheat flour.
However, maize, corn, lentils and rice are all used in some shape
or form to make different kinds of roti. Methods of cooking roti
vary according to the type and the region, but can be broadly
divided into three main cooking styles, the most common of
which uses a hot griddle (tava). The dough is prepared from
wheat flour and water and expertly rolled out to a thin round
before being slapped onto the preheated tava. The roti is quickly
turned to cook the other side, turned again and slipped onto the
hot coals for a few seconds to puff it up.
Another cooking style that is quite popular throughout India
is frying, either “shallow” frying in butter or ghee as for
parathas, or deep-frying in ghee or oil as for pooris and
bhatooras. Parathas are flat breads that are layered with ghee and
shallow-fried on a tava. Sometimes, cooked spicy lentils, grated
vegetables or chopped fenugreek is added to the dough. For
other variations, cooked, spiced potato, cauliflower or a mixture
of vegetables is used to “stuff” the paratha before rolling. Pooris
and bhatooras, sometimes flavored with carom, cumin or poppy
seeds, are golden, deepfried, puffy rounds of dough often served
at festive occasions.
Tandoori roti and naan, a particularly popular type of flat
bread in the West, are oven-baked using an electric or
traditional charcoal-fired tandoor. The dough for the naan is
leavened using yeast, yogurt cultures or baking powder before
being baked.
COOKING INDIAN BREADS AT HOME
Naan, plain and flavored, is the most popular type of bread on
the Indian restaurant menu, but the other varieties are well
worth a try. The tandoor is without doubt the best way of
cooking naan, but I have found that with a few modifications
you can get really good results at home with a large tava or
frying pan and a good grill.
Heat your frying pan or tava, and cook your naan for about 2
minutes each side, turning once or twice. It will puff up
beautifully. Alternatively, cook one side on the tava or frying pan
and place under a grill to cook the upper side — you will need to
do this anyway if you are putting ingredients onto one side of
the naan.
Brush the cooked naan with extra-virgin olive oil or butter
and keep warm in a clean tea towel while cooking the remainder.
BREADS
PLAIN NAAN
Leavened flat bread, deliciously light, puffy and soft, brushed
with extra-virgin olive oil.
GARLIC NAAN
Leavened flat bread, sprinkled with finely chopped fresh garlic.
PESHWARI NAAN
Leavened flat bread, stuffed with toasted nuts and dried fruit.
MIRCHI NAAN
Leavened flat bread, sprinkled with marinated onions and sliced
green chilies.
STUFFED PARATHA
Unleavened whole-wheat flat bread, layered with butter, stuffed
with spicy potatoes and panfried with extra-virgin olive oil until
crispy.
POORI
Unleavened whole-wheat flat bread, deepfried until puffed and
golden.
BASIC NAAN RECIPE
This is a really simple recipe but it produces wonderful results. If you
have a bread maker, use it on the dough setting, but only let it knead
for about 5 minutes. Dough that’s kneaded long enough to make good
bread loaves becomes too elastic to roll out easily to make naan. You
can leave the dough to rise in the bread pan with the machine
switched off.
MAKES 6 NAAN
Preparation time: 10 minutes plus about an hour to let the dough rise
approx. 11 fl oz (300 mL) water
2 tsp sugar
3 tsp instant dried yeast
1 tbsp oil
1 lb (450 g) white bread flour or plain white flour
1 tsp salt
▪ Warm the water slightly, pour into a large bowl and add the
sugar, yeast and oil.
▪ Add the flour and sprinkle the salt over the flour. Using your
hand, mix and bring the ingredients together, adding more water or
more flour until you have a soft but non-sticky dough.
▪ Place the dough onto a clean, lightly floured surface and knead it
for 5 minutes until smooth.
▪ Put the dough in a lightly greased bowl, cover with a damp tea
towel or greased cling wrap. Stand the bowl in a draft-free place for
about an hour or until the dough has doubled in size.
▪ Degas the dough by punching it down and knead briefly before
using.
▪ The dough can be kept in the fridge for up to 2 days. It will rise
quite quickly at first until it cools down, so check it frequently and
punch it down.
Freezing: The dough can be frozen for up to a month.
TIP
If you are planning to make several naan, have sheets of parchment paper or
thick paper towels handy. Roll out your naan, place on a sheet of paper and
place another sheet of paper on top. Repeat with up to 6 naan; any more and
you might find the bottom ones stick. Cook as soon as possible.
PLAIN NAAN
MAKES 6 NAAN
Preparation and cooking time: 20 minutes
1 quantity of basic naan dough (page 153)
1 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
▪ Divide the dough into 6 portions.
▪ Roll a portion into a thin round or teardrop shape and cook on a
hot tava or frying pan for about 2 minutes on each side until it is
puffed and brown spots start to appear.
▪ Alternatively, cook the underside on the tava and place under a
very hot grill for about a minute to cook the top.
▪ Wrap in a clean tea towel to keep warm while cooking the
remaining naan.
▪ Brush with the oil and serve.
GARLIC NAAN
MAKES 6 NAAN
Preparation and cooking time: 20 minutes
1 quantity of basic naan dough (page 153)
1 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
3 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
▪ Divide the dough into 6 portions.
▪ Roll a portion into a thin round or teardrop shape, brush with the
oil and sprinkle with the garlic. Press the garlic down into the dough
very lightly.
▪ Cook the naan on a hot tava or frying pan for about 2 minutes
and place under a very hot grill for a another minute or so.
▪ Wrap in a clean tea towel to keep warm while cooking the
remaining naan.
PESHWARI NAAN
MAKES 6 NAAN
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
2 tbsp almonds, blanched
2 tbsp pistachios
2 tbsp raisins
2 tsp finely granulated sugar
1 quantity of basic naan dough (page 153)
1 tbsp sliced almonds
1 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
▪ Roast the nuts in a hot pan on gentle heat until the almonds start
to color. Cool.
▪ Chop the nuts and raisins finely, or process briefly in a food
processor and combine with the sugar. Set aside.
▪ Divide the dough into 6 portions. Roll one portion into a thick
round and place about 1 tablespoon of the nut-and-raisin mixture
onto one half of the round, about 1 inch (2.5 cm) from the edge.
▪ Dampen the edges slightly with water and bring the other half
over the mixture and press to seal the edges.
▪ Carefully roll out the naan, stretching it to form a teardrop shape.
Sprinkle with flaked almonds, pressing them down into the dough
lightly.
▪ Cook the naan on a hot tava or frying pan for about 2 minutes
and place under a very hot grill for a another minute or so.
▪ Wrap in a clean tea towel to keep warm while cooking the
remaining naan.
▪ Brush with olive oil and serve hot.
MIRCHI NAAN
MAKES 6 NAAN
Preparation and cooking time: 40 minutes
1 onion, finely sliced
½ tsp salt
2 green chilies, deseeded and finely sliced
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground coriander
1 quantity of basic naan dough (page 153)
1 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
▪ Combine the onion and salt in a small bowl and allow to stand for
about 20 minutes. Drain off any liquid and mix in the chilies, cumin
and coriander.
▪ Divide the dough into 6 portions.
▪ Roll a portion into a thin round or teardrop shape, brush with oil
and sprinkle with the onion-and-chili mixture, pressing it down into
the dough very lightly.
▪ Cook the naan on a hot tava or frying pan for about 2 minutes
and place under a very hot grill for another minute or so. Brush with
more olive oil.
▪ Wrap in a clean tea towel to keep warm while cooking the
remaining naan.
STUFFED PARATHA
These delicious breads are a meal in themselves but they can also be
served with dhals and curries for a substantial accompaniment.
MAKES 4 PARATHA
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
8 oz (225 g) chapati flour, plus extra for dusting
4 fl oz (110 mL) water
1 large potato, grated
1 tsp salt
1 tsp garam masala
1 tsp garam masala
½ tsp turmeric
2 green chilies, finely chopped, or 1 tsp chili powder
2 oz (50 g) butter, softened
4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
▪ Place the flour in a large mixing bowl and slowly add the water,
mixing the flour and water together until you have a soft, pliable
dough.
▪ Using damp hands, knead the dough briefly, fold into a neat
shape, cover and set aside for 10–15 minutes.
▪ Squeeze excess liquid out of the potato and combine with the salt,
garam masala, turmeric and chilies.
▪ Heat a tava or heavy-based frying pan on low to medium heat.
Take two golf-ball-sized pieces of dough and, using the extra flour
for dusting, roll both out to about the size of a saucer.
▪ Spread a little butter on one round of dough to about 1 inch (2.5
cm) from the edge and cover with about 1 tablespoon of the potato
filling.
▪ Place the second round of dough over the potato filling and press
to seal the edges. Dust with flour and roll out to about the size of a
dinner plate.
▪ Slap the paratha from one hand to the other to remove any excess
flour, which will burn if left on.
▪ Place onto a medium-hot tava and brush or spray olive oil onto
the upper side. Flip over and brush or spray the other side with oil.
▪ Cook for about 30 seconds and flip over and brush with a little
more oil. Repeat the process after another 30 seconds or so.
▪ If the tava or pan is at the right heat, the paratha should take
about 3 minutes to cook. When cooked, the paratha will be crisp at
the edges and a nice golden brown with large dark-brown spots. If
those spots are black, the heat is too high; if they are not brown
enough, the heat is not high enough.
▪ Wrap the paratha loosely in foil to keep it warm while making the
remaining parathas. Serve hot with pickles and spiced yogurt.
TIP
For a variation, boil and mash the potato instead of grating it. Allow it to cool,
mix with the spices and proceed as above.
POORI
These deepfried little breads are often made with plain white flour, but
I think whole-wheat chapati flour gives them a better flavor. Pooris are
a good choice if you are planning to serve a large number of people as
they are quick to prepare and reheat well.
MAKES 18–20 POORI
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
1 lb (450 g) chapati flour, plus extra for dusting
1 tsp salt
8 fl oz (220 mL) water
oil for deep-frying
▪ Place the flour in a large mixing bowl, sprinkle with the salt and
slowly add the water, mixing the flour and water together until you
have a soft, pliable dough.
▪ Using damp hands, knead the dough briefly, fold into a neat
shape, cover and set aside for 10–15 minutes.
▪ Fill a karahi or deep saucepan about two-thirds full of oil and heat
the oil until it is hot but not smoking.
▪ Take a piece of dough about the size of a golf ball and roll into a
round about 6 inches (15 cm) in diameter and very thin (about of
an inch or 1 mm thick). Repeat with 3–5 more pieces of dough
depending on the size of your karahi.
▪ Quickly slide the pooris into the hot oil. They should rise to the
surface within about 6 seconds and begin to puff up. As they do,
gently flip them over for a few seconds to lightly brown the other
side. The whole process should take about 15 seconds.
▪ Remove the pooris and drain them on a wire rack placed over a
tray. Repeat with the remaining dough.
▪ Serve immediately or wrap in foil. Reheat for a few seconds in the
microwave or place on a baking tray, cover with foil and put in a hot
oven for about 15 minutes.
T
19. RICE DISHES
HERE IS SOME speculation about the origins of rice but it
appears to have a long history going back to 3000 BCE
when, it is believed, Indian natives discovered the rice plant
growing in the wild and began experimenting with it. Today,
rice is grown and harvested on every continent with the
exception of Antarctica, where growing conditions are
completely unsuitable.
Two-thirds of the world’s population relies on rice as a food
source. Rice is the staple food of 65 percent of the Indian
population and in more recent times has become the principal
crop grown in the country. Rice cultivation is carried out in all
Indian states — many would say to the detriment of the
environment due to the crop’s high water requirement — and
India now ranks second only to China in world rice production.
Rice-based industries are a source of employment and income
for more than 50 million households within India.
Although about 600 new varieties of rice have been developed
during the last 30 years, basmati rice remains the most prized.
The basmati grain is slender and aromatic with a nutty flavor
and superior cooking qualities for a light, fluffy, flavorful result.
Rice is versatile, nutritious, healthy, nonallergenic and gluten
free. It is naturally low in fat, cholesterol and sodium, and has
only 200 calories per cup cooked. Products such as alcoholic
liquor (sake), glue and even clothing are made from rice or rice
products in the rice-producing regions throughout the world.
It is no wonder, then, that the grain is regarded with such
reverence within many cultures that it is used for religious
offerings, and to throw leftover rice away is considered sinful. To
add to its virtues, uncooked white rice can be kept indefinitely as
long as it is kept dry, and uncooked basmati rice actually
improves with age.
To prevent any bacteria in the rice from causing food
poisoning, it’s best to serve rice when it has just been cooked.
However, if that is not possible, you should cool the rice as
quickly as possible (ideally within one hour) and keep it in the
fridge for no more than one day until reheating. Reheated rice
should be piping hot and rice should not be reheated more than
once.
PILAU RICE DISHES
Here are a few simple tips to help make rice cooking a breeze:
• Always measure the rice and water carefully to ensure that you get a
perfect result with the rice grains firm and separate, and not soft and soggy.
One measure of rice to one-and-a-half measures of water is the perfect
proportion for savory basmati rice dishes.
• Drain the rice well after washing it to ensure it is quite dry before cooking
(some cooks say rice should never be washed, but I prefer to wash it).
• Always cook the rice well in oil or ghee as directed. This cooks the outer
layer of starch and helps keep the grains separate.
• Once the water is boiling, keep the heat as low as possible and ensure the
pot is well sealed with a tight-fitting lid. “Dry” the rice in a warm oven for a
few minutes if possible.
• Gently fluff up the rice before serving.

RICE DISHES
PILAU RICE
Basmati rice flavored with whole spices and ghee.
EGG FRIED RICE
Basmati rice with fried egg.
PESHWARI PILAU
Basmati rice with almonds, pistachios and dried fruit.
SAFFRON PILAU
Basmati rice delicately flavored with saffron and cardamom.
MUSHROOM PILAU
Basmati rice with mushroom.
PILAU RICE
Colorful and beautifully aromatic, this is still the most popular rice
dish on the menu. Its appearance, however, relies on artificial food
colorings. If you don’t like the idea of that, leave them out; they don’t
contribute to the flavor.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: about 30 minutes
9 oz (250 g) basmati rice
½ tsp yellow food coloring
½ tsp red food coloring
1 tbsp ghee (clarified butter, page 24) or olive oil
2 tsp finely chopped onion
6 green cardamoms
two 1-inch (2.5 cm) sticks of cinnamon
4 cloves
2 bay leaves
15 fl oz (425 mL) cold water
½ tsp salt
▪ Wash the rice several times and leave to drain in a large sieve.
▪ If you are using it, mix each food coloring with about a
tablespoon of water, keeping the two colors separate, and set aside.
▪ Preheat the oven to 325°F (170°C).
▪ Meanwhile, heat the ghee or oil in a heavy-based pan with a
tight-fitting lid, and fry the onion until just translucent.
▪ Add the cardamoms, cinnamon, cloves and bay leaves, and cook
for 1 minute.
▪ Add the drained rice and mix well to coat all the grains with the
ghee or oil. Cook on medium heat for about a minute.
▪ Stir in the water and salt, and bring to a boil. Once boiling, turn
the heat to very low and place the lid on the pan.
▪ Stir the rice after about 5 minutes, and again after 3 minutes. Recover and leave for another 4–5 minutes, after which time all the
water will have been absorbed.
▪ Add the food colorings to the rice, if you are using them, by
spooning in two separate lines across the rice for each color.
▪ Replace the lid and put the pan in the oven for about 20 minutes
to dry off the rice and set the colors.
▪ Transfer the pilau to a serving dish, taking care not to break the
grains of rice. Fluff up with a fork. Serve immediately or cool as
quickly as possible and refrigerate for use the next day.
▪ Reheat in a microwave oven for about 2 minutes.
EGG FRIED RICE
This is quite a substantial dish to serve on its own, but is particularly
so when combined with some precooked vegetables or when eaten
with a dhal.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
9 oz (250 g) basmati rice
6 green cardamoms
1-inch (2.5 cm) stick of cinnamon
4 cloves
2 bay leaves
1 tsp salt
2 tbsp ghee (clarified butter, page 24) or olive oil
2 tsp finely chopped onion
2 eggs, lightly beaten
2 tbsp soy sauce
▪ Wash the rice several times in cold water and add to a large pan
with the whole spices.
▪ Add plenty of cold water so that the water is 3 or 4 inches (7–10
cm) above the rice and bring to a boil.
▪ Stir in the salt and simmer for about 12 minutes or until the rice is
cooked. Drain through a large sieve.
▪ Place the sieve over a pan or bowl and leave the rice to drain
completely. Remove the whole spices if preferred.
▪ Meanwhile, heat half the ghee or oil in a heavy-based frying pan
and fry the onion for about a minute.
▪ Add the beaten egg and tilt the pan to spread the egg accross the
base of the pan. Cook over medium heat for about 3 minutes until it
is completely set.
▪ Remove the omelette from the pan, roll up tightly and slice the
roll thinly to obtain strips of omelette.
▪ Heat the remaining ghee or oil in a karahi or large pan and add
the drained rice. Stir-fry over medium heat for 4–5 minutes until
heated through.
▪ Sprinkle the soy sauce on top and add the omelette pieces. Stir-fry
for another minute and serve.
PESHWARI PILAU
The nuts and sultana raisins, lightly roasted in ghee, add a lovely
crunch and sweetness to this rice dish. It is great with spicy curries.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
9 oz (250 g) basmati rice
2 tbsp almonds, blanched
2 tbsp pistachios
1 tbsp ghee (clarified butter, page 24) or olive oil
2 tbsp sultana raisins or golden raisins
6 green cardamoms
6 cloves
two 1-inch (2.5 cm) sticks of cinnamon
15 fl oz (425 mL) cold water
½ tsp salt
½ tsp salt
▪ Wash the rice several times and leave to drain in a large sieve.
Chop the almonds and pistachios coarsely.
▪ Preheat the oven to 325°F (170°C).
▪ Heat the ghee or oil in a heavy-based pan with a tight-fitting lid
and add the nuts, raisins and whole spices. Cook gently for about 2
minutes, stirring.
▪ Add the drained rice and mix well to coat all the grains with the
ghee or oil. Cook on medium heat for about a minute.
▪ Stir in the water and salt, and bring to a boil. Once boiling, turn
the heat to very low and place the lid on the pan.
▪ Stir the rice after about 5 minutes, and again after 3 minutes. Recover and leave for another 4–5 minutes, after which time all the
water will have been absorbed.
▪ Place the pan in the oven for about 20 minutes to dry off the rice.
▪ Transfer the pilau to a serving dish, taking care not to break the
grains of rice. Fluff up with a fork. Serve immediately or cool as
quickly as possible and refrigerate for use the next day.
▪ Reheat in a microwave oven for about 2 minutes.
SAFFRON PILAU
Saffron is an expensive spice with a sweet, delicate aroma and deep
auburn color. It needs to be soaked in warm milk for a few minutes to
release its color and aroma. The resulting dish will be a pale yellow
color.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
1 tsp saffron strands
3 tbsp warm milk
9 oz (250 g) basmati rice
9 oz (250 g) basmati rice
1 tbsp ghee (clarified butter, page 24) or olive oil
2 tsp finely chopped onion
6 green cardamoms
2 bay leaves
15 fl oz (425 mL) cold water
½ tsp salt
▪ Combine the saffron and warm milk and set aside. Meanwhile,
preheat the oven to 325°F (170°C).
▪ Wash the rice several times and leave to drain in a large sieve.
▪ Heat the ghee or oil in a heavy-based pan with a tight-fitting lid,
and fry the onion until just translucent. Add the cardamoms and bay
leaves, and cook for 1 minute.
▪ Add the drained rice and mix well to coat all the grains with the
ghee or oil. Cook on medium heat for about a minute.
▪ Stir in the water, saffron mixture and salt, and bring to a boil.
Once boiling, turn the heat to very low and place the lid on the pan.
▪ Stir the rice after about 5 minutes, and again after 3 minutes. Recover and leave for another 4–5 minutes, after which time all the
water will have been absorbed.
▪ Place the pan in the oven for about 20 minutes to dry off the rice.
▪ Transfer the pilau to a serving dish, taking care not to break the
grains of rice. Fluff up with a fork. Serve immediately or cool as
quickly as possible and refrigerate for use the next day.
▪ Reheat in a microwave oven for about 2 minutes.
TIP
For a “cheat’s” version, use about ¼ teaspoon of turmeric instead of the saffron.
Stir in with the water.
MUSHROOM PILAU
This mildly spicy rice dish with the meaty texture and taste of
mushrooms is a delicious accompaniment to meat curries.
SERVES 4
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
9 oz (250 g) basmati rice
3 oz (100 g) button mushrooms
1 tbsp ghee (clarified butter, page 24) or olive oil
2 tbsp finely chopped onion
6 green cardamoms
6 cloves
two 1-inch (2.5 cm) sticks of cinnamon
2 bay leaves
1 tsp cracked black pepper
13 fl oz (375 mL) cold water
½ tsp salt
½ tsp turmeric
▪ Wash the rice several times and leave to drain in a large sieve.
Preheat the oven to 325°F (170°C).
▪ Wipe the mushrooms, trim the stalks, and quarter. Heat the ghee
or oil in a heavy-based pan with a tight-fitting lid and stir-fry the
mushrooms for about 2 minutes until lightly browned.
▪ Add the onion and all the spices and stir-fry for another minute.
Stir in the drained rice and mix well to coat all the grains with the
ghee or oil. Cook on medium heat for about a minute.
▪ Add the water, salt and turmeric and bring to a boil. Once boiling,
turn the heat to very low and place the lid on the pan.
▪ Stir the rice and mushrooms after about 5 minutes, and again
after 3 minutes. Re-cover and leave for another 4–5 minutes, after
which time all the water will have been absorbed.
▪ Place the pan in the oven for about 20 minutes to dry off the rice.
▪ Transfer the pilau to a serving dish, taking care not to break the
grains of rice. Fluff up with a fork. Serve immediately or cool as
quickly as possible and refrigerate for use the next day.
▪ Reheat in a microwave oven for about 2 minutes.
R
20. ACCOMPANIMENTS
CHUTNEYS, PICKLES AND RAITA
ELISHLIKE condiments (achaar) and chutneys are
embedded in Indian culture. In keeping with the richness
and diversity of the cuisine, Indian pickles, chutneys and
achaars, served with virtually every meal, come in a mindboggling variety of types, flavors and colors. Mangoes, peaches,
tomatoes, chilies, ginger, garlic, lemons, limes, carrots,
eggplants, turnips, cauliflower, cilantro, mint, coconut and
many more fruits and vegetables are turned into pickles and
chutneys or used in spicy yogurt dishes such as raita. Some
accompaniments are as simple as grinding or mixing ingredients
together, while others are complex, time-consuming
concoctions of dozens of spicy and exotic ingredients, matured
over months.
Indian chutneys and pickles are packed with fresh or pungent
spicy flavors and are served in small quantities to whet the
appetite and enhance the meal.
Author’s note: In order to prevent contamination and lengthen
the shelf life of pickles and chutneys, it is necessary to sterilize
storage jars, bottles and lids. This may be done by washing the
jars and lids in very hot, soapy water and after draining, placing
them in a moderately warm (300°F/150°C) oven for about 30
minutes. Use the jars straight out of the oven and fill them
almost to the rim with hot chutney. Turn the jars upside down
for two minutes to help seal them. I find wearing rubber gloves
to handle the hot jars makes this task easier.
ACCOMPANIMENTS
MANGO CHUTNEY
A sweet chutney made with ripe mangoes.
PEACH CHUTNEY
A sweet, fruity chutney made with ripe peaches and raisins.
COCONUT AND MINT CHUTNEY
A tart, spicy chutney made with coconut, fresh mint and spices.
LEMON PICKLE
A tart, salty pickle made with quartered lemons.
CRUNCHY PICKLED VEGETABLES
A spicy, vinegary salad of mixed shredded vegetables.
MANGO PICKLE
A salty pickle of tart green mangoes and whole spices in oil.
RAITA
A spiced, yet cooling yogurt dish with a variety of shredded
vegetables.
MANGO CHUTNEY
Sweet mango chutney is a popular accompaniment to spicy dishes.
Good-quality mango chutney is quite expensive to buy so making
your own not only saves you money, but you will find it tastes much
better too.
This chutney will keep well for up to two years so you can make a
large quantity when mangoes are cheap and plentiful.
MAKES ABOUT 28 FL OZ (800 ML)
Preparation and cooking time: 1½ hours
4 lb 8 oz (2 kg) ripe mangoes
18 fl oz/1 US pint (500 mL) white wine or cider vinegar 13 oz (350 g) white sugar
2 tsp grated ginger
2 red chilies, deseeded and finely sliced (optional)
▪ Peel the mangoes and discard the peel. Slice the flesh from the
stones, chop coarsely and place in a large, heavy-based saucepan
with all the remaining ingredients. Bring slowly to a boil, stirring to
dissolve the sugar.
▪ Simmer, partly covered, for 1 hour, stirring occasionally.
Meanwhile, wash the jars and lids in hot soapy water, rinse well and
dry in a warm oven. Please see the author’s note about this on page
169.
▪ Spoon the hot chutney carefully into the warm, clean jars, place
the lids on firmly and invert each jar for two minutes.
▪ Store the chutney in a cool, dry place. After opening, store in the
fridge.
PEACH CHUTNEY
This sweet-and-sour, fruity chutney is a nice change from mango
chutney and goes well with cold meats, cheese and sausages, as well as
spicy curries. You can buy bruised and misshapen fruit but it’s
important that it is sweet and ripe, as tasteless fruit will produce a
poor-quality chutney.
Ripe nectarines may be used instead of peaches.
MAKES ABOUT 18 FL OZ/1 US PINT (500 ML)
Preparation and cooking time: 2 hours
2 lb 4 oz (1 kg) ripe peaches
7 oz (200 g) golden raisins
9 fl oz (250 mL) cold water
2 large onions, sliced
13 fl oz (370 mL) malt vinegar
9 oz (250 g) white sugar
9 oz (250 g) white sugar
2 tsp grated ginger
1 tsp chili powder
▪ Wash the fruit well, remove the stones and chop the flesh
coarsely. Place in a large, heavy-based saucepan with the raisins and
water, bring to a boil and simmer uncovered for 20 minutes, stirring
once or twice.
▪ Add all the remaining ingredients and bring slowly back to a boil,
stirring to dissolve the sugar.
▪ Simmer, partly covered, for about 1 hour and 15 minutes, stirring
occasionally. Meanwhile, wash the jars and lids in hot soapy water,
rinse well and dry in a warm oven. Please see the author’s note about
this on page 169.
▪ Spoon the hot chutney carefully into the warm, clean jars, place
the lids on firmly and invert each jar for two minutes.
▪ Store the chutney in a cool, dry place. After opening, store in the
fridge.
COCONUT AND MINT CHUTNEY
This is a lovely, fresh-tasting accompaniment to dhals (pulses) and
curries and is also great in sandwiches. It keeps well in the fridge for
up to five days.
MAKES ABOUT 9 FL OZ (250 ML)
Preparation and cooking time: 15 minutes
1 bunch of mint (about 7 oz or 200 g)
1 green chili, roughly chopped
3 oz (100 g) shredded coconut
2 tbsp blanched almonds, roughly chopped
5 oz (150 mL) plain yogurt
1 tsp salt
½ tsp garam masala
▪ Remove the leaves from the mint and discard the stalks. Wash the
leaves well and drain.
▪ Place the mint leaves, chili, coconut and almonds in the bowl of a
food processor and process until finely chopped. Stir in the remaining
ingredients and mix well.
▪ Chill the chutney until required.
LEMON PICKLE
There are many and varied recipes for this pickle, some using oil and
spices, others using vinegar, and yet others avoiding vinegar and
simply relying on the salt and the juices from the lemons. The one
thing these recipes have in common is that the lemons are rarely if
ever precooked. Instead, huge jars of freshly salted lemons, combined
with whole red chilies, whole cloves of garlic and thick slices of ginger,
are exposed to several long days of hot sunshine in the summer
months to “cook” and pickle them.
Since hot sunshine is not guaranteed in all parts of the world, I have
cooked the ingredients in an oven to speed up the process in this
recipe. Use Indian limes if you can get them (they look like pale yellow
limes), or thin-skinned lemons.
Important note: It is essential that, when preparing this pickle, your
hands, all ingredients and all containers are completely dry. No water
must be allowed to seep into the pickle or it will go moldy. You will
need a large, clean glass or ceramic jar with a tight-fitting lid.
MAKES ABOUT 1 LB 12 OZ (800 G)
Preparation and cooking time: 1 hour
1 lb 2 oz (500 g) lemons or Indian limes
12 long red chilies
3 oz (100 g) ginger
1 garlic bulb
2 tsp turmeric
3 tbsp salt
1 tsp chili powder
3 fl oz (100 mL) white vinegar or lemon juice
▪ Rinse the lemons and chilies and wipe dry. Peel the ginger and
slice thickly. Spread the ingredients out on a dish or a large tray and
air-dry for at least 1 hour.
▪ Divide the garlic bulb into cloves and peel. Preheat the oven to
325°F (170°C).
▪ Quarter the lemons, slit the chilies and place in a large roasting
tray. Scatter the ginger over the top.
▪ Place in the oven and cook for 20 minutes. Remove, stir the
ingredients, cover the tray with foil and return to the oven for
another 20 minutes.
▪ Meanwhile, rinse a large glass or ceramic jar and lid (needs to be a
tight-fitting one) in hot, soapy water. Rinse in hot water and dry
thoroughly. Please see the author’s note about this on page 169.
▪ Combine the turmeric, salt and chili powder in a small bowl.
Gently warm the vinegar or lemon juice in a small pan.
▪ Remove the tray from the oven and spoon one-third of the hot
ingredients plus juices into the jar. Sprinkle on a third of the salt
mixture. Repeat twice more and pour on the warmed vinegar or
lemon juice.
▪ Allow to cool for about 30 minutes and add the garlic.
▪ Place the lid tightly on the jar and shake well to mix all the
ingredients. Store for at least a week, shaking the jar daily before
using.
TIP
Shake the jar every few days and place on a sunny windowsill once a week if
possible to help maintain the pickle in good condition.
CRUNCHY PICKLED VEGETABLES
Another fresh-tasting accompaniment that goes well with most spicy
dishes, this salad is simplicity itself to prepare. Choose any selection of
crispy vegetables that are in season and full of flavor.
MAKES ABOUT 14 FL OZ (400 ML)
Preparation time: 20 minutes
3 fl oz (100 mL) cider vinegar or white vinegar 2 tsp sugar
1 tsp salt
1 tsp cracked black pepper
½ tsp cumin seeds
1 green chili, finely chopped
1 carrot, julienned or grated
1 bunch of radishes, thinly sliced
1 red onion, thinly sliced
½ cucumber, thinly sliced
▪ Place the vinegar, sugar and salt into a large bowl and whisk until
the sugar dissolves. Add the remaining ingredients and mix well.
▪ Let the salad stand for about half an hour before serving to allow
the flavors to develop.
MANGO PICKLE
If you like store-bought mango pickle, you will love the homemade
one. It is packed with so much more flavor that it will make your
tastebuds tingle. It is quick and easy to prepare, but requires a little
patience to let it mature before it is ready to eat.
Important note: It is essential that when preparing this pickle, your
hands, all ingredients and all containers are completely dry. No water
must be allowed to seep into the pickle or it will go moldy. You will
need a large, clean glass or ceramic jar with a tight-fitting lid.
MAKES ABOUT 20 FL OZ (600 ML)
Preparation time: 20 minutes
6 medium or 8 small green mangoes
4 tbsp salt
2 oz (50 g) mustard powder
2 tbsp fenugreek seeds
2 tbsp fenugreek seeds
2 tbsp fennel seeds
2 tsp chili powder
5 fl oz (150 mL) olive oil
5 fl oz (150 mL) sesame oil
▪ Rinse the mangoes and dry thoroughly. Place on a tray or large
plate and air-dry for at least 1 hour.
▪ Slice the flesh along the stone, scraping off as much pulp as
possible. Dice the flesh into bite-sized pieces and place in the jar
(please see the author’s note about this on page 169). Sprinkle on the
salt, place the lid on the jar and tighten. Shake the jar well and place
on a sunny windowsill for a day.
▪ Remove the lid and sprinkle the spices onto the mango in the jar.
Pour on the oils, replace the lid tightly and shake the jar well to
ensure everything is thoroughly combined.
▪ Place the jar on a sunny windowsill, if possible for at least 7 days,
shaking and mixing the ingredients daily.
TIP
If you don’t have a sunny windowsill, salt the diced mangoes in a large
microwaveable bowl and microwave on high for 5 minutes, stirring the mangoes
once halfway through. Allow to cool for 10 minutes, mix in all the remaining
ingredients and transfer to a jar. Keep the jar in a warm place for several days,
shaking it daily.
RAITA
Yogurt is a superb accompaniment to spicy foods and is traditionally
served in some guise or another at every meal. It is a common side
dish or accompaniment on the Indian restaurant menu as raita, lightly
spiced and usually combined with shredded cucumber. Cucumber is
an excellent ingredient to use in raita — it doesn’t require cooking, is
easy to prepare and has the right texture and mild flavor, but other
vegetables or even fruits can be used to add variety.
I have used a combination of onion, cucumber and carrot but you
might like to try grated daikon or radish, chopped tomato, shredded
mint or finely diced melon or apple.
If you don’t wish to make your own yogurt, purchase a goodquality, preferably organic, commercial product.
SERVES 4
Preparation time: 15 minutes
½ red onion, finely sliced
1 carrot, grated
½ cucumber, grated or julienned
1 small clove of garlic, finely chopped
1 green chili, finely chopped
11 fl oz (300 mL) yogurt (page 24) ½ tsp salt (or to taste)
½ tsp cumin seeds
½ tsp garam masala
pinch of turmeric (optional)
▪ Combine all the ingredients in a large bowl and stir until well
mixed. Refrigerate until required.
T
21. DESSERTS
HERE IS NO doubt that Indians are great lovers of spicy
food. There is also no doubt that, somewhat paradoxically,
a close second is their love for traditional Indian desserts or
mithai. The consumption of mithai is more than a need to
satisfy a sweet tooth; it is ingrained in Indian culture. Rich,
expensive, luscious and gloriously sweet, lavishly decorated with
sultana raisins, almonds, pistachios and silver leaf, mithai
appears everywhere in Indian life. From birthdays to holy days,
from religious ceremonies to wedding feasts, from simple gifts to
lavish offerings, there is always a reason to give, receive and
consume generous quantities of mithai. Indeed some occasions
would simply not be complete without its presence.
Each region of India has its own specialities and there are
hundreds of different variations of Indian desserts, but most are
based on fresh, full-cream milk boiled down to make khoa,
combined with ghee (clarified butter) and sugar in varying
proportions. Other ingredients like besan (chickpea flour),
carrots, squash, rice and nut flours are used to create different
types of desserts. Cardamom, cloves, mace, and rose or kewra
water are added to create exquisite flavors.
It was usual when I was growing up to make some of the less
elaborate Indian desserts at home and there would always be a
stash of ladu, besan or barfi to snack on with a glass of milk upon
returning home from school. Later I learnt to make rasgulla, the
most popular modern-day dessert in India, gulab jamon, a
regular on the restaurant dessert menu, ras malai, and the wellknown and loved Indian ice cream, kulfi. No party, celebration
or blessing ceremony was thinkable without a selection of these
essential items.
Nowadays it is rare for Indian cooks to make any of these at
home, with the exception of kheer (Indian rice pudding), which
is a simple dish to make. Superb quality Indian desserts are
available everywhere Indians have settled, and, although ghee is
now rarely used, the end result has not suffered significantly.
DESSERTS AND TREATS
KHEER
A creamy rice and milk dessert made with basmati rice and fresh
milk.
CARDAMOM ICE CREAM
Homemade ice cream flavored with ground cardamom.
MANGO SOUFFLÉ
A deliciously cool, light, fruity “soufflé” made with ripe mangoes
and cream.
GAJRELLA (CARROT HALWA)
Carrots, nuts and sugar combine to make this warming, luscious
dessert.
SWEET PILAU
Basmati rice cooked in saffron-flavored sugar syrup and flavored
with sweet, aromatic spices.
KULFI
A quick recipe for an old favorite, using evaporated milk,
sweetened and flavored with cardamom and nuts.
KHEER
This rice “pudding” is made with basmati rice, the grains of which
have more aroma and a firmer texture than pudding rice, even after
long, slow cooking. I like to make this dessert with 1 percent or skim
milk because I find the long, slow cooking makes the dish creamy
enough, but you can use full-fat milk if you prefer, for an even
creamier dessert.
Kheer is delicious served warm, or cold straight from the fridge.
SERVES 6–8
Preparation and cooking time: 2 hours
4 tbsp basmati rice
70 fl oz/4.2 US pints (2 L) fat-reduced or full-fat milk 6 oz (175g) white
granulated sugar
▪ Wash the rice several times in cold water and place in a large,
heavy-based saucepan with the milk.
▪ Slowly bring to a boil. Turn down the heat to very low, partly
cover the pan, and simmer for about 1½ hours, stirring now and
then. Add more milk if the mixture is too thick.
▪ Stir in the sugar, and simmer for another 20 minutes.
VARIATIONS:
Stir through a couple of tablespoons of chopped almonds and pistachios, or a handful
of sultana raisins about halfway through cooking.
CARDAMOM ICE CREAM
This is a really easy recipe that is deliciously creamy considering there
is very little cream in it. In fact the health and weight conscious can
omit the cream altogether and replace it with evaporated milk, with
very little loss of texture or flavor.
If you have an ice-cream maker, you can prepare this dessert while
you are eating dinner. Otherwise, it will take about 4–5 hours in the
freezer.
SERVES 8–10
Preparation time: 10 minutes (plus churning or freezing time) 8 fl oz (225 mL)
sweetened condensed milk
20 fl oz (600 mL) light evaporated milk
7 fl oz (200 mL) half-and-half cream or heavy whipping cream 1 tsp cardamom
seeds, crushed to a powder
▪ Whisk all the ingredients in a bowl. Place in your ice-cream maker
and prepare the ice cream according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
▪ If you don’t have an ice-cream maker, place the mixture in the
freezer. Remove from the freezer after 30 minutes and beat with a
whisk or a fork until smooth. Repeat twice more and freeze until
hard.
VARIATIONS:
For Pistachio Ice Cream, stir in 2 tablespoons of chopped pistachios towards
the end of churning or just before freezing.
For Coconut Ice Cream, omit the cardamom, replace half the evaporated milk
with coconut milk, and stir in 2 tablespoons of grated fresh coconut toward
the end of churning or just before freezing.
For Coffee Ice Cream, omit the cardamom, dissolve 1 tablespoon of instant
coffee in 2 tablespoons of hot water, cool and whisk in with the milk and
cream.
MANGO SOUFFLÉ
A lovely, no-cook, cool treat after a spicy meal, this is a delicious and
creative dessert with ripe, sweet mangoes. Pureed fruits like
strawberries, raspberries or apricots could be used instead.
SERVES 6
Preparation time: 30 minutes (about 3 hours of setting time required) 1 tbsp
powdered gelatin
2 fl oz (60 mL) cold water
1 tbsp finely granulated sugar
7 fl oz (200 mL) double cream
3 egg whites
7 fl oz (200 mL) ready-made custard
20 fl oz (600 mL) mango pulp
juice from half a lime
▪ Prepare six ramekins (that can hold 6 fl oz or 180 mL each) by
tying a strip of parchment paper around the rim of each ramekin.
The parchment paper should be positioned about 1 inch (2.5 cm)
below the rim and should extend about 1 inch (2 cm) above the rim.
▪ Add the gelatin to the water in a small pan and soak for 10
minutes. Heat gently until dissolved. Add the finely granulated sugar
and stir until dissolved. Set aside to cool.
▪ Beat the cream until soft peaks form. Beat the egg whites until
stiff.
▪ Place the custard in a large bowl and stir in the mango pulp and
lime juice, followed by the gelatin, cream and egg whites. Mix until
combined.
▪ Pour the mixture into the ramekins so it comes about halfway up
the parchment-paper strip. Refrigerate until set.
▪ Carefully remove the paper and serve with extra fruit if desired.
GAJRELLA (CARROT HALWA)
The combination of grated carrots, nuts, cardamoms, sugar and pure
ghee produces a dessert with a lovely texture and an absolutely
delicious taste. Don’t compromise on the ghee though; nothing else
will do for this dessert.
Gajrella will keep in the fridge for several days, but halve the
quantity of ingredients if you don’t want to make so much.
SERVES 8–10
Preparation and cooking time: 1 hours
2 lb 4 oz (1 kg) carrots, grated
3 oz (100 g) ghee (clarified butter, page 24) 1 tsp cardamom seeds, lightly
crushed
3 oz (100 g) almonds, blanched and chopped
3 oz (100 g) pistachios, chopped
2 oz (50 g) sultana raisins
4 oz (125 g) finely granulated sugar
5 fl oz (125 mL) sweetened condensed milk
2 tbsp ground almonds
▪ Place the carrots in a large, heavy-based saucepan with 4
tablespoons of water and cook, stirring, on high heat for about 3
minutes. Turn down the heat, cover and cook for another 5 minutes,
stirring once or twice.
▪ Add the ghee, turn up the heat again and stir-fry the carrots for
another 5 minutes.
▪ Lower the heat and stir in the cardamom and nuts, saving about 2
tablespoons. Continue to cook over low-medium heat, stirring
frequently, until the carrots have turned a deep orange and the ghee
has started to separate from the mixture. This will take about 20
minutes.
▪ Stir in the raisins and sugar and stir-fry on low heat for another 5
minutes. Add the condensed milk, turn up the heat a little and stirfry the mixture for about 3 minutes.
▪ Stir in the ground almonds and mix over low heat until well
combined.
▪ Serve warm, garnished with the remaining nuts, with thick cream
or ice cream. Or press into a jelly roll pan, refrigerate until firm and
cut into squares. Serve with tea or coffee.
Note: This recipe works best with organic carrots as they contain less
water than their nonorganic counterparts.
SWEET PILAU
A dish that celebrates the versatility of rice beautifully, this sweet,
perfumed pilau is simple yet quite exquisite.
The typical beautiful deep-yellow color of this dish is unfortunately
a result of artificial food coloring, but you can leave it out and have a
dish that is paler in color but still tastes wonderful.
SERVES 6–8
Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes
1 tsp saffron
2 tbsp warm water
8 oz (220 g) basmati rice
35 fl oz/2.1 US pints (1 L) hot water
6 oz (175 g) granulated sugar
¼ tsp yellow food coloring (optional)
2 oz (60 g) ghee (clarified butter, page 24) 6 cardamoms
6 cloves
2 tbsp almonds, blanched
3 oz (100 g) sultana raisins
▪ Combine the saffron and warm water, and set aside. Wash the rice
a few times and leave to drain for several minutes.
▪ Meanwhile, put the hot water and sugar in a large saucepan, and
place over low heat, stirring to dissolve the sugar. Once the sugar has
dissolved, turn up the heat and bring to a boil. Turn off the heat and
stir in the coloring if you are using it.
▪ Heat the ghee in a large, heavy-based saucepan and add the rice.
Stir until the grains of rice are well coated with the ghee.
▪ Add the cardamoms, cloves, almonds and raisins. Stir-fry for 2
minutes.
▪ Carefully (as it will spit) pour in the sugar syrup. Turn the heat
down to very low, stir in the saffron water, and simmer gently for
about 30 minutes, stirring now and then to ensure the rice cooks
evenly.
▪ Turn off the heat and let the rice stand, covered for 10 minutes.
Fluff up with a fork and serve hot or cold.
KULFI
Often referred to as Indian ice cream, kulfi is still one of the most
popular desserts on the Indian restaurant menu. This quick recipe cuts
out a lot of time-consuming effort but still produces a wonderful
result.
SERVES 6
Preparation time: 20 minutes (plus time for freezing) 11 fl oz (300 mL) light
evaporated milk
4 tbsp finely granulated sugar
3 fl oz (100 mL) thick cream
½ oz (15 g) almonds, blanched and finely chopped ½ tsp ground cardamom
½ oz (15 g) pistachios, finely chopped
1 tbsp chopped pistachios to serve
▪ Heat half the milk in a small pan, add the sugar and stir to dissolve
over low heat. Cool.
▪ Place all the remaining ingredients except the nuts in a large
bowl, add the sweetened milk and whisk until well combined.
▪ Stir in the nuts and divide the mixture among 6 kulfi molds. Freeze
until completely hardened.
▪ Dip the molds in hot water to loosen the frozen kulfi and serve
sprinkled with more nuts if desired.
