The story behind ' Baci '  : Europe ' s most romantic chocolate turns 100

A century later , the success of the charming paper wrapped chocolates isn ' t letting up
A century later , the success of the charming paper wrapped chocolates isn ' t letting up - Copyright AP
By Theo Farrant  & AP • Updated : 14 / 02 / 2022
If you ' ve ever delighted in the taste Italian chocolates wrapped with a little love note , it was probably ' Baci '  . 

The world ' s Valentine ' s Day favourite is celebrating its centenary in 2022 . 

Meaning ' kisses ' in English , Baci were created in 1922 in Perugia , Italy by Luisa Spagnoli , a confectionary entrepreneur . 

The company that produces them , Perugina , largely attributes their success to her creativity and ambition . 

After all of these years , the chocolate ' s recipe remains the same : dark chocolate , gianduia , chopped hazelnuts and crowned with a whole hazelnut . 

Unless , of course , you ' re in the market for a limited edition 100-year-anniversary chocolate , courtesy of Dolce and Gabbana . 

Delicate yet indulgent , the fashion house has collaborated with Perugina to create a celebration collection with a limited edition recipe , which has a lemon-flavoured centre , coated with white chocolate . 



A 10 metre sculpture made of chocolate ? Meet Patrick Roger , cocoa ' s most creative artist
Flowers , Chocolates , or deer semen : Which one will you choose for your loved one on Valentine ' s Day ? 
A chocolate love story with a rich history
AP Photo
The Perugina company now operates a chocolate-making school at its factory in PerugiaAP Photo
According to Perugina , which was sold to Nestle in 1988 , Spagnoli set her sights on creating a new chocolate with a unique shape , which she thought looked like the knuckle of a clenched fist . 

At first she called it ' Cazzotto '  ( meaning ' punch ' in Italian )  . 

Her life companion , Giovanni Buitoni , owner of the Buitoni pasta company , thought the name was inappropriate .  
 
 " Can you imagine "  , he allegedly said to Luisa ,  " going into a shop and asking the shop assistant for a punch ?  "  . 

He proposed a more romantic name , and the chocolates were called ' Baci '  , meaning kisses . 

Spagnoli ' s creativity and ambition set the wheels in motion for a bonafide Italian treasure . 

This was the beginning of what was to become a fascinating story of one of the world ' s best-known food-based romantic gestures . 

That being said – Baci ' s famous love notes weren ' t her idea and the chocolates didn ' t originally come with them . 

A few years after the birth of the Baci , Federico Seneca , Perugina ' s art director at the time , decided to include something unique in the wrapping paper the chocolate had become famous for . 

To this day the little love notes remain , translated into several languages . 

Spagnoli was a true pioneer in confectionery
AP
Born in 1877 , Luisa Spagnoli was the brains behind ' Baci ' AP
Spagnoli not only invented Baci , but also went on to create her own fashion house bearing her name and one of the big names in Italian fashion .  
 
 " The role of Spagnoli is an extremely dynamic one , a pioneer of what will become female entrepreneurship ,  " says Cristina Mencaroni , Director of the Perugina Historical Museum .  
 
 " It was already strange to find a woman sitting on the board of a company let alone finding one who looked after the innovative aspects , the recipes , the products , the activity concerning the products , but she was an ingenious entrepreneur with a very modern spirit .  " 

Would you eat this 3D printed plant-based steak ? 
Sacrebleu ! Meet the French brewery using algae to make their beer blue
Millions of chocolates produced each year
Canva
View of the scenic Piazza IV Novembre in Perugia – the birthplace of Perugina chocolateCanva
Perugina ' s factory produces many brands , including ' Kit-Kat '  , but none more famous than the hazelnut treat – 80 million are individual chocolates are created annually for worldwide consumption . 

Large machines make nearly 2 , 000 Baci every minute for eight hours a day .  
 
 " Production goes on for six-seven months a year so you can imagine how many arrive to our consumers ,  " explains factory director Marco Muratori . 

Meanwhile , the chocolate is a huge aspect of life in Spagnoli ' s native Perugia . There are stores to explore and even a restaurant called ' Bacio ' on the high street of the charming hilltop town . 

Although not exclusively for lovers , Baci is hoping the oldie-but-goldie will pack a punch , and maybe a kiss , this Valentine ' s Day . 

Check out the video above to learn more about the chocolate ' s 100th birthday . 

Video editor • THEO FARRANT