A Brief History of Salt
BY TIME STAFF MARCH 15 , 1982 12 : 31 PM EST
Salt comes from dead , dried-up seas or living ones . It can bubble to the surface as brine or crop out in the form of salt licks and shallow caverns . Below the skin of the earth it lies in white veins , some of them thousands of feet deep . It can be evaporated from salt “ pans ,  ” boiled down from brine , or mined , as it often is today , from shafts extending half a mile down . 

U . S . Revokes Russia ' s ' Favored Nation ' Trade Status , Bans Its Alcohol and Diamonds

POSTED 4 DAYS AGO

The history of the world according to salt is simple : animals wore paths to salt licks ; men followed ; trails became roads , and settlements grew beside them . When the human menu shifted from salt-rich game to cereals , more salt was needed to supplement the diet . But the underground deposits were beyond reach , and the salt sprinkled over the surface was insufficient . Scarcity kept the mineral precious . As civilization spread , salt became one of the world ’ s principal trading commodities . 

Salt routes crisscrossed the globe . One of the most traveled led from Morocco south across the Sahara to Timbuktu . Ships bearing salt from Egypt to Greece traversed the Mediterranean and the Aegean . Herodotus describes a caravan route that united the salt oases of the Libyan desert . Venice ’ s glittering wealth was attributable not so much to exotic spices as to commonplace salt , which Venetians exchanged in Constantinople for the spices of Asia . In 1295 , when he first returned from Cathay , Marco Polo delighted the Doge with tales of the prodigious value of salt coins bearing the seal of the great Khan . 

As early as the 6th century , in the sub-Sahara , Moorish merchants routinely traded salt ounce for ounce for gold . In Abyssinia , slabs of rock salt , called ‘ amôlés , became coin of the realm . Each one was about ten inches long and two inches thick . Cakes of salt were also used as money in other areas of central Africa . 

Not only did salt serve to flavor and preserve food , it made a good antiseptic , which is why the Roman word for these salubrious crystals ( sal ) is a first cousin to Salus , the goddess of health . Of all the roads that led to Rome , one of the busiest was the Via Salaria , the salt route , over which Roman soldiers marched and merchants drove oxcarts full of the precious crystals up the Tiber from the salt pans at Ostia . A soldier ’ s pay—consisting in part of salt—came to be known as solarium argentum , from which we derive the word salary . A soldier ’ s salary was cut if he “ was not worth his salt ,  ” a phrase that came into being because the Greeks and Romans often bought slaves with salt .  
 
 
 “ With all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt ,  ” says Leviticus 2 : 13 . Because of its use as a preservative , salt became a token of permanence to the Jews of the Old Testament . Its use in Hebrew sacrifices as a meat purifier came to signify the eternal covenant between God and Israel . In one biblical case , salt symbolized a lack of fidelity . In Genesis 19 : 1-29 , two angels of the Lord command Lot , his wife and two daughters to flee the sinful city of Sodom without ever looking back . When Lot ’ s wife cast a fleeting glance backward ( her faith was uncertain )  , she was immediately transformed into a pillar of salt . A Roman religious ritual , however , in which grains of salt were placed on an eight-day-old babe ’ s lips , prefigures the Roman Catholic baptismal ceremony in which a morsel of salt is placed in the mouth of the child to ensure its allegorical purification . In the Christian catechism , salt is still a metaphor for the grace and wisdom of Christ . When Matthew says ,  “ Ye are the salt of the earth /  ’ he is addressing the blessed , the worthy sheep in the flock , not the erring goats . 

During the Middle Ages , the ancient sanctity of salt slid toward superstition . The spilling of salt was considered ominous , a portent of doom .  ( In Leonardo da Vinci ’ s painting The Last Supper , the scowling Judas is shown with an overturned saltcellar in front of him .  ) After spilling salt , the spiller had to cast a pinch of it over his left shoulder because the left side was thought to be sinister , a place where evil spirits tended to congregate . 

The social symbolism of salt was painfully evident in the medieval equivalents of the Amy Vanderbilt Complete Book of Etiquette . As late as the 18th century , the rank of guests at a banquet was gauged by where they sat in relation to an often elaborate silver saltcellar on the table . The host and “ distinguished ” guests sat at the head of the table— ” above the salt .  ” People who sat below the salt , farthest from the host , were of little consequence . 

Salt taxes variously solidified or helped dissolve the power of governments . For centuries the French people were forced to buy all their salt from royal depots . The gabelle , or salt tax , was so high during the reign of Louis XVI that it became a major grievance and eventually helped ignite the French Revolution . As late as 1930 , in protest against the high British tax on salt in India , Mahatma Gandhi led a mass pilgrimage of his followers to the seaside to make then-own salt . 


If the importance of a food to a society can be measured by the allusions to it in language and literature , then the significance of salt is virtually unrivaled . Nearly four pages of the Oxford English Dictionary are taken up by references to salt , more than any other food .  “ A grain of salt ” may be a recipe for skepticism . But there can be no doubt about how salt has seasoned history . 