FOREWORD
BY CHRISTINE DARWIN, M.D.
As an endocrinologist, I often meet people who are looking for an
explanation for their fatigue or weight gain that is associated with their
hormones and metabolism.
This unique book addresses hormones in an easy-to-read format, and
Jillian Michaels explains, in a superb way, her own personal life
experiences about how she turned her mistakes into learning opportunities
for others. The book reflects not only Jillian's passion for advocating a
healthy lifestyle that includes physical fitness, but also her commitment to
helping readers learn essential information about hormones, diet, and
health.
This simple guide answers many of the most frequently asked questions,
especially in the areas of hormones and weight issues. It's a book for
everyone, because it addresses people of all ages who want to incorporate
healthy eating with a balanced lifestyle. Master Your Metabolism even
serves as a helpful guide to parents who are concerned about their children
being at hormonal risk, especially in today's world, where childhood obesity
is skyrocketing into an epidemic.
In addition to those patients with legitimate hormonal concerns, I also
meet otherwise healthy people who insist on taking some sort of hormones
on a regular basis because they erroneously believe they will achieve some
favorable effects in overcoming a weight or metabolic problem. As a doctor
treating many patients with similar conditions, I advise against putting more
hormones into your body to deal with such issues. In fact, hormones will
not help. Instead, they pose a danger of altering your natural hormone
production. Additional hormones can cause long-term negative effects on
your body that can lead to dependence for the rest of your life.
Your body needs regular medical checkups. You have to pay close
attention to what is going on inside, just like you sort the mail everyday or
“declutter” your room and living spaces. We don't accept spam or junk mail
on our computers because it is of no good use to us. The same is true when
it comes to harmful and toxic products that make their way into our bodies.
We have to throw them away. They are no good to us. They need to be
removed regularly, otherwise they will cost us space, time, and eventually
will dominate the healthy aspects of our lives.
Some products are healthy just like those documents we hold on to and
file away. Healthy nutrients and good habits such as exercising at least
thirty minutes three to four times a week are the kind of things we want to
keep. Exercise gives us a sense of reward and helps us to reap enormous
benefits even with minimal amount of weight loss. Exercise harmonizes
with your hormones to optimize your internal biochemistry and helps you
to reclaim your body once again.
Jillian's book illustrates the environmental challenges we face daily and
how stress influences our bodies emotionally and physically. It shows us
how to avoid those challenges and get ahead of the stress so we can restore
and reclaim a healthy body. The important work within these pages also
emphasizes how vital it is to balance our psychological, hormonal,
nutritional, and physical exercise to achieve a long, healthy, and rewarding
life.
As you read this book, you will receive the necessary tools to understand
how hormones work so you can begin to recognize and remove all toxic
influences that can creep into your life. Also, as you read and learn, you
will want to consult your physician to correct any hormone issues so you
can reclaim your body.
Congratulations! You are about to embark on an amazing journey that
will inspire you to eliminate toxins and rebalance your life with healthy
habits as you take charge of your body.
—Christine Darwin, M.D., F.A.C.P., F.A.C.E.
Associate Professor of Medicine
David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California,
Los Angeles (UCLA)
INTRODUCTION:
TAKE BACK YOUR METABOLISM
WHY HORMONES MATTER—TO ALL OF US
I could have called this book The Evolution of a Health and Fitness
Guru. Why? Because after seventeen years of work in the fitness field—
seventeen years of studying with the world's top doctors in sports medicine,
nutrition, endocrinology, and antiaging—this is everything I've learned.
Yes, this is what it has all been leading up to: Master Your Metabolism, my
total approach to optimal weight and optimal health.
This book is the distillation of my entire journey in health, from
childhood binge eater to weight-loss guru. I've been at this for almost two
decades, but what I've learned in the past few years completely changed my
body and my life.
My first book, Winning by Losing, centered on the psychological and
behavioral aspects of losing weight. In that book, I focused on how to get
yourself into a frame of mind so you'd be ready to lose weight. (If you're
just getting started with an exercise program, and want an approachable
plan, you might want to check it out, too.)
My second book, Making the Cut, was my ode to fitness. It is a physical
fitness regimen designed to get rid of those last ten pounds—the hard way!
It is ruthless, but very effective (insert evil laugh here). It gets you
shredded, blasts the problem areas, like muffin tops and saddlebags, and
helps you prep for that big event or party where you want to look your best.
(If you have only a few pounds to lose and want to get fit fast, its thirty-day
plan will work for you.)
This book, however, has nothing to do with exercise.
Surprised?
I know, that's not what you expect to hear from me. I've gone on and on
in the past about the benefits of exercise. And you and everyone else know
it's good for you. So that's not the purpose of this book.
And it's not a calorie-counting book either.
I know what you're thinking: that after being such a tyrant about exercise
and watching calories, I've finally gone soft, right? Wrong!
Master Your Metabolism is, first and foremost, a diet book. My very first
diet book. And let me tell you—if you practice what I'm preaching here, it
will change your life, in more ways than just being skinny. I'm talking about
adding years of quality to your life.
We all know that fad diets are a thing of the past, and that the no-carb,
no-fat crazes of the eighties and nineties are scientific laughingstocks and
pop-culture dinosaurs. Welcome to the future—this is the era of genome
mapping, stem-cell research, and nutrigenomics (the study of how food
communicates with our genes). Yes, calorie counting and exercise are very
important, but they are not the whole story. Underneath the dieting and
workout programs are the little messengers that carry information from
your body to your brain and vice versa. These “little messengers” are your
hormones.
What do hormones have to do with anything? Let me explain. If I were to
ask you what your metabolism is, what would you say? I bet you would
answer, “The way my body burns calories.”
If so, you would be wrong. That's one of the key things your metabolism
does. But do you know what it is?
The answer is hormones! Your metabolism is your biochemistry.
Some hormones tell you you're hungry, some tell you you're full. When
you eat, hormones tell your body what to do with that food, whether to store
it or burn it as fuel. And when you exercise, hormones tell the body how to
move and consume energy stores, and how to boost or shut down different
parts of the body. Hormones control almost every aspect of how we gain
weight—and how we can lose it.
Maybe right now you're thinking, “I'm a guy—I don't have to worry
about hormones.” Or, “If this book is about hormones, it's not for me— I'm
twenty years away from menopause.”
That's what I thought, too! I'm only thirty-four—what could my weight
possibly have to do with my hormones? But guess what: Whether you're a
girl or a guy whether you're young or old, your weight has everything to do
with your hormones. Whether you want to lose the freshman fifteen, the
postbaby belly, or the beer gut, your hormones determine whether you'll
succeed or fail. And right this minute, your hormones—and by definition
your metabolism—are being set up to fail. Without you even knowing it,
your hormones have been hijacked by toxin-filled, nutritionally deficient,
stress-dominated systems—endocrine disruptors—that cause obesity and
disease. These systems lurk in surprising places, but they ultimately disrupt
our hormone function and cause hormone imbalances—in all of us.
That's why I designed Master Your Metabolism: to identify these
catalysts of obesity and disease, cut them out at the roots, and create a state
of optimal health where the body and mind function at maximal efficiency
Together, we'll target and eliminate these endocrine disruptors and replace
them with the hormone-positive systems that make you healthy, happy, and
skinny, no matter how old you are.
Synthesizing what the science of endocrinology can teach you about your
metabolism, your eating habits, and your weight, Master Your Metabolism
gives you a clear-cut plan that makes the latest research work for you and
your individual biochemistry. And this complete lifestyle plan will help you
not only lose that weight but keep it off once and for all.
The endocrine system is sometimes compared to an orchestra. Each
hormone is like an instrument. Playing together, in tune, they sound
amazing. But what happens if, right in the middle of a concert, the violin
suddenly goes wildly astray, twanging away? And then the clarinet starts
shrieking? And then the pianist can't keep a steady pace?
They would sound like crap, right?
It's exactly the same with your metabolism. Your body can't work the
way it's supposed to if any of your hormones is out of tune. Once one loses
the beat, they all follow. That's why, when your hormones are off note, you
can't just focus on one hormone at a time—you have to work to get them all
in tune and playing in the right key again.
You've probably heard the words cortisol, growth hormone (or HGH),
insulin, and leptin— especially being thrown around on weight-loss
infomercials at one A.M. Am I right? Well, those words are the names of
hormones, and those hormones dramatically affect your weight and your
health.
So the weight-loss products that target them must work, right? Hardly.
Thing is, those bunk “treatments” focus on only one hormone at a time (if
they even work at all), which is a very incomplete and misleading picture.
Unlike those infomercials, instead of trying to isolate one hormone at a
time—which is totally impossible—this book is about how you can
naturally optimize all of your hormones. And how you can do it without
taking dangerous or expensive drugs.
Our hormones—all of them—are influenced by millions of things in our
diet and environment, from processed foods to pesticides to lack of sleep to
excess stress. Any disruption will kick one hormone into overdrive and
another into hibernation mode. When the normal function of one hormone
gets thrown off, that imbalance creates another, and another, and another.
Way too often, these chronic imbalances make you fat—even when you are
ruthless and meticulous about calorie counting and burning.
I want to teach you that you can get your hormones in check simply by
changing your habits in the grocery store and at the kitchen table. We're
going to dig deep here and remove all the toxic crap that damages your
endocrine system, turns on your fat-storing hormones, and causes you to
gain weight. Then we'll restore the nutrients that speak directly with your
fat-burning hormones to nudge them back to most favorable levels. Finally,
we'll rebalance the energy going into and out of your body, so that your
metabolism works for you as a fat-burning machine, instead of against you,
storing fat and stealing energy.
When your hormones are at their optimal levels, your body functions at
peak efficiency:
Your metabolism starts jammin’.
You look a lot better.
Your body maintains a healthy weight without much conscious
effort.
Your belly flattens.
Your skin is clear and radiant; your hair and nails are strong and
shiny.
Your eyes are bright.
Your senses are keen, not dulled.
You don't suffer from excessive hunger or crazy cravings.
You get cut and lean.
You have energy to burn.
You live a longer, healthier life.
If you've seen me on television or heard me on the radio, you know that I
am like a dog with a bone—I do not give up. I have perfected this plan to
work for everyone. And I've done it the way I've worked to help every one
of my clients and Biggest Loser contestants—through careful attention to
detail and relentless persistence. I've taken all the latest cutting-edge
research and personally tested it to make sure I could offer the healthiest,
most effective eating and lifestyle program possible.
Believe it or not, I've fine-tuned this plan to the point where I can eat two
thousand calories a day, and hit the gym for 2 to 3 hours a week (gotta love
those grueling work schedules!), and still manage to maintain my physique.
Sounds crazy? It's possible for you, too.
The best part is, I've done all this work so now you don't have to!
I know you have a hectic and full life. I know you hate plans that make
you count and chart and obsess about minute details. Forget all that. I may
be tough in the gym, but I'm going to make it easy on you on this diet. Just
pull up a seat at the table and enjoy.
In this book, you'll learn how to
Optimize all the hormones that are necessary to lose weight
Fix your metabolism so it works for you, not against you
Choose foods and habits that trigger weight-loss hormones
Avoid foods and habits that trigger weight-gain hormones
Learn which foods work together and how to cook them for
maximum endocrine benefit
Prepare fast, hormone-balancing meals with items already in your
kitchen
Eat incredibly well on a few bucks a day
Correct biochemical dysfunction with relaxation techniques
Detoxify your environment so that hormones readjust and weight
drops off
Enjoy fresh foods that can prevent cancer, heart disease,
depression, diabetes, and other diet and lifestyle-related diseases
Dramatically increase energy levels and potentially lengthen your
life by many years
As you work your way through the book, you can follow this program
either as general guiding principles or as a specific, prescribed weight-loss
plan. I'll break it down in as much detail as you need—do it all or just take
the major lessons and go on your way. It's your call.
I want you to begin to see everything that we're up against, and start
making choices that follow the major tenets of this plan. Do that, and you'll
take back control of your hormones, restart your metabolism, and get it
revving faster than it ever has. Because, bottom line, this is not a book
about being thin to be healthy. It's about being healthy to be thin.
Ready? Let's go.
LET ME GUESS—
IS THIS WHAT'S HAPPENING TO YOU?
HOW I CAME TO REALIZE MY HORMONES WERE TOTALLY SCREWED UP
I tried putting the pieces together every which way, but the story was always
the same.
Doctor after doctor, study after study, test after test, told me this very scary
fact: In my quest to be “skinny,” I had abused my body for years and years.
Rather than getting thinner, I'd succeeded only in aging myself, screwing up my
hormone levels, and teaching my body to be fatter.
Now, before you say, “Jillian, give me a break—look at your body,” hang on a
sec. If you've seen me on TV, you know I'm not a slacker. (I guess you don't get
called “TV's toughest trainer” for being a softy.) True, I have logged many hours
in the gym. I have literally worked my butt off for the body that I have.
But that's my point: Despite all of that work, my body still wasn't responding
the way it should have, which is when I realized I was missing a piece of the
puzzle. Today, it kills me to realize that I could've done half the work to get the
body I have, had I just known then what I know now.
Now I know that the solution to living happily and healthily is hormone
balance—not an impossible regimen that sucks the joy out of life. When I
learned how to eat and live in a way that balanced and optimized levels of key
hormones, most of my weight-loss battle was won before I even set foot in the
gym.
HORMONE HELL
STRIKES AGAIN
Let me guess. Do you have
a scale that's stuck, no matter how little you eat or how much
exercise you do?
a sagging energy level that seems only to be getting worse?
skin that's starting to turn sallow or wrinkle excessively—and
you're not even past forty?
skin that's constantly breaking out—and you're decades past
adolescence?
moods that peak and trough unpredictably?
a monthly cycle that drives you (and everyone around you)
absolutely nuts?
crushing fatigue that doesn't improve, no matter how much sleep
you get?
a burned-out, slightly “crispy” feeling that you can't shake?
Have you lost and gained the same five, ten, twenty pounds, over
and over?
Or, more likely, have you lost and gained steadily more each time,
losing ground, getting more and more hopeless?
I did, too. All that and more. I knew something was wrong, but I couldn't
figure it out—I thought I was going insane. That's when I started digging
into the field of endocrinology—the branch of medicine that deals with
hormones—and slowly but surely realized (with no small amount of horror)
that I was bringing a lot of this on myself.
But it took me a really, really long time to figure that out—and I don't want
that to happen to you.
When I look around, I know I'm not alone. There are a lot of screwed-up
endocrine systems out there. The statistics tell the story:
24 million Americans have diabetes (1 in 4 don't even know it yet).
57 million Americans have prediabetes.
1 in 4 people have metabolic syndrome.
1 in 10 people have an underactive thyroid gland.
1 in 10 women have polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS).
1 in 13 women have severe PMS.
That's before we even start talking about the 33 million women barreling
straight toward menopause. Boomers, sure, but I'm talking about the first Gen
Xers, too. Then add on another 33 million men headed for andropause, aka
“male menopause,” which, yes, really does exist.
All of these conditions are caused by hormonal imbalance. Some are the
predictable result of aging; some are brought on by genetic predisposition. But
what's the most common symptom of an out-of-whack endocrine system?
Excess body fat, plain and simple.
Obesity—not to mention premature aging and disease—is caused by
hormonal imbalances that gradually wear down the endocrine system until it is
tricked into packing on pounds. And once your metabolism thinks you want to
put on weight, it does all it can to accommodate you.
That's why two out of three of us are overweight, and one in three of us have
become obese.
And that's why I wrote this book.
Together, we're going to reeducate you and your metabolism so that your body
becomes a naturally vibrant, invigorated fat-burning machine.
Any and every body function you can imagine is controlled by your
hormones. From minute to minute, your biochemistry tries to maintain
homeostasis—a sense of balance—in your body. In addition to helping all the
systems of your body—your kidneys, gut, liver, fat, nervous system,
reproductive organs—communicate with one another, your hormones have
another enormous job. Whenever your body interacts with millions of external
variables—the contents of your meal, the time of day, the intensity of your
workout—your endocrine system responds, releasing hormones to help you
balance your blood sugar, go to sleep, burn fat, or build muscle.
The only problem is that sometimes those external variables shoot way off the
charts, and your hormones don't know which way is up. They try to help your
body regain balance, but in the face of unhealthy foods, environmental toxins, or
too much stress, they begin to overreact and overcompensate. And that's when
the problems start.
Too many stressful deadlines spike belly-fat-creating cortisol. Synthetic
estrogens in the environment assault the body from every corner, and fake out
your testosterone. Too many missed nights of sleep make fat-burning growth
hormones dip low. Skipped lunches make the hunger hormone ghrelin jump.
Addictions to sugared sodas stop satiety (fullness) hormones like leptin from
working.
These dramatic hormonal shifts weren't part of your body's original plan. So
the unpredictable fluctuations start to wear down your body's natural regulatory
processes. Your endocrine system no longer understands what balance looks like.
It stops responding the way it should. Your organs take a beating; your glands
burn out. You get hypothyroid, leptin-resistant, and insulin-resistant.
And then you gain weight.
That's why we need to get your body back in balance. And that's what this
book will do. I'm going to give you all the tools you need to regain control of
your body's biochemistry. Together, we're going to press the reset button on your
metabolism and retrain your hormones, so that instead of gaining, you can start
losing weight—a lot of it.
There's evidence of a national endocrine meltdown everywhere. More
Americans are overweight than ever before—72 million of us. Obesity is the
second leading cause of preventable death. Only the act of lighting known
carcinogens on fire and repeatedly inhaling them into your lungs— aka smoking
—beats it out for the deadliest spot.
People who are obese are 50 to 100 percent more likely to die earlier than
people of normal weight. They also have a higher rate of many debilitating
and/or deadly conditions:
Arthritis
Atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries)
Cancer (especially cancer of the pancreas, liver, kidney, endometrium,
breast, uterus, and colon, and possibly leukemia and lymphoma)
Congestive heart failure
Coronary heart disease
Crushing depression
Devastating social stigma
Gallbladder disease
Gout
Heart attacks
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
High triglycerides
Respiratory problems
Sleep apnea
Stroke
Thicker heart walls
Type 2 diabetes
I wish I were making this stuff up to scare you, but I'm not. We've all read the
headlines. We know there are supposedly many reasons why this is happening:
twenty thousand cable TV channels, super mega cheeseburgers, processed foods,
fifty-mile commutes to work, seventy-hour workweeks.
But there are other reasons that no one seems to be talking about. What about
the chemicals in our air, water, cosmetics, clothes? How about the weed killer on
our neighbors' lawns? How about the plastic that's invaded every corner of our
world?
We've demonized our “supersize me” habits for a long time. But there are
many other environmental, dietary, and societal factors that have come into play
only in the past thirty years, and a vast number of them disrupt our hormones
and switch off our metabolisms.
I have watched so many people I love go down the path of hormone-induced
early death. You know that guy—maybe you are that guy—with a barrel of
heart-attack fat strapped onto his waist. Or that woman who finds a lump in her
breast at twenty-eight. Or the kid who gets diagnosed with “adult onset” type 2
diabetes before he's allowed to see a PG-13 movie.
This last one is such a heartbreaker for me. The diagnosis rate for diabetes has
shot up 40 percent in the past decade. What the heck is going on here? Why are
our hormones spinning so out of control, and how are we ever going to stop
them?
Clearly, there is only one way. We have to wake up and realize that every bite
we take and every lifestyle choice we make matters. Not just for calories or fat
or carbs, but because those bites or choices tell our bodies how to react. With
bite after bite, sip after sip, breath after breath—when we pick the wrong foods
or surround ourselves with toxic chemicals, each moment of consumption tells
our hormones to do things that, consciously, we would never want them to do.
We have to learn how our modern food supply and toxic world interact with
our hormones. We have to understand exactly how they make us overweight and
sick. That's the only way we can set it right again. And that is what Master Your
Metabolism is all about.
Just how far have we strayed from the path of natural hormone balance?
Pretty damn far, actually. And I know, because for many years of my life, I
was way, way off it myself.
I'm going to tell you what happened to me, how my hormone levels got
entirely messed up, not because it's so unusual, but because many of the same
things have probably happened to you and everyone you know. Without realizing
it, even a fitness guru can have all her hard work undermined by out-of-whack
hormones—so how does a teacher or a salesman or a stay-at-home mom stand a
chance?
It all began when I was a total chubster.
I may look ripped now, but I spent my early years constantly struggling with
excess weight.
Part of what started it all was living with my dad. My dad was an addict. And
food was just one of his addictions. He was also very likely hypothyroid,
although none of us knew that at the time. But his addiction to food and his
genetic predisposition for being overweight definitely was transferred to me.
French fries are one of the three most
common vegetables consumed
by infants 9 to 11 months of age.
I'd hang out with my dad at home when my mom was going to night school
studying to be a psychologist. Food was the only way that he knew how to show
affection or relate to me. He would make huge buckets of popcorn and we would
watch Buck Rogers together. Or we would make pizzas together. He even got
into making us homemade ice cream.
If we left the house, we'd go out to our special chicken schwarma place, or the
burrito place we liked. Food became one of the only connections I had with my
dad.
But my issues with food didn't all come from Dad. My mom, who was always
skinny, would sometimes use food as a reward. I was an only child, and if my
parents were both out, they would leave me with a sitter. I hated being with a
sitter. So before the sitter got there, they'd take me to the bakery and say, “Pick
whatever you want.” Or my dad would just order me a napoleon because that
was his favorite. And on the way out of the bakery, I could have a rum ball, an
extra little baked confection. Those things still have such a bizarre emotional
connection for me, it's scary.
My mom knew I missed her when she went to work, so before she left for the
day, she'd say, “What would you like from the vending machine?” As soon as
she got home, she'd bring me my Twix bar. I had an elaborate Twix-eating ritual:
First, I'd carefully eat the entire caramel layer off the top of the cracker. Then I'd
dunk the cracker in a glass of milk. These food rituals were a comfort to me.
They were steady, consistent, reliable—and eventually very destructive.
That's how it always was in my family, as far back as I can remember. Once
when I was three years old, my parents were having a conversation about
separating. They gave me a bag of Cheetos and put me in the kitchen while they
argued in the next room. I remember sitting at the kitchen table alone in front of
a huge bag of Cheetos, wondering, “What does this mean for me?” No brothers
or sisters at the time. No real support, but the Cheetos were there for me. The
food kept me company. It gave me something to look forward to that I knew was
consistent and wouldn't let me down.
THE ROOTS OF FAT, PART 1:
IT'S (PARTIALLY) IN THE FAMILY
Consider these elements of the family environment that are associated
with an increased risk of developing obesity:
Mother's weight: By the age of 6, kids born to overweight mothers
are 15 times more likely to be obese than kids born to normal-weight
mothers.
Breastfeeding: Numerous studies link breastfeeding to lowered
chance of childhood obesity. Some experts estimate that bottle-fed
babies have a 15 to 20 percent greater chance of being obese than
breastfed babies.
Television: Every hour of television teens watch increases their
risk of developing obesity by 2 percent. Reducing television viewing
to 1 hour a week could cut the number of obese teens by almost onethird.
Family meals: A survey of 8,000 kids found that those who didn't
eat many meals with their family but watched a lot of TV were more
likely to become overweight by the third grade.
No outdoor play: If those kids also lived in unsafe neighborhoods
that didn't allow for outdoor play, they'd be fat by kindergarten.
Parental control: If parents are very controlling about what kids
eat, their kids never develop the ability to self-regulate their intake and
will likely become overweight.
Dieting too early: Boys and girls who are encouraged to diet are
three times more likely to be overweight five years later, due to
increased binge eating, skipped breakfasts, or other unhealthy attempts
to lose weight.
Poverty: Lower income combined with any of these factors
increases the risk of obesity dramatically. I believe that toxins in our
environment target the most vulnerable people: poor children whose
parents can afford only the most widely available, genetically
modified, pesticide-laced, corn-and soy-based processed food.
Sad, huh?
My parents ultimately got divorced when I was twelve. Not coincidentally,
that was really the pinnacle of my weight gain. Everything was falling apart for
me. I was skipping school, failing in my classes, experimenting with the contents
of my parents' liquor cabinet—doing all kinds of bad things, dangerous things.
I started stealing my mom's car after school—now, bear in mind, I was twelve.
I'd get home in the afternoon while she was still at work, and grab her spare
keys. I would take out the Jeep Cherokee and race around the neighborhood like
a crazy person. I was very lucky that I didn't kill someone, including myself.
While I was out in the car, I'd hit my fast-food regulars. It started with a Taco
Bell run: two bean and cheese burritos with no onions and extra cheese. Then it
was two bean and cheese burritos with no onions and extra cheese and a taco.
Then, three bean and cheese burritos with no onions and extra cheese and a taco
supreme—and, come to think of it, sure, throw in the cinnamon sticks and a
Coke.
Or, after school, I would order a Domino's pizza, go sit on the roof of my
house, eat the whole thing. Or I would get a bag of Cheetos and eat the entire
bag while I watched Punky Brewster or The Facts of Life—I would just sit on the
couch and gain weight and be miserable.
Around this time, I started having dreams that I was a POW in a war zone. I
became obsessed with movies about the Vietnam War, and I literally started to
believe I was a reincarnated POW. The day my parents' divorce was finalized, I
kicked a hole in the wall.
I was twelve years old, five feet tall, and weighed about 175 pounds. (In other
words, I was two inches shorter and 55 pounds heavier than I am now.)
My mom took a good look at me and realized she had to act—and fast. She
took me to a therapist, but thankfully she also recognized that I needed a
physical outlet to release my anger and frustration.
And that's when martial arts saved my life.
At the time, my mom was dating this guy whose nephews were taking
martial arts from a teacher who was a bit unconventional, to say the least. I was
intrigued. At some level, my mom sensed it would be the right thing for me, but
sending your kid to this instructor was kind of like sending her off to military
school. He did not mess around.
His name was Robert David Margolin and he taught out of a dojo in his
garage in the Calabasas Hills. Robert created a hybrid style, a mix of aikido and
Muay Thai called Akarui-Do. In essence, he was one of the first mixed martial
arts pioneers. He became a sort of father figure to me—but he was definitely a
renegade.
He was very extreme, and I loved it. It felt more real to me than a tamer, more
conventional approach would have. I guess I'm just drawn to extremes. (You
might have guessed this about me already.)
Children who play sports are 80 percent
less likely to be overweight than
kids who never played any.
The men at that small dojo became like brothers to me. They were all
dedicated to their health and were driven, spiritual, and focused. Because I
looked up to them so much, I began to realize that all the other stuff I was doing
—the drinking, the ditching school, and basically making a mess of my life—
was not cool. This was cool to me. I wanted to be just like these people. I wanted
to impress them.
So, what was it Rob said to me that finally got my ass in gear? Here is the
story. I believe everyone who is serious about changing their lives has one of
these—I call it “the rock-bottom moment.” It's the epiphany that ultimately
drives you toward change—no matter what.
One day while I was waiting for my lesson, I was standing there, scarfing
down my bag of Cheetos. Robert came out to get me, took one look at the bag,
and threw me out of the studio. “You're wasting my time,” he said to me. “And
until you're ready to pick up what I'm laying down, you're wasting your own
time, but I actually value my time. So get out.” I felt the blood drain out of my
body. He saw how stunned I was. “If you want to take this seriously, and take
yourself seriously, then come back and I can help you out.” And he shut the door
in my face.
Robert's message to me, which became my guiding philosophy since that
moment, was: The entire journey to health is about power. The definition of
power, in my opinion, is learning how to make your dream a reality.
Let me tell you a little secret: I don't love working out. Sometimes I do, but
it's rare. I couldn't care less if somebody has six-pack abs or buns of steel. Don't
get me wrong, if you have that, good for you. But fitness is about so much more
for me.
I use fitness to empower people. It makes people feel strong and confident and
potent, and that strength transcends into other parts of life.
And now I understand that it's the same with your diet and other aspects of
your lifestyle. Once you make the decision to take control of what goes into your
body, you're able to harness that power. By recognizing that forces outside of
your body have been disrupting your internal biochemistry, and taking steps to
optimize your hormones, you're tapping in to that same power, reclaiming it for
yourself.
The day Robert kicked me out of his studio, I was fourteen. I'd been there just
over a year. I suddenly realized how far I'd come. I'd gone from being the fat kid
in school who couldn't take her eyes off the ground— the one who ate lunch in
Mrs. Cronstad's office every single day because I was so afraid to show my face
in the school yard—to being the kid who would walk down the hall and look
people in the eye and think, “You can't talk to me like that—I just broke two
boards with my right foot. Bring it.”
I couldn't risk losing that power again.
Working with Robert turned me around psychologically, gave me confidence,
and showed me a way of life that I valued and that would help me achieve my
dreams. He helped me realize that the stronger I was physically, the more potent
I was as a human being.
But I still didn't understand one key thing. Robert didn't care whether I was
skinny. I did. But he couldn't have cared less. He wanted me to eat a healthy diet
to take care of my body, but I didn't really get that part of his message until
many years later.
By seventeen, I was a certified fitness trainer. And I was vain.
I was a young woman living in Los Angeles. Naturally, I wanted to look good.
I was voracious about it. There was nothing that I didn't read or know about. I
had every trade magazine, from Muscle & Fitness to Shape. I read every diet
book, tried every fitness craze. I saw what worked and what didn't.
I was studying Navy SEAL training, poring over books about Bruce Lee and
Israeli SWAT team methods. I spent hours and hours in the gym, doing the
craziest stuff—I was doing plyometrics and high-intensity workouts a decade
before they hit the mainstream. I would go to the gym and hang upside down by
one gravity boot or do one-arm pull-ups like it was nothing.
People at the gym would see me and think, “What the heck is this girl doing?”
Then a couple of them started coming up to me and asking me to train them.
That's how my career as a trainer began—people wanted me to teach them all the
crazy stuff I was doing to myself.
I wasn't even thinking of making a career out of it. I was already bartending at
night. (With a fake ID, I might add—still a bit of a rebel. Some things never
change.) I was making really good money for a teenager. I didn't need the extra
money. I never looked for clients. I just thought, “Well, I'm doing this for me,
but if you want me to, sure, I'll train you. What the heck? Could be fun.”
Of course at that point I had no idea this would be my destiny, helping people
change their bodies and their lives through fitness and health. I was still going
through my own saga, my own continuing struggle with my weight.
The average American woman has tried
to lose weight at least 10 times.
I was obsessed with finding the right ways to burn fat, not just for my clients
but for me. For example, for a while, I followed the prevailing belief that the
most effective way to burn fat was to work out on an empty stomach. Then I had
the chance to talk to a biochemist about it and came to find out that it was
exactly the wrong thing to do because your body will metabolize its own muscle
tissue! Scratch that, move on to the next thing.
I did the same thing with my diet. I experimented with Pritikin, Atkins, Blood
Type, pH, Paleolithic, vegetarianism, food combining— even the dreaded Master
Cleanse—you name the diet, I went on it. Why? Because I wanted to be skinny!
For a full decade, I treated my body like I was a lab rat. How could I have
dreamed that all these extreme experiments were messing with my hormones?
All I cared about was never going back to being the fat kid, and frankly, I didn't
care how I got the results I was looking for.
Working in the gym, reading up on all the latest diet research, I was totally in
my element, loving life. But then, somehow, I got lost in cubicle land for a few
years.
Have you ever made a choice in your life that seemed like a mild course
correction but turned into a major detour? That's what happened to me, and it
took me years to get back on track.
I was happily training people during the day and bartending at night, not
thinking so much about the future, just having fun. But then I started taking flak
from a guy I was dating. “Jillian, you're twenty-three,” he said. “You live in Los
Angeles. You can't be a trainer [as if he were saying drug dealer] for the rest of
your life. You need to get serious. You need to get a career.”
From that point on, I thought, “Oh, I guess being a trainer isn't a real career.”
Probably the saddest part was that I didn't think of training people as a career
precisely because I liked it so much. Something so fun couldn't be work, right?
Tragic.
I told myself I needed to get serious and find an “adult job.” So I went to work
at a major talent agency in Los Angeles.
For the next four excruciating, soul-crushing years, I burned the candle at both
ends, holding down a sixty-hour-a-week desk job with sky-high stress and 100
percent butt-in-chair time. Yet even if I had to do my workout at midnight, I was
still working myself into the ground at the gym, still obsessed with health, still
training—I just wasn't training anybody else. During my few off hours, I was
still voraciously devouring every diet out there: Oh, are we on the Zone now?
Hold on, now we're doing metabolic typing, is that it? What's this South Beach
thing—is this the way? Because it was always a constant battle with my weight,
my body, my health. Day in and day out, I was slavishly counting every last
calorie.
About this time, I noticed that I had a kind of blotchy brown spot on my face
that wouldn't go away. I went to the dermatologist. Turned out I had melasma,
also known as “the mask of pregnancy,” extreme hyper-pigmentation on the face
that's often caused by high levels of estrogen and progesterone. My
dermatologist looked at it and said, “We could do a peel to lighten it.”
I thought, “Peel it? Hang on—why am I getting it in the first place?” I'd never
been pregnant and I wasn't on birth control pills. What was going on?
I didn't have time to think about it. Stressed to the gills, living on processed
(i.e., fake) diet foods, artificial sweeteners, sugar alcohols, and caffeine, I was
forcing myself through my days, gutting it out through a sheer naked addiction
to Diet Coke—I'd have a six-pack, or more, every day.
From the outside, my job was really glamorous. I didn't wait in line at
restaurants. People “knew” me. I worked in Hollywood, for goodness' sake. I
thought I was a big shot.
People who report job stress have a
73 percent higher chance of developing
obesity and a 61 percent higher chance
of developing abdominal fat than
people who report none.
But in reality, I hated my job, hated what I was doing. Every morning I would
wake up and basically want to scream. I felt like my life had no meaning.
You know that saying, “Things are always darkest before the dawn”? My
darkest point was getting caught in a power struggle between two agents. I knew
something terrible about one of them, something he'd been doing that would
definitely get him fired, if not sued. The stress of knowing this information was
too much for me. (Plus, to be honest, I really couldn't stand him.) So when the
upper management pulled me in to question me about what he'd done, I spilled
it. The whole story. I told them what he'd done and how he'd done it.
You see where this story is going, don't you?
The agent renegotiated his contract. They fired me. And now I had a mortal
enemy for life.
What happened next was straight out of You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town
Again. He blackballed me all over town. I couldn't get a job. I couldn't even get
off the couch. I just sat there thinking, “I wasted four years of my life killing
myself for no reason, being miserable. And for what?”
At a certain point, I had no choice—I had to make money. A friend hired me
at a sports fitness place to be a physical therapy assistant. I had to suck it up and
work for about a tenth of my former salary, putting towels on kids who were
assistants at the company that had just fired me— kids I'd sent to that gym when
I was their superior at work! The whole experience was just mortifying.
And just about the best thing that ever happened to me.
A bad day for your ego is a great day for your soul.
As it turned out, that gigantic ego check was exactly what I needed. The
move put me back in my element and made me humble and hungry enough to
work hard again. After a long time of trying to live up to someone else's
definition of success, I was back where I belonged. And happy, for the first time
in years.
Within just a few months, I'd helped the center extend its offerings and open a
full gym. My client list started to fill up—I was working with celebrities like
Vanessa Marcil and Amanda Peet, Hollywood agents and producers, all new
clients who had come to me because of my time in the entertainment industry.
As I became more established, I would get to speak with these celebrities'
nutritionists, dietitians, and sports medicine doctors, all the best in the business.
Believe me, I never wasted a chance to pick their brains. I'd take these theories
that I learned and say, “Explain Atkins to me. Where's the science behind this
diet? What is it really doing?” The picture was gradually becoming clearer, but I
still wasn't putting all the pieces together—especially not about what was
happening in my own body.
By the following year, I had opened my own sports medicine facility in
Beverly Hills, complete with three physical therapists, a physiatrist, and a
chiropractor. Soon after that, I started getting calls from Shape, Self, Red-book,
and Marie Claire whenever they needed an interview on a new fitness, diet, or
weight-loss phenomenon.
Professionally I was rockin’ and my future looked bright. But through it all, I
was still constantly struggling to keep my weight down. The only reason I was
staying in shape was because I was meticulous, and I mean me-ti-cu-lous, about
counting calories. I was training my body rigorously for seven to eight hours a
week. Even as I told my clients to drink tons of water, I was heavily addicted to
caffeine, pounding diet sodas hourly.
For each can of diet soft drink
consumed each day, a person's risk
of obesity goes up 41 percent.
God forbid I should fall off the wagon for a few days. I'd instantly gain five
pounds, which would then drive me back to the grueling routine. After all the
effort I'd put into learning about diet and nutrition, I just couldn't figure out why
all my working out and freaky eating habits weren't doing the trick. I really
thought I'd been royally screwed in the genetics department—that my
metabolism just sucked, and I would never be able to have it as easy as some of
my friends.
But as it turned out, the reality was that a body can handle that kind of strain
for only so long before it gives out completely. Which is what happened when I
joined the cast of The Biggest Loser.
Now, if a girl's gonna go on TV and inspire people to lose hundreds of
pounds, she's gotta look good, right? That was my guiding thought as I prepared
to be on camera. “I have to be ripped. Gotta make an impression,” I'd tell myself,
so I would severely restrict my calories to twelve hundred a day while killing
myself in the gym. This was the only way to get my body in amazing shape. I
had one chance to get people's attention and make an impression. I had to be in
the best shape of my life—to walk the walk, you might say.
Well, I walked the walk, all right—the walk of the living dead. I was
exhausted. Worked to the bone and stressed to the max.
As soon as the season ended, I went from twelve hundred calories a day to a
healthy eighteen hundred, a perfectly reasonable shift for someone who worked
out as hard as I did.
And I put on fifteen pounds practically overnight.
But it wasn't like I just went home and stuffed myself with pizza. I was still
working out five hours a week! If I had a single glass of wine, I gained weight.
Again, I had to kill myself to get it back off.
Something else was going on. This is ridiculous, I thought. Something was
definitely wrong with my metabolism. It just shouldn't be this bloody hard.
Then, right about this time, I hit the big 3-0. Funny thing about turning thirty,
it really makes a person think—about the possibility of having kids, about the
desire to live longer and healthier. Up until that point—and this might seem a
little bit funny—I had always assumed I was going to die young. When I got
there, I realized I wasn't James Dean—I wasn't going to get the easy way out.
And I didn't want it! I wanted to have a long life, to grow up and age gracefully.
After age 20, basal metabolic rate drops
about 2 percent per decade; after 40,
it slows down 5 percent per decade.
The journey wasn't just about being thin anymore; it was about health and
longevity, too. I wanted not just a skinny body but a healthy, happy, and long life
as well.
At this point, a good friend and client of mine had been seeing an
endocrinologist. I got on the phone with this doctor to discuss the health and
wellness of my client, which was totally routine for me. I'd pretty much worked
with the entire medical community of Los Angeles, seen or talked to every
dietitian, sports medicine doctor, biochemist, chiropractor, podiatrist … you
name it. But this was my first endocrinologist.
While talking to this doctor, I finally understood why my client wasn't seeing
results. All the missing pieces of the puzzle were right in front of me. My client
had hypothyroidism, which is why we couldn't get off her last fifteen pounds.
She was also suffering from PCOS, which is linked to type 2 diabetes, which
was also making her metabolism function at a snail's pace. Whoa. I knew she had
a slow metabolism, but now I knew why. And with his help, we created a diet
plan to change it for her.
Women's testosterone and progesterone
peak in their twenties, then decline
for the rest of their lives. Growth
hormone secretion declines by about
75 percent after age 35.
Incredible, I thought. I have to get this done to myself. “How soon can I get in
there?” I asked. “Can I drive over right now?”
Eventually I did put myself at the endocrinologist's mercy. I got tested for
everything from cholesterol to heavy-metal poisoning. I still remember the day I
was sitting in his office when he strolled in with my results. He smiled, handed
me a piece of paper, and, before I had a chance to read it, said, “How long have
you been hypothyroid?”
I blinked. The paper was full of numbers in the “abnormal range” column.
“And your testosterone is really low. Have you ever been on Accutane?”
I couldn't catch my breath.
“Do you know what ‘estrogen-dominant’ means?”
At that point, I almost felt dizzy. All of a sudden, I had a completely plausible
explanation for all the symptoms I'd ignored or denied for so many years: my
facial pigmentation, my peaks and troughs of energy, and, yes, those fifteen
instant pounds. The uniting factor was my hormones.
My fat-storing stress hormones, like cortisol, were through the roof. My fatburning youth hormones, like growth hormone and DHEA, were plunging. I had
more estrogen floating around than my body knew what to do with. My entire
endocrine system was entirely whacked-out—and with it, my metabolism.
This realization was one of the greatest awakenings of my career. And from
that moment on, I was unstoppable. I was totally new to this world, but I saw an
avenue to fix things and make them right.
I channeled all the energy I'd previously put into slashing and burning calories
into this new obsession. I began studying the science of antiaging, meeting with
the best toxicology experts and endocrinologists around the country.
I started to learn about environmental toxins and their effects on the body. I
got into organics. Just as I had in the gym as a teen, I dug up the most obscure
research, tried it out, and saw what didn't work—and what did. I began to truly
understand why I'd always struggled with my weight, and that I had made it so
much harder than it should have been.
I learned that burning the candle at both ends and my unhealthy obsession
with dieting and food restrictions had really done a number on my hormones
and, consequently, my metabolism.
Realization #1: Since I was fourteen, my entire diet had consisted of foods
with the word free in them: fat-free lunch meat, carb-free bread, sugar-free
yogurt. In other words, nonfoods, Frankenfoods, creepy-scary processed foods.
To my horror, I learned that synthetic chemicals in these “foods” talked to my
cells on a DNA level. They could even switch on fat-storage genes that might
have lain dormant had I just eaten an apple instead of the Apple-icious SugarFree Chemi-Cookies. And, naturally, all of these foods were packaged in plastics
that sent out even more endocrine-disrupting messages to my body!
Realization #2: The extreme version of the “calories in, calories out” equation
I'd lived and dieted by had come back to slap fat on my butt. The equation
remained the same; the numbers had just gotten smaller. I suddenly saw that my
years of calorie restriction had trashed my resting metabolic rate by helping
deplete my already weak thyroid.
Realization #3: The Accutane I'd taken for six months in my early twenties—
six or seven years before I saw symptoms—had possibly suppressed my
testosterone levels and helped me become estrogen-dominant, which gave me
those hideous splotches on my face that I'd been peeling ever since. Not to
mention all the lost calorie burning from a testosterone shortage! (Now, that one
really made me want to cry.)
Realization #4: I had been sleeping five hours a night while preaching to my
clients to get to bed earlier. “Good sleep has been linked to weight loss,” I'd tell
them, as I totally ignored my own advice. Now I realized that I'd been cheating
myself out of the fat-burning, muscle-building hormones that my body would've
released had I actually been home in bed instead of out on the town, pounding
sugar-free Red Bulls.
On and on it went—every discovery about hormone balance pointed to
something that I'd gotten wrong in my diet, my supplements, my lifestyle.
Finally, it all made sense. It wasn't my genetics that had screwed me; I had
screwed myself by burning the candle at both ends, working myself into the
ground at the gym, and living on processed diet foods, artificial sweeteners,
sugar alcohols, and caffeine. What a train wreck I was.
To say that I was crushed was an understatement. How many years, how many
thousands of extra hours in the gym, had I logged because I didn't know how to
protect my hormones? How much incredibly disgusting diet food had I eaten,
believing it was helping me to stay skinny—when it was really making me
fatter?
THE ROOTS OF FAT, PART 2:
IT'S (PARTIALLY) IN THE GENES
You've probably heard of a theory about the so-called thrifty gene,
which researchers believe evolved to help our ancestors store fat more
efficiently during lean times. People with this gene developed a type of
seasonal insulin resistance that allowed more of their calories to be stored
as fat during times of scarcity (such as during the winter). These fat stores
could later be tapped for survival, but doing so would trigger even more fathoarding. (So much for thrifty—sounds downright greedy to me.)
All this fat storage was very handy in feast-or-famine times. But in
America today, where we produce 25 percent more calories per person
since 1970, we live in feast-feast-feast times, with nary a scarcity in sight.
So having this greedy gene would really suck, right? Well, how about
having thousands of greedy genes? A recent report in the British Medical
Journal suggests that more than 6,000 genes—about 25 percent of the
human genome—help determine our body weight. Researchers estimate
that there may be up to 10 times as many genes that increase body weight
than decrease it.
These genes—and how they are expressed in each individual—all have
different actions. Some tell us to eat more or less sugar. Some spur people
to fidget in their seats, burning hundreds of excess calories a day. Some
genes might predispose us to metabolism-regulating thyroid disorders.
Some might cause a deficiency of the satiety hormone leptin, causing us to
either underproduce it or block it.
But just because your whole family is overweight doesn't mean that is
your destiny. We all can change the expression of our genes by improving
our physical environment as well as our cellular environment via diet and
lifestyle choices.
I knew that I needed to stop seeing food as an enemy and instead start learning
about it as fuel for a long and healthy life. It was this realization that turned the
light on for me. For my own sanity I had to find a way to turn my mistakes into a
learning opportunity for others. That's how I created Master Your Metabolism.
Once I hit upon just the right combination of elements, I started to see results
very quickly. Pounds started to fall off without having to spend hours in the gym.
Whereas before I would have to be meticulous and watch every single calorie
that passed between my lips, now I could eat normally, not be hungry, and stop
obsessing about food. I had the body I always wanted—and I felt healthier and
more energetic than I had my entire life.
How did I do it? I started to recognize and appreciate how hormones affect
every single bodily process, 24-7. Of course the food I was eating, the schedule I
was keeping, and the stress I was enduring were all affecting my hormones.
Through trial and error, lots of consultations with doctors and experts, and tons
of reading and research, I gently nudged and massaged and tweaked my entire
life to help reset those hormones and optimize their levels, so that they could
function the way nature had always intended them to.
And now it's your turn to do the same.
I'm thirty-four, and I feel healthier than I ever have before. I don't overeat,
but I live on eighteen hundred to two thousand calories a day instead of twelve
hundred. I spend about five hours a week in the gym at most. I don't have to do
more because my body takes care of that balance naturally. For someone who
practically used calculus to track her food and exercise for years, you can't
imagine how freeing that is.
I don't eat synthetic crap anymore, because it tastes like poison to me now—
which it is! I don't spend hours in the gym, but when I go, I go big. I have the
energy to do way more than I used to, and I feel like I've turned back the clock
on my age by at least a decade.
And you can, too.
No matter how you've abused your body up until now—and I'm willing to bet
you have, even if you didn't mean to—you can make it better. You can reboot
your metabolism and optimize your hormones so your body can relearn how to
incinerate fat. You can learn what foods and lifestyle habits trigger weight-loss
hormones and which ones dampen weight-gain hormones. You can make
changes that will turn back the clock for your body and add those extra years to
the back end. And you'll do it in three simple steps.
Most likely you've been trying to do your part to help heal the earth with the
three Rs: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle? Well, we're going to heal your body's
metabolism with the three Rs of hormone power: Remove, Restore, Rebalance.
We're going to:
REMOVE THE ANTINUTRIENTS
We're going to get that Frankenfood out of your kitchen once and for all. We'll
go through your pantry and toss all the antinutrients, the toxic processed foods
and synthetic chemicals that have been screwing up your metabolism—including
the ones that you thought were helping you. We'll even clean up a few of the
natural foods that have a surprisingly negative impact on your hormones.
RESTORE THE HORMONE POWER FOODS
We'll add back the foods that your body needs, whole, fresh foods that
naturally, instinctively optimize your hormones. We'll focus on Restoring the
food groups that trigger your fat-burning hormones and blunt your fat-storing
hormones. Each of these hormone power foods also builds muscle, smooths skin,
increases energy, and helps prevent dangerous conditions and diseases like
cancer, heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and
much more.
REBALANCE YOUR TIMING AND PORTIONS
No calorie counting here. We'll create an easy-to-follow, personalized plan to
help you Rebalance your food intake to maintain your blood sugar balance and
energy throughout the day without hunger or cravings. You'll learn how to
combine foods in ways that trigger the optimal release of hormones, making sure
you get all the proper nutrients in the right ratios to support your metabolism.
And to keep your body burning calories throughout the day, you'll eat almost
constantly—one of my favorite aspects of the plan.
Repairing your metabolism doesn't end with your diet. One of the most
surprising things about my hormonal revelation was learning the impact of the
environment and lifestyle on our hormones. The newspapers have been full of
stories lately about the dangers of plastics leaching estrogens into our food
supply. As I talked to scientists around the world, I was shocked to learn how
much broader the issue of endocrine disruption goes, both in the global
environment and in our own homes. But as widespread as the problem is, I was
gratified to learn that there are many, many ways to reduce our risks. That's why
Master Your Metabolism also has a lifestyle program to help you root out and
minimize as many risk factors as possible in your own life. You'll learn to:
REMOVE THE TOXINS
You won't believe how many chemicals in your water supply house, car, office
—you name it—are making you fat right now. We'll continue to detoxify our
bodies by removing known endocrine disruptors from our environment wherever
possible. And we'll automatically help heal the earth, one house at a time.
RESTORE THE NUTRIENTS
Everything about the modern American food supply—from industrial farming
to pesticide use to overprocessing—drains our food of its natural nutrients. Once
you begin to restore the hormone-optimizing nutrients, you will certainly be on
the right path. But sometimes your body needs more of certain vitamins and
minerals to get your metabolism to full power. In those cases, I'll address any
lingering deficiencies with a few supplements to Restore critical missing
nutrients to your diet.
REBALANCE YOUR STRESS LEVELS
Rebalance is the final piece of this program, but in many ways this is the most
important aspect. Rest and relaxation have a greater impact on hormone balance
than just about anything you can do. You may have a pristine diet, but if you're
stressed-out or sleep-deprived, it's not going to make that much difference. We'll
Rebalance and learn how to manage the inevitable stress in our lives (as well as
reset the wake/sleep balance) to keep our stress hormones in check.
Your body has been tricked, swindled out of health. Now we're going to
make it right. But I need to ask something of you, too.
You need to be an active participant here. You need to take responsibility and
understand that Uncle Sam is not looking out for you. Big food companies are
not on your side. Just because pesticides are legal, just because the USDA says
hormones in beef are totally safe, just because your boss says you need to be
married to your job 24-7—that doesn't make it so. You cannot bury your head in
the sand anymore. The faux foods and chemicals and stress are messing with you
on a genetic level, altering your hormones to an unrecognizable degree,
poisoning your body and killing our planet one evil dollar at a time. This is not
just about your waistline—this is about saving ourselves.
To be honest, it doesn't matter if you're on board with the “save the world”
portion of our program. As long as you follow the diet, whether you do it for
your waistline or for the planet, I don't care. The net effect is the same—your
hormones will be balanced, your waistline will be smaller, and you'll be around a
lot longer to enjoy the world you helped to save. Fine with me!
Before we get to the plan, let's take a quick sec just to define our terms. We
could talk all day about your metabolism, but do you really know what your
metabolism is made of? We'll hit the highlights of some of the key hormones that
help dictate your weight. You'll get a feel for how out of whack your hormones
really are—and even if they are. Some people are lucky, like my friend Vanessa.
(You'll hear about her in a minute.) But many, many of us have at least one
hormonal imbalance that has either slowed or completely halted our ability to
lose weight. In the next two chapters, we'll learn about what each hormone does,
the key symptoms of imbalance in the body, and how exactly we all got stuck in
this hormonal meltdown to begin with.
If you're eager to get started, go ahead and jump to chapter 4 and read about
the plan first. You can even dig right in with chapter 5, “Step 1 — Remove,” and
start cleaning out your kitchen today. A lot of people like to get started with the
program while they learn about the underlying issues. That's not a bad idea—
everyone benefits from this plan, so you might as well jump right in. We don't
have a second to waste here.
But when you're done there, come on back. Because as scary as some of this
information is—and it is— knowledge is power. Now, let's talk hormones—
which ones impact our weight and how we can start pushing their levels in the
right direction, today.
MEET THE KEY PLAYERS
HOW YOUR HORMONES DETERMINE YOUR METABOLISM
Remember how I told you my life changed the day I went to the
endocrinologist?
My true “Aha!” moment actually came about two weeks later.
At first when my doctor told me my endocrine system was fried, I was
stunned speechless. My brain was just spinning. But then a little part of me said,
“I don't know about this. Maybe he's just trying to sell me on this whole
supplementation business thing he's got going.”
I enlisted the help of my best friend, Vanessa, to catch him out.
Vanessa is one of those annoyingly effortlessly thin women. And did I
mention she's drop-dead gorgeous? She is five years older than me, but I've seen
her wolf down more food than her lithe little frame could possibly burn off in a
lifetime. Yet, she never gains a pound. Why?
We are exactly the same height, I have way more muscle than her, but I still
had to watch every calorie while she packed away cartloads of food—what the
hell was going on here?
If the endocrinologist said she needed some hormone intervention, I'd have
proof they were just out for cash.
Long story short, the day her results came in, I got schooled.
“Vanessa, I've read your report, and I'm amazed,” the doctor said. “You have
the testosterone level of an eighteen-year-old boy. Your growth hormone is
perfect. Your thyroid is extremely healthy. You are in flawless shape. Don't do a
thing.”
Vanessa thanked the doctor and chatted a bit as I sat there, getting more and
more pissed off. I love my girl V, but man, how'd she get so lucky?
I was determined to find out how. After working my ass off for so many years,
I wanted to be like her.
Most people throw the word metabolism around and feel pretty confident
that they know what it means. We say things like “I have a slow metabolism,” or
“He must have a fast metabolism,” about how easily people gain or lose weight.
This is an expression of what metabolism does, but it says nothing about what it
actually is. So what is it? And can it be damaged or enhanced?
We tend to think of metabolism as a furnace, but it's actually more like a
chemistry lab. Your metabolism is the combination of all the molecules,
hormones, and brain-, gut-, and fat-cell messenger chemicals that regulate the
rate at which you burn calories. As you eat, the enzymes in your digestive tract
break down the food: proteins turn into amino acids, fats into fatty acids, and
carbohydrates into glucose. The blood brings each component to the cells, and
their arrival triggers chemical reactions that determine how each is used, or
metabolized. Whether this energy will be burned now, stored as fat, or used to
build muscle is all in the hands of hormones.
Basically, all metabolic activities can go one of two ways:
Catabolic activities are about destruction—they break apart larger molecules
(like the carbohydrates, fats, and protein in our food) to release the fuel that
allows the body to function. This process not only gives us the energy to walk
around and smile and think but also to build body tissues in anabolic activities.
Anabolic activities are about construction—cells take the glucose, fatty acids,
and amino acids from catabolism and turn them into body tissues, like muscles,
fat, and bone.
Many hormones that impact our weight are typically put into one of these two
categories. For example, cortisol is considered a catabolic hormone; growth
hormone is considered an anabolic hormone. Neither catabolic nor anabolic
hormones are fully good or bad—you need both kinds of hormones for your
metabolism to function normally. The trick is to have the right balance of
hormones, like Vanessa, so that you burn fat and build muscle, and not the
opposite—nobody wants to build fat and burn muscle.
The differences between Vanessa's hormone test and mine were like night and
day. I was really forced to take a look at them and ask myself, “Why? How did
this happen?” I started to consider the differences between us:
I had dieted and cut calories for, oh, about fifteen years.
Vanessa had never been on a diet.
I had eaten tons of faux food, fat-free this and low-carb that.
Vanessa ate whole foods—always had.
I drank a six-pack of Diet Coke a day.
Vanessa never drank soda, ever.
I didn't pay attention to where or how my food was grown or produced.
Vanessa ate organic whenever possible.
I kept going through the “I do/she does” list until my head hurt. The results
were at times depressing, but ultimately they helped to point the way out of my
predicament.
The good news, and what I learned after (a) freaking out and (b) educating
myself, is that if metabolism is your biochemistry, then it is dynamic, not static,
and can be changed. For the worse, true, but also for better. Just a few small
changes in your diet, habits, and lifestyle can have a major impact on your
metabolism and your body's natural ability to build fat and burn muscle—and
you don't need to be a biochemist to do it.
If you're after immediate results, and you'd rather just take hormones in the
form of a pill or a shot every day, you could go to a doctor, get a prescription,
and be done with it. But keep in mind that this approach makes your body
dependent on external support, and that doesn't come without serious risks.
Instead, this program gets at the deeper roots of the problem, optimizing your
body's innate hormone levels and resetting your metabolism naturally.
When you give your body the foods it was built to understand, you support
your hormones to do what they're meant to do and make your metabolism work
for you, not against you. I'm happy to reap the benefits of a strong metabolism
now, but for a long time, my hormones were not on my side. I had no idea where
they were or what they did, let alone know how to make them work for me. Let's
start there.
“NORMAL WEIGHT OBESITY”—
DO YOU HAVE IT?
Even if you're not officially overweight, you could be overfat—and that
excess fat makes you more susceptible to insulin resistance. Recent Mayo
Clinic research shows that many normal-weight adults actually have high
body fat—greater than 20 percent for men and 30 percent for women—as
well as heart and metabolic disturbances. Researchers found this “normal-
body-weight obesity” (what I call “skinny fat”) in more than half of the
patients with a normal BMI. They also tended to have altered blood lipids
(high cholesterol), high leptin (a hormone found in fat that is involved in
appetite regulation), and higher rates of metabolic syndrome. Body
composition is what really counts, not weight.
Your hormones are chemical messengers that control and coordinate
activities throughout your entire body. The main goal of your endocrine system
is to maintain homeostasis so that the body has enough—but not too much—
insulin, cortisol, thyroid, and so on to make the whole operation function well.
When levels of certain hormones go down, or the body thinks it needs more
for whatever reason, glands are triggered. The released hormones then travel
through the bloodstream to their specific receptors in tissues and organs all over
the body. Each hormone fits into its receptor like a key fits into a lock. When
they “click,” they activate body processes such as hunger, thirst, digestion,
muscle building, fat storage, menstruation, sexual desire. You name it, hormones
control it. Once the action is completed, homeostasis is restored—however
temporarily—and the whole process starts all over.
The problems begin when we get too much or too little of certain hormones in
the body. Maybe your gland overproduces the hormone; maybe the receptors on
your cells malfunction and don't bond with the hormones as well as they should.
Maybe an organ in your body doesn't work right, such as your liver or your
kidneys, and the level of hormones circulating in your body gets way too high.
Or maybe your endocrine system receives confusing hormonelike signals from
toxins in food or the environment, and mistakenly it releases the wrong
hormones in response.
When hormonal “storms” like these hit your body, all bets are off.
Some glands get overstimulated and overproduce; some burn out and fail
entirely. In today's world, these endocrine problems almost always happen
because of factors in our lifestyle and environment.
The “food” we eat now simply doesn't give our hormones what they need to
stay balanced. The chemicals and toxins in the environment send signals to our
bodies that make them produce more or fewer hormones than normal. These
“endocrine disruptors” are substances that act like hormones, tricking the body
into reacting (and often overreacting) to their signals, disrupting the normal,
healthy functioning of the endocrine system. We'll talk about the most prevalent
endocrine disruptors, and how they impact our metabolism, in chapter 3. But for
now, know that when your hormones get disrupted, not only is your health in
serious jeopardy, important weight-control functions slow down or stop
altogether.
That's why we'll get rid of as many of these external endocrine disruptors as
possible. Your hormone distribution system will work smoothly again, and your
glands and receptors won't go on strike. We'll get your body back to the business
of building muscle, burning fat, and staying healthy and happy.
Let's take a few moments to learn about the major hormonal players in your
metabolism and what happens when they get all screwy. Once we know a bit
more about how our hormones are meant to work, we can fix them.
I think we all know why you're here: You want to lose weight. And I want
you to as well. So rather than give you the thousand-page treatise on the
comprehensive functioning of the endocrine system, let's zero in on those
hormones that have the most impact on your body weight. Because it doesn't
matter if you're a twenty-five-year-old frustrated diet addict or a fifty-five-yearold who wants to lose his gut, you have the same metabolic hormones. Even if
your hormones are at wildly different levels, the principles of the program will
work for anyone.
We'll consider the role each hormone plays in metabolic function, hunger,
body fat and lean muscle tissue distribution, energy level, and other aspects of
general health. We'll talk about what happens when each hormone is at its
optimal level, and what type of damage each does when it gets whacked-out.
Once we know all that, we'll have a better grasp of the root causes of many
metabolic disturbances we'll talk about in chapter 3. When you know what's
happening and why, you'll see why the plan can help you fix it.
Throughout the book, we'll also talk about some more recently discovered
players on the metabolic and hormonal scene, such as adiponectin, resistin,
CCK, neuropeptide Y, and others. But first, let's focus on the major players:
Insulin
Thyroid
Estrogen and progesterone
Testosterone
DHEA and cortisol
Epinephrine and norepinephrine
Human growth hormone
Leptin and ghrelin
We heard a lot about insulin in the days of low-carb diets. And for good
reason. Problems with insulin are a root cause of some of the most dangerous
health conditions, as insulin affects almost every cell in the body. If you can get
a grip on your insulin's ups and downs, you'll be a good way toward restoring
your body's hormone power.
Where Insulin Comes From: The pancreas. Perched behind your stomach,
the pancreas plays a critical role in how the body reacts to food.
How Insulin Impacts Your Metabolism: Insulin's most important function is
to lower the concentration of glucose in your blood. Shortly after you eat food,
especially highly processed carbohydrates, your meal is broken down into
simple sugars and released into the bloodstream. Within minutes, the pancreas
pumps out a series of insulin surges. Insulin then ushers those sugars directly
into the liver, where they are converted into glycogen for use by the muscles.
Insulin also helps turn glucose into fatty acids and ushers them into fat cells,
where they can be stored as fuel to be tapped later. Both of these activities lower
the concentration of sugar in the blood, which is very important.
While high levels of blood glucose trigger insulin release, low levels suppress
it. Maintaining low levels of insulin—one of the primary goals of the diet—
allows your body to more easily tap in to your stored fat for fuel. (Exercise also
helps your muscle cells become more sensitive to insulin and more efficient at
using glucose for fuel.) When your insulin-release mechanism works the right
way it helps keep your weight in check. But when it's not working, watch out!
GOOD FAT, BAD FAT
The jiggle on your hips and butt, the fatty layer directly beneath your
skin, is called subcutaneous fat. This fat is not necessarily bad for you—it's
where your metabolically positive hormones leptin and adiponectin come
from. A recent study by the Joslin Diabetes Center at Harvard found that
subcutaneous fat may even help improve your sensitivity to insulin and
protect you from diabetes. However, the fat in your gut—aka visceral fat—
surrounds your organs and sets off a hormonal firestorm (and not the good
kind). Dr. Scott Isaacs, author of The Leptin Boost Diet, calls visceral fat
“metabolically evil” because it does everything bad: slows metabolism,
lowers growth hormone, raises cortisol, creates insulin resistance, and
increases your risk of all kinds of diseases, including diabetes, heart
disease, high blood pressure, and fatty liver disease.
How Insulin Gets Out of Whack: Problems arise when your body starts
creating too much insulin, which can happen for several reasons. You can
probably guess the most common one: when you eat too many of the wrong
carbohydrates too often, especially refined carbs like white bread or pasta, which
increase your blood sugar dramatically. To cope with this increase, your pancreas
delivers a proportionate amount of insulin to scoop it all up into the cells.
For example, lets say you had a Milky Way on an empty stomach. Your blood
sugar surge is then so dramatic that insulin overreacts and works twice as hard to
clean the sugar out of the blood. This overefficient sugar removal doesn't leave
enough glucose circulating in your bloodstream, so your blood sugar
concentration drops, you feel hungry again, and you crave (and probably eat)
more carbs. That's the postsugar “crash-and-binge” cycle, the root of sugar
addiction.
When muscles are still filled up from the last snack, where does the insulin
put these extra new calories? Straight into fat. And as long as these large
amounts of insulin are still lurking in the bloodstream, your body won't have a
chance to tap in to your fat stores for fuel—so you won't burn any fat, either.
If you repeat this cycle enough times, your pancreas will overcompensate and
produce more insulin, which your cells will eventually start to ignore. This is
called insulin resistance, the precursor of Type 2 diabetes and also common
among people with a metabolic syndrome—and excess pounds. Turned away at
the door of the muscles, the sugar is left to roam the streets of your blood,
aimless and homeless.
If that homeless sugar hangs around the blood too long, doctors call this
impaired fasting glucose (if measured in the morning) or impaired glucose
tolerance (if measured two hours after a meal). If left unchecked, both conditions
can eventually lead to full-blown diabetes.
The more body fat you have, the more insulin is in your brain. And just as our
bodies can become insulin-resistant, so can our brains. A longitudinal study
found that men who had insulin response problems at fifty were more likely to
have cognitive decline, vascular dementia, or Alzheimer's thirty-five years later
than men who had normal insulin response.
While you may have heard that obesity causes insulin resistance and diabetes
—and it does—another plausible sequence is that insulin resistance comes first,
spikes insulin production and blood sugar, and makes people fat. (We'll talk
about some more surprising—and terrifying— sources of the insulin resistance
epidemic in chapter 3.)
Hypothyroidism has become a bit of a hot health topic these days, following
Oprah's revelation of having “blown out” her thyroid gland. I can relate—the
same thing happened to me. The truth is, thyroid problems are very common in
this country. About 27 million people have a thyroid imbalance, but less than
half of them know it, because the symptoms— changes in energy, mood, weight
—are similar to many other conditions.
Where Thyroid Hormones Come From: Your thyroid gland, a butterflyshaped gland located in your neck just below your Adam's apple and just above
your collarbone. Normally, it's pretty small—only about two inches, with a lobe
on each side of the windpipe. But if your thyroid gets inflamed, you could
develop a goiter, where you can actually see a bulge appear on your throat.
How Thyroid Hormones Affect Metabolism: Thyroid hormones perform a
ton of functions in your body: They help control the amount of oxygen each cell
uses, the rate at which your body burns calories, your heart rate, overall growth,
body temperature, fertility, digestion, and your memory and mood. (Basically,
the whole enchilada.)
Your pituitary gland creates thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) to kick-start
the thyroid. The thyroid then grabs iodine out of your blood and turns it into
thyroid hormones. The largest amount is T4, thyroxine, which is actually kind of
a metabolic dud. The thyroid magic happens when T4 is converted to T3, the
zippy metabolism-boosting thyroid hormone. This conversion is fickle and
completely dependent upon what's going on in your body. Whether you're sick,
stressed, eating well or poorly, pregnant, on medication, getting older, absorbing
environmental toxins—all of this will impact how efficiently this conversion
happens and, consequently, how much active T3 your body has at any given
moment. For example, when you're not taking in enough calories, the pituitary
gland stops producing enough TSH, and the thyroid doesn't produce enough T4.
Less T4, less T3. Less T3, slower metabolism. This is part of what creates the
vicious cycle known as yo-yo dieting.
How Thyroid Hormones Get Out of Whack: When thyroid hormones get
unbalanced, either too high or too low, chemical reactions all over the body get
thrown off. An underactive thyroid can lower your energy and make you gain
weight. Called hypothyroidism, you can feel sluggish and start to pile on extra
pounds that you can't blame on a poor diet or lack of exercise. (See “Mastering
Hypothyroid” on page 219.)
Most of my clients who are hypothyroid tend to be about fifteen pounds
overweight. Same with me. Since I started my thyroid medication—and this diet
—I'm back down to my fighting weight and I maintain it with moderate effort. I
still exercise and I don't overeat, but I am not killing myself in the gym or
starving my body either.
The most common cause of hypothyroidism is Hashimoto's thyroiditis, a
hereditary condition seven times more common in women than in men in which
the immune system attacks the thyroid. So you can see that women are royally
screwed in the thyroid department. All the more reason to get your thyroid tested
if you suspect you have one or more of the symptoms listed here. The good news
is that this diet will help support your thyroid so it can get to work burning some
fat for you.
Given that hypothyroidism can make everything slow down, you might think
that being hyperthyroid would be a good thing, right? Not so much. In Graves'
disease, the most common form of hyperthyroidism, your heart can race, you can
become intolerant to warmer temperatures, and you can lose weight and/or get
very tired. People with overactive thyroid glands are sometimes given
radioactive iodine, which then makes them hypothyroid. So you can see that
thyroid balance is really tricky with unpleasant effects at both ends of the
spectrum. That's why it's important to work with a good endocrinologist to keep
your levels well balanced.
Estrogen performs an incredible number of roles, especially in women's
bodies. In addition to directing a woman's entire development, from child into
adult, estrogen also has a major impact on blood fats, digestive enzymes, water
and salt balance, bone density, heart function, and memory, among many other
functions.
Estrogen and progesterone are steroid hormones. Most people think of
muscle-bound meatheads when they hear the word steroid, but all it means is
that your body creates those hormones out of cholesterol. Men and women both
produce estrogen and progesterone normally, but our environment also thrusts a
tremendous amount of estrogen on our bodies. Xenoestrogens are man-made
estrogens, such as pharmaceutical hormone replacement therapy, environmental
toxins (pesticides, plastics, dioxins), and food additives, all of which can have a
profound effect on the body's overall estrogen balance. Phytoestrogens are plant
sources of estrogen, such as soy and flaxseed, which have a milder effect on the
body.
Where Estrogen and Progesterone Are Produced in Women: Ovaries,
adrenals, fat tissue, and placenta. Estrogens are actually created throughout the
body. They can either bind with receptors on the outside of cells, like other
hormones, or scoot directly to receptors in the nucleus, where the DNA lives.
These dual powers are part of what makes estrogen so influential.
Women actually have many different kinds of estrogen, but the three main
forms are estradiol, estrone, and estriol. Before she hits menopause, the highest
amount of naturally produced estrogen in a woman's body is the estradiol from
her ovaries, which gets delivered through the entire body within seconds of
being created. Estradiol gives women breasts and hips, smooths our skin,
protects our brain, heart, and bones, and regulates our menstrual cycle.
Estrone is an estrogen that's produced in our fat cells and our adrenal glands,
the walnut-sized glands located right above the kidneys, and has fewer positive
things to do in our body. Luckily, before we hit menopause, estrone is easily
converted into estradiol. (Afterward, no dice—it stays estrone.)
The third most common estrogen, estriol, isn't nearly as prevalent as the first
two. The placenta produces estriol during pregnancy.
Estrogen's buddy progesterone, comes from the ovaries, where it's released
when the follicle bursts and releases your egg every month. Progesterone plays a
big part in protecting pregnancy and promoting breastfeeding. Progesterone is
also produced in the adrenals, and serves as a precursor to cortisol, testosterone,
and estrogen.
Where Estrogen and Progesterone Are Produced in Men: The testes and
adrenals. Men have a small amount of natural estradiol, produced in the testes
and adrenals. When estrogen is at a normal level, it can help protect a man's
brain, heart, and bones as well as maintain a healthy libido.
How Estrogen and Progesterone Impact Women's Metabolism: Estradiol is the
estrogen of youth; in proper levels, it primarily helps women's bodies stay lean.
Estradiol lowers insulin and blood pressure levels, raises HDL, and lowers LDL.
Women with more estradiol tend to have higher levels of muscle and lower
levels of fat. Estradiol helps regulate hunger by creating the same satisfied
feeling that comes from serotonin. Similarly, it helps keep your moods stable and
your energy high, so you're more motivated to exercise. Estradiol does put fat on
your hips and butt, but remember—that fat actually helps your insulin response.
As you prepare to go through menopause, your ovaries start to shut down and
your production of estradiol decreases. Then estrone becomes your main
estrogen, which really sucks. Estrone immediately shifts fat from your butt and
hips to your belly. As you lose more of your ovarian estrogen, your body
becomes desperate to hang on to other estrogen-making areas of the body,
including fat, making it harder for you to lose that belly fat. And the more fat
you have, the more estrone you'll produce, because fat tissue turns fat-burning
androgens into fat-storing estrone.
Most women tend to gain several pounds during this transition, ramping up
what becomes a vicious cycle: more estrone, more fat on the belly; more fat on
the belly, more estrone.
Another of estrogen's vicious cycles has to do with insulin. Insulin increases
circulating levels of estrogen, and estrone causes insulin resistance. According to
the Mayo Clinic, estrogen is fifty to one hundred times higher in postmenopausal
women who are overweight than in those who are thinner, which may account
for the 20 percent greater risk of cancer (especially breast cancer) among heavier
older women.
WHAT ABOUT
BIOIDENTICAL HORMONES?
Since 2002, when the Women's Health Initiative study found that
women on conventional hormone replacement therapy were at increased
risk of breast cancer, heart attacks, and strokes, interest in bioidentical
hormones as a natural alternative has shot up. Manufacturers swear that
these custom-mixed compounds are safer and better tolerated than the
commercial, FDA-approved versions.
Well, that's great—I get it. Everyone wants the hormones they had when
they were younger. I do! But I have real concerns. First of all, personalized
bioidentical hormone treatment is very expensive. And taking these drugs
(and they are drugs, let's face it) is an external management of the problem,
not an internal solution. And perhaps scariest of all, some bioidentical
hormone products are unstudied. The simple fact is that we don't really
know what these substances do in the body; no one has done the research
yet. For all we know, they could carry the same risks as conventional HRT.
If you are interested in bioidentical hormones, please work with a boardcertified endocrinologist. Check out the Endocrine Society's consumer Web
site (www.hormone.org) and search for an endocrinologist by zip code.
Have your hormones checked before treatment and insist on a checkup
every few months. The biggest dangers come when patients do not have
follow-up.
Finally, please, please, don't take unregulated, over-the-counter hormone
supplements—and if you already have, please tell your doctor. They're not
benign and some can do serious damage to your glands, even destroy them.
Be careful!
Progesterone helps to balance estrogen and can help manage some of these
issues, so when progesterone levels drop, that creates problems, too. For
example, when progesterone drops right before your period, that imbalance may
be what triggers cravings to eat, primarily carbs. Progesterone also drops at
menopause, even more dramatically than estrogen. Because progesterone is also
the precursor for testosterone and estradiol, when your progesterone production
falls off, you also start to lose the fat-burning effects of those metabolically
positive hormones.
How Estrogen and Progesterone Impact Men's Metabolism: When
estrogen is in balance with men's testosterone, it has little negative impact on
metabolism. But when estrogen is out of balance with other hormones, men can
lose their muscle-building, fat-burning advantage. That's when they tend to
develop man-boobs (affectionately known as “moobs”) and love handles,
features typically seen on women.
How Estrogen and Progesterone Get Out of Whack: People used to think
that all of women's hormone balance problems stemmed from declining levels of
estrogen, especially during perimenopause and menopause, PMS, or postpartum
periods. But increasingly, women in Western cultures tend to have too much
estrogen rather than too little.
For the past fifty years, doctors have started to notice that girls' puberty
changes—budding breasts, pubic hair development, and early menstruation—
have been happening earlier and earlier. Rates of breast cancer have jumped 40
percent in the past thirty-five years. And many signs—including decreasing
sperm counts and increasing prostate cancer rates—indicate that men are facing
the same issue of excessive estrogen.
A large part of this hormonal disruption comes from the overwhelming
explosion of xenoestrogens in the environment. We will get into this problem in
much greater detail throughout the book, as it is one of the most troubling
repercussions of our country's addiction to toxic chemicals. Our bodies are
getting slammed with endocrine-disrupting synthetic estrogens, from the
ingredients in our cosmetics and the cleansers under our sinks to the
preservatives in our foods and the plastics wrapping them. You'll see how the
scope of the impact on our hormonal balance is staggering.
Other factors can also increase unhealthy levels of estrogen, such as stress, a
lack of quality fats or protein, and too many refined grains, sugars, and
processed foods. We'll talk about all of these factors, because estrogen overload
is one of the most critical crises in our biochemistry today.
Men are naturally prone to increases in estrogen as they age, but any
additional excess can lead to further problems with decreased metabolism,
muscle building, and libido. For younger men, rising levels of estrogens are
almost always a product of environmental estrogens. These excess estrogens put
all of us at higher risk of cancer, infertility, diabetes, and other serious
conditions.
In contrast with traditional thinking, some researchers now believe that most
perimenopausal or menopausal hormonal symptoms are caused not by a dip in
estrogen but by a plummet in progesterone. Some believe that too much estrogen
and too little progesterone creates “estrogen dominance,” a condition that was
named by John R. Lee, M.D., one of the first prominent doctors to supplement
with bioidentical progesterone to help his patients manage menopause. Dr. Lee's
theory is still controversial, but as the evidence of the destructive forces of
environmental estrogens piles up, belief in an emerging epidemic of estrogen
dominance continues to grow.
Stress can also make this imbalance worse. Cortisol and progesterone compete
for the same receptors on your cells, so when you overproduce cortisol, you
threaten your healthy progesterone activity. The Master Your Metabolism plan
will help you correct your estrogen/progesterone balance by addressing many of
these issues. You'll start by identifying and Removing as many exogenous
estrogens from your diet and your environment as possible. You'll also Restore
the whole foods, especially healthful fats, that help your body build the right
hormones, while you Rebalance the stress that can hamper proper hormone
production.
The androgens testosterone and DHEA are not just for guys. Don't worry,
ladies—boosting these hormones won't turn us into knuckle-dragging
Neanderthals. In fact, they can help increase our energy, make us want to hit the
gym, and help us build more calorie-burning muscle. That's why we have to do
everything we can to protect their levels, because as we get older, they start to
head south.
Where Testosterone and DHEA Come From: The testes, ovaries, and
adrenals. Men produce most of their testosterone in their reproductive glands,
the testes. Just as estradiol does for women, testosterone helps develop men's
secondary sex characteristics, such as body and facial hair. But testosterone
helps both guys and girls—it boosts libido, keeps energy high, protects bone,
and preserves mental function in later years.
Most of women's testosterone comes from their adrenals, which is also the
source of their DHEA. A precursor to testosterone (and estradiol), DHEA may
help prevent breast cancer, cardiovascular disease, impaired memory and brain
function, as well as osteoporosis. Awesome hormone that it is, DHEA may even
help us live longer.
How Testosterone and DHEA Impact Your Metabolism: Androgens are,
by definition, anabolic hormones—they build rather than destroy. And what they
build, thank goodness, is mostly muscle. In both men and women, testosterone
helps increase lean muscle mass and strength, boosts libido, and improves
energy. In women, testosterone can also be converted to estrogen. Testosterone
and DHEA are forces of good in the metabolic war.
How Testosterone and DHEA Get Out of Whack: Testosterone and DHEA are
both hormones of youth. As men and women get older, our production of them
starts to trend downward. According to Scott Isaacs, about one-third of all
women experience low androgen levels at some point in their lives. Starting as
early as thirty, men's testosterone dips about 1 to 2 percent per year. In most
men, this slow and steady decline of “andropause” is different from women's
more rapid loss of estrogen and progesterone (which basically fall off a cliff at
menopause). DHEA also declines, and because it's the building block of so many
important hormones, all hormone levels suffer.
As we lose these powerful androgens to advancing age, certain things happen:
Our libidos slip, our muscles lose mass, we gain abdominal fat, and our bones
weaken. Motivation to exercise decreases, which is absolutely tragic because
exercise helps to boost testosterone. Men with abnormally low free testosterone
levels are almost three times more likely to be depressed than men with high
testosterone.
To make matters worse, as people gain weight, their bodies start to convert
more of their testosterone to estrogen. This estrogen can then start to
overshadow the effects of the testosterone in another vicious cycle: more
estrogen, more fat; more fat, more estrogen. The testosterone keeps getting
crowded out of the equation.
Testosterone supplementation is a new field for men and women, and although
some of the research seems very promising, doctors remain a bit cautious until
longer-term studies are completed. One area that's clearly dangerous is when
younger people try to supplement their androgens without the help of an
endocrinologist. When young men and women take artificial anabolic steroids,
they actually train their glands to produce less of their own androgens. That's
why guys who take 'roids tend to have tiny testicles and high voices—their
bodies think they have plenty of male hormones, so they stop producing any of
their own. (Kind of the opposite of what they want, right?)
Another risk comes when people self-diagnose “adrenal fatigue”—a very
trendy term these high-stress days—and start to supplement with DHEA without
consulting an endocrinologist. When done incorrectly, this type of
supplementation can do one of two things:
Hamper adrenal hormone production (because your adrenals now
believe you have enough circulating hormones and stop making their own)
Cause your body to convert the excess DHEA into excess estrogen
(which can worsen your problems with body fat and exacerbate cancer
risks)
Bottom line: Don't mess around with supplementation without medical
assistance. You're much better off optimizing your body's natural production of
androgens. You can do that by protecting your adrenals—the source of more
than 50 percent of women's androgen production—and making sure you have
plenty of good-quality fats and protein, as well as vitamins and minerals (like B
vitamins and zinc) to build these critical steroids.
On the other end of the spectrum, some women develop PCOS, a syndrome in
which they have too much androgen. (See “Mastering PCOS” on page 224.)
PCOS is intricately related to insulin resistance, but researchers are still not 100
percent sure of what causes it. Women with PCOS often have irregular periods,
abnormal hair growth, and trouble getting pregnant. Unfortunately, the excess
androgens and insulin resistance also send a lot of fat directly to women's bellies,
mimicking male-pattern weight gain. Because we still don't know exactly where
it comes from, our best chance of avoiding PCOS is to manage our insulin levels
— which is job number one on this diet.
Our fight-or-flight hormones can get us out of some pretty tight squeezes.
They help us make deadlines, save toddlers from tripping down stairs, and run to
catch buses. But while the effects of heart-pumping epinephrine and
norepinephrine are fleeting, fat-storing cortisol's legacy is longer lasting—and
deadly.
Where Norepinephrine, Epinephrine, and Cortisol Are Produced: The
adrenal glands. Cortisol, also called hydrocortisone, is produced in the adrenal
cortex, the outer part of each adrenal gland. The inner part of the adrenal gland,
the adrenal medulla, produces the other primary stress hormones, norepinephrine
(which restricts blood vessels, increasing blood pressure) and epinephrine
(which increases heart rate and blood flow to muscles). Each of these stress
hormones is released in different ratios based on the challenge you face. If you're
looking at a challenge that you think you can handle, your adrenals release more
norepinephrine. (And after you win, you release more testosterone as you savor
the victory.) If you face a challenge that seems more difficult, something you're
not sure you can master, you release more epinephrine, the “anxiety hormone.”
But when you're overwhelmed, totally discouraged, and convinced you're
screwed, you release more cortisol. That distinction has led some researchers to
call cortisol “the hormone of defeat.”
How Norepinephrine, Epinephrine, and Cortisol Impact Metabolism:
When you first become stressed, norepinephrine will tell your body to stop
producing insulin so that you can have plenty of fast-acting blood glucose ready.
Similarly, epinephrine will relax the muscles of the stomach and intestines and
decrease blood flow to these organs. (Your body figures it would rather focus on
saving your life than digesting your food.) These two actions cause some of the
high blood sugar and stomach problems associated with stress.
Once the stressor has passed, cortisol tells the body to stop producing these
hormones and to resume digestion. But cortisol continues to have a huge impact
on your blood sugar, particularly on how your body uses fuel. A catabolic
hormone, cortisol tells your body what fat, protein, or carbohydrates to burn and
when to burn them, depending on what kind of challenge you face. Cortisol can
either take your fat, in the form of triglycerides, and move it to your muscle, or
break down muscle and convert it into glycogen for more energy. (That's not all
it breaks down. Excess cortisol also deconstructs bone and skin, leading to
osteoporosis, easy bruising, and—ugh—stretch marks.)
While the epinephrine (aka adrenaline) rush of acute stress suppresses appetite
—who really wants to eat when a bully is about to punch you?—any cortisol
hanging around after the fact will stimulate it. If you haven't released the excess
cortisol in your blood by punching back or running away, cortisol will increase
your cravings for high-fat, high-carb foods. Cortisol also lowers leptin levels and
increases levels of neuropeptide Y (NPY), shifts proven to stimulate appetite.
Once you eat, your body releases a cascade of rewarding brain chemicals that
can set up an addictive relationship with food. You feel stressed, you eat. Your
body releases natural opioids, you feel better. If you don't consciously avoid this
pattern, you can become physically and psychologically dependent on that
release to manage stress. It's no coincidence that stress eaters who self-medicate
with food tend to have hair-trigger epinephrine reactions and chronically high
levels of cortisol.
When stress continues for a long time, and cortisol levels remain high, the
body actually resists weight loss. Your body thinks times are hard and you might
starve, so it greedily hoards any food you eat and any fat already present on your
body. Cortisol also turns adipocytes, young fat cells, into mature fat cells that
stick with us forever.
Cortisol tends to take fat from healthier areas, like your butt and hips, and
move it to your abdomen, where cortisol has more receptors. In the process, it
turns once-healthy peripheral fat into unhealthy visceral fat that increases
inflammation and insulin resistance in the body. This belly fat then leads to more
cortisol because it has higher concentrations of a specific enzyme that converts
inactive cortisone to active cortisol. The more belly fat you have, the more active
cortisol will be converted by these enzymes—yet another vicious cycle created
by visceral fat.
How Norepinephrine, Epinephrine, and Cortisol Get Out of Whack:
Depending on genes and early childhood experiences, some lucky people may
have very mellow adrenal reactions to stressful situations. Many other people,
however, tend to overrespond, even to minor threats, because the stress feedback
loop became stronger and stronger with each negative experience in their past.
By the time these people are adults, their bodies have very touchy stressresponse systems.
Chronic overstimulation of our adrenals is epidemic in this country. We are
both victims of and addicted to our stress. And our bodies pay the price. Longterm activation of the stress system has a lethal effect on the body. When you
abuse your adrenals as much as we do, you set yourself up for heart disease,
diabetes, stroke, and other potentially fatal conditions. But before you even get
there, you could completely fry your adrenals.
“Adrenal fatigue” is a trendy term tossed around quite a bit right now.
Mainstream medicine has not officially recognized the syndrome (supposedly
characterized by insomnia, weight gain, depression, acne, hair loss, carb
cravings, and lowered immune function), but some endocrinologists have built
their practices on helping patients reverse these symptoms.
If you suspect either abnormally high or abnormally low cortisol levels, this
plan is the perfect way to give your body the best nutrition and lifestyle
strategies to support yourself in times of stress. When you limit your caffeine to
200 milligrams a day, avoid simple carbs, processed foods, and refined grains,
and get plenty of high-quality protein, in addition to following the de-stressing
strategies I'll share with you in chapter 8, you'll automatically help your body
keep your stress hormones, especially cortisol, lower.
If you still need some help, work with a credentialed endocrinologist to assess
your levels before doing any kind of supplementation. Please do not take any
over-the-counter “adrenal support” supplements— you could actually push
your body into full-blown adrenal insufficiency, a very serious, potentially
fatal condition.
Growth hormone (sometimes called HGH) is one of those hormones that we
all want more of. It seems to make everything better—it builds muscle, burns fat,
helps you resist heart disease, protects your bones, increases your overall health,
and some say it even makes you happier. People with higher levels of growth
hormone live longer, and better. But don't get HGH shots just yet—
supplementation is controversial and risky, and may even cause insulin
resistance. One of the primary goals of this program is to protect and increase
your natural production of growth hormone.
Where Growth Hormone Is Produced: The pituitary a tiny gland nestled
underneath the hypothalamus in the brain. Growth hormone is one of the most
influential anabolic hormones, playing a huge role in the growth of bone and
other body tissue while also enhancing immunity.
How Growth Hormone Impacts Metabolism: Growth hormone increases
your muscle mass in several ways: It helps your body absorb amino acids, helps
synthesize them into muscle, and then prevents the muscle from breaking down.
All these actions raise your resting metabolic rate and give you more power for
your workouts.
Growth hormone is also amazing at helping you tap in to your fat stores. Fat
cells have growth hormone receptors that trigger your cells to break down and
burn your triglycerides. Growth hormone also discourages your fat cells from
absorbing or holding on to any fat floating around in your bloodstream.
Add to these amazing feats the fact that growth hormone can be your liver's
best friend. It helps to maintain and protect the pancreatic islets that produce
insulin and also helps the liver synthesize glucose. Growth hormone promotes
gluconeogenesis, a really cool process by which the body can create carbs out of
protein. Gluconeogenesis helps you lose fat faster while providing your brain
and other tissues with the energy they need, without excess dietary carbs.
Growth hormone actually counters insulin's ability to shuttle glucose into
cells, nudging it into the liver instead. Unfortunately, this action is one of the
reasons excess supplemental growth hormone can cause insulin resistance—
which is why you have to be very careful before you go down that road.
How Growth Hormone Gets Out of Whack: Growth hormone deficiency
is a very real condition, especially detrimental in childhood. Kids without
enough growth hormone end up shorter and have delayed sexual development,
and their growth hormone shortfall can continue into adulthood. Growth
hormone deficiency can begin in adulthood as well, but can be harder to
diagnose then, as symptoms include some common characteristics of aging, such
as declining bone mass, energy, and strength.
The fact that this medically definable condition exists has given some
antiaging clinics the latitude to supplement their patients interested in growth
hormone's fat-burning, muscle-building traits. Just as in menopause and
andropause, the sad fact is that growth hormone naturally starts to decline
sometime after our thirties. But we also do many things that hasten that decline
prematurely, and we should look to change those behaviors before we ever
consider supplementation.
Of all the less-than-smart things we do to mess up our hormone balance,
depriving ourselves of good-quality sleep is probably the dumbest. Growth
hormone is released in adults in an average of five pulses throughout each day.
The largest of these pulses happens during our deepest, stage 4 sleep, about one
hour after we first drop off. A University of Chicago study found that when
people are deprived of this stage of sleep (with minor disturbances that didn't
quite wake them but interfered with the quality of their sleep), their daily growth
hormone levels fell 23 percent.
Another way we surpress our own growth hormone levels is when we eat too
many low-quality carbs and keep our blood sugar and insulin high. Protein, on
the other hand, can help release higher levels of growth hormone, so if we
shortchange ourselves there, in favor of carbs, we slam our production on two
levels. New evidence is also starting to emerge that hormones from pesticides
and other contaminants in our environment and diet can impact our growth
hormone levels.
One surefire way we turn our bodies into growth hormone factories is with
intense exercise. During intense exercise, and especially during intervals, growth
hormone shuns glucose and instead encourages the body to use fat as its fuel.
Not only does this help you burn fat while you exercise, it keeps your blood
glucose level stable so that you have the energy to keep exercising. When you
don't exercise and your muscles become insulin-resistant, you increase your
level of circulating insulin, and you suppress growth hormone even further. We
need to get off our butts and capitalize on this incredibly healthy way to reverse
aging—not jab ourselves with HGH syringes!
The Master Your Metabolism diet incorporates all of the proven ways to
naturally boost growth hormone: stress relief, rest, and improved sleep; balanced
blood sugar and high-quality protein; and just enough intense exercise to burn
fat, improve insulin sensitivity, and flush toxins from the body.
Scientists used to believe that fat cells were just big blobs of yuck waiting to
get bigger or smaller. Now they know that our fat is an enormous endocrine
gland, actively producing and reacting to hormones. While scientists continue to
identify more and more fat cell hormones every day perhaps the best studied of
these hormones is leptin.
Where Leptin Is Produced: Fat cells. Leptin is a protein, made by fat cells,
that is controlled by an influential gene called the ob gene. Leptin works with
other hormones—thyroid, cortisol, and insulin—to help your body figure out
how hungry it is, how fast it will burn off the food you eat, and if it will hang on
to (or let go of) weight.
How Leptin Impacts Your Metabolism: You have receptors for leptin
scattered everywhere, but your brain is where this hormone is most active. When
you've eaten a meal, the fat cells throughout your body release this hormone.
Leptin travels to the hypothalamus, the part of the brain that helps regulate
appetite, and bonds with leptin receptors there. These receptors control the
production of neuropeptides, small signaling proteins that switch our appetites
on and off.
One of the most well known of these is neuropeptide Y, the peptide that turns
on the appetite and turns down the metabolic rate. Leptin switches off
neuropeptide Y, switches on appetite-suppressing signals, and the body gets the
message to stop being hungry and start burning more calories.
When it's working the right way, leptin also helps the body tap in to longerterm fat stores and reduce them. But when leptin signaling doesn't work, you
keep eating because you never feel like you've had enough food.
In addition to the leptin release you get after eating, your body also
experiences a leptin surge overnight, while you sleep. This leptin surge boosts
your levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone, which helps the thyroid release
thyroxine.
How Leptin Gets Out of Whack: Leptin can go wrong in several ways.
One, you could be born with low levels of leptin. Scientists have found that a
mutation of the ob gene hurts our leptin production; this mutation causes certain
children to become severely obese. Simple supplementation with leptin usually
helps these children maintain a healthy weight. This condition is extremely rare
—you would definitely know by now if you had it.
Believe it or not, low levels are not our biggest leptin problem. Researchers
are finding that many people who are overweight actually have very high levels
of leptin. How could this be? Well, the more fat you have, the more leptin you
produce. And similar to what happens in insulin resistance, when the body
continually cranks out excess levels of leptin— in response to overeating—the
receptors for leptin can start to get worn out and no longer recognize it. People
with leptin resistance have high levels of circulating leptin, but their receptors
cannot accept it, neuropeptide Y never gets shut off, they remain hungry, and
their metabolism slows down. (This high level of neuropeptide Y also interferes
with your T4 activity, further damaging your metabolism.)
Leptin resistance and insulin resistance go hand in hand, but just like with
insulin resistance, if you lose a bit of weight, your body will become more
sensitive to leptin and it will start acting the way it was intended to—to help you
push away from the table and say, “Enough!”
Leptin and ghrelin act in kind of a yin-yang balance between hunger and
satisfaction. Just as leptin tells the brain to turn off hunger, ghrelin tells the brain
that you're famished.
Where Ghrelin Is Produced: The stomach, duodenum, and upper intestine.
When you're hungry, about to eat, or even just thinking about eating something
delicious, your gut releases ghrelin. Acting as a messenger, ghrelin then travels
up to your hypothalamus and turns on neuropeptide Y, which increases your
appetite and decreases metabolic burn. Ghrelin has one good thing going for it,
though—it helps the pituitary release growth hormone.
How Ghrelin Impacts Your Metabolism: In your average Jane, ghrelin
goes up when the stomach is empty. This hormone is the reason you always feel
hungry at particular moments in the day—your body's clock triggers the release
of ghrelin according to a finely tuned schedule. Ghrelin levels will stay up until
you've given your body enough nutrients to satisfy its needs. Because those
signals can take a few minutes to kick in, eating slowly may help you to eat less
overall. By the time your stomach fills up, ghrelin levels start to drop again, you
feel satisfied, and you can stop eating.
Interestingly, it's not ghrelin itself that makes you feel hungry—that hunger is
stimulated in part by neuropeptide Y and also by the growth hormone it releases.
In fact, ghrelin levels must rise to allow the release of growth hormone. That's
just one of the many reasons why this plan does not allow eating after nine P.M.—
I want that food to be nearly out of your system by the time you head to bed.
A FEW MORE METABOLIC HORMONES
In the past few decades, scientists have discovered dozens of hormones
that impact weight, fat stores, hunger, cravings, and metabolism. While we
focus on the twelve major hormones in this chapter, the plan works to
balance the following hormones and peptides as well.
Adiponectin: Created by the fat throughout your body—mostly in your
butt!—adiponectin is a hormonal good guy. It improves the function of your
liver and blood vessels, lowering your blood sugar and guarding your body
against insulin and leptin resistance. Low levels of adiponectin are
associated with inflammation and metabolic syndrome.
Cholecystokinin (CCK): A natural appetite suppressant, neuropeptide
CCK is created near the top of your small intestine after you eat a meal—
especially one with fiber, fat, or protein—to tell your brain that you're no
longer hungry. CCK acts quickly, with a half-life of 1 to 2 minutes, and then
resets for the next meal.
Glucagonlike peptide (GLP-1): Also created in the small intestine,
especially when you eat carbs and fat, GLP-1 stimulates the pancreas to
stop producing glucagon and start producing insulin. GLP-1 also slows
down your digestion, keeping your appetite low.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY): NPY is not your friend. Activated by ghrelin,
neuropeptide NPY makes you want to eat—a lot—and stimulates your body
to store fat. Both extreme dieting and overeating/weight gain tend to
increase the activity of NPY. It is created in the brain and in belly fat cells,
and it stimulates the birth of new fat cells, too. (Like I said, not your
friend.)
Obestatin: Although controlled by the same gene that controls ghrelin,
and also produced in the gut, obestatin actually works the opposite of
ghrelin—it tells your brain that you're not hungry and that you should eat
less.
Peptide tyrosine-tyrosine (peptide YY, or PYY): PYY is also released
when your belly expands after a meal and also decreases your appetite,
primarily by blocking the action of NPY. Fat and protein seem to raise PYY
the most, but fasting for two or three days can cut PYY levels by 50
percent. PYY's effects last longer than other gut hormones—it starts to
climb within 30 minutes of eating and stays high for up to two hours
afterward.
Resistin: This evil hormone plays a big role in insulin resistance,
blocking the ability of muscles to respond to insulin. Some experts even
think it may be the link between obesity and insulin resistance. Your belly
fat produces 15 times more resistin than your peripheral fat does—all the
more reason to lose that gut!
Your body requires ghrelin to enable you to move effectively through all the
necessary phases of sleep. Without the proper progression, you won't get to stage
4 sleep, during which you get a big pulse of growth hormone, or to the REM
sleep that helps protect leptin levels. For the rest of the day, though, the object is
to keep ghrelin levels low. You don't need the extra diet-endangering hunger and
all the metabolic havoc those resulting blood sugar ups and downs wreak on
your system.
How Ghrelin Gets Out of Whack: You have to stay ahead of those ghrelin
surges, because ghrelin is crafty about getting you to eat. New research shows
that it triggers reward centers in the brain to make food look more appetizing.
These areas of the brain have been linked to drug addiction for many years, and
researchers believe ghrelin triggers these centers even when you don't have any
reason to eat—other than passing a bakery just as the bread comes out of the
oven.
Constant calorie restriction keeps ghrelin levels high, which may be why some
yo-yo dieters feel like their hunger just keeps getting worse the fewer calories
they eat. This is all part of nature's way of getting us to eat, eat already. As we
walk around in a world of way too much French bread, this ever-rising ghrelin is
probably a big part of what makes maintaining weight loss so challenging.
Interestingly, a select group of people may feel better when they have higher
levels of ghrelin. People with anorexia nervosa actually have much higher levels
of ghrelin than average people, whereas people with binge-eating disorder have
lower levels. Binge eaters' ghrelin production may take a hit after they
repeatedly eat well beyond the point where ghrelin is no longer making them
hungry—as with other hormones, their hormonal feedback system no longer
works. On the other hand, animal studies suggest that increases in ghrelin may
help some people manage depression caused by chronic stress. Perhaps in people
with anorexia, ghrelin acts almost as an antidepressant.
A reduction in ghrelin levels might even be one of the ways that gastric bypass
surgery reduces people's weight. When you go into your stomach and literally
remove the cells that produce ghrelin, you feel less hunger. But I don't know—
this seems a tad extreme to me. We can come up with better ways to manage
your ghrelin than going under the knife—like eating balanced meals every four
hours and hitting the sheets for eight hours a night. That doesn't sound so bad,
does it?
Every choice you make in your life impacts this very complex chemistry:
where you live, how long you sleep, whether or not you have kids, what you do
(or don't do) for exercise, who's dumping what into your water supply. Now, we
can't change everything, but we do have a great deal of power over what we put
in our mouths, on our skin, and in our minds.
First, let's take a look at what's causing all these problems. Be prepared to get
scared. When I first found out, I certainly was. Once you know what you're up
against, you'll learn how to restore your metabolism and put your fat-burning
hormones to work again.
HOW YOU GOT THIS WAY
WHY THE LAND OF PLENTY IS NOT GOOD— IN MORE WAYS THAN ONE
I bet you know at least one person who can eat everything in sight and still
struggle to keep the weight on. The woman who lost sixty pregnancy pounds in a
month. The guy who puts away three burgers at a sitting but still wears the same
jeans he wore in high school.
I don't know about you, but I can't do that. My metabolism will not allow it.
So where did my slowpoke metabolism come from and how do I change it? Can
I please just blame my parents and be done with it? Isn't it all in the genes?
Not so fast. Genes are only a slice of the picture—some scientists estimate
that genes are responsible for 30 percent of the risk of obesity while others say
70 percent. But all agree that the real answer is how our genes express
themselves, and that is based on what is happening in our environment.
When we starve ourselves on yo-yo diets, eat processed foods, surround
ourselves with toxins, work beyond the point of exhaustion, all of these choices
influence the way our metabolisms process food, burn calories, and regulate
weight. To learn how to use this plan to manipulate our biochemistry to our
benefit, we have to understand how our hormones have already been
manipulated to our detriment.
One warning: Some of the stuff you'll read here isn't going to be pretty. But
we have to know what we're up against before we can fight back.
You now know that your metabolism is made up of different hormones.
When these hormones are functioning normally everything's just fine— your
muscles use appropriate amounts of blood sugar, your insulin stays stable, your
thyroid hums along normally. Everything is in balance, burning off energy as
you take it in.
But when those hormone levels start getting funky and one goes south, the rest
scratch their heads and go, “Huh?” Then they try to sort things out for
themselves. Each gland starts over-or underproducing its hormone in a desperate
attempt to get back to homeostasis. And that's when the pounds pile on. Any
factor that gets in the way of your body's normal hormone functioning spells
trouble for your metabolism.
An endocrine disruptor is any substance or influence that somehow alters the
way the body's hormones usually work. They may increase, decrease, or change
the normal activity of hormones in a number of ways, including
Mimicking a hormone and clicking into a receptor, setting it off as if it
were the hormone itself
Blocking a real hormone from having access to its receptor
Increasing or decreasing the number of hormone receptors in certain
parts of the body
Changing the amount of a specific hormone that's produced
Impacting the speed at which the hormones are processed in the body
Any of these actions can set up a chain of events. For example, let's say your
body absorbs bisphenol A, a chemical that's been shown to leach out of
polycarbonate plastic containers into the liquids they hold. Studies on animals
have found that those exogenous estrogens zoom into the body and, within as
little as thirty minutes, decrease blood sugar levels and sharply increase insulin
levels. After just four days of exposure, that BPA stimulates the pancreas to
secrete more insulin and the body starts to become insulin-resistant.
Now consider the fact that we have more than one thousand additive
chemicals in our packaging and food processing. Think of how many other
plastics hit your lips or your food in one day—that Styrofoam coffee cup, the
squeeze bottle of salad dressing, the cling wrap around your leftovers, the liner
in a can of soup, that microwavable bag of vegetables. Think of the scents in
your laundry detergent and the chlorine bleach in your bathroom scrub. The
ChemLawn truck parked in front of your neighbor's house. The …
Can you see how a teeny little problem might start to snowball? This diet and
lifestyle program is all about stopping that endocrine-disrupting snowball before
it picks up new problems, careens downhill, and destroys everything in its path.
As with nearly everything in our overbloated society, one of the reasons we're
getting so fat is because of the way we consume. We purchase in bulk. We want
things to be cheap. We want them to last forever on the shelf. All of this comes
at a hefty cost to our health. Let's take a look at some of the factors that might set
the snowball off on its rapid and destructive descent.
I can't tell you how many people just let exercise slide as they get older, and
then turn around and blame their lagging metabolism on their hormones. That's
why I want to get the age question out of the way as soon as possible.
A few hormones increase as we get older; others stay the same. But I'll admit
it. Most hormones are headed in one direction: south.
Yes, as we age, our hormones shift in ways that encourage weight gain. For
example, as you get older, the leptin receptors in your brain start to decrease, so
your body doesn't recognize when you're full—which can lead you to overeat. In
women, female hormones decrease and insulin-regulating hormones are less
effective, both of which can lead to more pounds. For men, bioavailable
testosterone levels tend to decline gradually, about 1.5 percent per year after age
thirty, and DHEA levels decline even faster—2 to 3 percent per year. These
declines can decrease muscle mass and energy while they increase belly fat and
insulin resistance. They also make you irritable and depressed—which is all very
bad news for your metabolism.
These hormonal declines give drug companies and hormone pushers all the
ammunition they need. They use them to support their marketing claims that we
need to supplement with synthetic or bioidentical hormones to compensate for
the hit to our metabolism or to help extend our lives. But do we really? A major
study of more than eleven hundred men aged forty to seventy found that if they
maintained a healthy weight, stayed away from excessive drinking, and avoided
serious illnesses like diabetes and heart disease, they could add 10 to 15 percent
to the levels of several hormones, especially their androgens.
Every day, though, more and more research points to the fact that age-related
muscle decline is largely under our control. We've spent years blaming the fat on
our bellies on our advancing years, but the truth is, we just haven't been taking
care of ourselves! The more we eat clean, live clean, and work out, the better our
hormone balance will be, and the healthier our metabolism will remain.
Look, I'll be honest. I don't like to exercise. But the reality is we have to do it.
Your body needs it like it needs oxygen and water.
First of all, every pound of muscle burns three times more calories than every
pound of fat does. Muscles scoop up blood sugar and enhance your body's
insulin sensitivity. Exercise reduces weight-gain hormones like cortisol by
releasing endorphins to combat stress and increases fat-burning hormones like
testosterone, human growth hormone, DHEA, and thyroxine (T4) production.
You need exercise. Period.
(Yes, I know this is not an exercise book, but you can't deny the benefits and
the necessities of working out. If you want the information in this diet to be
really effective, you will work out simultaneously. I am not asking for a grueling
fitness regimen. I am simply saying get off your butt and incorporate some
healthy activity into your life as soon as possible. I'll talk more about how you
can get the most positive impact in the least amount of exercise time in chapter
8.)
Now, if you want to go the route of supplemental hormones, that's a matter for
you and your doctor. Do some reading (my favorite book on the subject is
Ageless, by Suzanne Somers), and talk to a few antiaging endocrinologists.
Definitely go to a specialist. Frankly, the research that came out a few years ago
in the Women's Health Study about the spike in the risks of heart disease and
cancer in women who received hormone replacement therapy scared the crap out
of me! But lots of research is ongoing and could uncover some great things in
the near future.
In the meantime, I designed this diet to explore other avenues to protect and
optimize hormone balance naturally to comply with our bodies' God-given
design. Nature has provided us with the cure; we just keep messing it up! We
have amazing foods—which we'll talk about in chapter 6—that not only help us
balance our hormones but also fight cancer, diabetes, stroke, heart disease, and
Alzheimer's. But what do we do? We spray them with pesticides and toxic gases,
turning our natural medicine into poison. We have to reclaim these natural
hormone balancers and fight back against the many ways our hormones are
under assault every day. I'll show you the simple, safe, natural, and effective
strategies that will help you feel better and help your body cope, without all
those nasty pharmaceuticals.
If you're reading this book, I'm willing to bet that you've given this weightloss thing a go or two in your lifetime. About 75 percent of Americans are
concerned about their weight, but most are not going about addressing it in the
right way. A survey by the International Food Information Council found that
only 15 percent could accurately estimate the number of calories they should be
eating for their height and weight.
That lack of knowledge sets us up to fail. People go to crazy extremes to lose
weight. They cut out entire macronutrients, like carbs or fats. This is all BAD,
BAD, BAD. This type of dieting directly disrupts your hormone balance,
sending survival messages to the body to store fat and slow down your
metabolism in case the state of famine persists.
Most “weight cyclers”—aka yo-yo dieters—have been on diets all their life.
This pattern of eating starts as early as the teen years. One study done at the
University of Minnesota tracked twenty-five hundred teens—both boys and girls
—for five years and found that those who dieted were three times more likely to
be overweight and six times more likely to be binge eaters than their peers who'd
never dieted. The Nurses' Health Study found that severe weight cyclers, those
who'd lost at least twenty pounds three times within the past four years, gained
an average of ten pounds more than women who'd maintained a more stable
weight. Weight cyclers typically prefer to “diet” to lose weight as opposed to
eating proper portions of the right foods. This becomes an even bigger problem
when paired with a lack of exercise.
Not only is this up-and-down pattern frustrating, it makes each weight-loss
attempt more frustrating than the one before—especially if you lost weight by
starving your body. You have to work out when you diet to maintain your muscle
mass. This “calorie partitioning” ensures that the calories you do consume go
toward rebuilding and repairing your muscles.
If you don't work out, once the diet is over, it becomes apparent pretty quickly
that you've just screwed yourself. Starvation diets are catabolic; they prompt
your body to cannibalize your muscles for fuel. Your body, wisely, is thinking
about long-term survival and wants to hold on to all the calories it can in case of
a prolonged famine. Without that muscle, your metabolism is slower, plus your
powerful metabolic thyroid hormones are lowered. And the most significant
change in thyroid and resting metabolic rate comes when people make the most
drastic cuts in their calories.
So many people I've worked with got themselves into a fast/slip-up/binge
pattern. You desperately want to lose pounds for the big day and figure a couple
of weeks of eight hundred calories a day can do only good things. What
happens? Well, first of all, your metabolism downgrades itself incredibly fast.
Then you go back to what would be considered normal eating of roughly sixteen
hundred to two thousand calories a day, and you're toast. Your T3 levels have
plummeted. Your sensitivity to leptin and insulin has taken a hit. Your ghrelin
has shot through the roof. And on and on it goes.
Some foods, especially processed foods, are murder on our hormone balance.
Why? Here's the dirty little secret: Our bodies don't recognize them as foods.
Processed foods don't come from nature; they come from factories. The more
productive the factories, the more money the corporation makes. And the less the
corporation can spend on the cheap raw materials going into those factories, the
higher the profit margins. Well, who can blame them? Higher profits, higher
productivity—isn't that the American way? Put pennies in, take dollars out. That
must get kind of addictive. Kind of like the “foods” they're creating.
Our twenty-first-century diet is composed primarily of corn, soy, and wheat—
whether or not we ever consciously recognize them on our plates. These crops
have been subsidized for so long, and have become so inexpensive for food
manufacturers, that they're constantly trying to figure out new ways to use these
cheap ingredients. And through the miracle of modern chemistry, food
manufacturers essentially do just that. You may think you're about to eat a piece
of lunch meat/bowl of soup/glass of juice, but it is really basically wheat, soy, or
corn. Refined wheat flour. Hydrolyzed soy protein. Partially hydrogenated corn
oil. High-fructose corn syrup. With a bit of salt thrown in, too. (Another cheap
additive.)
ARE YOU A FOOD ADDICT?
When people see their favorite foods, the neurochemical associated with
pleasure, dopamine, is released into the area of the brain linked to
motivation and rewards. Just like junkies, obese people have fewer
dopamine receptors in this area—and the more obese they are, the fewer
receptors they have. Scientists aren't sure if the receptors get worn out from
repeated dopamine baths brought on by drug or food binges, or if addicts
are born with fewer receptors to begin with, but the net effect is the same—
they're constantly left wanting more. Strategies that help boost dopamine
naturally—like working out or eating enough protein—can help.
How do they do that? How do they get us to eat these three foods in
everything? Well, food manufacturers take these three incredibly cheap,
incredibly bland ingredients and add a whole mélange of chemicals to make
them actually have taste. Think of corn, soy, and wheat as the blank canvas upon
which the food-science industry paints the illusion of food. And to keep the
illusion going, they may even be resorting to dirty tricks.
Foods high in fat and sugar make the brain release “endogenous opioids,” aka
biological morphine. If you've ever thought of an Oreo, made up of nearly 60
percent sugar and fat, as a drug you had a jones for, you were right on the
money. Just like when an addict is reminded of his drug, your brain's
orbitofrontal cortex, the center of motivation and cravings, is stimulated when
you see, smell, or taste foods you crave.
Yes, people, we can get high on dessert and we can get addicted. “Well, you
could just say no,” say the people arguing for “personal responsibility.” But
here's where the story gets a bit tricky. A 2005 investigative series from the
Chicago Tribune reported that Kraft, the makers of the Oreo cookie, had shared
brain research with scientists from Philip Morris, the tobacco company, and
Miller Brewing, the beer maker, all corporate partners at the time. (Hmm,
cigarettes, alcohol, and Oreos … what could they possibly have in common?)
When the Tribune broke the story, the Kraft spokesperson said it was just good
business to have their scientists “look for ways to exchange information, share
best practices [italics are mine], and identify efficiencies that reduce overall
costs.”
Interesting, huh?
Bottom line? The more processed the food is, the greater the chance is that
some unscrupulous biochemist is tinkering around with your neurochemistry to
make you want to eat more—and more and more. We'll talk about how toxic
processed foods are to your hormones and overall health in chapter 5, but for
now, just realize that as long as the combination of low-quality starch + sugar +
fat + salt + addictive chemicals is the cheapest and most profitable combination
for megafood corporations, they're going to fight like crazy to keep it on the
shelves and in our mouths. Until our government can learn to listen to the
research and stand up to the food lobbies, and make this widespread poisoning of
the public more expensive for them, we have to figure out how to protect
ourselves. And Master Your Metabolism will help you do that!
Most of the crops food manufacturers are getting their “main” ingredients
from are genetically modified or sprinkled with dozens of endocrine-disrupting
pesticides. Our buddy corn is one of the worst offenders: The Organic
Consumers Organization reported that every year, the corn fed to animals and
turned into other corn products is sprayed with 162 million pounds of chemical
pesticides. We have no idea what's going into our bodies, and it shows.
A recent large-scale epidemiological study by the National Institutes of Health
looked at what happened to thirty thousand people, mostly men, who used
pesticides in their work on farms. These “licensed applicators” of the chemicals
probably had protective gear—goggles, gloves, boots, overalls—the whole nine
yards. Yet researchers found that if these men used any one of seven specific
pesticides—even if they used them just once—they had a much greater risk of
diabetes. The results suggest that being exposed to pesticides may be a
significant contributing factor to diabetes, just like obesity, lack of exercise, or a
family history.
One of these pesticides, trichlorfon, is a popular product often used on lawns
and golf courses. This study found that people who had used this chemical just
ten or more times had a nearly 250 percent greater chance of developing
diabetes. Now, I ask you: How many rounds of golf have you played in your
lifetime? How many times has the ChemLawn truck parked in front of your
neighbor's house? Or your own?
Now consider our diet. As consumers, we're not only touching plants with
pesticides on them—we're eating them. In some parts of the world, trichlorfon is
even poured over cattle to treat them for pests.
Some pesticides that have been banned in the States for more than twenty
years are still hanging around in our food supply. They accumulate in the fatty
tissues of our bodies and stick with us for decades. They're found in fish, birds,
other mammals, human breast milk. The CDC says we get exposed to
organochlorines, a family of toxic chemicals found in pesticides, through
Eating fatty foods, such as milk, dairy products, or fish, that are
contaminated with these pesticides
Eating foods imported from countries that still allow use of these
pesticides
Breastfeeding or through the placenta when we are in utero
Our skin
Some researchers argue that pesticides may be more to blame for insulin
resistance, metabolic syndrome, and diabetes than obesity is! One study of more
than two thousand adults found that at least 80 percent had detectable levels of
six “persistent organic pollutants,” or POPs, chemicals that remain in our tissues
for up to ten years, possibly more. Those people whose bodies had high levels of
POPs such as dioxin, PCBs, and chlordane were thirty-eight times more likely to
be insulin-resistant than people with low levels. Even people who were fatter but
didn't have any traces of POPs in their systems had much lower rates of diabetes.
I'm not saying pesticides are the only cause of diabetes. But it's clear that the
POPs in your body fat continue to interact with the excess pounds to drive up
your diabetes risk even further.
I didn't even mention the organochlorines' other fun side effects— tremors,
headaches, skin irritations, breathing problems, dizziness, nausea, seizures. Oh,
and cancer, brain damage, Parkinson's disease, birth defects, respiratory illness,
abnormal immune system function … Shall I go on?
And think of it—organochlorines are just one category of chemical pesticides,
just a small sliver of the endocrine-disrupting potential that lurks in the entire
food supply. We also have pregnancy and lactation hormones given to dairy
cattle to “improve yield.” Or growth hormones given to cattle to create more
meat. Or antibiotics injected into chickens wedged into shoebox cages to prevent
the spreading of illnesses. As terrifying as some of the research is, scientists still
mostly just look at each of these chemicals, pesticides, and other endocrine
disruptors one at a time, in isolation. New research suggests that the combined,
synergistic effect of all of these substances may be way worse than we could
possibly imagine.
Whenever I talk about eating organic food, some people always wonder what
the fuss is about. “C'mon—is the extra money really worth it, Jillian? Times are
tough.”
What price do you put on your health? Why are women getting breast cancer
in their early thirties? Why are we putting eight-year-olds on statins? Why are
mysterious diseases like fibromyalgia popping up over the last ten years
seemingly out of nowhere? Are you not as scared as I am?
When you ask about the extra money for organics, how much do you think all
those prescriptions for obesity-related diseases are going to cost? Or
chemotherapy? Lots, I bet. I know people who have lost their homes because of
illness. Every dollar you put into prevention will save you thousands down the
road in treatment.
Think of this: We get the highest concentration of organic pollutants from our
food when we are between one and five years old, just as our obesity genes are
being switched on or off, just as our metabolic patterns are being set. We've
endured this toxic onslaught for years without knowing what it's doing to our
bodies. Now that we know, we must start paying very close attention to where
our food comes from. I am not being an alarmist when I say that every bite could
have lifelong ramifications on our health, hormones, and metabolism.
Our food is not the only place riddled with endocrine-disrupting toxins. More
than one hundred thousand synthetic chemicals have been registered for
commercial use—with two thousand more added each year— but very few of
them have been tested adequately for toxicity let alone for any potential
hormonal activity. Instead, officials have pooh-poohed their effects. “These
things are dangerous only at very high levels,” they say, neglecting to mention
that they didn't test them at very low levels. Now researchers are starting to
realize that many of these chemicals impact our endocrine systems at moderate
and even minute levels. And they're starting to pile up in our bodies. Research on
Swedish women found that the concentration of polybrominated diphenyl ether
(aka the flame retardants found in baby pajamas, pillow cases, electronics, and
furniture) in their breast milk doubled every five years from 1972 to 1998.
And this stuff really messes with our hormones. Take the women who fish in
Lake Ontario, which is known to have high levels of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs). A study in the American Journal of Epidemiology found that the
fisherwomen who ate more than one fish meal a month for several years had
shorter menstrual cycles than women who didn't. Other studies on women who
eat fish from PCB-laden lakes suggest they have a harder time getting pregnant.
Girlie bits aren't the only ones affected. Boy rats exposed to just one dose of
dioxin in the womb produced 74 percent fewer sperm than those that had not
been exposed. Their levels of testosterone were lower than normal, and the size
of their genitals was significantly reduced. The researchers said it was clear that
prenatal exposure to dioxin “demasculinizes and feminizes male rats.” (I don't
know too many guys who want their junk shrunk, do you?)
Some studies have also shown that when animals are subjected to PCBs and
dioxins, their thyroid glands change in ways similar to the way people react to
Hashimoto's disease. When pregnant rats are exposed to increased levels of
PCBs, their babies have less thyroid hormone and wacky neurotransmitter levels.
Carbon tetrachloride, a chemical sometimes found in drinking-water tests, has
been linked to thyroid dysfunction. Researchers are also beginning to see that
fish in lakes and rivers are actually getting chemically induced sex changes—
boys are becoming girls—because of the high levels of man-made estrogens in
the water!
These xenoestrogens are endangering us at all levels of life. In April 2008,
Canada became the first country to ban bisphenol A, or BPA, a chemical that's
been shown to mimic estrogen in the body, from baby bottles. After Canadian
officials reviewed the available research, they decided that the risks were too
great to allow babies to ingest it. Thereafter, an article in the Journal of the
American Medical Association found that higher BPA concentrations in people's
urine were associated with a 300 percent greater risk of cardiovascular disease
and a 240 percent greater risk of diabetes, as well as abnormalities in liver
enzymes. Women with PCOS have higher blood levels of BPA compared with
women who don't have the disease. Even low doses of BPA have been shown to
create new fat cells and increase their size. In all, more than 130 animal studies
have linked very low doses of BPA to breast and prostate cancer, early puberty,
brain damage, obesity, diabetes, lowered sperm count, hyperactivity damaged
immune system, and other serious conditions.
The problem is, BPA is everywhere—more than 6 billion pounds of BPA are
produced in the world every year, one-third of it by the United States. A CDC
study found that 95 percent of Americans have BPA in their urine.
Manufacturers add BPA to polycarbonate plastic and the linings of cans, bottles,
and other food containers.
These toxic endocrine disruptors in our environment do more than just mess
with our metabolisms—they may give us hormonally-influenced cancer. A
recent Harvard study found that as many as 50 percent of all prostate cancers are
linked to excess estrogen in the body. According to Physicians for Social
Responsibility, some of the most common pollutants found in plastics, fuels,
drugs, and pesticides cause cancer in animals (and likely in humans) precisely by
interfering with healthy hormone activity.
Those of us Gen X-and Yers, who are younger than baby boomers, may be
doubly screwed—we didn't have a childhood foundation free of these endocrine
disruptors that could've shielded us or at least given us a bit of resistance against
some of this. Instead, we've been raised in an environment that essentially has
been upping the hormones on all sides, all with the net outcome of making us fat
—and unhealthy!
And it's the combination of all of these factors that scares the crap out of me.
One report looked at the impact of PCBs and dioxin, both of which were widely
detected in people's bodies. The combination of these two chemicals inflicted
four hundred times as much damage to the liver as dioxin alone. Now multiply
that by the number of chemicals out in the environment today.
We have to start protecting ourselves right now!
Part of what lured us into this pesticide-riddled mess was the desire to kill
the “pests” that live all around us but seemed bothersome or threatening. We, the
superior beings, are certainly entitled to do that, right? We tried to rid ourselves
of every bug, big and small, especially scary ones like staph, salmonella, and E.
coli, with an onslaught of antibacterial products. We pump our livestock full of
antibiotics. Heck, we pump ourselves full of antibiotics.
Here's the deal: Trying to get rid of most bacteria is not only dangerous, it's
practically pointless. According to an article in the New York Times, of the
trillions of cells in your body only one out of every ten is human. The rest are
bacteria, fungi, protozoa—in total, more than five hundred other species of
microbes, most of which are hanging out in your gut.
Most of these bugs are actually beneficial—these “probiotics” that live in our
bellies are integral to the healthy functioning of our immune and digestive
systems. But when they get out of balance, and the “bad” bugs overwhelm the
beneficial bugs, bad things start to happen. You might get yeast infections,
diarrhea, or other stomach-bug symptoms. You might develop food allergies.
You might succumb to truly evil bugs, such as methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA, a potentially fatal staph infection you can
pick up in hospitals and other public settings.
You might even get fat.
Dr. Nikhil Dhurandhar created the term “infectobesity” to describe the
phenomenon of infection as a cause of obesity. In the past twenty years, at least
ten pathogens have been reported to increase weight in humans and animals,
including viruses, bacteria, and microflora in the gut.
Researchers at Washington University have found that when people lose
weight, the proportion of two key microflora—Bacteriodetes and Firmicutes,
which comprise 90 percent of the gut flora—change. These researchers believe
that our “gut microbial ecology” may actually be responsible for how many
calories our bodies absorb from food and send to fat cells. They first did a study
on mice and found that obese mice had 50 percent fewer Bacteriodetes and 50
percent more Firmicutes. Then they did a study on human beings and found that
as people lost weight, either on a low-fat or low-carb diet, their skinny
Bacteriodetes started flourishing and the fat Firmicutes diminished. The
researchers believe Firmicutes bacteria actually help the body absorb more
calories, especially from carbs, and send more directly into fat. But as the people
lost weight, it's almost as if they shed these bacteria in favor of the leaner,
meaner Bacteriodetes. The researchers even wondered if perhaps some people
are predisposed to obesity because they start out with a higher proportion of
Firmicutes in their intestines.
The irony is that when you take antibiotics to help wipe out the “bad”
bacteria, you end up taking out the “good” bacteria, your best defense, at the
same time. Then you have to start building up your beneficial bacteria's defenses
again, a nearly impossible challenge when fed solely on the standard diet of
processed foods that the “bad” bacteria adore. The only thing we can do is to
keep our immune systems strong and take care of our microflora environments
by eating the kinds of foods that replenish and feed our beneficial bacteria so
they can counterbalance the activity of the negative bacteria. This plan helps you
by focusing on organic meat and dairy from animals that have been raised
without the use of antibiotics, and by avoiding overmedicating your body with
antibiotics whenever possible.
Stress is like kryptonite for your hormones—even just a bit of it can throw
them entirely out of whack. If you remain a stress case for a long time, you could
do some major damage to many parts of your body, including your glands. (Just
think of how I screwed up my thyroid with years of cortisol overload, calorie
deprivation, and overall general abuse.)
According to Dr. Scott Isaacs, author of The Leptin Boost Diet and guru of all
things hormonal, stress can cause
Leptin resistance
Insulin resistance
Lower estrogen (estradiol) in women
Lower testosterone in men
Lower levels of growth hormone
Higher cortisol levels
Impaired conversion of thyroid hormone
Every single one of these hormonal changes will slow down your metabolism
and cause you to gain weight. Add them together, and then throw in all the
behavioral issues that come with stress—eating on the run, stress snacking,
eating at night, not exercising, excess caffeine and/or alcohol, even a stolen
cigarette or two—and you will see that stress is a major source of endocrine
disruption.
Perhaps one of the biggest causes and symptoms of the hormonal shutdown
from stress is when people start to cut into their hours of quality sleep. The
percentage of young adults sleeping eight to nine hours per night has almost
been cut in half in the past fifty years, from 40 percent in 1960 to 23 percent in
2002. During the same time period, the incidence of obesity has nearly doubled.
Coincidence?
TOO MUCH SLEEP?
If you sleep 10 hours a night, you might face some of the same
hormonal risks as those who sleep too little. A recent Canadian study found
that people who sleep fewer than 7 hours or more than 9 hours weigh an
average of 4 more pounds (and had wider waists) than people who sleep 8
hours every night. Researchers believe that having too much or too little
sleep interferes with your ability to control your appetite, because it
simultaneously increases hunger hormone ghrelin while it decreases
satisfaction hormone leptin.
A study done at the University of Chicago found that when a group of young
men had their sleep restricted just two nights in a row, their levels of the satiety
hormone leptin dropped almost 20 percent, and their levels of the hunger
hormone ghrelin shot up almost 30 percent—in short, they became ravenous.
Their appetite for sweet foods (like candy, cookies, and ice cream) and starchy
foods (like bread and pasta) shot up 33 percent, and for salty foods (like chips
and salted nuts), 45 percent. Left to their own devices, these guys would've
wolfed down almost twice as many carbohydrates as before the study. Other
research from the same institution found that when healthy people were deprived
of the ability to reach deep, slow-wave sleep—the period in which most of our
growth hormone is released—for just three days, their ability to process sugar
dropped by 23 percent. They essentially became insulin-resistant in just seventytwo hours. We need our rest!
Drugs are big business. And drug companies have become very creative
about selling us sickness via new lifestyle diseases. Whether you're sad, anxious,
mad, hyper, or feel any other human emotion, they have a drug to medicate it
away. Here's my favorite: restless leg syndrome. I mean, really?! And despite the
fact that women have been going through menopause for thousands upon
thousands of years, now we need drugs to manage that as well?
Here's one that I played around with and paid the price for: Accutane. When I
was in my twenties, I had acne. So I did what any vain twenty-something would
do—I went to a dermatologist and asked for Accutane. I didn't know what it
would do to me; I just didn't want to break out anymore. Nobody explained to
me how serious its side effects could be. I'm convinced—though my
dermatologist argues with me about it to this day—that I became more estrogendominant because taking it helped shut down my testosterone production. And
my endocrinologist agrees with me! To add insult to injury after I took the
Accutane, I started to develop the melasma on my face. While it may have been
due in part to increased sensitivity to sunlight, abnormal facial pigmentation is
also an unmistakable sign of estrogen dominance.
Now, you expect your hormones are going to get tossed around a bit when
you're on birth control pills or hormone replacement therapy. But skin
medication? And that's just the start of it. Even if you leave aside the obvious
hormonal actions, many pharmaceuticals have been found to have endocrinedisrupting chemicals in them as well. A common class of antidepressants,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs, has been linked to higher rates
of metabolic syndrome. And a French study found that after only four to six
weeks on the antipsychotic medicine olanzapine, animals had higher blood sugar
levels and more fat around their bellies.
One major review found that many classes of pharmaceuticals cause weight
gain:
Anticonvulsants
Antidiabetics
Antihistamines
Antihypertensives
Contraceptives
HIV antiretroviral drugs and protease inhibitors
Psychotropics (antipsychotics, antidepressants, mood stabilizers)
Steroid hormones (such as prednisone)
All of these pharmaceuticals could have a serious impact on your hormonal
health. Because our medical system doesn't think holistically your doctor could
prescribe one drug to help you achieve the desired results in one part of your
system, while over in another, you're throwing a hormone level totally out of
whack. Certain herbs, vitamins, and other supplements can have very powerful
hormonal effects. If your doctor doesn't know you're taking them, and dashes off
another prescription in haste, you could do real damage to your endocrine
system.
You say you never take pharmaceuticals or any other pills, so this particular
endocrine disruptor won't apply to you? Think again. The Associated Press did a
massive study on the municipal water supplies of fifty of the country's major
metropolitan areas. They found that twenty-four of them— the water supply of
41 million Americans—had detectable levels of pharmaceuticals. At least one,
Philadelphia's, had fifty-six different drugs, including antibiotics,
anticonvulsants, mood stabilizers, and sex hormones.
How did all those pharmaceuticals get there? Several ways, but mainly
through our toilets. How gross is that?
This drug-addled drinking water not only comes from human waste. Livestock
that are fed or injected with hormones or antiobiotics will also pee or poop them
out, and they'll leach into the groundwater. Some of the hormones given to cattle
can be one hundred to one thousand times stronger in biological activity than
other environmental hormone disruptors.
The wastewater is treated at several stages, but many drugs remain because no
sewage treatments were designed to remove them. Only reverse osmosis
removes almost all pharmaceutical residue, but don't hold your breath that your
local water authority will start using that process—it's too expensive for largescale use. (Which is why in chapter 8 I recommend that you install a reverse
osmosis filter in your home.)
No one knows exactly what decades of drinking this medicated water will do
to us, but disturbing trends are popping up all over nature. One study found that
fish swimming in rivers downstream from a cattle farm had four times the
hormonal activity of those swimming upstream.
A Journal of Endocrinology review of more than one hundred studies on the
hormonal effect of smoking came to a stunning conclusion: Smoking sucks.
Smoking impacts many endocrine glands—your pituitary, thyroid, adrenals,
testicles, ovaries—in addition to your lungs, heart, brain, and, oh yeah, every
other cell in your body. Smoking helps cause insulin resistance and diabetes,
drives up your cortisol levels, and gives you a fat stomach. Smoking can make
you infertile and throw your body into menopause years before your time.
Smoking is also a huge risk factor in developing problems with your thyroid—it
can lead to hypothyroidism because of increases in levels of thiocyanate, a
known goitrogen (a substance that grows goiters). If you're already hypothyroid,
smoking cuts your thyroid secretion even further.
Even with all we know about smoking, I still have twenty-year-olds who come
to me, smoking like chimneys, saying, “I can't quit—I don't want to get fat!” (In
fact, a survey of four thousand women in Self magazine found that 13 percent of
women smoke to lose weight.)
CALORIE COUNTS, BY THE NUMBERS
Number of calories available daily to every American in 1982:
3,200
Number of calories available daily to every American in 2004:
3,900
Number of calories the average guy ate every day in 1974: 2,450
Number of calories the average guy ate every day in 2000: 2,618
Rate at which guys' increased calories would add excess weight: 1
extra pound every 20 days (18 pounds per year)
Number of calories the average girl ate every day in 1974: 1,542
Number of calories the average girl ate every day in 2000: 1,877
Rate at which girls' increased calories would add excess weight: 1
extra pound every 10.5 days (35 pounds per year)
I have news for you—smoking will make you fat. And old. And ugly. Oh, and
maybe dead. That's hardly a sustainable beauty regimen.
Do we really have to go over this? For the last time, people, quit smoking. Just
because some starlet is shown chain-smoking her heart out at a sidewalk café
doesn't mean that's the secret behind her weight-loss plan. Smoking fills your
body with many pollutants that not only won't help you lose weight, they will
make you fat.
Just don't do it.
This last reason our hormones are in full meltdown mode is often one of the
first reasons cited for our excess pounds: the “obesogenic environment.” And
yes, there's no denying that we are struggling with an environment that conspires
to make and keep us fat. Restaurant portions have increased up to 500 percent
since the 1970s. On average, we each eat 23 pounds of candy and drink 35
gallons of regular soda a year. Add in remote controls, no sidewalks, 5 million
television channels, Internet addictions, drive-throughs, longer commutes,
extended workweeks, super sizing…. Okay, I can see you starting to nod off.
You've heard this.
You know this.
You've read all about “portion creep” and all the other insidious ways our food
supply has ballooned over the years.
But we have to see this epidemic of “too much” not just as a harmless
symptom of our supposedly greedy appetites. I want you to see this caloric
excess as a highly profitable, corporately sanctioned endocrine disruptor every
bit as scary and horrific as the pesticides and pharmaceuticals we talked about
earlier. I want you to look at supersized, overblown fast foods and think of them
as bordering on grotesque, just like the thought of swallowing a glass full of
estrogen right out of your tap. We need to look at these huge portions as
poisonous in and of themselves, to help us realize that by cutting back, we're not
depriving ourselves—we're sidestepping an enormous black hole of toxins in our
environment.
And we can fight back; there are hopeful signs everywhere of how we can
change our country's zombie walk straight into the deep-fat fryer. One study
found that if schools offered kids in fourth to sixth grade healthier snacks (and
rewards for eating them), limited the availability of soda and junk foods, and
provided fifty hours of nutrition education per year (woven into the normal
curriculum), they reduced the number of overweight kids by 50 percent,
compared with a control school that took none of these steps.
If they can do it in school, you can do it in your house. Toss the soda, keep
reading about nutrition—i.e., this book!—and follow this plan back to a place
where your metabolism and hormones start working for you, instead of greedy
corporate poison peddlers.
When you look at all of these factors together, it's kind of unbelievable that
everyone isn't morbidly obese. We are locked in a struggle, there's no doubt
about it. But once we've had our eyes opened, we can start to do things
differently. Each change you make here will make a positive difference in your
endocrine function and create changes of its own. Soon you'll have a much
healthier, more balanced endocrine system—and a lot less fat to show for it.
Now let's take a look at how we'll accomplish just that.
HOW THE DIET WORKS
OVERVIEW OF HOW THE REMOVE/RESTORE/REBALANCE PLAN RESETS YOUR
METABOLISM
Now that you know what you're up against, you may feel like throwing up
your hands and saying, “Forget it. The deck is stacked against me. I can't
possibly fight back!”
But you can.
What you need is a plan. A program. A systematic way of fending off the
assaults on your endocrine system, no matter where they may be coming from. A
science-based approach that will recalibrate your hormonal levels, so you can be
healthy and reset your metabolism to do what it was meant to do: burn calories
and shed fat.
So how are we going to do that? Simple, really. We're going to come at this in
three steps. You're going to Remove the toxins from your diet and your
environment; Restore the nutrients to your food and supplement plan; and
Rebalance the energy that goes into and comes out of your body. Just these three
steps will be all most people need to trigger the fat-burning hormones, quiet
down those fat-storing hormones, and get your body back to being a lean, mean
machine.
In chapter 3, you heard about the absolutely horrific amount of toxicity in
our food and environment. We've talked about how some of these toxins have
disrupted our endocrine systems, damaged our metabolisms, made us sick, made
us look older and feel less vital, and also, yes, made us fat. We have to get as far
away from this crap as we possibly can! When you think of the ten thousand
chemicals that we already have on the shelf, and the two thousand more added
each year, we need to eliminate as much as possible from our diets and our lives,
and keep holding the line.
Step 1 will walk you through your entire kitchen and pantry and help you get
rid of the biggest endocrine offenders. Certain endocrine evils you may have
already heard of: High-fructose corn syrup? Gone. Hydrogenated oils? Gone.
But we'll also talk about some other healthy-sounding foods you may not realize
are routinely messing with your hormones. (Who ever thought “spices” could be
a bad thing?)
Once we've trashed all the CRAP from your diet, all the foods that encourage
your hormones to store fat, we can start to rebuild it with foods that will trigger
your fat-burning hormones. And that's where Step 2 comes in, Restore.
Before you start thinking that this diet is all about what you can't eat, let's get
right to the good stuff. I want you to eat how nature intended us to eat. More
important is that I want you to eat foods that will flick the on switch to your
metabolism. You will eat foods that will repair, nourish, and support every cell in
your body so your body will work for you and not against you. Be good to your
body and it will be good to you. And I promise you, after two weeks on this diet,
you will never want to go back to that processed, chemical-laden crap again.
In the immortal words of Michael Pollan, author of The Omnivore's Dilemma,
I want you to “Eat food.” That's it! Simple, real, naturally occurring food. Food
that has been on this planet for tens of thousands of years. In other words, not
foods that say, “Exciting new flavors!” on their labels. Aside from those teeny,
annoying labels that always get stuck to fruits and vegetables, you won't be
seeing too many labels on this diet.
If I had to sum up Step 2 in one sentence, it would be: “If it didn't have a
mother and it didn't grow from the ground, don't eat it.” Cheetos don't have a
mother and, I don't know about you, I don't recall seeing a Cheeto tree in my
backyard when I was growing up.
How do we do this? The biggest part of Step 2 is actually quite simple, and
you've likely heard a lot about it. GO ORGANIC. While even organic food is not
100 percent “pure,” it is by far the best defense we have against endocrine
disruptors in our food supply.
Now, I know some of you are probably bellyaching right now. “Sure, Jillian—
easy for you to say! You have the money to do it; I only wish I could afford to
eat organic.” Here's the deal—you do have the money. If you have a hundred
dollars a week for groceries, you have the money. Stop wasting money on gossip
rags and junk you don't need and invest that extra cash in your health. We're not
going for perfection, we're going for maximum impact. That's why I'll share tons
of tools for how to eat organic on a budget, let you know what the biggest
chemical culprits in our food supply are, and show you how following a few
other Remove rules will actually save you a lot of cash—dollars you can put
directly into your organic-produce budget.
You'll eat simple, real, naturally occurring food. Organically grown fruits and
vegetables. Grass-fed beef. Organic free-range chicken. Ocean-caught fish.
Whole grains. Nuts, beans, seeds. These are foods your body recognizes from
way back. In fact, your body knows what to do with every part of these foods,
what nutrients get sent to what part of the body, and, most important, what foods
turn on (or off) which hormones. These foods make sense to your body.
Imagine spending your whole life speaking one language—you can read, tell
jokes, sing songs. You're fluent. Then one day, you wake up and everyone is
speaking another language, and they don't understand a word you're saying. You
simply can't communicate.
Eating faux foods is like force-feeding your body gibberish and expecting it to
understand you. Your body wants to understand the foods you feed it, really and
truly. But it can't. So it will be forced to make do, create work-arounds, flub a
couple of sentences, use wild hand signals. And try as your body might, it will
never be fluent in faux food language, so all those work-arounds will eventually
start to pile up and create one giant mess of your biochemisty And what you're
left with is a failure to communicate. And that failure manifests itself in
premature aging, disease, obesity, depression, and more.
In Restore, we'll simplify the conversation. We'll get fluent in body language
and really listen to the cues we're getting. Your body will say “Oh, I get it! Now
I'm supposed to stop eating!” or “That's right—now I'm supposed to burn these
calories, not store them.” When you Restore real foods to your diet, you'll talk
directly to your genes and your hormones and guide them to do what they're
meant to do—maintain your weight and overall health, and add years of quality
to your life.
Like I said, I want you to eat. Seriously. Three square meals and one snack.
That's the only way you're going to convince your hormones that they don't have
to hang on to that fat for a rainy day.
Once you're eating the foods that your body recognizes, and there are no
funky endocrine disruptors trying to confuse your hormones and trick them into
hoarding fat, your body needs to know that there is plenty where that came from.
No shortage here. No way you're ever, ever going to run out of food.
Now, before you belly up to the buffet, remember one thing. I've said it a
million times, I'll say it again: Calories. Do. Count.
That said, did you ever stop to think about how few calories there are in real
food? Apple: 76 calories. Chicken breast: 142 calories. Head of broccoli—yes,
the whole head: 135 calories.
Now let's contrast that three-ounce portion of chicken with, oh, say, three
ounces of Cheetos: 480 calories. This snack “food” is full of 30 grams of fat, 45
grams of carbs, and more than a third of your daily sodium—as well as half a
dozen known endocrine disruptors.
Is it any wonder that kind of “food” is unrecognizable to the human body?
There is literally nothing in there that our bodies recognize. So, with faux foods,
not only are you putting hundreds of extra calories into your body, you're also
feeding your hormones all kinds of mixed signals that will multiply this caloric
effect exponentially.
When you Rebalance, you'll see that eating every four hours during the day is
best for your body. We'll even talk about how to time your first and last meals of
the day to get the very best fat-burning power out of your early-morning and
late-night hormonal swings. And you'll learn that eating before you are hungry
will make your metabolism start to hum along like a finely tooled machine.
Listening to your body and stopping before you're overfull will get easier and
easier with practice—and, in time, you'll find out that being “stuffed” isn't
comfortable or enjoyable. That Real Food does not exclude any nutrient—carbs,
fat, or protein—because hormonal balance (not to mention efficient, safe,
permanent weight loss) is possible only when all nutrients are present and
accounted for.
Now, that covers the “energy in” portion of the Rebalance step—but what
about the “energy out”? You know how much I push exercise. I'm a pusher, it's
true—guilty as charged. But the “energy out” I'm talking about here is a different
kind of energy. I could call it “metaphysical energy” but I don't want to seem too
New Age-y So let's call it the energy you have to do the things you want to do in
life. How are you using that energy? How are you protecting that energy? How
is that energy impacting your family and friends, job, or love life? How are you
recharging and rebalancing that energy? You might be surprised to learn how
much the use of your personal energy impacts your hormone levels and your
metabolism. How much you sleep, how much you stress and freak out and pull
your hair out, how much you, yes, sit on your butt—all of those choices about
how you Rebalance your energy stores will directly impact how you rebalance
your hormone levels, your weight, and your entire life.
I know you want to Rebalance. We all do. And with the information in this
book, you can.
STEP 1—REMOVE
ELIMINATE THE ANTINUTRIENTS THAT TRIGGER YOUR FAT-STORING
HORMONES
Your poor body is stumbling around, trying to scrounge something nutritious
out of this toxic food environment. Your willpower is not enough to sustain your
weight-loss efforts, because there's too much static. Too many additives and
processes have mangled the food supply and confused your body's normal
metabolism.
That's why, again, I could sum up this entire food plan in one sentence: If it
didn't have a mother or it didn't grow from the ground, don't eat it.
I'm sure PETA's going to be after me about that one. But I'm not joking. I'm
talking about whole foods. Food the way nature intended, before it got sent to a
chem lab and became indecipherable to our biology.
My standard diet used to look something like this:
Breakfast: low-carb protein bar, coffee with NutraSweet
Snack: Diet Coke
Lunch: Diet Coke, 2 slices of low-carb white “bread” with 3 slices of
processed turkey
Snack: Diet Coke, processed nonfat cheese with diet crackers
Dinner: nonorganic chicken loaded with antibiotics and nonorganic
veggies
Now, looking at that mouthwatering menu, do you think my body was saying,
“Ooooh, great, I just ingested tons of trans fats, sugar alcohols, high-fructose
corn syrup, nitrates, antibiotics, pesticides, and artificial sweeteners. I know just
what to do with this. I'll build some healthy muscle and some smooth skin with
it!”?
No. When I ate this supposedly edible wealth of chemicals, my body got
confused. That “food” was basically foreign matter. Check out this ingredient list
from the protein bar alone:
Protein blend (soy protein nuggets, [soy protein isolate, rice starch,
brown rice flour], whey protein isolate, calcium caseinate), yogurt coating
(maltitol/lactitol, palm kernel oil, calcium caseinate, nonfat yogurt powder,
palm oil, soy lecithin, titanium dioxide color, oligofructose, fructose,
acesulfame K), maltitol, lemon pieces (inulin, fractionated palm kernel oil,
oat fiber, citrus oil, citric acid, soy lecithin, acesulfame K, turmeric extract
(color), glycerin, cocoa butter, natural and artificial flavor, vitamin and
mineral blend (dicalcium phosphate, magnesium oxide, ascorbic acid, dAlpha tocopheryl acetate, niacinamide, zinc oxide, dextrose, copper
gluconate, d-Calcium pantothenate, Vitamin A palmitate, pyridoxine
hydrochloride, thiamin mononitrate, riboflavin, folic acid, biotin, potassium
iodide, sodium selenite, cyanocobalamin), high oleic sunflower oil, gum,
corn syrup solids, citric acid, soy lecithin, potassium sorbate, sucralose.
May contain traces of peanuts and/or tree nuts.
Impressive, no? Quite a feat of modern chemical engineering.
(It's funny that the allergen alert about peanuts and tree nuts includes two of
the only whole foods on the list.)
News flash: Your body does not jump for joy over this little bomb of toxic
chemicals. It scratches its head and goes, “Huh? What the …? Okay, I guess I'll
just do … this.”
And “this,” your body's very next reaction, is always, always bad news to your
hormones.
This protein bar is one example. But the same number of processed and
chemical ingredients—and sometimes many more—are in other “healthy”
cereals, breads, soups, waffles, soy-based meat replacements, and so on. How
many times have your eyes glazed over as you tried to decipher an ingredients
list with dozens of syllables?
A few manufacturers are consciously trying to break this cycle by using fewer
and more natural ingredients. (For a list of some of my favorite brands, check
out the Resources on page 243.) But overall, to escape the chemical infestation
and hormonal devastation of our food supply, we need to just say, “NO!”
That's why the first part of this diet has to be about what we Remove. If we
don't get some of this crap out of your mouth and out of your system, no amount
of whole, healthy food will make a dent.
What are we removing? Processed foods get the big no. No chemicals, no
MSG. No trans fats. No artificial sweeteners. No additives that “thicken,” or
“stabilize,” or otherwise tamper with the texture or freshness of the food. You're
going to learn how to dump the foods that prevent the release of weight-loss
hormones. You're also going to learn which foods provoke a rapid release of
weight-gain hormones. We'll also remove, or at least reduce, a few whole foods
that tend to screw with our hormones, even though they grow from the ground.
Let's take a look at some of the common antinutrients in the modern food
supply that most violently disrupt your body's natural biochemistry. The
corporations have made some of these antinutrients downright addictive—that's
why I want to give you as much motivation to resist them as possible.
We are a busy nation. We don't have time to cook, let alone get to the market
every day—we have stuff to do! So we think, “We need to stock up, buy in bulk,
shop once a week.”
That's how processed food came to take over the food chain: Corporations
figured out a highly profitable way to play off our time deficit. And boy, are we
paying for it.
A processed food is any food that's been canned, frozen, dehydrated, or had
chemicals added in to make it last longer, texturize it, soften it, allow it to sit on
the shelf forever. Some processed foods—like frozen or prechopped veggies—
can be a godsend. Maybe not as ideal as buying food in season from a local
farmers market, but I'm a realist and whole processed foods help us walk the
right path.
What I'm talking about are the processed foods made of refined grains,
vegetable oils, and added sugar that comprise almost 60 percent of our diet. We'll
get rid of these products that add cheap chemicals and dilute less profitable
whole food ingredients—in other words, most of the processed foods we eat!
As you read this section, I want you to grab a trash bag, go through your
kitchen and refrigerator, and put this stuff directly into the trash. Sometimes
you'll read a diet article that says, “Clean out all your ___ foods and donate them
to a soup kitchen or homeless shelter.” Forget that! No one should eat this food.
Why should a poor person eat this crappy food if you shouldn't?
I want you to make the mental connection that this stuff is poison, horrible for
your own or anyone else's body. Yes, you may have paid money for it, but cut
your losses and also prevent anyone else from poisoning their body. THROW IT
AWAY.
If there are any evil foods in the world, they include hydrogenated fats.
Created for the convenience of the processed-foods industry, hydrogenated fats
allow foods like chips, crackers, cookies, pies, and bread to sit on the shelf
forever and still retain their “freshness.” I don't know, is there something wrong
with a cookie that can be eaten years after it is produced? Common sense would
probably answer YES to that question.
Hydrogenated fats are created when a regular fat—such as a corn oil or a palm
oil—is blasted with hydrogen to change the liquid into a solid at room
temperature. More than any other kind of fat, including saturated fat,
hydrogenated fats increase your “bad” LDL and triglycerides and decrease your
“good” HDL. They also shrink the size of your LDL particles, which makes
them more likely to clot and dramatically raises your risk of heart attack. Just a 2
percent increase in trans-fatty acids in your diet increases your chance of heart
disease by 23 percent. Eating excess fried foods, which also include trans fats,
can increase your risk of metabolic syndrome by 25 percent.
Trans fats also increase your body's inflammation. People who eat more trans
fats have higher blood levels of interleukin-6, a hormonelike substance that's
been linked to hardening of the arteries, osteoporosis, type 2 diabetes, and
Alzheimer's. Research on animals found that interleukin-6-induced inflammation
also causes the liver to stop responding to growth hormone and the muscles to
wither away—and with that, metabolism. Definitely not the effect we're looking
for.
If you make a steady diet of trans fats, heart disease is virtually guaranteed. A
New England Journal of Medicine review of more than eighty studies found that
trans fat is more dangerous to health than any food contaminant, even when it's
only 1 to 3 percent of your total calorie intake. The study authors found that
you'd need to eat only 20 to 60 calories from artificial trans fats a day to start
damaging your health.
And you know how all those chip and cracker companies are claiming “no
trans fats” on their packaging? Manufacturers are permitted to use that claim as
long as one portion contains less than 500 milligrams of trans fats. A couple of
extra smears of your “zero trans fats” margarine and a couple of extra “trans
free” cookies can get you over that twenty-calorie mark pretty damn fast.
Hormone Homework: There is no safe limit to this stuff! Toss out anything
with “shortening” or “partially hydrogenated oil” of any type—palm, corn,
soybean—as they always include trans fats.
A small amount of trans fats are also found in meat, created in the bellies of
cows, sheep, and goats, but don't worry about these trans fats— they're mainly
good guys. These “ruminant” trans fats are not nearly as dangerous as
industrially produced trans fats, and may have some health benefits. Research
suggests that one, conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), may reduce the risk of breast,
prostate, intestinal, lung, and skin cancer, as well as reduce body fat and enhance
muscle growth. (Important note: These benefits of CLAs have not been
demonstrated in supplemental form. In fact, several studies have linked CLA
supplements to increased risk of insulin resistance, so please don't supplement
with CLAs.)
Hormone Homework: Always choose organic meats and dairy and look for
grass-fed options—cows that are allowed to graze exclusively on grass produce
milk and meat with 500 percent more CLAs than those fed grain. (We'll talk a lot
about this and many other reasons to choose organics in chapter 6.)
Remember my dictum to eat only food that had a mother or grew from the
ground? Once grains are refined, they no longer qualify. Refining grains helps
extend their shelf life by removing the bran and the germ of the grain—and with
it, almost all the fiber, vitamins, and minerals of the entire grain kernel. And then
the B vitamins—thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, folic acid—and the iron stripped out
during processing have to be restored by being “enriched.” The only people who
profit from this process are the corporations who can then stretch these refined
grains with added sugars, salt, fats, and chemicals, and then pocket the savings
themselves.
RIGHTING THE OMEGA BALANCE
We consume about 10 times more inflammation-causing omega-6 fats
(from corn, soybean, and sunflower oils, for example) than we do
inflammation-reducing omega-3s. As a result, the optimal ratio between
omega-3s and omega-6s—2:1 to 4:1—has been completely thrown off.
We're now at 14:1 up to 25:1! This diet helps you reduce the inflammation
and right that balance by Removing omega-6s on one end and Restoring
omega-3s on the other end.
Refined grains like white pasta, flour tortillas, white rice, and white bread are
devoid of many of the healthful nutrients of grains, and have a large downside:
Because they are so easy to digest, they guarantee skyrocketing blood sugar and
insulin spikes. Over time, those repeated spikes lead to insulin resistance and
diabetes. People who never eat whole grains have a 30 percent higher risk of
diabetes than people who eat just three servings of whole grains a day.
A study in the Journal of Clinical Nutrition found that, compared with those
who eat whole grains, people who eat refined grains have almost 40 percent
higher levels of C-reactive protein, a sign of chronic, low-level inflammation in
the blood vessels that's associated with heart attack and stroke. And there's no
doubt that these refined grains make you fat—these “fast” carbs are so easy to
eat, and so not filling, that we often don't wake up from our carb-coma until our
fingers hit the bottom of the bag.
Corn and wheat are among the worst insulin offenders. The availability of
corn flour and cereal products has almost doubled in the last thirty years, and
wheat products have increased more than 20 percent. On the other hand,
availability of barley, a nutritional wunderkind, has dropped by a third. In
contrast with corn's meager nutritional offerings, barley packs more than thirteen
grams of fiber in a single cup, helps stabilize blood sugar, and is a fantastic
source of selenium, which is essential for thyroid production. It's also rich in
magnesium, which helps lower triglycerides and dangerous blood lipids in
diabetics. Also consider oats—in addition to their miraculous work on
cholesterol, oats significantly lower blood sugar and enhance immune system
function.
Can someone explain to me why the average American has access to 31
pounds of corn and 134 pounds of wheat, but only 4 pounds of oats and less than
a pound of barley? Why on earth can't we get more of the grains that have
actually been proven to help us?
Hormone Homework: Go through your cabinets and fridge and get rid of
any processed grain product that doesn't say “100 percent whole_____” as the
first ingredient. I'd love for you to get rid of all your processed grains, but if you
must keep them, be sure they have at least 2 grams of fiber per serving. Beware:
Products billed simply as “whole grain” are required to have only 51 percent
whole grain. (Isn't that really “half grain”?)
In the late seventies, the medical establishment laughed at Dr. Atkins when
he said that fat didn't make people fat, carbohydrates made people fat. People
thought he was nuts. He was even called in front of Congress to defend himself
and his diet.
At that point, less than 15 percent of Americans were obese.
Then the low-fat dogma really kicked in, and in the decade that followed, the
obesity rate shot up 8 percentage points. Now here we are thirty years later, and
we're at 32 percent. The rise has been exponential. And thirty years after Atkins
asserted his controversial stance, surprise, surprise, we take it as common
knowledge that carbohydrates make you fat. Our bad.
This reversal of accepted wisdom won't take back those years of sugar
addiction, sadly. Some of the damage was done. But we can work with our
hormones to teach our bodies to react to food the way it did before we
overwhelmed our insulin response systems.
The only way we'll do this is to dump the most evil refined grain of all, highfructose corn syrup (HFCS). Get this: The U.S. production of HFCS went from
3,000 tons in 1967 to 9,227,000 tons in 2005. Production has increased 350
percent since 1980 alone. While our average consumption of refined sugar has
slowly dwindled in the past forty years, our consumption of HFCS has shot up
almost twenty-fold. Tufts University researchers reported that Americans
consume more calories from HFCS than from any other source.
As one of the cheapest sweeteners around, HFCS helps processed-food
companies boost their profits for pennies, but all it does for us is boost our fatstoring hormones. A recent University of Florida study found that a highfructose diet directly causes leptin resistance in lab rats. Another study, done at
the University of Pennsylvania, found that fructose doesn't suppress hunger
hormone ghrelin levels the way that glucose (table sugar) does. Women who ate
fructose instead of glucose had higher ghrelin levels throughout the day,
overnight, and into the next day.
SODA SUCKS
Consumption of soft drinks has increased 500 percent in 50 years.
Every corn syrup-or sugar-sweetened drink a child consumes each day
increases his or her obesity risk 60 percent.
Why does your body react this way? Well, for one thing, glucose is
metabolized by all your cells; fructose must be metabolized in the liver. HFCS
somehow tricks the body into not releasing insulin and leptin, two hormones
your body releases when you're done eating. And unlike regular sugar, HFCS
does nothing to dampen ghrelin, whose rising levels demand that your body eat
more. So if you eat or drink HFCS, you'll actually continue to consume more
calories, even twenty-four hours later, than you would had you just eaten plain
table sugar. HFCS also increases triglycerides, and high triglycerides prevent
leptin from working in the brain, so it can't tell you to stop eating.
You've probably seen ads from the Corn Refiners Association, trying to make
it seem like people who avoid HFCS are paranoid. Don't buy their crap—and
certainly don't eat it!
Hormone Homework: I have a zero tolerance policy for this garbage. Train
yourself to see the initials HFCS as short for “poison” and just say NO.
The good news? The per capita consumption of regular soda has begun to
drop by half a gallon each year. We're still at a staggering thirty-five gallons a
year, from an all-time high of almost forty gallons in 1998.
The bad news? We're replacing it with diet soda—climbing steadily at almost
half a gallon a year.
We think, “If sugar is bad, artificial sweeteners must be the answer, right?”
Hell, no. The irony is that artificial sweeteners may put us in even greater
metabolic danger than sugar or HFCS. A huge retrospective study of ninety-five
hundred people over nine years found that eating meat and fried foods and
drinking diet soda were the three most prominent risk factors of whether people
developed metabolic syndrome. Compared with people who drank none, those
who drank just one can of diet soda a day had a 34 percent greater incidence of
metabolic syndrome.
Huh? How is this possible? Don't diet sodas take away the sugar?
HIDDEN HIGH-FRUCTOSE CORN SYRUP
As the most abundant source of calories and one of the cheapest
ingredients in our food supply, HFCS has found its way into everything.
Check labels! Make any amount of HFCS your deal breaker. (After looking
at this list, you might wonder what the heck you can eat. Don't panic: Many
of these foods come in healthy forms as well, such as whole grain hot dog
and hamburger buns, organic yogurt without HFCS, plenty of organic lunch
meats. You simply need to know where to find them and what to look for—
that's what chapter 6 is all about.)
FOODS THAT COMMONLY CONTAIN HFCS
(PROCESSED, NONORGANIC VERSIONS OF THE FOLLOWING):
Applesauce Cocktail sauce Ketchup
Baked beans Cola and other sodas Lunch meat
Baking mixes Cookies Mayonnaise
Barbecue sauce Cough syrup Pasta sauce
Bread Crackers Peanut butter
Bread crumbs English muffins Pickles
Breakfast cereal Fruit drinks Protein bars
Candy Fruit juice blends Relish
Canned fruit Hot dog and hamburger buns Salad dressing
Cereal bars Ice cream
Chocolate milk Jams and jellies
Studies on animals give us a clue to what's happening here. Researchers at
Purdue University found that when animals were fed yogurt with saccharin they
later consumed more calories, gained more weight, and put on more body fat
than animals that were fed yogurt sweetened with glucose, a natural sugar with
the same number of calories—fifteen per teaspoon—as table sugar. The theory
goes that just as we can have mental and emotional associations with certain
tastes, our bodies have caloric associations with sweet tastes.
Normally, when we eat sugar, our body registers sweetness and comes to
understand that very sweet things mean lots of calories. However, when we
repeatedly drink diet soda, this understanding breaks down—your appetite says,
“Okay, here's the sweetness, but there aren't many calories—that must mean I
have to eat a lot of sweet things to get my needed calories.” The next time you're
given something sweet to eat, your body doesn't recognize how many calories
they hold, so you overeat them. And then, in contrast to those people who ate
sugar to begin with, you don't make up for those excess calories by eating less at
later meals.
TOSSING ALL SUGARS
Just because HFCS is evil doesn't necessarily put a halo over other
sugars' heads. No, we still have way too much of the noncorn variety in our
diets as well. The average American eats more than 30 teaspoons of sugar a
day—that's more than 114 pounds of sugar a year! To put it in perspective,
that's about how much I weigh.
Sugar is everywhere and you want to be sure to eat it in extreme
moderation. The World Health Organization recommends no more than 12
to 15 teaspoons a day, or 48 to 60 grams. I prefer that you keep it as low as
possible. Check out sugar in its many aliases below. (I'll give you a hint:
Anything that ends in “-ose” is a sugar.)
OTHER NAMES FOR SUGAR
Beet sugar Glucose Malt syrup
Brown sugar Grape sugar Maple syrup
Corn sweetener High-fructose corn syrup Molasses
Corn syrup Honey Raw sugar
Dextrose Invert corn syrup Rice syrup
Evaporated cane juice Invert sugar Sucrose
Fructose Lactose Sugar
Fruit juice concentrates Malt Syrup
Galactose Maltose
This next part is even scarier. The Purdue study also found that as the animals
continued to eat the artificial sweeteners, their metabolism started to “forget”
that most sweet things do have a lot of calories. Scary! So there's a good chance
that when you finally do break down and have that chocolate-glazed doughnut,
your body thinks, “No big deal,” and doesn't bother burning up the calories
because sweetness doesn't mean anything.
One more plausible explanation why artificial sweeteners make us fat might
be the fact that aspartame, also known as NutraSweet, is an excitotoxin, a
chemical that may cause permanent damage to our brain's appetite center. (See
“Antinutrient #9: Glutamates” for an explanation of excitotoxin's link to
obesity.) And the earlier these neural changes begin, the worse it is. A study at
the University of Alberta, Canada, found that baby rats that ate more diet foods
in their childhood had a greater chance of becoming obese later in life.
Researchers called it “taste-conditioning process”—we might call it the “Diet
Soda Backlash.”
Hormone Homework: As a recovering Diet Coke addict who would ingest
Splenda by the boatloads, I feel a bit hypocritical to say “Don't eat any artificial
sweeteners.” This is really a case of “Please do as I say, not as I have done.”
Aside from the risks from HFCS and artificial sweeteners, here's one more
reason to avoid soda. A major bottler settled a lawsuit with a group of parents
who claimed that several of the company's products contained high levels of
benzene, a known carcinogen also linked to serious thyroid damage. Benzoate
salts are added to soda to prevent mold growth. A Consumer Reports test found
that when drinks with these salts sit in plastic soda bottles in direct sunlight or in
heat, dangerous levels of benzene can form. Coca-Cola removed the additives
from several of their products, but these preservatives—and many others that
have not been adequately tested—remain in many other sodas on the shelf.
Hormone Homework: Don't take any chances—avoid any soda with
sodium benzoate or potassium benzoate and vitamin C (ascorbic acid), as the
combination of these two additives can create the benzene. If you must drink it,
be sure to store your soda in a cool, dark place.
How could an idea with such a good intention—to prevent spoilage and food
poisoning—go so incredibly wrong? The artificial preservatives in our food
supply age us and create all kinds of autoimmune diseases, from multiple forms
of cancer to MS. Researchers are discovering more and more that these
preservatives are also likely to destroy our biochemistry, inhibit our metabolism,
and interfere with our ability to lose weight.
Let's take one example: A common preservative, butylated hydroxyanisole, or
BHA, has been “generally recognized as safe” by the FDA, but is still
“reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen.” (How much sense does that
make?) This chemical antioxidant helps prevent food spoilage, but it's also an
endocrine disruptor. One study determined that the more BHA a male rat
received, the less testosterone and T4 he had circulating in his body. These little
guys stopped wanting sex, they had fewer and weaker sperm, and their testes
shrunk. Plus, their livers and adrenal glands swelled up and their thyroid glands
were completely screwed.
Now consider that we eat BHA in hundreds of foods, including butter, lard,
cereals, baked goods, sweets, beer, vegetable oils, potato chips, snack foods,
nuts, dehydrated potatoes, flavoring agents, sausage, poultry and meat products,
dry mixes for beverages and desserts, glazed fruits, chewing gum, active dry
yeast, defoaming agents for beet sugar and yeast, and emulsion stabilizers for
shortening. BHA is also found in food packaging, lipsticks, lip glosses,
mascaras, eye shadows, and facial creams. Even if the individual levels of BHA
are “generally recognized as safe,” what happens when we use multiple products
that all include them, or eat multiple servings? And consider this: BHA could be
replaced by vitamin E or left out of some foods altogether. So why take the risk?
Hormone Homework: Check packages for signs of BHA, which also goes
by the names anisole, butylated hydroxy-; antioxyne B; antrancine 12;
butylhydroxyanisole; tert-butyl hydroxyanisole; embanox; nepantiox 1-F;
phenol, tert-butyl-4-methoxy; phenol, (1,1-dimethylethyl)-4-methoxy-; sustane 1-
F; tenox BHA. (You're probably looking at this list thinking, “Are you kidding
me? How am I going to remember any of those?” That's exactly my point— see
how it might be easier just to stay away from processed foods altogether?)
We could have this same conversation about so many chemical additives, for
so many devastating health risks. The debate has raged for decades about the
link between kids' behavior problems and artificial coloring and preservatives.
Pediatricians have often pooh-poohed parents' concerns about these chemicals,
citing government “generally regarded as safe” guidelines and saying that
parents are just looking for scapegoats for their kids' bad behavior. But a recent
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study—in other words, rock-solid
research—in The Lancet proved otherwise. After preschoolers and grade-school
kids ate an additive-free diet for six weeks, then reintroduced additives into their
diets, their hyperactivity levels rose dramatically. Considering that the
prevalence of ADHD in this country has risen to almost one in ten kids, and a
bunch of them are being put on medication at as young as four, maybe we should
do something about this!
Hormone Homework: Always choose foods with the least number of
artificial chemicals for your kids, and be on the lookout for artificial colors,
many of which have been linked with thyroid, adrenal, bladder, kidney, and brain
cancer. The worst offenders are blue 1 and 2, green 3, red 3, and yellow 6. But
really, why subject them to any of this crap? Choose color-free medication, and
when you allow them a treat, make sure it's a small portion of the real thing. For
example, give them real ice cream instead of rainbow freezy pops.
Some of the absolute worst preservatives for your metabolism are used in
processed meats. A landmark NIH study of more than nine thousand people
found that the single greatest predictor of a person's chance of developing
metabolic syndrome was a steady diet of hamburgers, hot dogs, and processed
meats. The sodium nitrate and nitrite in bacon, ham, lunch meat, and hot dogs
give processed meat its pink color and prevent the spread of bacteria. But much
of that preventive protection could easily be achieved with adequate refrigeration
without risks to our health. After analyzing more than seven thousand studies on
diet and cancer risk, the American Institute for Cancer Research estimated that
for every 3.5 ounces of processed meat you eat per day—the equivalent of one
hot dog and two slices of smoked turkey breast—your risk of colon cancer
shoots up by 42 percent.
Hormone Homework: Avoid any processed meats, especially those that
include nitrates or nitrites. (Ask the deli counter clerk to read the label on the
meat before slicing it for you.) Choose fresh meat—look for organic or, at the
very least, nitrite-free meats. More and more grocery-store chains are
developing their own low-cost brands.
Now we move on to our pal glutamates, most frequently talked about as
monosodium glutamate, or MSG. Many people mistakenly think MSG is a
preservative. Were that the case, it might actually have a semiplausible excuse
for being in food. No, glutamates are “flavor enhancers.”
Glutamates do exist in natural foods like cheese and meat. But the low levels
of “bound” glutamates in natural foods are nowhere near the levels of “free”
glutamates currently being exploited by the processed-foods industry. You've
chowed on MSG in everything from canned raviolis, soup, and canned tuna to
bouillon, ice cream, and ranch dressing. A recent New York Times article noted
that Doritos have five kinds of glutamates.
Glutamates are produced by hydrolyzing proteins, a process that “frees” the
glutamates from the protein. When added to foods, glutamates enhance the
savory taste experience—indeed, we probably have taste receptors for
glutamates just like we have taste receptors for salty, sweet, bitter, and sour
tastes. Sounds good, right? But it turns out that high levels of free glutamates
also mess with your brain chemistry, big-time.
Glutamates are a form of excitotoxin, which studies as far back as the 1950s
have shown to be devastating to the nervous system. Excitotoxins dive into the
brain with relative ease, excite brain cells, and can rapidly cause permanent brain
damage and eventual cell death. One area of the brain particularly vulnerable to
excess glutamates is the hypothalamus, ground zero for hunger hormones like
neuropeptide Y.
Although the debate about MSG's safety remains heated, some researchers
assert that animals fed MSG sustained damage to their hypothalamus that led to
obesity and endocrine problems later in life. One possible reason is that MSG
damages your leptin receptors, causing your body to produce more, while
simultaneously creating leptin resistance in the brain.
The worst part? Some processed foods not only have one form of glutamate,
they may have two, three, or even four kinds. (See “The Glutamate Finder” that
follows.) As with all of these scary chemicals, who's to say what their synergistic
effects could be? By padding their foods with several varieties of glutamates,
food companies want you to love their food, so you'll keep coming back for
more. This is your brain on corn chips. Just say no!
THE GLUTAMATE FINDER
The government has decreed that anything that has monosodium
glutamate in it must say “Contains MSG.” Does that mean that if your food
doesn't have the label, it doesn't have glutamates? Absolutely not—it just
doesn't have that particular glutamate.
Don't be fooled by the words “natural flavor” or “spices” either. Foods
with natural flavors or spices could, in fact, be jam-packed with glutamates,
and you'd never know it! Check out this list of code words for hidden free
glutamic acids in your processed foods:
LIKELY SOURCES OF MSG
Autolyzed yeast Monosodium glutamate
Calcium caseinate
Natrium glutamate (natrium is
Latin/German
Gelatin for “sodium”)
Glutamate Sodium caseinate
Glutamic acid Textured protein
Hydrolyzed corn gluten Yeast extract
Hydrolyzed protein (wheat, milk, soy,
whey—
Yeast food
any protein that is hydrolyzed) Yeast nutrient
Monopotassium glutamate
Hormone Homework: As you eliminate as many glutamates as possible
from your diet, also explore ways to boost the natural flavor of foods. Fermented
foods, wine, soy sauce, Parmesan cheese, anchovies, and ketchup are all
naturally flavorful. Also, roasting, smoking, or slow grilling makes foods taste
rich and savory. And seek out the organic versions and enjoy without fear!
While whether to eat some of these foods is a black-and-white issue— may
another gram of hydrogenated fat never pass your lips, for example— some
foods are okay in smaller quantities. Let's take a look at some less-than-stellar
options in our food supply, and set an upper limit to how much you should have.
Your hormone levels may be fine with small quantities, but they may become
overwhelmed with more.
You'll find out how much I love vegetables in chapter 6. But one type is not
on the top of my list: starchy vegetables.
Just as we store our energy as glycogen, plants store their energy as starch. As
such, starchy vegetables are more calorie-dense than nonstarchy vegetables.
Nonstarchy vegetables, like broccoli, spinach, and green peppers, have 25
calories and 5 grams of carbs per half cup cooked serving, and they cause a
negligible bump in your blood sugar. Starchy carbs, on the other hand, have 80
calories and 15 grams of carbs per half cup cooked serving—and most have an
immediate and dramatic impact on your blood sugar and insulin. And which
vegetable could you imagine yourself overindulging in, potatoes or spinach?
Root vegetables and other starchy vegetables, such as potatoes, beets, corn,
and peas, have some redeeming nutritional qualities—potatoes are a fantastic
source of potassium, for example—but they're missing out on a lot of the more
potent antioxidants and other phytochemicals that are more prevalent in
nonstarchy vegetables. When you put those two things together—more calories
and less nutrition—I think you know where I stand on the matter.
Hormone Homework: Aim for less than two servings of starchy vegetables
a day. If you're going to have them, try interesting types like parsnips, a proven
cancer fighter, or beets, full of folate to help lower levels of heart-attackinducing homocysteine in the blood. I'm also a fan of sweet potatoes, packed
with free-radical-fighting beta-carotene and vitamin C. Anything but the usual
suspects of corn, peas, and potatoes—God knows you don't need more corn!
Watermelon, pineapple, banana, mango—basically all tropical fruits— are
high in sugar and should be consumed in limited quantities. But when I say
“limited,” I mean five servings a week (about one a day is okay). Dried and other
processed fruits should be treated as processed foods—i.e., not good for you—so
let them be. Many dried fruits use preservatives called sulfites, which can, in
some people, cause severe allergic reactions such as hives, nausea, diarrhea,
shortness of breath, or even fatal shock. Not good. Even grapes can be packed
with sulfites when they're shipped.
GO EASY ON THESE
STARCHY VEGETABLES
I'm never one to discourage veggie eating, but take it easy with these
guys:
Acorn squash
Butternut squash
Corn
Jerusalem artichokes
Peas
Plantains
Potatoes
Canned fruits, even when packed in their own juices, are considerably higher
in sugar than when you just eat them off the tree or vine. And heavy syrups—
well, nuff said on that front. That's just like grabbing a cup of corn syrup and
dunking in a forkful of fruit. So gross.
Hormone Homework: One dried fruit you might want to slip into rotation?
Dried plums, aka prunes. A good source of both soluble and insoluble fiber,
dried plums are excellent for your digestion and help manage your blood sugar
at the same time. Just watch your portions—each individual prune is twenty-five
calories.
For years, we heard about what a super food soy was—this lean protein
helped lower cholesterol, protect bones, improve circulation, reduce
inflammation, and lower the risks of cancer and diabetes. Soy was going to save
the universe, from the sound of things.
The food industry's inevitable reaction? If a bit of something is good (and
cheap!), way, way more of it must be better. Almost overnight, every processedfood product seemed to have added soy or isoflavones, the flavonoid in soy that
showed promise in many of these health claims. Premenopausal women were
promised freedom from hot flashes with soy supplements; heart patients were
chowing down on huge bags of soy nuts.
There's only one problem: Isoflavones are endocrine disruptors that mimic the
actions of estrogen. When we get isoflavones from natural products, we're fine—
the body knows what to do with the 38 grams of isoflavones in a half cup of
tofu. But it's really not sure what to do with the 160 grams of concentrated
isoflavones in a Revival soy bar.
While at first isoflavones were hailed as a shield against breast cancer, a
growing body of research suggests that isoflavones might be dangerous for
women who are either postmenopausal or at risk for breast cancer. The
estrogenlike activity of isoflavones encourages abnormal cell growth in those
already at risk. When you consider how many processed foods use soy as a
cheap protein source, and you add in the rising tide of environmental estrogens,
you can see that the last thing we need is extra estrogen supplementation!
Plus, many soy products are made from genetically modified (GMO)
soybeans. In fact, 85 percent of all soybeans planted in the United States are
GMO. Given that we suspect GMOs threaten biodiversity and the long-term
health of our farmland, but we know nothing about their long-term health
effects, I'd rather we just stay away from them.
A little bit of soy can be a good thing—it's rich in lean protein, omega-3s,
iron, magnesium, and various cancer fighters such as saponins and phytosterols.
And some of the phytoestrogen activity can be protective, especially for younger
women. But given the problems soy can create for those with thyroid issues (soy
is a known goitrogen) and those at risk of breast cancer (you can put most
American women in that category), I recommend you limit your soy intake to
whole foods that have the content of isoflavones nature intended them to have,
and eat only two servings per week.
Hormone Homework: I'm all for a few chunks of tofu or tempeh in a stirfry, and miso soup is also acceptable—these more natural uses of fermented soy
have been around forever and may be part of why Japanese women have a lower
incidence of breast cancer. But steer clear of processed products with isolated
soy proteins and/or high levels of isoflavones, like soy nuts, soy-fortified bars
and drinks, soy flour, soy cheese, soy milk, and faux meats. And if you're a
parent, really do your homework before you put your baby on soy formula.
Those tiny bodies are getting such concentrated doses of estrogens that some are
growing breasts! Soy formula can damage babies' immune systems and has been
linked with a 90 percent higher usage of allergy and asthma medications later in
life. Beware.
You've probably heard a lot lately about wine. “It extends your life! Fights
diabetes and heart disease! Prevents cognitive decline!” All due to the
miraculous effects of resveratrol, a powerful phytochemical that fights viruses
and inflammation. But there's just one thing about the amazing resveratrol— it's
also a phytoestrogen.
GET YOUR DRINK ON,
ORGANICALLY
Organic wines are produced without pesticides or preservatives, such as
sulfites. About 1 in 20 people are allergic to sulfites, and people with
asthma are particularly vulnerable. Many swear sulfites are behind that
“cheap wine” hangover.
All wine contains sulfites, but added sulfites can be 10 to 20 times the
natural amount. Red wines don't even need 'em; rosé and white wines have
more; and sweet wines, the most. Check for added sulfites on the label.
Once you've started drinking wines without sulfites, you'll never want to go
back—you'll taste the difference right away.
Alcohol releases estrogen into your bloodstream, promotes fat storage, and
decreases muscle growth. As soon as you have a drink, your body gobbles up all
the glycogen in your liver, makes you hungry, and reduces your inhibitions, so
you're more likely to grab that chicken wing or stuffed potato skin at happy hour.
You also burn way less fat, and burn it more slowly, than normal—Prevention
magazine estimates that just two drinks can cut your fat-burning ability by 73
percent.
While some argue that resveratrol's phytoestrogen nature is actually protective
against cancer, alcohol itself is a breast cancer risk. One study found that alcohol
helps develop the most common type of breast cancer tumors, those with both
estrogen and progesterone receptors. Analyzing data from more than 184,000
women, scientists deduced that one to two drinks a day increases your risk of
developing these kinds of malignant tumors by 32 percent; three or more bumps
that number to 51 percent.
On the other hand, especially if you're a guy, we can't deny that wine has its
benefits: it protects your heart, helps lower inflammation, fights viruses, and
might even lower blood sugar in diabetics. Recently, researchers at the UC San
Diego School of Medicine found that one glass of wine a day may decrease the
risk, by almost 40 percent, of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, a condition
associated with insulin resistance and heart disease. Bottom line, one drink a day
probably maxes out your benefits, so keep a cork in your alcohol consumption.
Hormone Homework: If you're going to have alcohol, drink wine. (See
“Get Your Drink On, Organically” above.) Women who had an occasional glass
of wine (one or fewer per day) increased their breast cancer risk by only 7
percent, which might net out with other health benefits—provided you don't have
other individual breast cancer risks. Ask your doctor to help you assess your
personal risk of breast cancer.
Fats are no longer the dietetic demons they once were. We know that some
fats are incredibly healthy for you, such as omega-3s, found in flaxseed and
wild-caught salmon; and conjugated linoleic acids (CLA), found in the meat and
milk of organic pasture-fed cows. But that doesn't necessarily mean all “full” fats
and dairy are good. Sure, saturated fats are not the best when you're trying to
reduce your risks of heart disease. And while some hard-core Atkins types argue
that saturated fats help you lose weight, we have a ways to go before the science
proves that beyond a doubt. There are conflicting arguments and convincing
cases on both sides, but the biggest danger of full-fat meat and dairy is their
tremendous endocrine-disrupting power from the garbage that is put in them.
Eating animal products is the number-one way we absorb dioxins— livestock
absorbs industrial pollution from incinerators. All the pesticides, hormones, and
other chemicals used in industrial farming—whether to increase meat growth,
boost milk production, or kill bugs and fungus on crops—find their way into
nonorganic meat and dairy. And stay there. Many chemicals used in farming
“bioaccumulate,” or collect, in the animal's fat tissue. And as soon as you
consume that flesh, those toxins take up residence in your fatty tissue and camp
out for decades. Consumer Reports cites an EPA estimate that you are ten times
more likely to develop cancer from dioxin—with about a one in one hundred
chance—if you eat a high-fat diet, precisely because of the high levels of this
toxin in meat and dairy.
The sad thing is that even organic meats have some trace of pesticides and
chemicals, just like every human born every second in this country. The result:
Your body is like a giant toxic-waste dump, collecting all the chemical crap in
the food supply—and holding on to it.
Before we get all bummed out here, let's get back to the basics of weight
control. The primary reason not to eat full-fat dairy and meat when trying to lose
pounds comes down to simple math: Ounce for ounce, those foods have way
more calories than leaner and lower-fat options.
Hormone Homework: Always go organic for meat and dairy. Also, try to
get the lowest fat content possible—choose leaner cuts of meat (look for the
words loin or round, such as “sirloin” and “eye of round”), trim any visible fat,
and choose skim or 1 percent dairy products. Try to get the majority of your fats
from unsaturated and omega-3 fats as often you can.
PREPARE FOOD TO MINIMIZE TOXINS
Removing certain foods is only half the picture—you also have to
prepare foods in ways that minimize the chance that endocrine disruptors
will leak into your food. Here are 20 tips to help you do just that:
1. Remove visible fat and skin from any chicken, meat, or fish.
2. Don't eat nonorganic full-fat animal products; choose skim or 1
percent dairy whenever possible.
3. Peel skins to eliminate pesticide residue from vegetables and fruits.
4. Remove the outer layers of cabbage and lettuce and throw them
away.
5. Chop off the tops of fruits such as apples and pears to avoid
pesticides that might drain into the stem area.
6. Wash reusable plastic drinking bottles by hand, never in the
dishwasher. If they get cracked or cloudy, recycle them and get a
stainless steel bottle for water.
7. Grill, bake, or broil meats. Don't fry them.
8. Avoid “everything but the kitchen sink” meat products, such as hot
dogs, bologna, and sausage—even minimize organic versions as they,
too, will have concentrated toxins in their organs.
9. Wash fruits and veggies with gentle dish soap that doesn't contain
scents or phosphates.
10. Don't store food in plastic containers. Throw them out and replace
them with glass ones.
11. Stay away from cans as much as possible by eating seasonal
produce.
12. Buy canned foods from Eden Foods because they don't use BPA in
their organic bean cans.
13. Buy broth, juice, milk, and other liquid products in cardboard
containers instead of cans.
14. Don't use plastic wrap; if you must, choose BPA-free Saran.
15. Never microwave with plastic wrap or other plastic containers; if
you need to cover a dish, use a chlorine-free paper towel or another
inverted dish as a top.
16. Don't buy boil-in-bag or microwave-in-bag vegetables or rice.
17. When grilling, use leaner cuts of meat or fish that won't create fatdrip flare-ups. These flare-ups deposit known carcinogens, called
heterocyclic amines (HCAs) or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs), on meat. (Grilled veggies and fruit don't have them.)
18. Throw away any juices that drip from grilled meat, fish, or
chicken.
19. Use glass baby bottles or bottles with liners.
20. Buy your veggies, fruits, meat, and dairy from your local organic
farmers market as often as possible!
We get almost 20 percent of our food from cans. Where do we live, in a
fallout shelter?
Look, I'm a realist. I know that when you're busy, it's much better for you to
whip open a can of Trader Joe's chili and nuke it than it is to cruise to the
Wendy's drive-through. I get it. But I still want you to get away from eating
vegetables from cans instead of from a farmers market. They're not the same.
First of all, you're not getting nearly the nutritional bang for your caloric buck.
Many veggies lose up to 90 percent of their original nutrition power in the
canning process. Second, canned foods are typically very high in sodium—some
cans of soup have 2,000 milligrams!
But perhaps worst is that cans are lined with plastic that contains BPA. The
Environmental Working Group did a study and found that for 1 in 10 cans of
regular food—and 1 in 3 cans of baby formula—a single serving was 200 times
the FDA's maximum safe level for other industrial chemicals. The problem is,
our government doesn't currently have a safety standard when it comes to BPA in
cans—the sky's the limit, folks! A study in the United Kingdom found that out of
62 cans purchased in supermarkets there, 40 tested positive for BPA. As you'll
recall from chapter 3, BPA is linked to insulin resistance, early puberty, prostate
cancer, and a host of other lovely conditions caused by hormone disruption.
Hormone Homework: This is reason #794 to stay away from processed
foods. If you must eat out of cans, buy organic, low-salt options. Try to minimize
your exposure to BPA as much as possible. Canned soup, pasta, and baby
formula have the most. As of press time, Eden organic beans
(www.edenfoods.com) was the only brand packed in a special can with a natural
resin-based liner that doesn't include BPA. Almost every other can in America
(with the exception of some canned fruit) has BPA in its lining—and, thus, in
your food.
We've come to my Achilles' heel—and I think I'm not alone. More than half
of us drink three to four cups of coffee every day. Maybe you do it for energy,
maybe because you've heard that some studies show caffeine enhances your
workout performance and helps to burn fat. But don't chug that pot of coffee just
yet.
It's true that pure caffeine in moderate doses (200 to 400 milligrams a day) can
elevate metabolism by up to 6 percent, improve cognitive function, and even
inhibit insulin resistance.
Here's the catch. Nonorganic coffee (or Red Bull or Diet Coke) isn't going to
give you any fat-burning effect. Those studies were done using isolated caffeine
as a supplement, paired with other specific substances, in a tightly controlled lab
setting. It doesn't apply to caffeine paired with excitotoxins or sugar or milk
solids or whatever else is lurking in your cup or can.
Even worse, when caffeine is abused, it damages your metabolism and
hormone balance. Caffeine stimulates your central nervous system, which makes
your endocrine system think that you are threatened in some way. With that third
cup of coffee at your desk each day, you kick your body into fight-or-flight mode
while you're just checking e-mail. Your adrenals pump out epinephrine and
norepinephrine. These two stress hormones set into motion a cascade of
fattening hormonal actions: Your liver releases blood sugar for quick energy,
your pancreas spits out insulin to counter the sugar, your blood sugar dips
because of the insulin's actions. Also, your blood vessels constrict, making you
feel like your blood sugar is dipping even further, so you head for the vending
machine. Ever notice how you crave something sweet somewhere between the
first and second cup of coffee? That's your body reacting to this sudden feeling
of blood sugar shortage.
The acids in one cup of coffee will elevate your cortisol for up to fourteen
hours. Now, if you sip caffeinated drinks all day, you switch on your stress
reaction over and over—your short-term energy burns out, you grab another cup,
repeat the hormonal cycle again, and effectively turn yourself into an addict.
Caffeine abuse overstimulates and eventually wears down your adrenals; it
also inflicts the long-term effects of real stress in your body: Oxygen flow to
your brain slows, your immune system is suppressed, the excess cortisol
increases your appetite and encourages fat to pack on your belly, and, last, your
continued insulin spikes help to create insulin resistance.
To make matters worse, when it's time to restore yourself with rest, the
caffeine you drank during the daytime may prevent you from getting adequate
sleep that night—and you now know that lack of sleep itself creates insulin
resistance.
The phosphoric acid in colas and coffee interferes with your calcium
absorption. In addition to being brutal on your bones, this calcium deficiency—
and the caffeine itself—can make the symptoms of PMS much worse, including
increased breast tenderness, irritability, and nervousness.
The National Academy of Sciences released a report claiming that caffeinated
beverages can be calculated in your daily water intake—but if you ask me, that's
bogus. Caffeine is a diuretic, draining precious water from your body at the very
moment you're trying to flush out the toxins. When you're dehydrated, your
blood volume decreases, reducing the amount of oxygen that can get to your
muscles, making them less effective at burning fat. There's no debate here: Get
your water from water.
Hormone Homework: Take this opportunity to transition to green tea.
You'll still get a caffeine boost, but green tea has been shown to promote fat
oxidation at rest and is believed to prevent obesity and improve insulin
sensitivity. Green tea also reduces the risk of breast and prostate cancer. But
guys, take note: Part of the reason green tea works is by lowering the amount of
circulating sex hormones in the body In other words, while it helps reduce
dangerous levels of estrogen, it also lowers testosterone—so tread lightly. No
more than one cup a day.
Limit yourself to one to two caffeinated beverages a day, and drink one extra
glass of water for every caffeinated beverage you drink. Make sure you finish
drinking both of them by noon. I want that caffeine completely out of your system
by nightfall.
You've taken the first step and eliminated the foods and other products that
stand in the way of your normal hormonal function. Now we're going to talk
about how to choose the foods that will optimize those hormones, and get your
metabolism working harder and burning higher than it has for a long time. In
chapter 6, you're going to revel in all the delicious foods you add to your diet.
On my website, you can get tons of recipes and personal meal plans that
incorporate these great foods. Like I've said before, I want you to eat. But I want
you to eat foods that work for you, not against you.
STEP 2—RESTORE
DISCOVER THE POWER NUTRIENTS THAT FEED YOUR FAT-BURNING
HORMONES
Now that we've Removed the antinutrients that spur your hormones to store
fat, we can focus on Restoring the foods that trigger your fat-loss hormones. The
main focus of Step 2 is the ten Power Nutrient Food Groups that repair your
metabolism and re-create your natural hormonal equilibrium. You'll learn to eat
whole, natural, real foods that help build muscle tissue and repair cells. You'll
also learn about specific foods and eating habits that help support your glands
and hormone production, turning on the hormones you want, and turning off
those that sabotage your weight-loss efforts.
Most of all, I wanted to create a food plan that's sustainable. You may not be
able to stick a bag in the microwave and call it dinner, but I've tried to make it as
easy as possible to follow this diet. You might have to work a little, but the
benefits are unbeatable.
You know how much I love to go on about the power of choice. What if I told
you that you have the power to reduce your risk of all obesity-related diseases,
such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and stroke, by 50 percent? This life-ordeath choice is made by you when you choose the foods you are going to put in
your body.
THE MASTER 10
1. Legumes
2. Alliums
3. Berries
4. Meat and eggs
5. Colorful fruits and veggies
6. Cruciferous veggies
7. Dark-green leafy veggies
8. Nuts and seeds
9. Organic dairy
10. Whole grains
Do you realize that there is nothing in our genes that tells us when to die?
There are genetic codes that tell us how to grow, how to breathe, and how to
sleep, but NOTHING that tells us to die. So why do we? Because we literally
rust and decay our bodies from the inside out with poor food and lifestyle
choices.
God/nature/whatever name you want to call it has provided us with all we
need to heal ourselves. Hippocrates said, “Let food be your medicine,” and boy,
was he right! Some foods heal with absolutely no negative side effects, are 100
percent natural, and are as far away as your local market. I call them Power
Nutrients. A Power Nutrient is a food that can dramatically improve the quality
and duration of your life. These foods have been scientifically proven to help
prevent and, in some cases, reverse disease. They also stabilize your hormones
and rev up your metabolism—a welcome side effect you'll never get from drugs.
Following is a list of ten Power Nutrient food groups that you should consume
as often as possible—I mean it! Let's look at what each one does for your body
and how each helps you restore your body's metabolism. As you read about the
Power Nutrients, you'll also encounter “Hormone Trigger Foods” sidebars,
collections of foods that have been found to either trigger or dampen specific
hormones. All the hormone-positive foods have been incorporated into this diet's
food lists, meal plans, and recipes. (For handy lists of Power Nutrient foods,
please see “The Master Shopping List,” page 236.)
Beans and other legumes (BEST CHOICE: red beans) do have carbs, but the
best kinds. For example, beans are one of the richest sources of soluble fiber,
which is key to good blood sugar control. They also have resistant starch RS1,
which “resists” being digested in the small intestine until it can pass into the
large intestine. There, the resistant starch ferments, rebuilds the intestinal lining,
and creates short-chain fatty acids, which fight systemic inflammation, cancer,
and “bad” bugs in the gut, like E. coli and candida. Resistant starch also helps
lower insulin levels, probably because it takes so long to digest that it slows
down the release of blood sugar. One study found that by adding 5 percent
resistant starch to your meal, you increase your postmeal fat burn—and 80
percent of that fat comes from your belly and hips, 20 percent from the fat in
your meal. Gotta love that! Plus, when you eat the resistant starch in beans, you
feel fuller, store less fat, lower your cholesterol and triglycerides, and improve
your whole body's insulin sensitivity.
Many beans contain phytoestrogens, but unlike isoflavone-enriched processed
soy products, these phytoestrogens are shown to reduce levels of circulating
estrogen. Beans are also high in zinc and B vitamins, both proven testosterone
boosters.
Hormone Homework: Have 1 to 3 servings per day.
Dried beans are better than canned; soak them for six to eight hours, or
overnight, in room temperature water, then drain before cooking.
Don't avoid canned beans if that convenience encourages you to eat
more legumes— the numerous health benefits of beans and lentils vastly
outweigh the potential dangers of cans. (Don't forget that Eden Foods has
BPA-free cans.)
Look for no-salt varieties and rinse them thoroughly before cooking.
No, refried beans with lard do not count! If you love that taste, look for
refrieds that contain beans, salt, and water. (See the Resources on page 243
for my favorite brands.)
Garlic (BEST CHOICE) and the other alliums—onions, leeks, chives,
shallots, and scallions—are incredible body detoxers. They stimulate the body to
produce glutathione, an antioxidant that lives within each cell, ready to fight free
radicals where they live throughout the body. Glutathione's action is especially
important in the liver, where it helps to remove pharmaceuticals and other
endocrine-disrupting chemicals.
A certain type of flavonoids in onions, called anthocyanins, are incredible
free-radical destroyers, and emerging science suggests they may also help fight
obesity and diabetes. Garlic and its siblings also help to lower total cholesterol—
but raise HDL—by decreasing the liver's synthesis of cholesterol. (Two cloves of
garlic a day might be as potent as some cholesterol-lowering drugs.) Although
studies in rats suggest that garlic's allicin may enhance testosterone levels, it's a
little early to know. But garlic already does so much—if they prove it does
increase testosterone, so much the better.
Leeks are especially cool. They take the best aspects of garlic and onions—
especially manganese, a blood sugar stabilizer—and combine them with fiber,
turning them into an all-around fantastic choice to keep insulin levels stable.
Hormone Homework: Have at least 1 serving per day.
Crushing, chopping, or chewing garlic helps release allinase enzymes,
which trigger many of its beneficial actions. At least chop the top off before
you roast it—that will allow for some enzyme activity.
Before you cook with chopped or crushed garlic, let it stand for 10
minutes to let the enzymes activate all of the beneficial compounds.
If you can hack it, try to eat these guys raw—allinase can be deactivated
by heat. Slice raw red or Vidalia onions for your sandwich or burger; chop
green onions into your salad or garlic into your dressing.
Pair garlic with olive oil to release even more helpful organosulfur
compounds. Sauté the white part of leeks with garlic for a double dose of
allium power. To battle garlic breath (which can last up to eighteen hours—
gross), chew a sprig of parsley or mint after your meal. Be sure to brush and
floss, and use a tongue scraper and/or mouthwash regularly.
Berries (BEST CHOICE) have high quantities of polyphenols, the same
phytochemicals that give wine and chocolate a lot of their health-protecting
qualities. But unlike wine and chocolate, berries are not fattening and have no
caffeine. Berries owe their beautiful colors to anthocyanins, flavonoids that just
might trip our fat-burning genes in the right direction. One Japanese researcher
found that anthocyanins stop individual fat cells from getting larger and
encourage fat cells to release adiponectin, a hormone that helps reduce
inflammation, lower blood sugar, and reverse leptin and insulin resistance.
Another study found that anthocyanins can reduce blood glucose levels after
starch-rich meals, preventing insulin spikes that lead to diabetes. Certain
polyphenols found in raspberries and strawberries block the digestive enzyme
activity of specific starches and fats, reducing your body's absorption of them.
Combine this activity with the soluble fiber in berries, and you have a sweet treat
that works hard to help you lose weight and keep your blood sugar where you
want it—low.
Hormone Homework: Have at least 1 serving per day (as much as you can
afford!)
Organic is a must! Berries are among the most pesticide-laden fruits.
Fresh or frozen is best. You lose almost all the anthocyanins when you
eat berries in processed foods.
Look for packages with no visible juice stains, which suggest the berries
are past their prime. Discard any soft or bruised berries and store the rest in
a bowl lined with a paper towel in the refrigerator. Try to eat them within
forty-eight hours of purchase.
When berries are in season at the local farmers market, buy an entire
flat, take them home, and gently wash them and let them dry. Place the
berries on a cookie sheet and freeze them, then transfer them to a freezersafe bag, where they can keep for up to two years.
Black raspberries have an extremely high concentration of anthocyanins
and ellagic acid and can often be found growing wild—keep your eyes
peeled!
Did you cringe a little when I said you'd be eating foods that grew from the
ground or had a mother? This is the mother part. On this plan, you're going to eat
meat. All different kinds, but primarily those high in beneficial fats, like CLAs
or omega-3s.
Meat is the best source of the amino acids you need to build muscle (BEST
CHOICE: Alaskan wild salmon). Meat and eggs both have amino acid Larginine, critical to the production of protein and to the release of growth
hormone in the body. L-arginine is also a precursor to nitric oxide (NO), a
beneficial gas that improves the functioning of your endothelium, the lining of
your blood vessel walls, to decrease clotting and increase blood flow. (NO is the
driving force behind Viagra, if you catch my meaning.)
The amino acid tyrosine not only keeps a lid on your appetite and reduces
body fat, it also supports the healthy function of your thyroid, pituitary, and
adrenal glands. Leucine, another amino acid found in meat, eggs, and fish, also
helps the body produce growth hormone, as well as regulate blood sugar levels
and grow the muscles that help all your hormones work better, especially insulin
and testosterone.
You know those twenty-five years of trying to reduce dietary cholesterol to
keep blood cholesterol levels down? Yeah, forget that. All sex steroids are
created from cholesterol, so your body needs the cholesterol in meat and eggs to
make that precious testosterone. In fact, many experts now believe there is little
connection between dietary cholesterol and unhealthy blood cholesterol. (Oops,
their bad.) Turns out whole eggs are a nearly perfect food, with almost every
essential vitamin and mineral our bodies need to function. (Pair an egg with an
orange and you'll get the one thing that's missing—vitamin C.)
Protein increases your metabolic rate because it takes more energy to burn
than carbs or fats. When you eat protein and fat, especially the omega-3s found
in organic free-range eggs, meat, and fatty deep-sea fish, ghrelin levels drop and
the stomach releases more of the neuropeptide CCK, slowing down digestion
and lowering your appetite. Salmon, which is rich in omega-3s, is also a source
of selenium, which is critical to your thyroid, and vitamin D, which helps to
preserve muscle.
Salmon is also the perfect food when you have PMS: One serving of salmon
gives you a huge amount of tryptophan, the precursor to serotonin, a brain
chemical associated with calm and positive moods. And eating fish also helps to
reduce your body's production of prostaglandins. Prostaglandins act like
hormones in the body, but rather than move their messages around the
bloodstream, they stay right in the cells. You can blame prostaglandins for
inflammation, pain, and fever in your body— and cramps. But while omega-6
fatty acids produce prostaglandins, salmon's omega-3 fatty acids can help blunt
their effects.
The omega-3s in salmon and organic free-range meats and eggs also help to
manage blood sugar and fight obesity. A dose of 1.8 grams of eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA) a day—most easily achievable with fish oil capsules—has been
shown to increase adiponectin levels, increasing insulin sensitivity. Another
study suggests that fish may help the body become more sensitive to leptin and
less likely to become leptin-resistant.
Many vegetarians might argue that you can get omega-3s from vegetable
sources, but no plant source of omega-3s would ever get you close to this
beneficial dose. Our bodies convert only 5 percent of ALA omega-3s (from
flaxseed, walnuts, and other tree nuts) to EPA, and even less to DHA. By all
means, include these in your diet, but don't count on them to get you to a
desirable threshold for healthy fats. For that, don't mess around—eat organic
meat, eggs, fatty fish, and, for good measure, take mercury-free fish oil capsules.
Because we have to face the one huge, unavoidable bummer of fish: toxins.
Were it not for that, you could eat fish every day of the week and I'd be happy—
and so would your hormones.
Hormone Homework: Have 3 to 5 servings (from recommended sources) per
week.
Always buy wild-caught salmon—farm-raised salmon are fed a diet that
raises their omega-6s, not their omega-3s. Farmed fish have higher levels of
PCBs and other organochlorines than wild-caught, and their farms create
sea lice that kill wild salmon. (Go to www.mbayaq.org for the best choices
in seafood for your area.)
Eat fish within two days of purchase. If you can't find wild salmon in
your area, consider ordering it online—it's worth the investment and the
peace of mind.
Used canned salmon, which is almost always wild-caught, to sprinkle
over salads, fold into a wrap, or add to an omelet. Or try kippered snacks—
smoked herring, quite delicious all by itself—or sardines.
Pasture-raised, grass-fed beef has a stronger flavor than corn-fed—some
love it, but it can take some getting used to.
If you're really freaked out about the environmental toxins in fish, you
can (and should!) take a daily fish oil supplement instead.
By seeking out vegetables of varying colors (BEST CHOICE: tomatoes),
you'll automatically get a range of phytonutrients, each of which has its own
particular health-promoting strengths. These colorful plant foods also happen to
be incredible sources of soluble and insoluble fiber—both essential for hormone
balance and impossible to get from animal products.
When people think “vegetables,” they often think of greens. Some of the most
powerful leafy and cruciferous veggies are green, and we'll address them below.
But some of my favorites are the vibrant-colored vegetables in orange, yellow,
red, and purple. The UCLA Center for Human Nutrition's color-code system
divides vegetables into several distinct color groups; I've adapted their system
here.
Orange: Foods high in beta-carotene include many orange vegetables, such as
carrots, sweet potatoes, cantaloupe, and mangoes. Researchers believe betacarotene may help cells speak with one another a bit more fluently increasing the
body's ability to avoid cancer. Beta-carotene also plays an important role in the
production of progesterone during pregnancy.
Yellow: Most citrus foods fall into this category, and the vitamin C in citrus
can also help us to manage stress. One German study made subjects stand in
front of a huge group of people and do math problems. Those who had received
1 gram of vitamin C had much less cortisol and lower blood pressure than those
who had not.
Purple: We talked about some of the powerhouse purples in the berry section.
Other purple fruits and vegetables, including grapes and olives, have high levels
of resveratrol, a type of plant antibiotic with tremendous promise in antiaging,
anti-inflammatory and blood-sugar-lowering effects. Even when rats were fed
diets high in hydrogenated trans fats, resveratrol reduced their risk of death by
30 percent.
Red: All red fruits and veggies share the phytochemical lycopene, a powerful
cancer-fighting antioxidant. Several studies found that those men with the
highest blood levels of lycopene had the lowest risk of developing prostate
cancer. Lycopene also halts oxidative stress, the process by which LDL particles
harden and gunk up the arteries. When healthy adults avoided lycopene for two
weeks, their fat oxidation jumped by 25 percent. One of the richest sources of
lycopene on the colorful vegetable and fruit list actually qualifies as both: the
tomato. One cup of tomatoes gets you almost 60 percent of your daily value of
vitamin C for just thirty-seven calories. You might not imagine it, but tomatoes
are also a very good source of fiber: one cup yields almost 8 percent of your
daily needs and helps you counter high blood sugar.
Hormone Homework: Have 5 servings per day.
Try for at least one serving from each color category each day to get a
good balance of varied phytonutrients.
Fruit salads, salsa, smoothies, tossed salads—any dishes that include a
rainbow of color help you in your colorful fruit and vegetable allotment for
the day.
Cooking tomatoes concentrates their power: tomatoes heated for two
minutes increased their lycopene and antioxidant activity by 50 percent;
thirty minutes increased them by 150 percent. Choose organic sauce, paste,
ketchup—all have greater lycopene content with no HFCS.
In contrast, many other colorful veggies lose their potency with
cooking. Eat a combination of raw and cooked vegetables to cover all
bases.
When in doubt, keep the skin on. Lots of insoluble fiber hides in that
carrot, apple, or pear skin.
Shop for produce in season, and always look for organic first. Check out
www.localharvest.org for a market near you or sign up for a subscription to
a CSA (community-sponsored agriculture) farm
(www.localharvest.org/csa). If you're concerned about your food bill, check
the list of essential organic choices on page 151.
Fall in love with low-sodium tomato juice, very low in calories but
incredibly filling— one six-ounce serving gives you 33 milligrams of
vitamin C for only thirty calories.
If you're in a rush, buy some fresh salsa—without preservatives—from
the produce section of the grocery store. Eat a cup with lunch and get
tomatoes, peppers, and onions all at the same time.
When you chew cruciferous vegetables (BEST CHOICE: broccoli), you
release enzymes that start the chemical process that gives these vegetables their
unbeatable cancer-fighting properties. The byproducts of this process,
isothiocyanates, are like little assassins in the body, eliminating carcinogens
before they can cause genetic damage and helping to prevent bladder, cervical,
colon, endometrium, lung, and prostate cancer. They can even correct problems
in hormone metabolism, such as preventing estrogen from stimulating breast
cancer cells.
Add to this that sulforaphane, found in cruciferous vegetables such as
broccoli, cabbage, and cauliflower, was shown to help your body repair itself
from damage brought on by diabetes. Sulforaphane can help your blood vessels
defend against damage caused by hypoglycemia. Researchers believe these
compounds can also help prevent the heart disease that often comes with
diabetes.
Don't forget our nutrient density credo—these babies pack this serious
nutritional power in spite of having fewer calories in every mouthful, primarily
because of their high water and fiber content. That fiber fills you up and can
increase your body's ability to burn fat by up to 30 percent. Studies have
consistently shown that people who eat the most fiber gain the least amount of
weight.
Hormone Homework: Have 2 to 3 servings per day.
Don't cook broccoli on the stove—microwave it instead. You'll preserve
90 percent of the vitamin C, versus 66 percent with boiling or steaming.
Try not to overcook cruciferous veggies—not only will they be less
nutritious, they can get stinky (it's the sulfur), mushy, and yucky. Try
blanching them instead—throw them into a pot of boiling water for two
minutes, drain quickly, and rinse with ice-cold water.
When you bring cruciferous veggies home from the farmers market,
wash and cut them right away, put them in bowls of water, and store in the
fridge for instant snacks.
Grab bags of precut broccoli, cauliflower, and cabbage at the store.
Throw them into salads, eat them with hummus, fold them into burritos.
Even if you're just opening the occasional can of (healthy!) soup for
dinner, toss in some chopped cruciferous veggies: cabbage, kale, rutabaga.
You won't even taste them, but you'll have more volume to eat for
practically zero calories, and your body will get the good phytochemicals.
Roasted cauliflower is awesome! Place florets on a baking sheet with a
light drizzle of olive oil, salt, and pepper. Bake for forty-five minutes at 450
degrees. Shake once or twice while cooking to even out the browning. Yum.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SOLUBLE
AND INSOLUBLE FIBER?
Insoluble fiber gives our stools bulk and helps maintain regular
digestion. Important benefits, sure, but soluble fiber may be more critical
for hormone balance. Soluble fiber traps carbohydrates to slow their
digestion, blunts the rise of glucose after meals, and keeps insulin levels
low. Soluble fiber's sticky quality also helps to drag cholesterol out of the
digestive tract, lowering your LDL. Experts at the University of Michigan
Cancer Center say the best way to tell the difference between soluble and
insoluble fiber is to picture the food submerged in water. Insoluble fiber,
like an apple skin or a stalk of celery, will retain its shape; soluble fiber,
found in foods like oatmeal and the inside of beans, will get gooey and
sludgy. (Bonus: Most sources of soluble fiber have insoluble fiber, too.)
SOURCES OF SOLUBLE FIBER
Almonds Cantaloupe Pears
Apples Carrots Peas
Apricots Crushed psyllium seeds Plums
Artichokes (Metamucil) Potatoes
Avocadoes Figs Prunes
Bananas Grapefruit Raspberries
Barley Ground flaxseed Rice bran
Beans (black, garbanzo, Kiwi Rye
kidney, navy, pinto) Lentils Strawberries
Blackberries Mangoes Sunflower seeds
Black raspberries Nectarines Sweet potatoes
Broccoli Oat bran Tomatoes
Brussels sprouts Oatmeal Wheat germ
Bulgur Onions
Cabbage Oranges
More than one thousand plants have leaves we can eat—but how many do
we eat? If we eat just five servings a day, we cut our risk of developing diabetes
by 20 percent. Several studies have found that leafy greens (BEST
CHOICE: spinach), more so than other vegetables, play a significant role in
decreasing our risk of diabetes, possibly because of their fiber and magnesium,
which helps thyroid hormone secretion, metabolism, and overall nerve and
muscle function. The manganese in green leaves is also essential for normal
glucose metabolism.
HYPOTHYROID? TAKE CARE
If your thyroid is at all compromised, take it easy with cruciferous
veggies. Perhaps because of the goitrogenic nature of isothiocyanates, very
high consumption of cruciferous veggies has been linked in animal studies
to an increased risk of hypothyroidism. The chances of this happening to
someone without a thyroid issue is pretty slight, but if you are thyroidsensitive, cook your cruciferous vegetables and sprinkle them with iodized
salt, to counter the ions that might compete with the iodine for space in
your thyroid.
The vitamin C in leafy greens can be helpful to the adrenal glands as well. The
adrenals release vitamin C during stress, but taking megadoses of it may lead to
an increased risk of diabetes. The best way to get your vitamin C is through
natural sources, such as romaine lettuce and turnip greens, both excellent
choices.
The high levels of iron in spinach and Swiss chard are great for bringing
oxygen to your muscles. When you don't have enough, your metabolism takes a
big hit. By blocking the formation of prostaglandins, leafy greens also help
prevent system-wide inflammation, reducing arthritis pain and blood clotting.
The soluble fiber in dark-green leafy veggies is considered a “prebiotic,” which
means it helps to feed the “good” probiotic bacteria in your gut, also known to
prevent inflammation.
Believe it or not, leafy greens even contain a very small amount of omega-3
fats. On their own, they won't get you all the omega-3s you need, but one serving
of spinach will give you half the amount in a serving of canned tuna, and even a
gram of protein.
Hormone Homework: Have 3 to 4 servings per day.
Start with arugula and make your way through the alphabet to turnip
greens—you'll be surprised at how delicious and different-tasting they all
are.
Start every dinner with a salad. Shake it up—do leaf lettuce one week,
romaine the next. Starting this way takes the edge off your hunger, and
makes sure you fit in your leafy greens. A salad plate easily holds two cups
—and you're halfway to your daily goal. Add other vegetables or just a
simple balsamic vinaigrette to the leaves themselves and you're golden.
Buy frozen spinach (organic, if possible) in those little bricks—they're
perfectly portioned for a full family or for an evening's meal with leftovers
the next day. Sauté with olive oil, chopped garlic, and lemon.
Use baby spinach for salads and mature spinach for cooking.
Mesclun is actually a mix of greens including different lettuces,
radicchio, dandelion greens, endive, and others. Try mixes from different
stores—all have different varieties of greens. Wash it, pat it dry with a
paper towel, and use within five days of purchase.
When my clients are weaning themselves off yucky trans fat snacks, I turn
them on to raw nuts like almonds, pecans, or walnuts. Nuts and seeds hit all the
right snacking notes (BEST CHOICES: almonds and walnuts), yet behind the
scenes, they're helping to protect you from heart disease, diabetes, and
inflammation.
The Adventist Health Study found that eating nuts on a regular basis cuts your
overall risk of heart attack by 60 percent. Much long-term research has credited
omega-3s, antioxidants, fiber, L-arginine, and magnesium with a role in helping
to tamp down inflammation—and all of these precious nutrients can be found in
nuts. When people eat nuts, they tend to have lower levels of C-reactive protein
(CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), both markers of inflammation.
Many people are afraid of nuts because of their fat; I'm more concerned about
their calories. Perhaps both fears are groundless: Research suggests that people
who eat nuts twice a week are much less likely to gain weight than those who
don't eat nuts. Pine nuts are especially good at helping to prevent hunger because
they stimulate the gut to produce the satiety hormone CCK.
Seeds also help reduce the risk of diabetes, as they are a source of resistant
starch, just like beans. Resistant starch helps reduce blood sugar and dampen
insulin spikes after eating. Flaxseed, in particular, is a great source of the
vegetable-based omega-3, alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), which also prevents
inflammation. Pumpkin seeds are a good source of omega-3s as well as zinc, a
key component in testosterone production and prostate health.
Hormone Homework: Have 1 to 2 servings per day.
Crush flaxseeds before you eat them; otherwise they'll pass through
your digestive system without being absorbed. Store crushed seeds in the
fridge to avoid oxidation.
Try to eat raw nuts whenever possible— roasting the nuts can cause
their precious fats to be damaged. Once you get used to them, you'll likely
find them more satisfying and rich than roasted ones.
Sprinkle slivered almonds on your yogurt for a satisfying texture.
Keep a handle on portion sizes—nuts are healthy, but they're very high
in calories. (See “How Many Nuts or Seeds in a Serving?” on page 144.)
Get an old-school nutcracker and grab a bag of mixed nuts still in their
shells. The activity of cracking the nuts is entertaining and the effort
involved will slow down your eating and cut down on mindless handfuls of
nuts finding their way into your mouth.
HEADS UP: High amounts of flaxseed and flaxseed oil can reduce
blood clotting and promote bleeding, and may interact with drugs that that
have a similar effect, such as aspirin.
Research is piling up that shows what a critical role dairy's calcium plays in
weight control (BEST CHOICE: organic low-fat plain yogurt). Even small
deficiencies of calcium change fat-burning signals in the cells and have a
dampening effect on metabolism. But calcium doesn't just impact weight—a
study of nine thousand people in the journal Circulation suggests that calcium
also protects against the development of metabolic syndrome.
Grass-fed dairy products have saturated and trans fats, but they also include
the best kind: conjugated linoleic acids, or CLAs. Shown to improve body
composition, CLAs help to drive fat out of fatty tissues, where it can be burned
up more easily. The combination of these healthy fats with dairy's high protein
also stimulates the appetite-suppressing hormone CCK. Organic free-range dairy
tastes better, and has no antibiotics or hormones and more omega-3s. Bonus: The
zinc in dairy also helps to support healthy levels of appetite-suppressing leptin.
Most dairy foods in this country are fortified with vitamin D, which helps the
body absorb calcium. Adequate vitamin D not only helps prevent osteoporosis, it
has also been linked with lower risks of cancer, type 1 and type 2 diabetes, high
blood pressure, glucose intolerance, and even MS. Recent research proves that
our country is incredibly vitamin D–deficient. Dairy is critical, especially if you
live at a higher latitude and don't get much sun during the fall, winter, and
spring.
The best dairy food is, by far, yogurt, primarily because of its probiotics.
Remember that you are one-tenth human, nine-tenths bug. Your gut is where
most of those good bugs live—ideally trillions of them. The probiotics in plain
organic yogurt join up with the bifidobacteria, the “good” bugs already in your
gut, to help fight against infections and protect you from yeast overgrowth.
Bifidobacteria also digest the foods we eat, creating critical vitamins, including
enzymes that metabolize cholesterol and bile acid. Without these microbes, the
whole digestive system would squeak to a halt.
Hormone Homework: Have 1 to 2 servings per day.
Take your milk straight—one 8-ounce glass of organic low-fat milk has
290 milligrams of calcium—almost a third of your daily needs—and more
than 8 grams of protein.
Don't drink chocolate or other flavored milks. And steer clear of soy
milk—while it's high in calcium, it's also high in potentially dangerous
phytoestrogens.
Look for brands of yogurt (and occasionally ice cream) with no
artificial preservatives, colors, flavorings, sugar, and other sweeteners—
organic is best.
Wean yourself from sugared (or, god forbid, artificially sweetened)
yogurts by adding ¼ cup of plain, then ½ cup, then ¾ cup, to your regular
yogurt. Once you get to 100 percent plain, use strawberries, raspberries, and
blackberries to sweeten your yogurt.
Steer clear of low-fat dairy products with thickeners and gums—I'd
rather you eat a small dollop of real sour cream or a reasonable portion of
full-fat cottage cheese than confuse your hormones with synthetic gunk.
Experiment with other kinds of cultured dairy, such as buttermilk, kefir,
or crème fraîche. Each of these dairy products has the distinctive tang of
fermentation—your belly bugs will love you for it.
Try high-protein Greek-style yogurt—the thicker consistency comes
from being strained through muslin so the watery part is removed.
Go easy on the full-fat cheese—it's tasty, sure, but don't forget that that
taste packs a pretty hefty caloric wallop.
HOW MANY NUTS OR SEEDS IN A SERVING?
You're pretty savvy—you must be thinking, “Wait a sec, aren't nuts
superfattening?” Indeed, nuts are high in calories; however, when eaten in
moderation they help to combat overeating and hunger due to their fiber
and protein content. Keep an eye on your portion sizes and you'll do just
fine.
Sources: www.nuthealth.org and www.calorieking.com
Grains make up 25 percent of our diet—but 95 percent of that is from refined
sources. That's just criminal, because whole grains can really help improve our
hormone levels—and our overall health—in countless ways (BEST CHOICE: tie
between oats and barley).
Most people don't realize that many whole grains are even better sources of
phytochemicals and antioxidants than some vegetables, making them even more
potent in the fight against heart disease and more than a dozen different kinds of
cancer. Part of the power of whole grains comes from their three kinds of
carbohydrate—fiber, resistant starch R1, and oligosaccharides—that skip over
the small intestine so they can be fermented in the stomach. The fermentation
process of these prebiotics creates beneficial short-chain fatty acids such as
butyric acid. Butyric acid fights colon cancer cells while it simultaneously feeds
the healthy cells of the colon. When colon cells are strong, they can help the
body detox from pharmaceuticals and other environmental chemicals, just like
the liver does.
The short-chain fatty acids from whole grains may also help us eat less
because they stimulate fat cells in our stomachs to release leptin, the satiety
hormone. The high levels of fiber in whole grains also help us feel satisfied by
filling us up, slowing blood sugar release, and steadying insulin levels. For this
and other reasons, eating whole grains can even help reverse insulin resistance.
Epidemiological studies link high intakes of whole grain foods with lower levels
of type 2 diabetes—and you need only three servings a day to reduce your risk
by 30 percent.
The trick is, you have to eat grains truly whole. Even just grinding whole
grains changes their cell structure and makes them more easily digested. Set
your mind to it. You'll never want to go back to those refined carbs.
Hormone Homework: Have 3 to 4 servings per day.
Oatmeal is the perfect breakfast—one study found that it keeps your
blood sugar stable longer than many other foods. Transition away from
instant varieties toward steel-cut oats, if only on the weekend.
Try grains like amaranth, quinoa, and spelt—experiment with recipes
and experience how satisfying these ancient grains can be.
If you're buying a processed whole grain product, look at the ingredients
—the whole grain should be the first one listed.
Make the switch from semolina pasta to 100 percent whole wheat, spelt,
or quinoa pasta. Give it a few tries (come on, do it!) for your taste buds to
adjust to the nuttier flavor.
Eat a whole grain cereal for breakfast—it's a fast way to get a huge
jump on your soluble and insoluble fiber tally for the day. Some brands are
great, but some use HFCS or NutraSweet as a trade-off for high fiber. Don't
fall for it! (See the Resources on page 243 for my favorite brands.)
Sprinkle wheat germ or bran over the top of casseroles or other baked
dishes, and on yogurt and cereal.
What is the best way you can be sure to avoid 90 percent of all hormonedisrupting agents in our food supply? Go organic.
The term “organic” applies to a farming method that raises food without
pesticides or other chemicals. The idea is that by allowing natural processes and
biodiversity to enrich the soil, as opposed to relying upon synthetic chemicals or
genetically modified seeds to protect the crops from pests, we'll get healthier
food and—imagine that—a healthier environment.
Organics help you stay slim and prevent diabetes. More than 90 percent of
endocrine-disrupting pesticides that hang around in our body tissues come from
foods we consume—especially animal products.
Organics help you avoid scary hormones. The FDA currently permits six
kinds of steroid hormones to be used in producing cattle and sheep. Eighty
percent of U.S. feedlot cattle are fed or injected with steroid hormones. Each of
these cows gains up to 3 pounds per day.
Organics help you avoid pesticides and other chemicals. A study at the
University of Washington found that the urine of kids who ate mostly
conventional (i.e., pesticide-laden) diets had nine times the organophosphorus
pesticide concentration of kids who ate mostly organic.
Organics help you prevent antibiotic resistance. Massive use of antibiotics
in the meat and dairy industries leads to widespread antibiotic resistance,
exposing us to potentially fatal bacteria such as methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA.
Organics make your food taste better. Organic food is and will always be
fresher than nonorganic food—without pesticides and chemical preservatives,
organic produce has to be eaten faster or it will rot!
Organics in season make your diet more diverse. You'll switch up your
fruits and veggies repertoire—asparagus in the spring, tomatoes all summer, kale
and sweet potatoes in the fall—and get more phytochemicals automatically.
Organics make your food more nutritious. Organic fruits and vegetables
can't rely on pesticides—they have to fight off bugs with their own “immune
systems,” naturally raising their antioxidant levels.
Organics help you save the earth. Produce grown in the United States
travels an average of fifteen hundred miles before it gets sold. But organic
farming uses 30 percent less fossil fuels while it conserves water, reduces soil
erosion, maintains soil quality, and removes carbon dioxide from the air.
One quick example: Take our Power Nutrient food tomatoes. God created
tomatoes and they have all the cancer-fighting health benefits mentioned above
—the best form of medicine with no harmful side effects. Now let's take our
little tomato and see what happens to it in the name of capitalism. The tomato is
grown conventionally, and sprayed with up to seven kinds of pesticides. Then it
is picked too early because it must make the long journey across the country—or
across the world— from its original location to your supermarket. Yes, you are
now polluting the environment with all the gas used to transport the tomato. But
there's more. The tomato is still green because it was picked too early, so now it
is sprayed with argon gas (also used to euthanize dogs) to make it turn red
prematurely. WOW! We have just taken God's natural medicine and turned it
into poison—for us and our environment. That is why we simply must make
efforts to go organic.
DO YOU HAVE CELIAC?
If you've experienced repeated bouts of diarrhea, bloating, or abdominal
pain, or if you're frequently struck with room-clearing gas after you eat
certain meals, you may have an increasingly common condition called
celiac disease. Sometimes confused with the symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome, celiac is an autoimmune digestive disorder caused by a
sensitivity to gluten, a protein found in wheat, rye, barley, or oats. This
painful and damaging disorder causes problems with nutrient absorption
and strikes 1 in 133 people in the United States, although many more may
be sensitive to gluten and not realize it. The tricky thing is, gluten is a cheap
filler and protein source, so thousands of processed foods manage to sneak
it by us all the time. For more information, check out Celiac Disease
Alliance, www.americanceliac.org, or the Celiac Sprue Association,
www.csaceliacs.org.
The more each of us votes with our dollars for products not produced with
toxins, the quicker we'll help right the wrongs and get this earth back where it
belongs. As more people eat organic, organic food will become cheaper. Yeah, I
knew we'd have to talk about the money.
Okay I'll admit it. Organics can be pricey. According to the New York Times,
organic food can be anywhere from 20 percent to 100 percent more expensive
than traditionally produced foods. But the health safety issues—not to mention
the environmental impact!—are too great to put a price on. And the scary
research will keep piling up. Think of it this way: Every time you spend a few
extra bucks to buy organic, you're saving thousands of dollars in co-pays for
chemotherapy or diabetes drugs.
Also bear in mind that as demand goes up, supply will go up, and prices will
go down. Most grocery chains have their own generic organic products. For
example, the affordably priced Nature's Promise line (at Giant, Stop & Shop,
Tops Markets, and Martin's food markets) of natural and organic meat, dairy,
eggs, and frozen and fresh produce is constantly expanding. Even Wal-Mart and
Target have organic store brands now.
Please always start with local options for your food—farmers markets, local
organic dairies, food co-ops. But if you must shop at low-cost or big-box
retailers, go for the organic instead of the conventional option. (For more tips on
how to cut down on costs of organic groceries, check the “Master Shopping
List” on page 236.) The Environmental Working Group (EWG) did an analysis
of the most important produce to buy organic. (Check out the full list of toxic
fruits and veg at www.foodnews.org.) Below you'll find their recommendations
for fruits and veggies, along with mine for other foods. I'll always say go for
organic, but if your pocketbook is stretched thin, use this list as your guide.
ALWAYS BUY ORGANIC
Even after washing or other attempts to reduce pesticides, these foods will
remain the most toxic. Spend your organic food budget here.
1. Meat, dairy, and eggs
2. Coffee
3. Peaches and nectarines
4. Apples
5. Bell peppers
6. Celery
7. Berries
8. Lettuce
9. Grapes
10. Foods you eat a lot
SOMETIMES BUY ORGANIC
I call this the “Hey if you've got the cash, why not?” section. Better safe than
sorry.
1. Processed foods
2. Onions
3. Avocadoes
4. Pineapple
5. Cabbage
6. Broccoli
7. Bananas
8. Asparagus
9. Corn
10. Mangoes
TALL GLASS OF HORMONES
Cows that produce organic milk are fed organic grains and are given
access to pasture, but, most important, they cannot be treated with
recombinant bovine growth hormone, also known as rBGH or rBST
(recombinant bovine somatotropin). And thank god for that! Traditional
dairy farmers feed this horrific synthetic hormone to their cows to boost
their milk production, and so far, the USDA still approves them as safe.
(Unlike regulatory agencies in Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and
twenty-seven countries of the European Union, where rBGH is banned.)
Studies have shown that rBGH increases the levels of insulinlike growth
factor 1, or IGF-1, in the milk of these cows. Drinkingjust 1 glass of milk a
day for 12 weeks can increase a human's blood levels of IGF-1 by 10
percent. At normal levels, IGF-1 does good things in the body; it's
responsible for cell growth, division, and differentiation. But IGF-1 has
been linked, in hundreds of studies, to increased breast, prostate, uterine,
colon, lung, and other cancers in humans. (Notice how many of those
cancers are in sex organs?) Emerging research even links high levels of
IGF-1 to autism. Rather than destroy IGF-1, pasteurization increases its
levels, and because bovine and human IGF-1 are identical, this raging
abundance of hormones is eagerly absorbed into the digestive tract and the
bloodstream, where it can act on various parts of the body.
Awesome.
Studies have shown that high levels of IGF-1 increases ovulation. In fact,
one study found that mothers who drink milk have an 80 percent greater
chance of having twins. And although a link has not yet been firmly
established, many believe that rBGH is one of the reasons early puberty is
on the rise.
The kicker? The USDA has consistently refused to mandate that milk
producers warn consumers that their milk products include rBGH, and
many state dairy boards are attempting to ban any mention of rBGH on
labels at all.
Still, signs are promising—Wal-Mart, Starbucks, Safeway, Kroger, and
many others are starting to use rBGH-free milk. Kraft is planning a line of
rBGH-free cheese. We may just get this horrific hormone banned. But in
the meantime, play it safe with organic. Organic farms are third-party
certified, unlike farms that produce nonorganic hormone-free milk.
DON'T BOTHER BUYING ORGANIC
Don't be duped into wasting your organic budget on
1. Seafood
2. Water
3. Foods you don't eat that often
You've Removed the toxins. You've Restored the nutrients. But exactly when
and how much and in what combinations do you eat the foods on the Master
Your Metabolism plan? We'll talk about that next—learning how to Rebalance
the energy into your body in ways that will improve your overall hormone
levels, trigger the fat-burning ones, and turn off the fat-storage ones.
STEP 3—REBALANCE
ADJUST THE TIMING, QUANTITY, AND COMBINATIONS
OF FOODS FOR MAXIMUM METABOLIC IMPACT
Thus far in the program, we've focused on the what—what foods to Remove
and what foods to Restore to optimize your hormones. In this chapter, we'll focus
on the how and the when to Rebalance your hormones.
The timing, quantity, and combinations of your meals have a great impact on
your hormones and metabolism. This chapter will focus on when to eat what
foods—and when not to—to capitalize on hormone patterns that lead to weight
loss. Rebalance features three key techniques: Eat Every 4 Hours, Eat Until
You're Full—But Not Stuffed, and Combine Foods Correctly. Let's take a look at
each one in turn.
On the Master Your Metabolism diet, you'll eat three meals and one snack
breakfast, lunch, midafternoon snack, dinner. Every day. No excuses.
I know everyone has a different way of scheduling their meals. And I want
you to go with that—you know your body better than I ever will. That said, I
have three iron-clad rules about meal timing that you must adhere to, or you run
the risk of blowing much of the good work you've done so far:
1. You must eat breakfast.
2. You must eat every four hours.
3. You must not eat after nine P.M.—and especially never eat carbs before
bed. Period.
These three rules will help you tap in to your body's natural hormonal rhythms
and instinctive calorie-burning patterns. Using these techniques in combination
with the Remove and Restore aspects of the plan will guarantee weight loss.
Belly up to the breakfast table. I know how some of you feel about this
one, but I'm sorry I don't want to hear it. “Jillian, I don't have time to eat in the
morning.” “Jillian, anything more than coffee makes me want to puke.” Get over
it! Less than half of us eat breakfast every day, but studies have shown that
breakfast is one of the most reliable ways to achieve a healthy weight and keep
your glucose and insulin steady. In fact, women who don't eat breakfast are four
and a half times more likely to be obese than women who do. People who never
eat breakfast are also the most likely to develop type 2 diabetes.
One study, published in the journal Pediatrics, tracked more than two
thousand adolescents for five years, from the time they were fifteen until they
turned twenty. Researchers found that the more often boys and girls ate
breakfast, the lower their BMI. This result was independent of all other factors—
age, sex, race, socioeconomic status, smoking—even whether they were
concerned about their weight (and their diet). The most striking thing about this
study? The kids who ate breakfast daily actually ate more calories than those
who ate breakfast less often—but they still weighed less.
Breaking your fast jump-starts your metabolism and prevents energy sags later
in the day. If you're a guy, your testosterone levels peak at about eight A.M. and
reach their lowest point during the early evening. By timing your biggest meal in
the morning, you'll be able to capitalize on that surge of metabolic power. One
Dutch study found that people who ate a big breakfast rich in complex carbs
(such as you'd get from oatmeal, high-fiber cereal, or a veggie omelet with
whole grain toast) felt satisfied and full for a longer time, in part because
breakfast reduced their ghrelin levels by 33 percent.
If nothing else, promise me you will always eat something before you work
out in the morning. During the night, about 80 percent of your glycogen stores—
the digested carbs waiting to be tapped as energy— have been used up. If you
work out on an empty stomach, you'll go through the last 20 percent almost
immediately and then quickly begin to gobble up your lean-muscle mass—
definitely not what you're trying to do here.
Hormone Homework: Eat as early as is feasible, no more than an hour
after waking up. Grab a quick bowl of high-fiber cereal or an apple with a
handful of raw almonds before your workout. The sole exception to breakfast
within an hour might be those taking thyroid medication—some kinds must be
taken on an empty stomach, others after breakfast. Check with your doctor about
the best timing for your medication and meals.
Eat every four hours. Let me rephrase: You must eat every four hours. I
planned the diet this way not only because eating often makes me happy but
because I know it makes my metabolism happy too. You not only don't have to
live with a rumbling stomach—you shouldn't!
When you eat meals spaced four hours apart, your body doesn't get a chance
to miss food, so it doesn't develop a scarcity mentality. If you feed your body
every four hours, you'll prevent the massive fat storage that comes from feast-orfamine eating. (Remember that “thrifty gene” from chapter 1? We don't want to
wake him up.) The act of eating and digesting accounts for 10 percent of your
body's metabolic rate. Starve yourself for any portion of the day and you cheat
yourself out of a good portion of this bump. The most important part of eating
regularly is that it stabilizes your blood sugar and your hormones: Your blood
sugar remains steady throughout the day, and because your meals are smaller,
your insulin does not spike as dramatically. The body trusts that there's more
where that came from, so it happily burns your meal for energy, confident that
you'll feed it more later.
Additionally, by eating every four hours you keep your hunger hormone
ghrelin in check and keep your leptin levels stable. These two hormones are to
blame when you skip meals, become ravenous, and are much more likely to
overeat. In fact, ghrelin does its job so well that when it's surging in your
bloodstream, it can actually make food taste up to 20 percent better.
On the other hand, the popular concept of six small meals throughout the day
is also less than ideal. You don't need your insulin surging on a constant basis by
eating nonstop. Body builders developed this style of eating to squeeze
thousands upon thousands of calories into their day. (How it became a weightloss trend is beyond me.) Many of them developed type 2 diabetes later on in
life. Coincidence? I think not. Eating every four hours is a perfect formula for
hormone balance— it keeps insulin stable, but doesn't spike hunger hormones,
either.
Hormone Homework: When you first start to eat every four hours, believe
it or not, you might find that you're not very hungry when the four hours are up.
But that's the idea—we don't want you to be famished. You want to head off
extreme hunger, which is a signal that your blood sugar has dipped too low, a
surefire recipe for cravings and overeating.
Don't eat after nine P.M.—especially carbs. One of the biggest risks of
skipping meals during the day is that you then overeat at night. Your body uses
calories throughout the day, but any big surplus gets stored as fat. One study in
the journal Metabolism found that people who skipped meals during the day and
ate a big meal between four P.M. and eight P.M. ended up with some very ominous
measurements:
Higher fasting blood glucose in the morning
Higher blood sugar overall
Higher levels of ghrelin
Impaired insulin response (an indicator of insulin resistance)
Scary, right? Yet so many people I've worked with have done this— work hard
all day, ignoring their need for food because they're “too busy to eat.” And then,
at the end of a long day, they “reward” themselves with a nice, relaxing,
diabetes-inducing meal.
Your levels of fat-storage hormone cortisol dip after breakfast and lunch, but
not after dinner or evening snacks. Eating more calories during the evening will
pack more fat around your belly, where you have more cortisol receptors than
other places in your body. Eating the bulk of your calories after dark also sends
your bad LDL up and good HDL down.
The rate at which food will leave your stomach—also known as your gastric
emptying rate—slows down at night. Plus, your ability to process glucose gets
weaker as the day goes on. If you eat a carb-heavy meal at eight P.M., your body
reacts much differently than if you eat a carb-heavy meal at eight A.M. The old
adage “Eat like a king at breakfast, a prince at lunch, a pauper at dinner” is right
on the money—although I'd stick another pauper in there somewhere.
The most important thing is not to eat before bed. Muscle-glycogen stores fill
during the day's meals. By the end of the day all the spots in the glycogen stores
are filled up. You're not going to be burning any extra calories, or drawing on
those glycogen stores, for the better part of seven or eight hours, so any
remaining calories you eat now will turn straight into fat.
This part is by far the most important: About one hour after you fall asleep—
at about midnight for most people—your body releases its largest pulse of
growth hormone for the day. Insulin inhibits growth hormone production, so the
last thing you want to do is eat any carbs that will drive up your insulin and
interfere with this precious fat-burning growth hormone supply.
Hormone Homework: As soon as you have your evening meal, shut the
kitchen down and don't head there anymore. Try to make that last meal tilt more
toward proteins than carbs, to keep insulin levels down and allow for maximum
growth hormone release at night.
This diet is not about counting calories. When you Restore nutritious foods
to your diet, nature will take care of portion control for you. While you're still in
the process of adopting these practices, though, consider the merits of
Rebalancing your “energy in.”
Eat until you're full. You need to eat enough to fuel your metabolism. As
we talked about in chapter 3, when you eat too few calories, you overtax your
thyroid and train your body to do more with less. And while economizing might
be a good strategy for your financial health, it sucks as a dietary strategy.
That said, eating until you're full of fast food is not allowed. When you eat
healthy, fresh, whole foods until you're full, you will find that your calories are
within a perfect range. Not too little and not too much. For girls this is anywhere
from 1,200 to 1,800. For boys this is anywhere from 1,800 to 3,000. The
difference in calorie allowances has to do with age and activity level. (See
“Ballpark Your Calories” on page 160.)
Severe diets make your body start eating its own muscle. Drastically reducing
your calorie levels for just four days can reduce blood levels of leptin by almost
40 percent; do it for a month and leptin plummets 54 percent. When you cut
calories to lose weight, the lower your leptin levels go, the more hungry you
become—a recipe for yo-yo dieting.
JUNK FOOD WITHOUT
THE JUNK
I know you're human. You're going to have sugar. You're going to have
chocolate. (Some argue that chocolate is a health food.) But here's the deal:
Instead of a processed, artificially flavored peanut butter cup with trans fat
and high-fructose corn syrup, have a Newman's Own organic peanut butter
cup. Instead of a huge bowl of sugar-free, nonfat frozen yogurt, loaded with
chemicals and artificial sweeteners, have half a cup of organic full-fat ice
cream. If you're going to have foods that are less healthy, eat real food and
not chemicals.
Eating nutrient-dense, high-fiber/high-water-content Power Nutrient foods
will also help you fill up without any fear of overeating calories. As you eat
these high-volume foods, your stomach starts to stretch a bit. This “distension”
triggers the release of satiety peptides. Translation: You'll feel full faster, with
fewer calories, and the fiber will help you stay satisfied longer. When you give
your body the foods it recognizes, it eagerly absorbs the nutrients critical to
optimal hormone production and puts them to work right away.
Hormone Homework: Check out the recommended calorie range for your
size and activity level. If the range is 1,200–1,400 calories, don't go down to 800
—you'll damage your metabolism and inhibit your thyroid. On the other hand,
don't do what some of my clients do when they hear that eating often ups their
metabolism by 10 percent—they go out and order a pizza! The problem is that 10
percent for most people is about 200 calories—not 3,000! Know your range and
stick close to it.
But not until you're stuffed. Now for the bad news: If you've been eating at
least one large meal a day, you probably stretched out your stomach, making it
difficult to feel full and trigger your satiety hormones. You may even have leptin
resistance—your body could be releasing leptin to let you know it's full, but you
ignore the hormone and continue eating.
Good news: You can return to a state of balance and get your appetite back in
check, but you have to follow these rules. Eating smaller meals four times a day
will help shrink it back to normal size. When it does, you'll be equally satisfied
but faster, with less food.
To train yourself to eat smaller portions, use a salad plate or a small bowl
instead of a bigger dinner plate. Many dieting studies have proven that this
advice works, possibly because of what marketing researchers at Washington
University call the “partitioning effect.” When people are given a hundred
dollars to spend, those who receive it in ten envelopes of ten dollars each spend
fifty dollars; those who are given one envelope with one hundred dollars blow
the whole thing. The same effect works with food, because when you reach one
partition—finishing the food on a smaller plate, say—you have to make a
conscious choice to reach for more.
Compare that scenario with the mindless shoveling of food from a bigger
dinner plate. We've seen how those large meals send insulin levels soaring and
overtax all the systems responsible for digestion. When you take the calories
eaten during one large meal and spread them throughout the day, all your cells,
organs, glands, and hormones can do their jobs so much easier.
If you have been overeating, perhaps it would help to know that cutting your
daily calorie intake by just 15 percent—from 2,000 to 1,700, for example—
could reduce your risk of cancer. University of Texas researchers found that mice
given 15 to 30 percent fewer calories inhibited the signaling power of IGF-1,
diminishing excess cell growth and the development of papillomas, precancerous
lesions on the skin. Researchers believe the same mechanism may be at work in
as many as 80 percent of other cancers as well.
Yes, as complex as the whole picture of hormones and weight loss is, one
undeniable maxim of weight loss still applies: Calories are important. Of the five
thousand people in the National Weight Control Registry who've successfully
maintained weight loss of at least 30 pounds, 99 percent of them had cut
calories.
Okay, I had to say it. But that's the last time we'll mention it.
Hormone Homework: The only portion sizes that really count are animal
products, processed foods, starchy vegetables, and high-sugar fruits. (See
“Using Your Rule of Thumb” below.) I truly don't care how many nonstarchy
vegetables you eat. I'd love it if you would eat plates and plates full of them!
Start your meal with veggies and you'll give your gut-based satiety hormones
more time to kick in.
I don't know about you, but I am sick to death of the entire no-carb, lowcarb, no-fat, high-fat conversation. Balance—that's all we need. Our bodies are
built for balance.
BALLPARK YOUR CALORIES
I repeat: This program is not about calorie counting, it's about health—
weight loss will come automatically. But it's still helpful to know what
range you should be operating within, so check out these recommendations
based on guidelines from the American Diabetes Association.
From now on, you're going to include a bit of protein, fat, and carbs in every
meal and snack (except the evening snack, which will focus on protein). As we
talked about during our discussion of Power Nutrient foods, each individual
nutrient performs a critical service to our hormone production. Take any one
nutrient away and you start to slow down your metabolism.
We need fat. They're called “essential” fatty acids for a reason. We have to
get these fats from our diet to avoid malnourishment. Animal and vegetable fats
provide valuable, concentrated energy. They also provide the building blocks for
cell membranes and a variety of hormones and hormonelike substances.
Fats slow the absorption of nutrients so that you can go longer without feeling
hungry, and they aid in sugar and insulin metabolism, which helps you lose
weight. Without fat, carbohydrates would take our blood sugar (and insulin) for a
nonstop roller coaster ride. They act as carriers for the important fat-soluble
vitamins A, D, E, and K, and all the carotenoids. Heart-healthy omega-3s help
keep our triglycerides in check and may improve insulin resistance, and some
fats—like CLAs— actually help us to burn stored fat from our bodies. People
who tend toward insulin resistance need about 30 percent fat in their diet to help
them lose weight; some studies have shown that when they try to lose weight by
following low-fat diets, they either fail initially or can't keep the weight off long-
term. Some researchers even argue that saturated fat, long maligned as the prime
factor in the development of heart disease and obesity, is actually innocent, and
may be beneficial to weight loss.
Okay, got it. Fat is good. Check.
We need protein. I'm pretty sure I won't have to fight with you on this one.
You need protein to maintain and build muscle. Just the act of eating protein can
help your body burn up to 35 percent more calories in digestion. Protein
stimulates the production of the satiety hormone CCK and dampens levels of
ghrelin. When carbohydrates are eaten without protein, insulin levels go through
the roof.
Critics have traditionally said that higher-protein diets are unsustainable, that
people will automatically rebound to carb craving. But research has not borne
this out—in fact, quite the opposite. Numerous studies on higher-protein diets
have now found that people who follow them are better able to sustain their
weight loss for longer periods of time. They have better body compositions; they
lower their cholesterol, triglyceride, blood sugar, and insulin levels; and they
increase their metabolisms more than when they began. The longer you follow a
diet with 30 percent protein, the more the postmeal fat-burning effects work for
you. Researchers found that someone who regularly eats a 30 percent protein
lunch may burn ten more extra calories per minute than the person who routinely
eats less than 20 percent protein. (This effect lasts for more than three hours after
you eat—just in time for your next meal!)
Even concerns about the increased heart attack risk of higher-protein diets
have begun to fall apart. One Swedish study found that 66 percent of the control
subjects who ate “normal” diets suffered a stroke or heart attack during the fouryear study, versus only 8 percent of test subjects on the higher-protein diet.
USING YOUR RULE OF THUMB
One survey found that only 1 percent of us can gauge serving sizes
correctly. Play around with measuring cups and get a feel for portion sizes.
It won't take long to learn what a cup of milk looks like or how many
ounces of chicken are in a small breast.
I think I like those higher-protein odds a wee bit better.
Protein is good. Check.
We need carbs. All that being said, we humans simply cannot function
without carbs. Carbs give us energy; without them, we couldn't think, walk,
dance, drive, or do anything. We need them to live. One study found that women
who severely restricted their carbs for three days belly-flopped into a vat of
carbs by the fourth day, eating 44 percent more calories from carbohydrate foods
than they had initially.
Carbs give our food texture and crunch, variety and color. They make us
happy, literally, by feeding our neurotransmitters. And people who eat three
servings of whole grains a day are 30 percent less likely to develop type 2
diabetes.
Carbs are also the vehicles for so many of nature's disease fighters.
Phytochemicals come only from plants, people—you can't get vitamin C from a
bunless burger. Without carbs, we'd be sitting ducks for cancer, heart disease,
metabolic syndrome, chronic inflammation, and digestive problems.
And as much as we've abused the vegetables in this country for years and
years, pouring our toxic chemicals all over them, they may yet help to save us
from ourselves. Eating fiber, a carbohydrate that can come only from plant
sources, is one of the few ways we can help our bodies flush out the toxins that
have built up in our tissues and messed with our endocrine systems for years.
Remember, the key here is GOOD CARBS! Vegetables, fruits, whole grains.
You've been paying attention, right? If so, I shouldn't have to reiterate this point,
but I did … just in case.
So, yes, we need carbs. Carbs are good. Check.
Hormone Homework: A 40 percent carbs, 30 percent protein, 30 percent
fat balance is a safe solution. Now, you can play with this ratio a little bit. Some
people will find they do better with a little more carbohydrate, and some people
do better with a little less. The final precise ratio for you has to do with the rate
at which your body breaks down your food into energy. Fine-tuning your
macronutrients can help give you more energy and keep you feeling fuller longer.
I wrote entire volumes on this point in my two previous books, so I won't go into
great depth here. The bottom line: You must have fat, protein, and carbs in each
meal. Period.
Scientists are just starting to appreciate how certain hormones, pesticides,
and chemicals interact with one another to produce side effects exponentially
more dangerous. Well, luckily for us, high-quality nutrition can have exponential
effects, too.
Nature has a powerful way to fight back, a health phenomenon also greater
than the sum of its parts, called “food synergy.” This new field of nutrition has
sprung up to study certain foods and patterns that appear to work together to
combat diseases such as cancer, heart disease, and other chronic conditions in a
stronger way than individual nutrients could on their own.
But I'll let you in on a little secret—food synergy is just a fancy way of saying
“Eat whole foods.” Don't focus on carbs, or protein, or fat—just food. Whole
foods work together to bring out each nutrient's individual strengths. By eating
more whole foods, you're inviting more of these natural synergies into your
body, where they can work together to optimize your hormones and detox your
body.
The special combination of steps—to Remove the hormones, pesticides, and
chemicals in conventionally raised foods; to Restore lost nutrients; and to
Rebalance your energy in and out—allows you to tap in to this food synergy on a
daily basis. All of the plan's facets work together to bring out these hormoneoptimizing foods' most powerful healing qualities. And now you're going to
learn how to fit all the pieces of the program together.
THE MASTER LIFESTYLE STRATEGIES
REMOVE TOXINS IN YOUR HOME,
RESTORE LOST NUTRIENTS IN YOUR DIET, AND
REBALANCE ENERGY TO ERASE CRUSHING STRESS
As we've seen, our bodies are literally under assault in the modern world.
Some toxins we ingest, such as refined sugars, artificial sweeteners, additives,
and prescription medicines. Some come from our environment: air and water
pollution, cosmetics, petrochemical and industrial wastes, and heavy metals.
Some we even inflict upon ourselves: overwork, overeating, lack of sleep.
All these chemicals and habits wreak havoc on our biochemistry and cellular
health. And the more of these toxic chemicals and habits we have, the greater
our “bioburden,” the combined impact of all of these endocrine disruptors.
Now that we've cleaned up your diet, we have to clean up everything else. We
have to Remove the remaining toxins in your home, Restore any remaining
nutritional deficiencies, and Rebalance your energy to fight back against the
crushing stress that can send hormones reeling. By the time you're done here,
you will have erased many of the remaining hormonal threats and rebooted your
metabolism entirely.
But don't look at the suggestions in this chapter as one program—that would
be a tall order and a lot to handle. Treat them as small steps with a cumulative
effect. The suggestions in this chapter represent a best-case scenario for reducing
your bioburden; if you do half of them, you'll be in great shape.
Let's get to work.
Cleaner choices not only help you lose weight and look amazing, they also
sustain the earth. With each change you make to your kitchen, home, or garden,
you'll have that much more impact on your own metabolism, vitality, longevity,
health, and happiness.
Manufacturers use plastics more than any other material; some are more likely
to leach endocrine disruptors and other dangerous chemicals than others. You
can tell the different plastics by the numbers printed on the bottom of the
containers. Let's go over the full list, so that you know which are the least toxic
and which you need to stop using now. (Check out a list of safe and unsafe
national brands at www.checnet.org/healtheHouse/pdf/plasticchart.pdf.)
UNSAFE PLASTICS—DO NOT USE!
These plastics are three prime suspects in the hubbub over environmental
estrogens. Avoid them at all costs.
NO! #3—Polyvinyl chloride (V or PVC)
Found in cooking-oil bottles, cling wrap, clear wrap around meat, cheese, deli
meats, and other food items, plumbing pipes, toys.
Why it's bad: Hormone-disrupting phthalates and cancer-causing dioxins
leach out of PVC when it comes into contact with heat, food (especially cheese
and meat), water, air, or our bodies.
Choose these instead: Glad wrap; Saran premium wrap, and Saran Cling
Plus wrap do not contain PVC or bisphenol A. Store your food in glass. Buy
cooking oil in glass bottles. Never microwave food in plastic—use parchment
paper or wax paper.
NO! #6—Polystyrene (PS; extruded type is known as
Styrofoam)
The extruded type is found in disposable coffee cups, takeout containers, foam
egg cartons, meat trays, packing peanuts, and foam insulation. The nonextruded
type is found in CD jewel cases, disposable cutlery, and transparent takeout
containers.
Why it's bad: Especially when it gets hot, known endocrine disruptor
polystyrene can leach chemicals into food. Materials used to create polystyrene
—benzene, butadiene, and styrene—are all known or suspected carcinogens.
Choose these instead: Buy eggs packaged in cardboard containers. Transfer
foods packed in polystyrene to glass or ceramic containers as quickly as
possible. Never drink hot drinks out of foam cups or eat food out of foam
containers. Go to restaurants that use paper-based takeout containers and corn-or
sugar-based disposable cutlery and cups.
NO! #7—Other (PC, for polycarbonate)
Found in baby bottles, microwave ovenware, stain-resistant food-storage
containers, medical storage containers, eating utensils, plastic liners of almost all
food and soft-drink cans, Lexan containers, old Nal-gene or other hard-plastic
drinking bottles, five-gallon water jugs, building materials.
Why it's bad: Hundreds of studies on animals and humans have linked
bisphenol A (BPA), a chemical in polycarbonate plastic, with harmful endocrinedisrupting effects, such as early puberty in girls, abnormal breast tissue and
prostate growth, and lower sperm counts.
Choose these instead: Rinse your canned food thoroughly before you eat it.
Use glass baby bottles, but if you continue to use polycarbonate bottles, don't
stick them in the bottle warmer—warming them increases the leaching effect.
Switch to stainless steel or ceramic-lined drinking bottles. Do not wash your
polycarbonate drinking bottles in the dishwasher. Once it starts to get cloudy, get
rid of it. If you ever smell plastics in any water or liquid, do not drink it.
#7 PLA—THE ONLY KIND
THAT'S GOOD
Any #7 plastic labeled “PLA,” for polylactide, is made from corn,
potatoes, sugar, or other plant-based starch. They're fully compostable!
Check the code on the bottom of your container—avoid PC, but PLA is
fine.
SAFE(R) PLASTICS
These plastics have a better track record than the three above. But if you ask
me, the fewer plastics in your life, the better.
OKAY: #1—Polyethylene terephthalate (PET or PETE)
Found in bottles for cough syrup, ketchup, salad dressing, soft drinks, sports
drinks, and water. Also found in plastic pickle, jelly, jam, mustard, mayonnaise,
and peanut butter jars.
OKAY: #2—High-density polyethylene (HDPE)
Found in toys, shampoo bottles, milk jugs, yogurt containers, margarine tubs,
recyclable grocery bags, trash bags, laundry detergent bottles, composite lumber,
Tyvek building material, some Tupperware products, sanitary products, original
Hula-Hoops, some shrink wrap.
OKAY: #4—Low-density polyethylene (LDPE)
Found in grocery bags, bowls, lids, toys, six-pack rings, trays, power cables,
liners, some cling wrap, sandwich bags, food-coloring and other squeezable
bottles, bottle caps.
OKAY: #5—Polypropylene (PP)
Found in plastic utensils, cups, thermal underwear (such as Under Armour
brand), clear bags, diapers, safe baby bottles, Stonyfield Farm yogurt containers,
condiment bottles.
REMOVING TOXINS FROM YOUR KITCHEN
With more than one hundred thousand chemicals out there, and very few of
them studied, we'll soon see much research about how damaging more of these
are. In the meantime, protect yourself in the kitchen.
NO: Chlorinated white paper towels
The EPA found that dioxins, byproducts of chlorine, are three hundred
thousand times more carcinogenic than DDT; they're also very estrogenic.
KEEP THE DISHWASHER
CLOSED
Don't open your dishwasher door during the wash cycle. That “whoosh”
of steam releases toxic volatized chlorine from the combination of detergent
and tap water.
YES: Chlorine-free paper products
Use products—toilet paper included —that say they are processed chlorinefree, or PCF.
NO: Bleached coffee filters
Bleached coffee filters leach chlorine into your coffee and release dioxins with
every drip.
YES: Unbleached or oxygen-bleached filters
These use chlorine dioxide, a type of bleach that doesn't create dioxin
residues.
NO: “Antibacterial” dish soap (or anything!)
In addition to helping create antibiotic resistance, when triclosan combines
with chlorinated tap water, it creates the carcinogenic gas chloroform and
chlorinated dioxins, a highly toxic form of dioxin.
YES: Natural soaps
Choose dish soaps without chlorine or phosphates. Good brands include
Seventh Generation, Ecover, and Mrs. Meyer's.
NO: Teflon pans
A chemical in Teflon likely damages the liver and thyroid and impairs the
immune system.
YES: Iron, porcelain-coated, stainless steel, or glass pans
Get added iron as you avoid endocrine and immune-system damage.
REMOVE TOXINS FROM YOUR BATHROOM CABINET
Cosmetics and personal-care products are actually a huge source of chemical
poisoning and endocrine disruption. But the FDA has tested only 11 percent of
the 10,500 ingredients used in cosmetics. Thankfully, the Campaign for Safe
Cosmetics, a consortium of sixty environmental and consumer health groups,
identified some of the most harmful substances in cosmetics and personal-care
products. When looking for alternatives, seek out companies that signed the
Campaign for Safe Cosmetics compact, a pledge of their commitment to safer
products and greater transparency about the ingredients of their products. A list
of signing companies can be found at www.safecosmetics.org. The following
ingredients all have suspected hormone-disrupting qualities.
NO: Mercury (often listed as thimerosal on ingredient labels)
Found in some lip liner, lip gloss, facial moisturizer, mascara, eye drops,
ointment, and deodorant.
Why it's bad: Mercury sticks around in the tissues forever, messing with our
neurochemistry immune systems, and other cells. It is also a suspected endocrine
disruptor and a known human reproductive and developmental toxin.
NO: Lead
Found in more than 60 percent of brand-name lipsticks, but never labeled as
such.
Why it's bad: Lead causes learning and behavioral disorders and has been
linked to other central nervous system damage, miscarriage, reduced fertility,
hormonal changes, and menstrual irregularities.
NO: Toluene
Found in nail polish and other cuticle and nail treatments.
Why it's bad: Toluene damages the nervous, respiratory, and cardiovascular
systems; it may also damage kidneys, lower sperm counts, cause birth defects,
and interfere with normal menstrual cycles.
NO: Formaldehyde
Found in moisturizer, facial cleanser, shampoo, conditioner, sunscreen, body
wash, styling gel, acne treatments, foundation, eye shadow, mascara, baby wipes,
hand cream, lubricant, hair spray, eye makeup remover. (It's also used as a
preservative in food—and funeral homes!)
Why it's bad: Formaldehyde is harmful to the immune system, is a known
human carcinogen, and has been linked to leukemia, irregular periods, asthma,
Lou Gehrig's disease, and DNA damage.
NO: Parabens
Found in shampoo, conditioner, body wash, tooth whitener, toothpaste, facial
cleanser, sunscreen, moisturizer, toners/astringents.
Why it's bad: Parabens have estrogenic effects on the body and are linked to
breast and prostate cancer.
NO: Placenta
Found in some hair relaxers, moisturizers, and toners.
Why it's bad: Placenta can produce estrogen, estrone, estradiol, and
progesterone, and increase your risk for breast cancer and other problems.
NO: Phthalates
Found in some nail polish, nail and cuticle treatments, fragrance, bath oil,
moisturizer, and hair spray.
Why it's bad: Pthalates may be toxic to the reproductive system, causing
infertility and birth defects. Because they're not listed on product labels, they can
be hard to track down (sometimes hidden as “fragrance”).
NO: Triclosan
Found in moisturizer, hand cream, shampoo, facial cleanser, conditioner,
antiperspirant, exfoliant, body wash, toothpaste.
Why it's bad: Triclosan is believed to interfere with thyroid hormone
metabolism, cause antibiotic resistance, and create carcinogenic compounds
when combined with chlorinated water.
YES: Natural cosmetics and personal-care products
Some cosmetics claim to be “organic,” but, unlike with food, no firm
governmental guidelines for cosmetics or personal-care products exist. Until we
have a reliable designation, check out Skin Deep, Environmental Working
Group's cosmetics database (www.cosmeticsdatabase.com), which takes the
ingredients in more than twenty-five thousand products and matches them with
fifty toxicity and regulatory databases. It's amazing—you don't need to go
anywhere else for information.
Here are some of my favorite natural cosmetic brands and how you can find
them:
Dr. Hauschka (www.drhauschka.com)
Ren (www.renskincare.com)
Aesops (www.aesop.net.au)
Nude (www.nudeskincare.com)
Jason (www.jasoncosmetics.com)
According to the EPA, the air in your house could have one hundred times
the level of pollutants in the air outside, primarily due to VOCs emitted from
toxic cleaners and other household products. Try these tips to reduce your
bioburden at home.
NO: Chemical home cleaners
Almost 90 percent of all poison exposures happen at home, most from items
like cleaning supplies, medicines, cosmetics, and other personal-care items. The
worst are drain, oven, and toilet bowl cleaners, and products containing chlorine
or ammonia. (The combination of chlorine and ammonia creates a toxic chlorine
gas, chloramine, used as a chemical weapon in World War I.)
YES: Use 100 percent natural products
Use truly natural products, such as white vinegar, hydrogen peroxide, lemon
juice, and plain old water. No risk of endocrine disruption and a lot of bang for
your buck!
HOW TO READ
SCARY LABELS
I was terrified to realize how toxic some common household items are.
Keep an eye out for these labels—check out just how dangerous they are!
They're not talking about babies either—this is the amount that could drop a
one-hundred-eight pound adult. Scary!
Poison, Danger, or Highly Toxic—If you swallow one teaspoon or less,
you could die.
Warning or Very Toxic—If you swallow one teaspoon to one
tablespoon, you could die.
Caution or Toxic—If you swallow one ounce to one pint, you could die.
White vinegar mixed with water can clean any kind of floor, window, mirror,
or other shiny surface. Vinegar gets rid of stink in the sink and mold in the
shower, cleans and softens clothes, and, when combined with baking soda, can
unclog drains.
Castile soap and hot water clears away dirt—use it anywhere with baking
soda and/or vinegar to get the job done.
Baking soda can be used to clean cutlery, deodorize stinky carpets and
doggie couches, scrub toilets and tubs, and destink your fridge and freezer.
Anyplace you once used scouring powder, you can use baking soda.
Lemon juice can be used as a substitute for bleach due to its whitening
ability.
Hydrogen peroxide can be used, in combination with white vinegar, as one
of the very best sanitizing kitchen cleansers. Susan Sumner, a food scientist at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, created this process: Buy two
empty spray bottles and fill one with hydrogen peroxide and the other with
vinegar; spray your counter first with the vinegar, then with the hydrogen
peroxide (or vice versa), and voilà! Tests proved this sequence of cleaning was
more effective than any bleach-based cleanser at eliminating bacteria—and it
doesn't emit bleach's cancerous dioxins. (Bonus: This spray also works on food
—and after you rinse the food with water, it leaves no detectable residue.)
YES: Use reliably safe store-bought cleansers
Household cleaners that claim to be natural could be toxic and we'd never
know. Stick with companies known to be environmentally responsible, such as
Seventh Generation, Mrs. Meyer's, Dr. Bronner's, Ecover, and Method. Look for
words like
ammonia-free
biodegradable
free of dye or perfume
noncarcinogenic
non-petroleum-based
nontoxic
NO: Artificial room deodorizers
These products only mask whatever foul odor is festering. They are little
factories of VOCs just pumping toxins into your room.
YES: Clean your air with a HEPA filter
A study found that using HEPA filters for two days dramatically improved the
cardiovascular function of healthy nonsmokers. Get one with a VOC filter.
YES: Surround yourself with green
NASA scientists found that one potted plant every one hundred square feet
can remove many harmful contaminants from the air in your home. Best
varieties include bamboo palm, English ivy gerbera daisy and green spider.
NO: Scotchgarded furniture or stain-resistant clothing
One PFC compound used to make stain-resistant fabrics and believed to cause
birth defects and cancer was the most highly concentrated one in the breast milk
of nursing mothers.
YES: Organic clothing whenever possible
Cotton farmers use the most (and most damaging) pesticides. Seek out organic
cotton, especially for sheets and baby clothes.
Pesticides increase your risk of dozens of cancers, not to mention the virtual
certainty of endocrine disruption and, eventually, insulin resistance. Getting the
pesticides out of your home and your yard is pretty much job one.
DITCH YOUR DRY CLEANER
Sierra Club has asked the EPA to ban nonylphenol and nonylphenol
ethoxylates (NPEs), estrogenic chemicals found in dry-cleaning products,
about 400 million pounds of which are produced each year. (Europe and
Canada have already banned them.) Until it happens, avoid dry-cleaning, or
find a dry cleaner that uses alternative products. If you must dry-clean,
remove the clothes from the plastic bag and air them outside for at least 4
hours.
NO: Weed killer
Chemical lawn treatment companies use atrazine, a weed killer proven to
cause extreme endocrine disruption. Boy frogs treated with atrazine look fine
from the outside but grow girl parts on the inside—part of the reason frogs are
dying out all over the world.
YES: Make your lawn organic
Mowing, watering, and fertilizing lawns contribute approximately 2 percent of
America's fossil-fuel consumption and 10 percent of our air pollution. Check out
www.safelawns.org for tons of useful tips.
YES: Plant a native garden
Beneficial bacteria found in soil could even help your brain produce more
serotonin. One study found that the bacterium Mycobacterium vaccae activates
pathways similar to the effects of antidepressant drugs.
Taking care of babies and pets can bring a whole new layer of chemicals into
your life. Protect them—and yourself—by making a few very conscious choices
about their care.
NO: Pest-control shampoo
One recent study found that parents who'd bathed their pets with pyrethrin
pest-control shampoos were twice as likely to have an autistic child.
YES: Natural pet shampoos
My pup Baxter and I alternate from Davines to Dr. Hauschka.
NO: Lice shampoo for kids
Every time you use lice shampoo, you're dumping pesticides on your kid's
head.
YES: Adopt a “No nits!” policy
Use a lice comb and get the nits out before they develop into lice. Prevent
recurrences with a few drops of tea tree essential oil sprinkled on their heads
every day.
NO: Flame-retardant clothing
Make sure your kids' pajamas, bedding, pillows, and mattresses do not include
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), chemicals linked to thyroid
disruption, learning and memory problems, damage to hearing, decreased sperm
counts, and birth defects.
YES: Organic bedding and clothing
Your body, your kids' bodies, and the planet will be much happier.
NO: Plastic toys
Many manufacturers and stores have pledged to remove phthalates from their
toys, but if the recalls on toys from China tell us anything, it's that we can't be
100 percent sure of product claims.
YES: Wood and cloth toys
Choose unpainted wood and organic fabric toys, and do not buy toys made in
China. (Sorry, but until they clean up their act, it's best to steer clear!)
NO: Soy formula
Unless your pediatrician says otherwise. Babies who drink soy formula
consume a tremendous amount of phytoestrogens per pound of body weight.
YES: Breastfeed
Try to breastfeed, and if you can't, ask your pediatrician to recommend the
best formula for your baby. Don't be scared that environmental toxins may leach
into your breast milk. Experts say the benefits of breastfeeding surpass any
potential dangers.
NO: BPA bottles or chlorine-bleached diapers
Don't put endocrine disruptors directly into your baby's mouth or on her
bottom.
YES: Use glass bottles and unbleached diapers
Choose glass bottles and unbleached diapers, such as Seventh Generation
chlorine-free diapers or gDiapers.
Now comes the big NO! Drugs.
Working with your doctor, I want you to remove all over-the-counter and
prescription drugs whenever or wherever possible. Period. The end.
Look, I know I am taking a strong stance here. And ultimately, I wouldn't
want to live in a world without modern medicine. But with rare exceptions,
many pharmaceuticals create more problems than they solve.
Have you ever actually read the package insert that comes with your
“medication”? It makes you wonder if the side effects of the drugs are more
sinister than the existing condition.
The drugs you should be most mindful of are the ones I call the anti's:
antidepressants, antiinflammatories, antibiotics, and so on. These drugs don't
work with the body's natural biochemistry; they work against it. Except in
extreme cases, their side effects can be much worse than the original condition:
kidney stones, abnormal blood clotting, blood disorders, deafness, colitis, fungal
infections, leaky gut, rash, difficulty breathing, nausea, diarrhea, inability to
orgasm, anxiety, constipation, weight gain, sleep disruption, hair loss, raised
blood pressure, anemia … the list goes on and on.
I have contestants come to the Biggest Loser campus while taking twelve
different drugs. They start out with some type of obesity-related disease: high
blood pressure, type-2 diabetes, arthritis, cholesterol, you name it. All these
drugs have side effects. So their doctors write a prescription for another drug to
treat the side effects. Within a month, the contestants are off those medications
permanently. That's your miracle solution: diet and exercise.
Perhaps the scariest drugs—and the ones most antithetical to the Master Your
Metabolism program—are synthetic hormones. Talk about endocrine disruptors!
Women have been going through menopause for thousands of years. Suddenly,
we think God/nature/evolution/(insert your personal belief system here) messed
up? The drug companies turn around and sell us a disease that isn't a disease at
all, and then they make a drug for it that kills us.
Think about what happened when the findings of the Women's Health
Initiative, sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, came out in 2002. The
eight-year study of estrogen-plus-progestin therapy was halted after five years,
because the women on the study were dropping dead of heart attacks and
strokes. The researchers analyzed the data and found that the combination of
these synthetic hormones was responsible for a
26 percent higher incidence of breast cancer
22 percent increase in total cardiovascular disease
29 percent increase in heart attacks
41 percent increase in strokes
100 percent increase in the rate of blood clots in the lungs
Since those results were released, many women have backed off from HRT.
But birth control pills are flying high, despite the National Toxicology Program's
Tenth Report on Carcinogens, also published in 2002, which classified all
steroidal estrogens—those used in HRT and birth control—to be carcinogens.
The National Cancer Institute reports that while birth control pills decrease risks
of ovarian and endometrial cancer, they also may increase risks of breast,
cervical, and liver cancers.
Why isn't the FDA cracking down on this? Here's why: Pharmaceutical
companies spend hundreds of millions of dollars to gain FDA approval for their
products. Public funding can't keep up with the agency's expanding
responsibilities, so more than 50 percent of the FDA's work checking safety and
effectiveness is funded by the companies whose products are being reviewed.
(Conflict of interest, you think?)
And on the other end of the pharmaceutical chain, the drug companies like to
think the doctors work for them. They cater lunches and dinners for them and
their entire staff. Doctors are required to do continuing education. Who do you
think sponsors those costs for them? That's right: drug companies.
Now, certainly, not all doctors are bad. In fact, I work with many whom I
would bow at their feet, they are so ethical, talented, and intelligent. In any
profession you will have both good and bad.
So here is your best line of defense: Get checkups, practice preventive
medicine, and be proactive. For the most part, you can reduce or even cure most
ailments with diet and lifestyle changes. Use condoms for birth control. Eat well
and live right to manage menopause naturally. Bottom line: Do your own
research and get a second opinion, at the least, before taking a drug. Drugs have
side effects. Exercise, food, and properly used vitamin supplements do not. Take
drugs only as a last resort.
Due to changes in farming methods, the sad state of our soil, and the lack of
biodiversity in this country, even our whole food is not nearly as nutritious as it
once was. And under constant assault from the environment we live in, our
bodies need certain nutrients to help us cope properly with the toxicity
Considering all of this, it's not surprising that more than 80 percent of Americans
are severely nutrient-deficient.
That's why after we Restore whole, nutritious foods to your diet, we must also
Restore lost nutrients that you cannot get any other way, because certain missing
vitamins and minerals are essential for hormone production. What you need, first
and foremost, are a quality multivitamin, a calcium supplement, and a fish oil
supplement.
No matter what brands you pick, try to find a multivitamin that includes the
following key vitamins and nutrients, each essential for proper hormone
function. I've listed the daily nutrient intakes recommended by the Linus Pauling
Institute at Oregon State University, a world-renowned research center on the
science of micronutrients. With a high-quality multi, calcium supplement, and
fish oil capsule, combined with the Master diet, you should get to these levels
quite easily.
BIOTIN: 30 meg
People with type 2 diabetes who take biotin have lower fasting glucose levels.
Biotin helps the body use more glucose to synthesize fatty acids. Biotin also
stimulates glucokinase, a liver enzyme that increases glycogen synthesis and
increases insulin release, which lowers blood glucose.
Food sources: 1 egg (25 mcg); 1 slice of whole wheat bread (6 mcg); 1
whole avocado (6 mcg)
FOLIC ACID: 400 meg
One study showed that folic acid can help lower ACTH, an adrenal hormone
that can lead to increased blood pressure. Ensuring adequate intake of folic acid
is essential for any woman of childbearing age, even if you're not planning on
getting pregnant—on the off-chance that you do, having folic acid in your body
beforehand will prevent neural tube defects that result in brain and nervous
system damage in babies.
Food sources: ½ cup cooked lentils (179 mcg); ½ cup cooked spinach (132
mcg); 6 spears asparagus (134 mcg)
NIACIN: 20 mg
Niacin protects your heart by increasing your HDL, lowering your LDL, and
turning dangerous tiny LDL particles into larger, less heart-attack-inducing ones.
Niacin may increase growth hormone release, but in people at risk for diabetes,
large doses of niacin may cause a spike in insulin and triglycerides. Stick to the
dosage in your multivitamin and you'll do great!
Food sources: 3 ounces tuna (11.3 mg); 3 ounces salmon (8.5 mg); 3 ounces
turkey (5.8 mg)
PANTOTHENIC ACID: 5 mg
All steroid hormones, including estrogen and progesterone, as well as the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine and melatonin, can only be produced when you
have enough pantothenic acid, or vitamin B5. Also, your liver needs vitamin
B5's coenzyme A to break down certain drugs and toxins.
Food sources: 1 whole avocado (2 mg); 8 ounces yogurt (1.35 mg); ½ cup
sweet potato (0.88 mg)
RIBOFLAVIN: 1.7 mg
Riboflavin—aka vitamin B2—helps metabolize vitamin B6, niacin, and folic
acid. Riboflavin is also involved in proper thyroid production and helps to
control homocysteine levels.
Food sources: 1 cup nonfat milk (0.34 mg); 1 egg (0.27 mg); 3 ounces beef
(0.16 mg)
THIAMINE: 1.5 mg
Thiamine helps metabolize glucose. Carb addicts are often deficient in
thiamine. One study found that after four days of increasing carbohydrate intake,
people's thiamine dropped up to 20 percent.
Food sources: 3 ounces lean cooked pork (0.72 mg); 1 cup long grain brown
rice (0.21 mg); 1 ounce Brazil nuts (0.18 mg)
VITAMIN A: 2,500 IU
Vitamin A interacts with vitamin D and thyroid hormone to directly impact the
way your genes are transcribed, helping teach each type of cell its specific job.
Vitamin A also helps protect your immune system and your skin.
Food sources: ½ cup cooked butternut squash (1,907 IU); ½ cup chopped
carrot (1,793 IU); ½ cup cooked collard greens (1,285 IU)
VITAMIN B6: 2 mg
Vitamin B6 helps the body release glucose from stored glycogen and
synthesize the neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine.
Vitamin B6 binds to the receptors for estrogen, progesterone, testosterone, and
other steroid hormones, preventing the uptake of excessive hormones, which
may help reduce the risk of breast and prostate cancer. Vitamin B6 may also help
relieve PMS, depression, and carpal tunnel syndrome caused by hypothyroidism.
Food sources: 3 ounces chicken (0.51 mg); 1 medium banana (0.43 mg); 6
ounces vegetable juice cocktail (0.26 mg)
COPPER: 900 meg
Copper works with zinc to help maintain the thyroid, but an excess in one will
create a deficiency in the other. Excess copper can also stimulate prostaglandin
activity, interfere with antioxidants' activity, and lower your immune system, so
stick to the dose in your multivitamin. Copper also helps dopamine convert into
norepinephrine.
Food sources: 1 ounce cashews (629 mcg); 1 cup raw sliced mushrooms
(344 mcg); 2 tablespoons peanut butter (185 mcg)
IRON: 18 mg
*1
Your body needs iron to properly use iodine to activate thyroxine. Researchers
recently discovered a hormone called hepcidin, which regulates the iron levels in
the body. If you have inflammatory bowel syndrome or other inflammation, you
may have too much hepcidin and too little iron in your body. People with celiac
disease, those who've had ulcers, vegetarians, and athletes are more prone to iron
deficiencies.
Food sources: 6 medium oysters (5.04 mg); 1 tablespoon blackstrap molasses
(3.5 mg): 3 ounces dark-meat chicken (1.13 mg)
MAGNESIUM: 320 mg (women)-420 (men) mg
Just a few days of magnesium deficiency may stimulate the release of
inflammatory cytokines, pro-inflammatory molecules that are linked to insulin
resistance. Between 25 and 38 percent of diabetics don't get enough magnesium,
yet magnesium may help reduce blood glucose: People who eat more
magnesium have a 30 percent lower chance of developing metabolic syndrome.
Food sources: 23 almonds (78 mg); ½ cup cooked Swiss chard (78 mg); ½
cup cooked lima beans (63 mg)
VITAMIN B12: 30 meg
Older people cannot absorb Vitamin B12 from food and need supplements.
Vegetarians must supplement with B12 because we only get it from animal
products. Diabetics are often B12-deficient because the pancreas supplies the
enzymes and calcium necessary to absorb B12 from food.
Food sources: 3 ounces steamed clams (84 mcg); 3 ounces steamed mussels
(20.4 mcg); 3 ounces cooked beef (2.1 mcg)
VITAMIN C: 400 mg
We can't make vitamin C, so we have to get it from our diets. Vitamin C is
also important in helping to support the proper production of the adrenal
hormones. Because your body cannot produce vitamin C, a bit more is usually a
good idea in times of stress. People who take supplemental vitamin C on a
regular basis may experience 25 to 40 percent lower risk of heart disease. Most
supplements have only 60 mg, which is not enough to saturate your blood and
cells—try to get to at least 400 mg with vitamin C–rich foods.
Food sources: ½ cup raw chopped sweet red pepper (141 mg); 1 cup
strawberries (82 mg); 1 medium tomato (23 mg)
VITAMIN D: 2,000 III
*2
Vitamin D helps the body regulate its calcium levels, boosts immunity,
discourages autoimmune disorders (such as inflammation), lowers blood
pressure, and may reduce the risk of osteoporosis and breast, colon, and prostate
cancers. Too little vitamin D can negatively impact insulin and glucose levels in
type 2 diabetics.
Food sources: 3 ounces canned pink salmon (530 IU); 3 ounces canned
sardines (231 IU); 8 ounces vitamin-D-fortified milk (98 IU)
VITAMIN E: 200 IU*3
Vitamin E also helps slow the aging of cells and tissues and may help reduce
the negative effects of environmental pollutants in the body. Lab studies have
indicated that vitamin E may be especially effective in helping prevent and treat
hormone-responsive cancers, such as breast and prostate.
Food sources: 1 ounce hazelnuts (4.3 mg); 1 tablespoon canola oil (2.4 mg);
1 tablespoon olive oil (1.9 mg)
VITAMIN K: 10 TO 20 meg
Vitamin K helps the clotting of blood after injuries and protects against
osteoporosis, kidney stones, cystic fibrosis, and—get this—body odor. Vitamin
K is highly concentrated in the pancreas and may be involved in the healthy
release of insulin after eating.
Food sources: 1 cup chopped raw kale (547 mcg); 1 cup raw spinach (299
mcg); 1 cup chopped raw broccoli (220 mcg)
ZINC: 15 mg
Zinc levels tend to be lower in older people, anorexics, alcoholics, people on
crash diets, children with ADHD, and diabetics. Zinc levels are related to leptin,
the hormone that helps us feel satisfied. Studies suggest that restoring
deficiencies of zinc helps people increase lean body mass while maintaining or
losing fat mass.
Food sources: 6 medium oysters (76.3 mg); 3 ounces dark-meat turkey (3.8
mg); ½ cup baked beans (1.8 mg)
SELENIUM: 70 mcg
Most of the fat-burning T3 in our bodies is activated when seleniumdependent enzymes help convert T4 to T3 by removing one iodine atom.
Selenium also produces other enzymes that help the body detox from the effects
of environmental pollutants, pharmaceuticals, and radiation.
Food sources: 3 ounces crab meat (41 mcg); 3 ounces shrimp (34 mcg); 2
slices whole wheat bread (23 mcg)
CHROMIUM: 60-120 mcg
About 90 percent of us don't get enough chromium, but chromium helps
insulin take glucose out of the blood and usher it into the cells. Low levels of
chromium can lead to insulin dysfunction and high triglycerides, further
increasing the risk of heart disease from people already predisposed to metabolic
syndrome and cardiovascular trouble.
Food sources: ½ cup broccoli (11 mcg); 1 medium apple (1.4 mcg); ½ cup
green beans (1.1 mcg)
POTASSIUM: 4.7 g
Potassium is both a mineral and an electrolyte that dances back and forth
across the cell membrane, swapping sodium for potassium. This dynamic
exchange of energy, which accounts for up to 40 percent of our resting metabolic
rate, protects the cell membranes and is a key aspect of our nerve, muscle, and
heart function.
Food sources: 1 medium baked potato (926 mg); ½ cup dried plums (637
mg); 6 ounces tomato juice (417 mg)
CALCIUM: 1,000-1,200 mg
*4
Calcium makes it possible for enzymes to break down glycogen, releasing
energy for the muscles to use and preventing muscle cramps or spasms. Calcium
also helps our nervous system send messages and plays a role in insulin
secretion. Your body can only absorb 300 mg max at a time, so if you don't eat
three servings of dairy a day take your calcium supplements at two different
times during the day.
Food sources: 1 cup yogurt (300 mg); ½ cup cooked Chinese cabbage (239
mg); ½ cup white beans (113 mg)
EPA AND DHA OMEGA-3 FATTY ACIDS: 1 g
Your body cannot make these fats, but you need them to survive. Fish oil
capsules allow you to get the nearly miraculous health benefits without the
heavy-metal toxicity and pesticide buildup in fish. Fish oil lowers triglycerides,
blood pressure, LDL, inflammation, arterial plaque, and raises HDL, all of which
help stave off heart disease. Fish oil also slashes the risk of death in those people
already diagnosed with heart disease, by reducing prevalence of heart attacks,
strokes, and abnormal heart rhythms. Burgeoning research suggests omega-3
supplementation can help prevent or treat other conditions, including ADHD,
asthma, bipolar disorder, cancer, dementia, depression, and diabetes.
Food sources: 4 ounces wild-caught salmon (2 g); ¼ cup walnuts (2.27 g); 2
tablespoons flaxseeds (3.5 g)
You could follow this diet to the letter, get rid of all the toxins in your house,
take the perfect vitamin supplements every day—but if you don't learn how to
manage your stress and Rebalance your energy you're still sabotaging your
hormones.
We used to burn off our stress hormones cortisol and adrenaline when we
outran lions in the jungle. Now, if our boss makes unreasonable demands, we
can't release that stress by hauling off and popping him one. No, we just have to
suck it up and sit there, with our hearts pounding and the adrenaline and cortisol
pumping through our veins, and struggle to maintain our composure and be good
and dutiful workers.
Constant overwork without adequate relaxation will keep your body in fightor-flight mode for far too long, corroding your organs and glands until your
system basically breaks down. People who secrete the most cortisol in response
to stress also have the most fat on their bellies, no matter how much they weigh.
They are also more likely to experience regular spikes in carb cravings.
When you overwork your brain and underwork your body, when you sleep too
little and worry too much, your growth hormone levels don't get their regular
daily and nightly bursts. You can't convert thyroid hormone as easily. Hunger
hormone ghrelin shoots up; satiety hormone leptin plummets. Your blood sugar
levels go through the roof, and within days, your body becomes insulin-resistant
—even if you're not overweight.
I am all about hard work. But I believe in full recovery, as well. Let's look at
how you can let your endocrine system take a breather, so it can repair itself and
allow your hormones to Rebalance to their optimal levels again.
A full night's sleep is not a luxury—it is a basic necessity for healthy
hormone balance. Once you dip below seven hours a night, you are at a much
greater risk of diabetes, cancer, heart disease, stroke, depression— and many,
many more pounds.
Some researchers believe that slow-wave sleep—the deep, dreamless sleep
that you ideally sink into about three or four times a night—may actually
regulate your metabolism. In fact, stage 4 slow-wave sleep, which begins about
an hour after we fall asleep, is when we release our greatest pulses of growth
hormone, the hormone that prompts the body to burn stored fat. When we're
young, we spend about 20 percent of our sleep in slow-wave stages 3 and 4. But
as we get older, we may only spend about 10 or even 5 percent there.
Sadly, just two nights of bad sleep will cut your satiety hormone leptin by 20
percent and increase your hunger ghrelin by 30 percent. That one-two punch
makes you much more likely to snack on high-carb treats, which couldn't come
at a worse time for your insulin levels—and a University of Chicago study found
that just three nights of poor sleep makes your body 25 percent less sensitive to
insulin, equivalent to the insulin resistance brought on by 20 to 30 extra pounds.
In order to block fat-storage hormones and allow the full release of fatburning hormones, you need to get at least seven hours a night. Don't forget this
one caveat:
Absolutely no carbs before bed. Your level of hunger hormone ghrelin
needs to be high in order to slip into stage 3 or 4 sleep. Carbs depress ghrelin
faster than any other nutrient, so eating anything, especially carbs, before bed
can delay your entry into deeper sleep for several hours. The release of growth
hormone is possible only when the body is in a semi-fasting state, so the insulin
spike that comes after carbs will automatically interfere with growth hormone
release. I am fanatical about restricting carbs before bed—why would you
knowingly eat something that interferes with restorative sleep and blocks one of
the most beneficial hormone releases of the entire day? Don't do it!
Exercise is the number one form of preventive medicine and dramatically
affects your hormone balance. When you really put energy into it, exercise
releases fat-burning growth hormone, reduces cortisol, and makes cells more
sensitive to insulin. Intense exercise even increases your metabolism-boosting
thyroid hormones for a brief time. And any type of exercise will boost
testosterone.
Exercise also increases DHEA, which props up your burned-out adrenals to
give you more energy, strengthen your libido, and help relieve depression.
Exercise floods the body with endorphins, natural morphinelike biochemicals
that cause the “runner's high.” Endorphins improve your body's reaction to
stress, enhance your mood, and even increase your pituitary's release of growth
hormone.
To use exercise to balance your hormones, focus on these seven suggestions.
(Note: If you're in the market for a step-by-step exercise program, I urge you to
check out my first two books, Winning By Losing, for beginners, or Making the
Cut, for intermediate to advanced.)
Get 4 to 5 hours a week. Forget that “walk across parking lots!” and “take
the stairs!” fitness advice. You can't lose weight in ten-minute bursts of exercise.
No, you need to get to the gym, work your ass off when you're there, and get the
job done. You'll burn way more calories in less time and enjoy more hormonal
benefits. Just three weeks of this level of exercise can start to reverse insulin
resistance.
Go big. I want you sweating, stretching, pushing yourself. You should be
reaching for 85 percent of your maximum heart rate (220 — your age = your
maximum heart rate, or MHR). Intense exercise increases your body's release of
endorphins and growth hormone.
Base your workout on strength training. Women who lift moderate to
heavy weights produce more active growth hormone after their workouts, and
for a longer timer, than women who do other kinds of exercise. The greater your
muscle mass, the higher your metabolism and the more sensitive to insulin your
muscles become. (This isn't limited to overweight people—average-weight
people have much better hormone balance when they have more muscle.)
Use circuit training to combine cardio and weight training. Each of your
five hours should be a combination of cardio and strength training. Circuit
training does both. For example, do a set of squats, then immediately follow up
with a set of pushups. Repeat each set three times, then move on to two other
exercises that work two different parts of the body, and alternate those.
There. You're circuit training. It's that easy.
Try intervals, too. Do intervals of walking and running. Start by alternating
thirty seconds of walking with thirty seconds of running. Do this for thirty
minutes. Intervals give the same hormonal benefits and high excess postexercise
oxygen consumption, or EPOC—also known as after-burn—as longer bouts of
continuous intense exercise.
Add extra cardio after your first five hours. You can add on extra hours of
cardio only after you do your circuit strength training. Try adding a thirtyminute-to-one-hour session in for a powerful two-a-day workout.
Do it even if you hate it. I do! But just like you work to pay the mortgage or
your car payment, you do the work in the gym to protect your most important
asset: a healthy body. Once you're on a steady path with exercise, you'll
automatically feel less stress.
Would you treat your kids the way you treat yourself? Would you want them
to go without love, nurture, sleep, play? So why on earth would you treat
yourself that way?
If I could burn one message into your brain permanently, it would be this:
Selfish is not a four-letter word. Selfish does not mean narcissistic or conceited
—it means healthy. I know from my own experience, and from watching
thousands of people change their lives, that the only way to accomplish this is to
put yourself first.
Detox your circle of friends. We have specific neurons in our brains that
make us automatically reflect the emotions of the people around us. Ask
yourself: Who makes me feel bad about myself when I hang out with them?
Who leaves me feeling drained? Take steps to minimize any time you spend with
that person.
Ask for help. No one gets anywhere in life without help. Ask for the
promotion at work, ask the in-laws to watch the kids so you can fit in your yoga
class, ask a trainer to teach you about exercise. One Journal of the American
Medical Association study found that people who had a brief monthly chat with
a coach—usually just ten to fifteen minutes—maintained more weight loss than
people who didn't have any kind of personal contact with one.
Identify your sources of stress. When I lie awake at night with thoughts
swimming around in my head, I get up and write them all down. I identify what
is bothering me and I create a game plan to fix it.
Learn to meditate. Meditation is to the mind what exercise is to the body. It
strengthens the prefrontal cortex, a part of your brain that regulates emotion.
When that part of the brain becomes stronger, research shows that people tend to
be happier and bounce back faster from negative events.
Try other forms of exercise. People who did tai chi and Qigong three times
a week for twelve weeks significantly lowered their BMI, waist circumference,
and blood pressure. The participants had high blood sugar at the beginning of the
study, but after three months, their Hb1Ac, fasting insulin, and insulin resistance
had all decreased.
Get a weekly massage. In a study of teenage girls with body image issues,
those who'd received a massage had lower levels of anxiety, depression, and
cortisol, and higher levels of dopamine, a neurotransmitter that enhances mood.
Massage also elevates serotonin, the same action produced by many
antidepressant medications.
Please take your vacations. Working more than forty hours a week doubles
women's risk of depression and increases men's risk by 33 percent. But even
with all this overtime, one out of every three of us doesn't take our allotted
vacation time. Don't make yourself a sitting duck for a heart attack. You earned
that vacation—take it.
Once you Rebalance your energy, all the pieces of the Master diet plan fall
into place. You are armed with a program that will help your ability to manage
stress—whether psychological or environmental. You have the knowledge that
you need to steer clear of toxins that damage your metabolism. You know what
foods to eat, and how to eat them, to trigger your fat-burning hormones and keep
your fat-storage hormones low. In short, you have all the resources you need to
handle any situation this crazy world can throw at you—and come out leaner,
cleaner, and happier for it.
Let's turn now to the Master two-week meal plan and recipes—and you'll see
how easy (and how delicious) the Master Your Metabolism eating plan can be.
*1 Men and postmenopausal women rarely have deficiencies in iron,
and too much can raise risks of heart disease; if you're in either group, seek
out a multivitamin without iron for that reason. But premenopausal women,
teens, and children all are at risk of iron deficiency and should supplement.
*2 *Linus Pauling Institute also recommends ten to fifteen minutes of
direct midday sun on arms and legs or face and arms at least three times a
week.
*3 *The Linus Pauling Institute recommends 200 IU of natural d-alphatocopherol every day or 400 IU every other day.
*4 Your multivitamin likely has some calcium in it, but nowhere near
the 1,000 to 1,200 mg of calcium that you need, because the pill wouldn't fit
down your throat! Look for a calcium carbonate or calcium citrate
supplement, as both are absorbed readily—carbonate is absorbed best with
food, citrate without.
THE MASTER MEAL PLANS AND RECIPES
THE MEAL PLANS AND 15-PLUS QUICK AND EASY MEALS
TO GET YOU IN AND OUT OF THE KITCHEN FAST
I know that learning a new way of eating can be a challenge. I want you to
see how easy and incredibly satisfying it can be to eat the best way to optimize
your hormones, without spending hours in the kitchen or millions of dollars at
the store. That's why I put together sample menus and sixteen recipes that take
all of the principles, Power Nutrient food groups, and strategies into account.
Even if you decide you don't want to follow these to the letter, please just take a
second to look them over. You'll be able to see very clearly how Master Your
Metabolism looks in real life.
Study after study shows us that the way to get all the benefits of all the
nutrients is to eat whole foods in balance. These aren't just long-term benefits—
after only four days on this type of diet, study participants felt more satisfied,
burned more calories at rest and during exercise, burned more calories while
they slept, improved their body composition, and burned more fat than those
who followed a traditional diet.
When you eat the way your body wants you to eat, when you stay away from
endocrine-disrupting crap and eat whole, organic foods in the right ratios, your
hormones naturally fall in line. Your insulin levels drop. Your cells get more
sensitive to insulin and leptin. Your ghrelin levels stay down after meals. CCK
rises. Your testosterone levels rise, burning fat and building muscle, even while
you sleep. Your thyroid is primed and helps your metabolism continue to burn
calories. Your estrogen levels stay in normal ranges. Your cortisol levels stay
down, and your belly fat melts away.
EATING OUT
When it comes to eating out, keep it to a minimum! The simple truth is
you really can't know what's in the food or where it comes from. You can
ask all the right questions about whether they use organics. You can speak
up and ask them to prepare your food grilled instead of fried. Blah, blah,
blah—we know all the right things to ask, but the bottom line is that the
quality of the food probably isn't great. Restaurants are businesses and they
are out to make money, so they are probably using cheap ingredients like
trans fats, HFCS, nonorganic foods, and so on.
By cutting back on eating out, you will save a fortune (money you can
spend on healthy groceries) and you will guarantee your success of
mastering your metabolism.
I do still eat out, but for no more than five meals per week, and when I
do, I order white fishes or ocean-caught salmon, healthy grains such as
brown rice, and plenty of vegetables. To stay on the plan, it's that simple.
You lose weight because you work with your hormones, not against them.
Now, how exactly do you do it? How do you put these foods together in the
right ratios? Well, I'm going to make it easy for you.
From my previous writing on balancing your macronutrients, I realize that this
can be confusing for people. (It was probably the thousands of e-mails I got from
you that tipped me off.) Then, in my second book, I created menus and recipes to
illustrate how to balance carbs, protein, and fat. Genius, right? I thought so. But
you wanted it simpler and reminded me that not everyone is at home cooking
meals all week long. Touché! In an effort to make this easy for you, I created
Master Your Food Math. With this grab-and-go chart, all you have to do is
simple arithmetic: 1 + 1 = a perfectly balanced, metabolism-firing meal. And
you're out the door.
This two-week meal plan is comprised of all the hormone health foods
needed to get you ripped and keep you there. Each of these days was built using
as many Power Nutrient food groups as possible. You will note that all the meals
are balanced in fat, protein, and carbs, except dinner. Remember that dinner is
predominantly protein and healthy fats with extremely high-fiber vegetables to
keep your insulin levels low at night so that you can max out your growth
hormone release while you sleep. This is also why there is no evening snack; I
don't want any insulin in that body of yours after nine P.M.
The items in bold in the menus can be found in the Master Recipes. In the
event you are not a recipe person, I've also incorporated some very simple grilled
meat and steamed veggie dishes that are brainless and don't require a recipe. The
answer to everyone's “What's for dinner?” problem is foil packets. Basically, you
take your meat and your veggies, sprinkle on a capful of extra virgin olive oil
and a dash of salt and pepper, wrap it up in some foil, toss it on the grill, and you
are golden.
I've also compiled a shopping list to help get your kitchen stocked and get you
amped—you'll find that on page 236, along with a list of my preferred brands of
organic and natural foods.
HOW LONG SHOULD I GRILL IT?
I am not a whiz when it comes to cooking, but I can always depend on
my grill to make me look good. For most people, meat cook times are a bit
confusing at first. Don't sweat it—just follow this chart. Try to turn your
meat only once, in the middle of the total cook time, to allow it to brown
just right.
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast Scrambled egg whites, fried tomatoes, and 1 grapefruit
Lunch Southwest Chicken Salad
Snack Orange with handful of walnuts
Dinner Halibut skewers with eggplant, peppers, and onions
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast Berry Smoothie
Lunch
Romaine lettuce salad with mixed raw veggies, balsamic vinegar and
olive oil, and 5 large shrimp
Snack Carrot sticks and hummus
Dinner Wild Pacific salmon with grilled vegetables
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast Breakfast Burrito
Lunch
Ezekiel Penne with Almond Tomato Sauce and 5 large grilled
prawns
Snack ½ cup black beans and salsa
Dinner Grilled pork chop with steamed green beans
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast Breakfast Parfait with side of 2 scrambled egg whites
Lunch
Grilled chicken breast and steamed spinach with onions and
mushrooms
Snack
Nonfat Greek yogurt with xylitol (natural sweetener), cinnamon, and
crushed dry-roasted almonds
Dinner Chipotle Beef
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast
3-egg-white omelet with tomatoes and sliced turkey breast and 1
piece Ezekiel 7-grain toast
Lunch Chicken Tacos with Drunken Beans
Snack Handful sunflower seeds
Dinner Lemon Garlic Shrimp with Veggies
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast Healthy Eggs Benedict
Lunch Hot Tuna Sandwich
Snack Organic low-fat mozzarella sticks and ½ cup blueberries
Dinner Grilled tilapia with steamed cauliflower
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast Buckwheat with skim milk and 2 scrambled egg whites
Lunch Grilled tuna fillet with ¼ cup brown rice and mixed green salad
Snack Carrot sticks and ½ cup hummus
Dinner Pork tenderloin with steamed asparagus
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast
3 egg whites, 1 turkey sausage, ½ Roma tomato, and 1 piece Ezekiel
7-grain toast
Lunch
½ cup black beans, ½ cup salsa, ¼ cup cheese, and 1 Ezekiel tortilla;
½ cup Greek yogurt for dipping
Snack 3 slices of watermelon with ¼ cup raw almonds
Dinner
Grilled flank steak with grilled onions and steamed Brussels
sprouts
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast 1 packet Quaker instant oatmeal with 2 hard-boiled egg whites
Lunch
Sliced turkey breast and mixed veggies over romaine lettuce with oil
and vinegar
Snack Guiltless Gourmet baked corn chips with fresh salsa
Dinner
Pepper Jack Cheeseburgers with Jalapeño Cumin Sauce (at dinner
use lettuce leaves instead of a bun)
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast Artichoke Scramble with 1 piece Ezekiel 7-grain toast
Lunch
1 can Amy's Organic Medium Chili with Vegetables with small
salad
Snack Low-fat organic Cheddar with Kashi vegetable crackers
Dinner Grilled salmon with Mustard Lemon Braised Vegetables
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast 1 serving Nature's Promise cereal with nonfat milk
Lunch Grilled Halibut Soft Tacos with Orange Salsa
Snack 1 cup Amy's Organic Split Pea Soup
Dinner Grilled chicken with grilled peppers and onions
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast
1 packet Quaker instant oatmeal, 1 cup blueberries, and 2 scrambled
egg whites
Lunch Quinoa-Stuffed Artichokes with side of turkey breast
Snack 1 cup mixed berries with ¼ cup pecans
Dinner
Poached wild-Pacific salmon with blanched broccoli, carrots,
onions, and celery
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast
3-egg-white omelet with green pepper and tomato and 1 slice
Ezekiel bread
Lunch
5 large prawns with mixed greens and raw veggies with Galeos
Caesar salad dressing
Snack 5 slices organic turkey with 1 peach
Dinner Roasted Garlic Chicken with Green Beans Amande
MEAL FOODS
Breakfast
1 packet Quaker instant oatmeal and 1 cup Greek yogurt with 1 cup
strawberries
Lunch
½ cup refried beans, shredded romaine, chopped onions, and
tomatoes in 1 Ezekiel tortilla
Snack 1 apple with almond butter smeared on top
Dinner Seared tuna steak with a mixed green salad
If you've taken a look at the Master Meal Plan, you no doubt already know
that this diet is a snap. I tried to take all the guesswork out of cooking, so all you
have to do is pull up a chair and enjoy. To design these recipes, I worked with
Cassandra Corum, an organic chef, who helped me interpret the principles of this
diet into delicious meals that trigger weight-loss hormones. Each one takes the
very best, freshest whole foods and turns them into hormonally active, metabolic
powerhouses—but all you'll taste is mouthwatering deliciousness. Enjoy!
BREAKFASTS
Artichoke Scramble (Day 10 Breakfast), page 205
Berry Smoothie (Day 2 Breakfast), page 205
Breakfast Burrito (Day 3 Breakfast), page 206
Breakfast Parfait (Day 4 Breakfast), page 206
Healthy Eggs Benedict (Day 6 Breakfast), page 207
LUNCHES
Chicken Tacos with Drunken Beans (Day 5 Lunch), page 208
Ezekiel Penne with Almond Tomato Sauce (Day 3 Lunch), page 208
Grilled Halibut Soft Tacos with Orange Salsa (Day 11 Lunch), page 209
Hot Tuna Sandwich (Day 6 Lunch), page 210
Quinoa-Stuffed Artichokes (Day 12 Lunch), page 211
Southwest Chicken Salad (Day 1 Lunch), page 211
DINNERS
Chipotle Beef (Day 4 Dinner), page 212
Lemon Garlic Shrimp with Veggies (Day 5 Dinner), page 213
Mustard Lemon Braised Vegetables (Day 10 Dinner), page 214
Pepper Jack Cheeseburgers with Jalapeño Cumin Sauce (Day 9 Dinner),
page 214
Roasted Garlic Chicken with Green Beans Amande (Day 13 Dinner),
page 215
ARTICHOKE SCRAMBLE
(Day 10 Breakfast)
Serves 4
4 medium-large artichokes
Nonfat cooking spray
3 teaspoons minced shallots
Salt to taste
8 medium egg whites
1 teaspoon lemon juice
2 to 3 sprigs parsley, minced, for garnish
Preheat the oven to 425°F.
Cut out the hearts from the artichokes and place them on a lightly greased
baking sheet. Cook in the oven for 10 to 15 minutes or until soft and done.
Coat a medium sauté pan with nonstick cooking spray, then add the shallots
and a dash of salt. Lightly sweat the shallots, then add the egg whites to the pan
and scramble together. Remove from the heat, then add the lemon juice.
Place the eggs on top of the artichoke hearts, and serve garnished with minced
parsley, if desired.
Per serving: Calories: 95.8, Cholesterol: 0 mg, Fat: 0.3 g, Saturated fat: 0 g,
Calories from fat: 5.4, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 11.6 g, Carbohydrates: 14.8 g,
Sodium: 231.7 mg, Fiber: 7 g, Sugars: 1.8 g
BERRY SMOOTHIE
(Day 2 Breakfast)
Serves 4
1 cup reduced-fat or fat-free milk
1 cup plain Greek yogurt
1½ cups frozen blueberries
1½ cups frozen strawberries
¾ cup ice
2 tablespoons flaxseed
¼ cup applesauce
1 tablespoon honey or 1 packet Stevia extract
Place all ingredients in a blender, and mix until smooth. Pour into glass and
serve.
Per serving: Calories: 193.5, Cholesterol: 2.4 mg, Fat: 4.1 g, Saturated fat:
0.5 g, Calories from fat: 16.4, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 8 g, Carbohydrates: 34 g,
Sodium: 87 mg, Fiber: 6.6 g, Sugars: 21 g
BREAKFAST BURRITO
(Day 3 Breakfast)
Serves 4
Nonstick cooking spray
1 large garlic clove, minced
3 cups prewashed spinach
8 large egg whites
Crushed red pepper to taste
Four 6-inch Ezekiel tortillas, warmed
3 large Roma tomatoes, chopped
½ cup grated nonfat pepper jack cheese
Lightly coat a medium skillet with nonstick cooking spray. Heat on medium,
add garlic, and cook until fragrant. Add in spinach and cook until soft.
Coat a separate skillet lightly with cooking spray and scramble the egg whites.
When almost finished, sprinkle in a moderate amount of crushed red pepper,
depending on your taste.
Place equal amounts of spinach and egg in each tortilla, top with tomatoes and
cheese, and serve.
Per serving: Calories: 400.3, Cholesterol: 6.3 mg, Fat: 9.4 g, Saturated fat: 3
g, Calories from fat: 32, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 27.5 g, Carbohydrates: 54.3 g,
Sodium: 951 mg, Fiber: 8 g, Sugars: 6.5 g
BREAKFAST PARFAIT
(Day 4 Breakfast)
Serves 4
1 cup plain fat-free Greek yogurt
2 cups Nature's Path flax cereal
1 cup fresh blueberries or defrosted frozen blueberries
1 cup fresh or defrosted strawberries
4 teaspoons pure honey
1 medium-large orange, peeled and thinly sliced
In 4 small bowls or large cups, place ⅛ of a cup of yogurt to line the bottom.
Layer ½ cup cereal, ¼ cup of each berry, and 1 teaspoon of honey. Cover with
another layer of yogurt, and top with 2 to 3 orange slices. Serve cold.
Per serving: Calories: 165.8, Cholesterol: 3.6 mg, Fat: 2 g, Saturated fat: 0.6
g, Calories from fat: 10.2, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 6.2 g, Carbohydrates: 34.7 g,
Sodium: 106.6 mg, Fiber: 6.5 g, Sugars: 21.9 g
HEALTHY EGGS BENEDICT
(Day 6 Breakfast)
Serves 4
Nonstick light cooking spray
3 cloves garlic, minced
1 10-ounce bag prewashed spinach (washed again)
Salt to taste
2 quarts water
3 ounces white vinegar
4 large eggs
2 large red tomatoes, sliced
4 multigrain English muffins, toasted
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
Coat a medium sauté pan with nonstick cooking spray and heat on medium.
Heat garlic until slightly tender, add the spinach, and cook until soft, adding a
pinch of salt if desired.
Bring the water and vinegar to a slow boil in a medium saucepan. Crack open
an egg in a small bowl or cup to ensure that there aren't any pieces of shell in the
yolk or white. With a wooden spoon, quickly stir the liquid in the pot to create a
spiral, or “tornado,” gently pour the egg into the center of the tornado, and stop
stirring. Remove the egg with a slotted spoon when it looks like it has cooked
through. Repeat with the remaining 3 eggs.
Place tomato slices on toasted muffin halves, followed by the desired amount
of spinach, and top with egg and black pepper to taste. Serve.
Per serving: Calories: 266.6, Cholesterol: 211 mg, Fat: 6.7 g, Saturated fat:
1.8 g, Calories from fat: 16.2, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 15.2 g, Carbohydrates: 37.9
g, Sodium: 483 mg, Fiber: 4.5 g, Sugars: 3.6 g
CHICKEN TACOS WITH DRUNKEN BEANS
(Day 5 Lunch)
Serves 4
4 large boneless, skinless chicken breasts
Kosher salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
Nonstick cooking spray
3 medium slices nitrate-free turkey bacon
1 clove garlic, minced
2 medium fresh jalapeños, minced
1 large can (16 ounces) refried black beans
1 small can (14.5 ounces) low-sodium 99 percent fat-free chicken
broth
1 bottle light beer, preferably Corona Light
1 cup shredded romaine lettuce
1 cup chopped Roma tomatoes
4 6-inch Ezekiel tortillas
Dust the chicken with kosher salt and pepper. Place on a preheated grill and
cook until done. Chop, and set aside.
Lightly coat a medium skillet with nonstick cooking spray. Lightly brown the
bacon. Add the garlic and jalapeños, and sauté until the garlic is soft and
fragrant, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the beans, then slowly add the broth, stirring until
smooth. Use half the can of broth, as the beer will bring the beans to the desired
consistency. Slowly stir in the beer. Spoon chopped chicken into 4 tortillas.
Serve the beans next to the tacos, shredded romaine, and tomatoes.
Per serving: Calories: 150, Cholesterol: 49.9 mg, Fat: 1.8 g, Saturated fat: 0.4
g, Calories from fat: 13, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 21.8 g, Carbohydrates: 6.6 g,
Sodium: 452 mg, Fiber: 2.5 g, Sugars: 3 g
EZEKIEL PENNE WITH ALMOND TOMATO SAUCE
(Day 3 Lunch)
Serves 4
2 cups Ezekiel penne pasta
2 cups tomato sauce
¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
¼ teaspoon kosher salt
8 large basil leaves
1½ tablespoons dry-roasted unsalted almonds, finely chopped
Freshly grated Parmesan cheese (optional)
Cook the pasta according to the package instructions. Set aside briefly.
In a large mixing bowl or blender, mix the tomato sauce, crushed red pepper,
salt, basil, and almonds until smooth and combined. Place the pasta in bowls and
top with the sauce and cheese, if using. Serve immediately.
Per serving: Calories: 312, Cholesterol: 52 mg, Fat: 5.3 g, Saturated fat: 0.7
g, Calories from fat: 26.4, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 11.3 g, Carbohydrates: 56.5 g,
Sodium: 670.7 mg, Fiber: 2.1 g, Sugars: 10 g
GRILLED HALIBUT SOFT TACOS WITH ORANGE SALSA
(Day 11 Lunch)
Serves 4
TACOS
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon ancho chile powder
1 teaspoon freshly squeezed lime juice
¼ teaspoon kosher salt
⅛ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
Four 4-to 6-ounce halibut fillets, 1 inch thick, skin on
Eight 6-inch corn tortillas
SALSA
2 large oranges
2 medium limes
1 teaspoon finely chopped cilantro
½ clove garlic, minced
2 teaspoons rice wine vinegar
Salt and pepper to taste
1 medium serrano chile, minced
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
FOR THE TACOS:
In a large Ziploc bag, combine the oil, chile powder, lime juice, salt, pepper, and
fillets. Shake the mixture until the fillets are fully coated.
Place the fillets on a preheated grill, skin side down, and grill until cooked
through.
Remove the skin from the fillets and separate equally among the tortillas.
FOR THE SALSA:
Peel the oranges and limes, removing all the membranes (use just the juicy
meat). Finely chop the fruit.
Mix together the fruit, cilantro, garlic, vinegar, salt, pepper, oil, and the
serrano chile. Set aside.
Top the tacos with salsa and serve.
Per serving: Calories: 306.2, Cholesterol: 75 mg, Fat: 8 g, Saturated fat: 1.2
g, Calories from fat: 16.3, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 25.9 g, Carbohydrates: 36.3 g,
Sodium: 93.3 mg, Fiber: 5.4 g, Sugars: 7.1 g
HOT TUNA SANDWICH
(Day 6 Lunch)
Serves 4
Nonstick cooking spray
¼ cup chopped onion
½ tablespoon minced garlic
Salt to taste
2 cans albacore tuna in water
½ teaspoon crushed red pepper
2 tablespoons whole grain mustard
4 slices multigrain bread, toasted
Lightly coat a medium skillet with nonstick cooking spray and heat over
medium-high heat.
Add the onion, garlic, and a dash of salt. Stirring frequently, cook for 1 to 2
minutes. Add the tuna and the crushed red pepper, mix completely with the
onions and garlic, and heat.
Spread ½ tablespoon whole grain mustard on each slice of toast, then spoon
the tuna mixture over each slice and serve.
Per serving: Calories: 174, Cholesterol: 24.8 mg, Fat: 1.9 g, Saturated fat: 0.4
g, Calories from fat: 9.4, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 24.8 g, Carbohydrates: 13.3 g,
Sodium: 151.4 mg, Fiber: 2.2 g, Sugars: 2.3 g
QUINOA-STUFFED ARTICHOKES
(Day 12 Lunch)
Serves 4
4 large artichokes
1 cup quinoa, uncooked
2 cups water
¼ cup sun-dried tomatoes
1 teaspoon kosher salt
1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 large lemon
ARTICHOKE PREP:
Boil the artichokes until tender.
Cut off the top inch of each artichoke, as well as the stem. Peel off the outer
tough leaves and cut away all spiky edges. Separate the outer leaves to loosen
them, as well as the inside leaves to make the lighter leaves around the heart
visible. Pull out the lighter-colored leaves and remove the choke with a spoon.
FOR THE STUFFING:
Bring the quinoa and water to a boil, reduce the heat, and simmer until the water
is soaked up and the quinoa is soft.
Stir in the sun-dried tomatoes, salt, and pepper, then squeeze the juice from
the lemon onto the quinoa. Mix.
Preheat the oven to 375° F.
Scoop ¼ to ½ cup quinoa stuffing into each artichoke and around the sides in
the gaps in the leaves.
Place in the oven to heat for 5 to 8 minutes. Serve.
Per serving: Calories: 344.9, Cholesterol: 0 mg, Fat: 4.4 g, Saturated fat: 0.6
g, Calories from fat: 30.2, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 16.3 g, Carbohydrates: 66.7 g,
Sodium: 470.5 mg, Fiber: 15.7 g, Sugars: 7.8 g
SOUTHWEST CHICKEN SALAD
(Day 1 Lunch)
Serves 4
½ cup lime juice
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 medium garlic cloves, minced
8 tablespoons chopped cilantro
1 to 2 teaspoons chile powder
1 to 2 teaspoons ground cumin
1 teaspoon salt (optional)
Nonstick cooking spray
4 medium boneless, skinless chicken breasts
One 15-ounce can black beans, drained
4 medium-large Roma tomatoes, diced
8 tablespoons chopped scallions
4 cups organic romaine lettuce
Place the lime juice, olive oil, garlic, cilantro, chile powder, cumin, and salt (if
using) in a closed jar. Shake until well mixed.
Lightly coat a grill with nonstick cooking spray, heat, and grill the chicken
until done. Slice into 1-inch strips.
Mix together the chicken, beans, tomatoes, scallions, lettuce, and jar mixture,
and serve.
Per serving: Calories: 415.3, Cholesterol: 68.4 mg, Fat: 11 g, Saturated fat:
1.7 g, Calories from fat: 35.9, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 41.2 g, Carbohydrates: 42.7
g, Sodium: 129.7 mg, Fiber: 16.7 g, Sugars: 8.3 g
CHIPOTLE BEEF
(Day 4 Dinner)
Serves 4
2½ to 3 pounds chuck roast
Kosher salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
Nonstick cooking spray
1 can (15 ounces) low-sodium beef broth
1 can (7 ounces) chipotle peppers in adobe sauce
2 bags prewashed salad lettuce of your choosing
Dust the meat with salt and pepper. Coat a medium skillet with nonstick
cooking spray. Heat the pan over medium-high heat, then brown the meat on
both sides.
Add the broth and the entire contents of the can of chipotle peppers, sauce
included.
Cook over low heat for 1 to 2 hours, then slice and serve over lettuce for a
delicious spicy salad that doesn't need dressing.
Per serving: Calories: 457.2, Cholesterol: 170.1 mg, Fat: 20.3 g, Saturated
fat: 7.8 g, Calories from fat: 41, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 62 g, Carbohydrates: 2.5
g, Sodium: 961.9 mg, Fiber: 0.7 g, Sugars: 0.6 g
LEMON GARLIC SHRIMP WITH VEGGIES
(Day 5 Dinner)
Serves 4
Nonstick cooking spray
1 large red bell pepper, diced
1 large green bell pepper, diced
2 pounds asparagus, trimmed and cut into 1-to 2-inch lengths
2 teaspoons minced lemon zest
½ teaspoon salt
6 cloves garlic, minced
1 pound raw shrimp, peeled and deveined
1 teaspoon cornstarch
1 cup non-reduced sodium chicken broth
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
2 tablespoons chopped parsley
Coat a medium skillet with nonstick cooking spray, and heat over medium.
Add the bell peppers, asparagus, lemon zest, and ¼ teaspoon salt. Stir
occasionally. When the vegetables just begin to soften, transfer to a bowl and
cover.
Add remaining ¼ teaspoon salt to the skillet with the garlic, and sweat about 1
minute. Add the shrimp and cook for another 1 to 2 minutes.
Whisk the cornstarch and broth in a separate bowl until smooth, then add to
the pan along with a dash of salt. Cook, stirring, until the sauce has thickened
slightly and the shrimp are pink and just cooked through, about 2 to 3 minutes.
Remove from the heat and stir in the lemon juice.
Serve the shrimp over the vegetables and garnish with parsley.
Per serving: Calories: 187.2, Cholesterol: 172.4 mg, Fat: 4.8 g, Saturated fat:
0.8 g, Calories from fat: 16.5, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 25.7 g, Carbohydrates: 10.9
g, Sodium: 176.8 mg, Fiber: 3.2 g, Sugars: 3.4 g
MUSTARD LEMON BRAISED VEGETABLES
(Day 10 Dinner)
Serves 4
tablespoon olive oil
pounds mixed vegetables
¼ cup chopped white onion
1 teaspoon salt
⅔ cup low-sodium chicken broth
2 teaspoons lemon juice
2 teaspoon Dijon mustard
Heat oil in medium skillet. When hot, add vegetables and a dash of salt. Stir
frequently until vegetables start to soften and brown, about 3 to 5 minutes.
Slowly pour in chicken broth, cover, and simmer until broth has been
absorbed and evaporated.
Uncover, add lemon juice and mustard, and combine with vegetables. Season
to taste with remaining salt. Serve.
Per serving: Calories: 193, Cholesterol: 0 mg, Fat: 5.284 g, Saturated fat:
0.824 g, Calories from fat: 3.62, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 8.636 g, Carbohydrates:
32.757 g, Sodium: 631.69 mg, Fiber: 9.42 g, Sugars: 0.77 g
PEPPER JACK CHEESEBURGERS WITH
JALAPEÑO CUMIN SAUCE
(Day 9 Dinner)
Serves 4
3 large fresh jalapeños, seeded and coarsely chopped
½ cup plus 3 tablespoons coarsely chopped cilantro
3 large garlic cloves, smashed
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
1 teaspoon cumin
2 tablespoons water
Pinch of kosher salt
1½ pounds ground grass-fed lean sirloin, at room temperature
4 ounces nonfat pepper jack cheese, shredded
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
Olive oil, for brushing
4 regular multigrain or Ezekiel hamburger buns (just the bottoms)
1 cup shredded romaine lettuce
4 thin tomato slices
Sliced pickled jalapeños, for serving
In a blender, combine the jalapeños with ½ cup cilantro, the garlic, lime juice,
½ teaspoon of the ground cumin, water, and a pinch of salt. Puree until smooth.
In a medium bowl, lightly knead the sirloin with the pepper jack cheese, the
remaining cilantro, and the remaining ½ teaspoon of cumin. Loosely shape into
4 patties about ¾ of an inch thick, and tuck any large pieces of cheese into the
burgers.
Season with salt and pepper and transfer to a plate lined with plastic wrap.
Brush the grate of a hot grill with a little olive oil. Grill the burgers for about
10 minutes, turning once, over medium heat. Set the burgers on the buns and top
with the lettuce, tomato, and jalapeño slices. Serve.
Per serving: Calories: 427, Cholesterol: 103.5 mg, Fat: 13.9 g, Saturated fat:
4.8 g, Calories from fat: 34.3, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 56 g, Carbohydrates: 18 g,
Sodium: 714 mg, Fiber: 2.8 g, Sugars: 5.8 g
ROASTED GARLIC CHICKEN WITH
GREEN BEANS AMANDE
(Day 13 Dinner)
Serves 4
CHICKEN
1 teaspoon olive oil
Kosher salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
1 head garlic
4 large boneless, skinless chicken breasts
GREEN BEANS
cup green beans, washed and trimmed
Nonstick cooking spray
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 tablespoon raw almonds, sliced
FOR THE CHICKEN:
Preheat the oven to 375° F.
Drizzle the olive oil and a pinch of salt and pepper over the garlic head, and
wrap it in aluminum foil. Roast the garlic about 15 to 20 minutes, until it is
halfway done.
While the garlic is roasting, lightly dust the chicken breasts with salt and
pepper.
Remove the garlic from the oven, then carefully pinch out the garlic cloves
onto the chicken. Put the chicken on a roasting rack and place in the oven. Cook
for 18 to 20 minutes.
FOR THE GREEN BEANS:
Bring 2 quarts of salted water to a boil. Place the green beans in the water for 2
to 3 minutes. Remove and pat dry.
Lightly coat a medium saucepan with nonstick cooking spray. Heat the pan on
medium, then add the minced garlic and the almonds. Cook until the almonds
turn slightly brown. Add the green beans and cook until combined and hot.
Serve with the chicken.
Per serving: Calories: 308.8, Cholesterol: 37.8 mg, Fat: 18.4 g, Saturated fat:
3.6 g, Calories from fat: 27.5, Trans fat: 0 g, Protein: 15.7 g, Carbohydrates: 21
g, Sodium: 397.3 mg, Fiber: 3.7 g, Sugars: 1.4 g
THE MASTER REMEDIES
PROGRAMS FOR 6 OF THE MOST COMMON
HORMONAL DISORDERS
I designed Master Your Metabolism for everyone—whether you're young,
old, male, female, thin, or packing a few extra pounds, the program will work for
you. However, there are some times when all of your hormones go a bit further
south, such as at menopause and andropause. When you have a more complex
hormonal condition, such as PCOS, metabolic syndrome, PMS, or a thyroid
imbalance, this diet will certainly help. But you may need a little extra help,
support, and, possibly, medication.
I've been lucky enough to work with one of the nation's leading
endocrinologists, Dr. Christine Darwin, an associate professor of medicine and
associate chief for clinical research, clinical epidemiology, and preventive
medicine at the UCLA Medical Center. She's helped me create programs that,
along with this diet, can help you find some relief for these conditions.
Premenstrual syndrome, or PMS, is a little slice of hell on earth. Up to 75
percent of women experience this constellation of unpleasant symptoms that rise
during the second half of their cycle, usually five to seven days before their
period. Just look at the number of symptoms often cited in connection with
PMS:
Acne Dizziness Mood swings
Aggression
Faster or more
pronounced Muscle tension
Anxiety heartbeat Nausea
Bloating Fatigue Paranoia
Constipation Feeling overwhelmed
Prickly hands and
feet
Cramps and pressure in the lower
belly
“Foggy” thinking Quick temper
Forgetfulness Sensitivity
Cravings Headaches
Swollen hands and
fee
Crying Hot flashes Teary
Depression Insomnia Tender breasts
Desire to be left alone Irritability Vomiting
Distractibility Loss of libido Weight gain
Many women have several of these symptoms; some may have only one or
two. One in twenty women experience such severe PMS that it can actually be
considered premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), a potentially lifedestroying condition, one of the symptoms of which can be uncontrollable anger.
(If your PMS interferes with your normal functioning at work, home, or with
loved ones, take it seriously and talk to your doctor.)
The true cause of PMS is a source of much controversy among
endocrinologists. Many physicians blame the rapid rise and fall in progesterone
levels after ovulation. Other physicians blame androgen disorders. Many experts
believe PMDD may be caused by lower levels of serotonin, the calming “good
mood” neurotransmitter. Thyroid disorders share many of the same symptoms as
PMS—if you have chronic PMS, you might consider asking your doctor for a
thyroid test, to rule out any problems there.
The good news is that PMS can be tamed if not cured. Make a note on your
calendar on the first day of your period and track how many days you have in
your cycle. Do this for three months, and patterns will emerge. Once you know
what to expect, you can take direct steps to manage your own symptoms. Try
these five tips:
Rest, relax, and exercise. Adequate sleep and less stress will put you in a
better hormonal position to handle this physiological imbalance. You may not
want to, but get in your workout anyway. The endorphin rush will help relieve
cramps and counterbalance a likely dearth of serotonin and happy
neurochemicals.
If you can, schedule around your period. Try to schedule downtime into
the last and first weeks of your cycle—that's when PMS and then your period
hit. Schedule stressful tasks for the second week of your cycle, which starts
seven days after the first day of your period, because several hormones, such as
LH, estrogen, and testosterone, not to mention your energy and focus, peak
during this week before ovulation.
Cut out most caffeine, alcohol, and salt. Women with fibrocycstic breasts
often experience a lot of tenderness during the premenstrual days. Reducing
caffeine can minimize breast tenderness as well as irritability. Steer clear of
alcohol, as it exacerbates feelings of depression. Cutting salt will reduce bloat.
Minimize simple sugars. Eating high-glycemic carbs increases the level of
inflammation in your body, making cramps worse. A blood sugar roller coaster is
never a good thing for your already raw nerves, so this diet gives you regular
meals and snacks with fiber and protein to help keep that blood sugar stable.
Supplement. Calcium can reduce symptoms of PMS—shoot for at least
1,200 milligrams a day, a dose shown to be effective versus placebo in clinical
trials on PMS. Magnesium is also helpful, as are B complex vitamins, with B1,
B2, B3, and especially B6. To reduce the inflammation of cramps and breast
tenderness, try a primrose oil supplement, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory that
may work in ways similar to ibuprofen.
An underactive thyroid is death to your metabolism and can make attempts at
weight loss very frustrating. Yet hypothyroidism, or low thyroid function,
becomes increasingly common as women get older—up to one in five can
experience some form, especially those who are white or Mexican-American.
Check out the list of symptoms on page 41 and ask yourself if you've
experienced one or more—but realize that sometimes you could have none of
these symptoms and still be hypothyroid.
The most common cause of hypothyroid is Hashimoto's disease, an
autoimmune condition in which the immune system attacks and damages the
thyroid, impairing your ability to make thyroid hormones. Concern is growing
that a great deal of hypothyroidism is being caused by environmental pollution
and the release of pesticide buildup from our fatty tissues. Sometimes a lessthan-thriving thyroid actually has more to do with your stress level and adrenal
function than with the thyroid itself. Adrenal hormones, such as cortisol, play a
big part in proper thyroid function; high levels can hinder conversion of T4 into
T3. To rule out this stress-induced hypothyroidism, ask your doctor to run a test
for ACTH and cortisol at the same time as your TSH test for thyroid function.
(See chapter 2 for more information on thyroid testing.)
If your test indicates hypothyroidism, seek out an endocrinologist— they have
experience with the subtleties of thyroid dysfunction. Try to find one who is
open to solutions beyond thyroid medication, especially nutritional and lifestyle
strategies to manage your thyroid. (Check out the “Find an Endocrinologist”
search tool at The Hormone Foundation Web site,
www.hormone.org/FindAnEndo/index.cfm.) If you are diagnosed with low
thyroid function, try the following steps:
Follow the Master diet—with a few modifications. The program
eliminates many of the environmental and nutritional toxins that have been
shown to create thyroid problems. Do take care to cook goitrogenic cruciferous
veggies, though—they're known to stimulate goiters. Also, don't take a
multivitamin with iron or a cholesterol-lowering medication, or eat anything
with iron, calcium, soy, or high fiber, within a few hours of your thyroid
medication—these can all interfere with thyroid hormone absorption.
Exercise and relax every day. The stress hormone cortisol interferes with
the conversion of inactive T4 hormone to the active T3 form. Exercise is a great
stress reliever that lowers cortisol levels while also increasing your body's
sensitivity to thyroid hormones. Check out some of the other relaxation
recommendations in chapter 8 and, as a general rule, shoot for at least thirty
minutes of some kind of exercise every day.
Don't supplement with iodine. Many “holistic” nutrition websites
recommend that you take supplemental iodine or kelp to support your thyroid.
Don't. The average American diet has plenty of iodine—and when the thyroid
gland senses high levels of iodine in the blood, it will release even less thyroid
hormone. Choose iodized salt instead of kosher salt to put on your food, but
don't supplement to add extra.
Take other thyroid-supportive supplements. The enzyme necessary to
convert T4 to T3 needs selenium to function properly. Other helpful supplements
include vitamin D, zinc, and fish oil. (See the thyroid-trigger foods chart on page
146 for advice on how to get these nutrients plus other nutritional support
suggestions.) As always, be sure to ask your doctor before you take any
supplements, especially if you are on thyroid medication.
If you take at least 1 gram of fish oil per day, you not only help support your
thyroid, you also help reduce your risk of heart attack, stroke, and other
cardiovascular disease. I recommend fish oil for everyone. And when you select
your multivitamin, make sure it has selenium (up to 200 micrograms) and zinc
(up to 40 milligrams).
As far as your vitamin D goes, get it the old-fashioned way: Go outside each
day for at least ten minutes of unprotected time in the sun. Your skin can
synthesize D3 when it is exposed to UVB rays from sunlight. You can also
supplement, but be sure not to exceed the daily upper limit of 2,000 IU per day.
Combine thyroid medications. Since my diagnosis at thirty thyroid
medication has made a world of difference to me. Work with your doctor to
choose the right thyroid replacement, and you may see relief in as few as two
weeks. Many people benefit from a combination of both the inactive T4, found
in Synthroid or Levothroid, and the active hormone T3, found in other
medications such as Cytomel (100 percent T3) and Armour Thyroid (a
bioidentical hormone that is 60 percent T4 and 40 percent T3). Because T3 does
not show up on blood tests, it's not on some doctors' radar and they're loath to
prescribe it. If your doctor objects, ask why. (And get a second opinion.)
We've talked a lot about insulin resistance throughout this book. Perhaps one
of the most dangerous conditions that is linked to insulin resistance is metabolic
syndrome (what's sometimes called syndrome X). You have metabolic syndrome
when you have three or more of these risk factors:
A sizable belly. If you are an “apple,” with a waist measuring more than 35
inches as a woman or 40 inches as a man, you're already in harm's way. Pile on
any additional risk factors, such as smoking, being older, or of South Asian,
Mexican, or Native American descent, or having diabetes in the family, and your
threshold drops to 31 to 35 inches for women or to 37 or 39 inches for men.
High triglycerides. If you've already been diagnosed and treated for
triglycerides, you have this risk factor, even if your level is lower than the 150
milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) threshold.
Low HDL. If you've already been diagnosed and treated for low (good)
HDL, you have this risk factor, even if your level is higher than the 50 mg/dL (as
a woman) or 40 mg/dL (as a man) threshold.
High blood pressure. If you've already been diagnosed and treated for high
blood pressure, you have this risk factor, even if your pressure is lower than the
130/85 threshold. (If either number is higher than the threshold— even if the
other one is lower—you have this risk factor.)
High fasting blood sugar. If you've already been diagnosed and treated for
high blood sugar, you have this risk factor, even if your fasting blood glucose is
lower than the 100 mg/dL threshold. (If you test between 100 and 125 mg/dL,
you're prediabetic; if your fasting blood test shows 126 mg/dL more than once,
you're officially diabetic.)
Are you in this group? You're not alone—nearly one in four Americans has
metabolic syndrome, but not many of them know it. The frightening thing about
metabolic syndrome is that if you do have it, you now are twice as likely to
develop heart disease and five times as likely to develop diabetes as those who
do not have it. You also have a higher chance of developing fatty liver disease
and PCOS. And some severe cardiovascular damage may have already been
done before you even knew you had it—several studies have found that
hardening of the arteries begins well before insulin resistance shows up as high
fasting blood sugar. That's why it's so important to take any one of these
symptoms very seriously and head off metabolic syndrome before it starts—and
here are some ways to do just that.
Lose just 5 percent of your weight (preferably more!). Losing this amount
of weight can reduce your risk of developing diabetes by 58 percent, reduce your
risk of stroke, and reduce or completely eliminate your need for blood pressure
medication. Lose 10 percent and you cut your overall risk of developing heart
disease and increase your life expectancy. Shooting for that 10 percent weight
loss in a year—if not sooner—is your top priority for treatment, with an ultimate
goal of a BMI under 25.
Manage your insulin response. The uniting theme in all of the risk factors
for metabolic syndrome is an increased risk of insulin resistance. If you follow
this books diet, especially eating smaller meals every four hours to keep your
blood sugar stable, you'll lessen the amount of insulin your body needs and may
radically change some of these readings very quickly. Make sure to eat some
amount of protein at every meal or snack, use cinnamon, garlic, and fiber
frequently, and quit smoking—all of these steps help lower blood sugar and
manage insulin resistance.
Get more sleep and lower stress. Stress is linked to increased body fat,
where your stomach has more receptors for cortisol. Reducing your stress level
can automatically shrink your waist and lessen the amount of dangerous visceral
fat, which is linked to systemic inflammation and decreased insulin sensitivity. If
you pair that with a solid seven-plus hours of sleep a night, you'll lower hunger
hormones cortisol and ghrelin, making it easier to stick to a healthy, low-crap
diet.
Exercise! The more muscle you have, the more cells are available to absorb
glucose. Exercise increases your cells' ability to use insulin, so you won't have to
produce as much in response to meals. When you produce less insulin, you
lower your chances of developing diabetes. (Note: If you're in the market for a
step-by-step exercise program, log on to my website at
www.JillianMichaels.com for a personal program that you can customize to your
own level of fitness. Or check out my first two books.)
Consider extra hormonal help. Normally I'm not a big cheerleader for
drugs, but in the case of metabolic syndrome, maybe hormones can help. Recent
research shows that men with metabolic syndrome and diabetes are also at risk
for lower levels of testosterone. A placebo-controlled study recently found that
diabetic men or those with metabolic syndrome who used a testosterone gel for
fourteen days had increased insulin sensitivity—and those results lasted for a full
year of treatment afterward. (Bonus: It might improve your sex life, too.)
Regardless of whether you're a man or a woman, it wouldn't hurt anyone with
metabolic syndrome to take advantage of the natural testosterone boost of
intensive exercise and the testosterone-trigger foods on page 127.
Polycystic ovarian syndrome is one of the most common hormonal problems
in women—one in ten premenopausal women in America has it. Women may
find out they have PCOS when they have trouble getting pregnant. It is the
number one cause of female infertility because women with the condition don't
ovulate or menstruate regularly. But girls as young as eleven have also been
known to develop this condition—they typically find out when they develop
severe acne or excessive facial hair.
PCOS is usually characterized by a combination of two hormonal
dysfunctions—insulin resistance and androgen excess. What comes first? No one
knows for sure. One theory argues that extra insulin stimulates the ovaries to
produce extra testosterone. Another theory says the conditions starts in the
hypothalamus. But not all women with PCOS have insulin resistance and not all
of them are overweight. That's why some doctors believe that in ten years we'll
have a PCOS type 1 and type 2, much like we have type 1 and type 2 diabetes
now.
One thing is for sure—women who have PCOS start to experience a lot of
collateral damage from their condition, in the form of these symptoms:
Abdominal obesity Thinning hair on head Skin tags
Acne Higher LDL
Excessive snoring/sleep
apnea
Infertility Dandruff Higher triglycerides
Irregular or missed
periods
Oily skin Lower HDL
Weight gain or
difficulty losing
weight
Excess hair on upper lip, chin,
chest, back, stomach, thumbs, or
toes
Darkened skin on neck,
arms, breasts, or thighs
Some of these symptoms can be a hassle, but the long-term health concerns of
PCOS are even worse—women with PCOS are up to seven times more likely to
suffer from a heart attack than women without the condition. Pregnant women
who have it face a steeper rate of miscarriage, gestational diabetes, preeclampsia,
and premature delivery. More than 50 percent of women with PCOS will
develop prediabetes or diabetes by the time they're forty. Managing your
symptoms will not only help you feel better right now, it will reduce your
likelihood of developing these serious complications.
If you suspect that you have PCOS, make an appointment with an
endocrinologist and ask him or her to test your androgen and blood glucose
levels for signs of insulin resistance. Other hormones that may be tested include
luteinizing hormone (LH), estrogen, progesterone, and thyroid hormones. Your
doctor may even order an ultrasound of your ovaries, which might show that you
have a string of small cysts—hence the name of the disorder.
If you're pregnant (or want to be) and have PCOS, don't despair— your doctor
can tell you about the various treatments at your disposal. PCOS is not curable,
but some lifestyle and diet tips can help make the symptoms more manageable
immediately and help prevent greater risks down the road. Give these a try, too:
Monitor your blood sugar. Even if you're not diagnosed with diabetes,
you'll want to get very comfortable with a blood sugar monitor—it's a great way
to keep tabs on how your diet influences your insulin response. Be sure to lean
toward higher-protein meals and snacks—when women with PCOS used higher
protein/lower carb diets to lose weight, they reduced their blood sugar, lowered
levels of free androgens, and maintained a healthy HDL.
Lose that 10 percent. The Department of Health and Human Services says
that even a 10 percent drop in weight can help to make your menstrual cycle
more regular—not to mention improve your body's insulin sensitivity. Definitely
use this book's diet, but don't forget to exercise. One study of women with PCOS
found that doing just thirty minutes on a stationary bike three times a week
netted them an average loss of 4.5 percent of their body weight and improved
their insulin sensitivity significantly without even dieting.
Quit smoking. Think of your increased heart attack risk! Smoking jacks up
your blood pressure and heart rate, raises testosterone, cortisol, and other adrenal
hormones, causes insulin resistance, and messes with your ovarian function—in
other words, it makes every aspect of PCOS worse. Just don't do it.
Stick to organic dairy. Insulinlike growth factor (IGF-1) stimulates the
production of certain skin cells that can plug skin ducts and lead to acne. While
no link has been proven between rBST hormones in dairy and PCOS, cows that
are treated with growth hormones do produce milk with higher levels of IGF-1.
Given the many other reasons to choose organic dairy, less acne is just icing on
the cake.
Muscles droop, your sex drive diminishes, and weight seems to pack on your
belly, rear, and thighs no matter what you do. That's right—you're headed for
menopause. Menopause naturally happens to all women between the ages of
forty and fifty-five, and during the years preceding menopause—aka
perimenopause—all of us face some degree of unpleasant symptoms, some more
dramatically than others.
Shorter periods Thinning hair
Longer periods Facial hair
Heavier periods Fuzzy thinking
Lighter periods Moodiness
Hot flashes and night sweats Loss of muscle tone
Insomnia Abdominal obesity
Vaginal dryness
Many of these symptoms, especially the night sweats and vaginal dryness, are
believed to happen because our ovaries stop producing estrogen and
progesterone—and, to a lesser extent, testosterone. When you've gone twelve
months or more without a period, you're considered fully menopausal.
After we go through menopause, we're at greater risk for a number of
conditions: breast cancer, hypothyroidism, metabolic syndrome, and diabetes.
The loss of estrogen can also lead to osteoporosis and heart disease, which is
why menopausal hormone therapy used to be standard care for women. That is,
until 2002, when the Women's Health Initiative study found that women taking
hormones faced much higher risks of heart disease, stroke, blood clots, and
cancer. Now women are seeking out alternatives, and many are learning about
antiaging medicine. (See “What About Bioidentical Hormones,” page 44.) But
why not start with some of these diet and lifestyle tips, choices that not only help
you manage menopausal symptoms but also improve your overall health?
Get enough protein. Sacropenia, or loss of muscle as we age, has been seen
as an inevitable outcome of aging, but a great deal of the severity is dictated by
our diet and exercise. Protein helps: One study found that men and women
between seventy and seventy-nine who ate the most protein lost 40 percent less
lean mass than those who ate the least. Muscle burns more calories, increases
your insulin sensitivity, and keeps your testosterone production higher so that
you can help stave off age-related conditions such as metabolic syndrome,
diabetes, and loss of libido.
Eat soy before menopause. Soy has phytoestrogens that may help relieve
hot flashes, although studies are mixed on this issue. Stick to whole soy foods,
such as tempeh and miso, and steer clear of soy bars and other products with
isoflavone extracts. The active compounds in processed isoflavone products may
be very different from how they are found in nature. While believed to be safe
for the short term, long-term use of concentrated soy extracts has been linked to
increased cancer risks, especially for women on the pill or with a family history
of breast, uterine, or ovarian cancer; endometriosis; or uterine fibroids. (Ask
your doctor to help you figure out if soy is okay for you.)
Don't bother with many “menopausal” supplements. Some herbs
traditionally taken to relieve menopause symptoms, such as black cohosh, dong
quai, and red clover, probably don't work. The National Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine, an arm of the National Institutes of
Health, looked at all the research on these three and found no evidence that they
helped with hot flashes. (It also found that red clover, a phytoestrogen, carries all
the same cautions as soy; black cohosh and dong quai are safe.)
One supplement that may help is ginseng, but while it may help enhance
mood and sleep, it doesn't help with hot flashes. Ditto for kava, which can help
lessen anxiety, but also increases your risk of liver disease. Small studies have
suggested that DHEA, the precursor to estrogen and testosterone, may provide
some benefit for relieving hot flashes and increasing libido, but controlled
studies have shown none. Considering that it might up your risk of breast or
prostate cancer, exercise caution and talk to your doctor before you start taking
DHEA. The one supplement you absolutely must take is calcium with vitamin D.
If you're a woman, especially if you're over thirty-five, you should be shooting
for 1,200 milligrams of calcium per day. Once you hit menopause, up that to
1,500.
Use hormone creams. If you are not at risk for breast or other hormonerelated cancers, but you are having trouble with hot flashes, vaginal dryness, or
an overall lack of well-being, consider an estrogen cream. Applied directly to the
vaginal mucous membranes, the estrogen goes where you need it most and not
throughout your body, the way earlier iterations of HRT did. Many women swear
by testosterone cream as well—studies have shown that it helps increase libido
and relieve vaginal dryness. As with all menopausal hormone therapy, minimize
any risks by asking your doctor for the smallest dosage for the shortest amount
of time to be effective.
Balance energy out. The holy trinity from chapter 8—sleep, exercise, and
stress relief—comes into serious play at menopause, too. Most women in this
age group are caring for parents and kids at the same time. Experts say that in
addition to the endorphin release you'll get, exercise also flushes out the system,
and helps you manage anxiety, irritability, and depression much better.
Despite years of jokes and ridicule, the science is clear: Andropause, or male
menopause, does exist. Unlike female menopause, which comes out of nowhere
and hits women like a ton of bricks, andropause—or partial androgen deficiency,
its real name—is a slow, steady decline in several key hormones.
Starting at age thirty, men's testosterone levels drop about 10 percent each
decade. If a man starts to gain weight, his levels of a protein called sex
hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) increase, binding with active testosterone
and making it inactive. The higher the SHBG, the lower the bioavailable
testosterone levels. About 30 percent of men in their fifties have noticeably
lower testosterone levels, which can lead to
Decreased libido Lagging energy
Depression Loss of muscle mass
Erectile dysfunction Memory loss
Insomnia Muddy thinking
Andropause can cause changes in the testes—sperm production slows down,
testicular mass shrinks, and it sometimes causes erectile dysfunction. The good
news is that none of this seems to impact a guy's fertility all that much—many
men go on to sire kids into their seventies. What is more likely to sideline a guy
is a problem with his prostate: About 50 percent of men experience benign
prostatic hypertrophy, a condition in which the prostate gets larger with scar
tissue, making it more difficult to pee or ejaculate. Thyroid-stimulating hormone
also declines, and cells start to lose insulin receptors, becoming less sensitive to
insulin. Fasting glucose levels can rise anywhere from 6 to 14 milligrams per
deciliter every ten years after age fifty This is because the cells become less
sensitive to the effects of insulin, probably due to a loss in the number of insulin
receptor sites in the cell walls. Diabetes and high blood pressure—also more
common among older men—can lead to erectile dysfunction, a condition few
guys want. Here are a few ways to head off andropause as quickly as possible:
Exercise, would ya? Again, exercise plays a role—not only is it great for
your general well-being, it also decreases your fat and helps to keep a lid on your
SHBG levels so your testosterone can wander around free, not bound to any
proteins. It also increases your bone and muscle strength, heading off any muscle
wasting or fat building.
Don't take testosterone without a doctor's help. Doctors have seen some
pretty horrific cases walking through their doors these days, after people took
their testosterone supplementation into their own hands. If you're mail-ordering
testosterone from, say, Bulgaria, you're essentially doping yourself with anabolic
steroids. By taking steroids without a doctor's guidance, you run the risk of
shutting off your own natural hormones coming from the pituitary, precursors to
important chemicals you need every day. You're effectively shutting down your
own testosterone production instead of increasing it. Just say no!
Have more sex! Guys tend to have fewer erections as they get older. Up to
90 percent of erectile dysfunction comes from a physical cause, not a mental
one. But doctors say being able to have decent sex when you're older is more
likely if you've continued to keep your equipment in working order by having
sex throughout middle age. (I know this is a hard sell, but just take one for the
team, buddy.)
Eat veggie protein and fat. One study found that the best predictor of
higher resting-testosterone levels was an increased level of saturated,
monounsaturated, and total fat in a man's diet. Another study found that protein
—but only from vegetable sources—was linked to higher levels of testosterone.
(See the testosterone-trigger foods on page 127 for more suggestions on how to
boost your testosterone with food.)
WELCOME TO YOUR
NEW METABOLISM
HOW TO CARRY THE REMOVE/RESTORE/REBALANCE
PROGRAM INTO THE REST OF YOUR LIFE
Okay, so here we are … at the end of the road—or should I say the
beginning? Now, bolstered by the success in your diet and your lifestyle, I want
you to continue these same three principles in all areas of your life. So this
chapter is short and sweet. I want you to:
Remove the crap from your life—the stress, the mental and emotional clutter
you carry around with you, not to mention the physical clutter that can drain all
your energy.
Restore the good stuff—take the time to appreciate the life that you've just
extended! You know what makes you happy—do more of it. Your hormones will
automatically work a lot better.
And Rebalance—understand that even when life throws you off for a while,
you have an opportunity every day to strive for that balance, to move to a middle
ground where you can enjoy just enough fun and excitement to keep things
interesting, but also enough rest and rejuvenation to keep yourself sane and
focused.
Once you start applying these principles to your life, in all areas, you'll see
that they're the only three you'll ever need—for your hormones, your health, and
your happiness.
I believe in this program. I believe in you. Some of what you've read may be
overwhelming, mindboggling, scary. I know. I have felt the same way. But you
do have the power to change anything in your life that you choose to—and at
any point that you choose to do so. And remember, I am right there with you
fighting the good fight, walking the walk, talking the talk. Let's take back our
health, reclaim our lives, shake things up, and save the world! Together we can
effect change individually and globally.
You will be hot, healthy, and happy. All you have to do is be aware (which
you now are) and begin incorporating these changes into your life. Some of it
might be tedious, but so what? You are going to look and feel great. Isn't that
worth it? And what is more important than your health? Health is the foundation
your entire life rests upon. Investing in your health is committing to the pursuit
of happiness. Investing in it is investing in you—what stock is more valuable?
THE MASTER SHOPPING LIST
YOUR GRAB-AND-GO GUIDES FOR
THE FARMERS MARKET AND GROCERY STORE
Of course, your shopping list should start with the Power Nutrient food
groups. I want you to buy at least some of them every time you go to the store or
the farmers market. Ideally you'll hit the farmers market first and then go to the
grocery store to fill in what you couldn't find there.
To make matters totally simple, take the Master Shopping List (page 236)
along—it will help you stock up on all the ingredients necessary to follow the
two-week meal plan from day one. Once you're in the swing of things, you can
modify it according to your tastes, as you start experimenting with new veggies
and other foods.
Until organic farmers start getting the subsidies traditional farmers do, the
only thing we can do to bring prices down is to buy more—demand goes up,
supply goes up, prices go down. Here are some tips to help you get the most for
your organic dollar.
Opt for store brands. Store brands of organic foods and other products are
often less expensive than more well-known organic brands. Safeway's O
organics line has more than three hundred products. (They're also available at
Vons, Genuardi's, Dominick's, Randalls, Tom Thumb, Pavilions, and Carrs
stores.) Buying these less show-offy brands not only makes good economic
sense, it encourages chains to see that organic customers are price-sensitive,
which will help all of us get lower prices.
Order online. If you like a certain type of food—say, beans that you know
you'll eat a lot of, or brown rice—order it from an online source. You may be
able to get a volume discount, and you can pick out just the varieties you like.
Check out the following:
Organic beef from www.mynaturalbeef.com
Home delivery of organic foods in New York City from
www.freshdirect.com
Home delivery of organic foods in the Pacific Northwest from
www.pioneerorganics.com
Home delivery of organic foods in the United States and Canada from
www.gobiofood.com
Various organic offerings at www.theorganicpages.com
Haunt your local farmers market. If you go often enough and get to know
the farmers at the local market, they can tell you when their specific crops are
coming in. Check out www.localharvest.org.
Eat less meat. Bean-based meals can give you all of the protein at a fraction
of the cost of beef, chicken, or fish. Start with one meatless meal a week,
working toward one a day. You'll lessen your exposure to toxic hormones and
pesticides that build up in the tissues of animal products, you'll save tons of cash,
and you'll help the environment.
Make coffee at home. Don't get duped into paying five bucks for a cup of
pesticide-laced coffee. Make your own organic, fair-trade coffee at home with
organic whole milk or even organic half-and-half, for a luxurious but low-cost
treat.
Make your own convenience foods and snacks. Single-serving containers,
such as those for applesauce, cheese sticks, or yogurt, use more fossil fuels to
package and ship, leach plastics into the food, and, ounce for ounce, cost more.
Consider buying larger containers and serving only what you need.
The exception to the rule comes when you find yourself throwing out a lot of
unused, spoiled foods. Organics don't last as long, so you have to eat them while
they're fresh! If you can't eat the whole container by the time it starts to rot, stick
with smaller containers or buy prewashed, presorted, precut produce, such as
shredded cabbage, baby carrots, or chopped salad, that will encourage you to eat
them right away.
Buy certain foods in bulk. Some stores will give you up to 5 percent off if
you buy a full case or flat of a particular item. Go in on these items with friends,
or even split the cost of a warehouse membership and take advantage of your
own economies of scale.
Investigate food co-ops. Many areas are creating organic food co-ops. You
may be able to get organic products you can't find in other stores, and because
the shoppers are also the owners, prices are kept quite reasonable. (If you don't
have one in your area, consider starting one. Check out the Cooperative Grocer's
Information Network at www.cgin.coop/how_to_start.)
Look for a Trader Joe's. I love this store. They have really mastered the art
of good-quality food at affordable prices. Many of their store brands have
higher-quality ingredients at way lower prices than expensive national brands.
Check out www.traderjoes.com to find the store nearest you.
Coupons? I don't know that we've hit the critical mass necessary for organic
foods to warrant coupons, but I hold out hope. If you do see a coupon for an
organic item, use it—doing so will only encourage other companies to offer
them in the future as well. Check online at manufacturer's sites for coupons.
(Stonyfield Farms has great coupons: www.stonyfield.com.) In the meantime,
get a frequent-shopper's card at each of your favorite stores and use those “10
percent off your whole order” coupons, especially during weeks when you buy
bulk items.
Don't buy “sticky” drinks. Juice, soda, and performance drinks all have
way too much sugar that you don't need. Don't waste your money—or your
resources—on bottled drinks, including water. The only beverage in a container
that I'd like you to buy is organic milk. Stick with 1 percent or 2 percent organic
milk, and try to find a local dairy farm, to minimize your carbon footprint and
encourage the local organic economy in your area. And drink filtered water from
your tap at home.
Try your hand at a veggie patch. A tomato plant might cost a couple of
bucks, but you'll end up getting thirty or forty dollars' worth of homegrown
tomatoes right off your back porch. Multiply that by a whole garden and you
may not need to go the farmers market at all.
When it comes to processed foods, very few brands pass the test for me. But
with these, you know you're in good shape:
Amy's Healthy Valley
Arrowhead Mills Horizon
Cliff Kashi
Eden Luna
Erewhon Nature's Path
Ezekiel Newman's Own
Greens
If you're ready to start the two-week meal plan, photocopy these pages to
bring to the store. You have everything you need here to follow the plan to a T.
(Amounts listed are for one person plus amounts for recipes; please modify
according to number of people on the plan.)
SHOPPING LIST—WEEK 1 OF MEAL PLAN
SHOPPING LIST—WEEK 2 OF MEAL PLAN

RESOURCES
I firmly believe that in a short time, everybody will come around to the
organic, natural way of eating. Given the evidence, how can they not? In the
meantime, it might be a bit tricky to find the food you need where you live. Not
to mention the personal-and home-care products that don't have all those
endocrine-disrupting chemicals. I've compiled a short list of good places to go to
get information, products, and other resources to help you lead the way.
www.nrdc.org/health/foodmiles
The National Resources Defense Council has developed a minisite to help you
find organic foods in your area. You can look up your state and the time of year
to find out what foods are in season locally.
www.earthlab.com
Calculate your carbon footprint and find tons of interesting ways to reduce it by
15 percent this year. I partner with these guys because I think they do great
work.
www.panna.org
www.pesticideinfo.org
Pesticide Action Network is at the forefront of the organic food movement and
helps you find out how you can minimize your exposure to highly hazardous
pesticides.
www.ewg.org
www.ewg.org/sites/tapwater
(The National Tap Water Quality Database)
These guys are so bad-ass. The Environmental Working Group is at the forefront
of many amazing initiatives to inform the public about just how bad greedy
corporations are screwing the environment and our health. (These guys were the
ones who did the big study that helped teach consumers about “The Dirty
Dozen,” the most pesticide-laden fruits and vegetables, for example.) They
recently developed a lobbying arm that's definitely on our side of the toxic
equation. Keep an eye out for them in the media—they are everywhere, and they
are definitely the good guys.
www.ourstolenfuture.org
This site takes its name from the book Our Stolen Future, an extremely
influential analysis of endocrine disruption that was first published in 1996.
Since its publication, the authors (two environmental scientists and an awardwinning investigative journalist) have continued to collect damning research
about endocrine disruptors in the environment. This site will make your hair turn
white. Seriously, take a look—you'll understand much better why I'm so
passionate about this topic.
www.theorganicpages.com
The Organic Trade Association (OTA) created the Organic Pages Online to make
it easier for you to find certified organic products, producers, ingredients,
supplies, and services in your area. It's expanding constantly— take a look.
www.eatlocalamerica.coop
Eat Local America is a challenge set up by the National Cooperative Grocers
Association (NCGA) to help boost local food co-op participation by asking
people to consume 80 percent of their diets (or 4 out of every 5 meals) from
local foods during the summer months. Fun! Check out their interactive map, or
visit the NCGA Web site for more resources: www.ncga.coop.
www.slowfoodusa.org
www.slowfood.com
Slow Food is a group dedicated to helping people reconnect with their food.
They advocate food produced in environmentally sustainable, clean practices
that protect animal welfare and people's health. You'll find lots of great resources
about how to make fresh, whole, locally and sustainably grown food a mainstay
of your diet.
www.eatwild.com
This site has a tremendous amount of info about grass-fed beef, lamb, goats,
bison, poultry, pork, dairy, and other similar foods. You'll also find tons of links
to local suppliers of all-natural, grass-fed products.
www.psr.org
Physicians for Social Responsibility started with a mission of ridding the world
of nuclear dangers. They've expanded to include all environmental degradation
as well. These guys are lobbying government on our side— check out their site
and do what you can to support them.
www.organicvalley.com
This is a favorite site of Chef Stuart O'Keeffe, an organic chef whom I work with
quite often. This company is one of his favorite organic food producers, and the
site contains lots of great information regarding reasons to buy organic.
www.wellnessgrocer.com
This is an online grocer devoted to organic foods and natural personal-care
products.
www.foodandwaterwatch.org
Another watchdog/lobbying group that helps protect our food and water. This
site has tons of helpful fact sheets, information, and reports on food and water
safety.
www.sustainabletable.org
www.eatwellguide.org
These sites have recipes, shopping guides, maps to hormone-free dairies, farmers
markets, food co-ops, and tons of other stuff. The Eat Well Guide is a free online
directory of sustainably raised meat, poultry, dairy, and eggs from farms, stores,
restaurants, bed-and-breakfasts, and more in the United States and Canada. Just
enter your zip or postal code to find healthy products in your town or wherever
you're going to be traveling to.
www.checnet.org/healtheHouse/pdf/plasticchart.pdf
This fantastic chart spells out the best and worst plastic products on the market
for home use.
www.truefoodnow.org/genetically-engineered-foods/shoppers-guide/
This site provides an extremely helpful, huge list of nongenetically engineered
foods.
www.organic-center.org
This site is an incredible trove of interesting resources about organics. The
organization is funded by many natural-food producers in an effort to further
knowledge of organic agricultural methods.
www.organicconsumers.org
Buyer's guides for everything from food to clothing to cleaning products. You
will find Community Supported Agriculture (CSAs), organic home delivery,
building materials, and resources. The Organic Consumers Association and
GreenPeople.org have compiled one of the world's largest directories of green
and organic businesses.
www.newdream.org
This amazing organization has been working to try to convince Americans to
live simply for more than a decade. They provide many great resources and
really smart, creative thinking to individuals, institutions, communities, and
businesses about how to “consume responsibly to protect the environment,
enhance quality of life, and promote social justice.” (They even have a wallet
card you can print out with this smart personal credo: “Every dollar I spend is a
statement about the kind of world I want and the quality of life I value.”)
apps.ams.usda.gov/FarmersMarkets
This is a great searchable database of farmers markets throughout the United
States that's maintained and updated regularly by the government.
www.organicexchange.org
This is a great resource for those interested in organic cotton, including buyer's
guides for organic cotton clothing.
www.localharvest.org
This site has a clickable interactive map that helps you locate your nearest
farmers market. They also have a ton of info about CSAs, family farms, and
other sources of sustainably grown food in your area.
www.amazon.com/tag/bpa-free/products
Amazon.com has compiled a list of hundreds of BPA-free products for one-stop
shopping.
www.healthychild.org
The Healthy Child, Healthy World program offers information and resources for
parents who want to create a healthy, nontoxic environment for their kids—and
for themselves, too.
www.householdproducts.nlm.nih.gov
This government site has a complete database of household products with safety
and handling suggestions.
www.calorieking.com
I recommend this site (as well as the companion book, The Calorie King
Calorie, Fat & Carbohydrate Counter by Allan Borushek) to everyone on
Biggest Loser. You can find great nutrient information about thousands of foods.
Use the site at home; buy the book for when you're out on the town. Even if
you're not watching calories, having a general gauge of nutrients is very useful.
www.JillianMichaels.com
You can get tons of up-to-date information, tools, and trackers, and customized
meal plans on my site. You can even add a personal coach, if you'd like!
