Roasted octopus with stewed aubergine , chorizo & baby leeks | The Kitchen
Roasted octopus with stewed eggplant and chorizo & baby leeks sauce
Roasted octopus with stewed eggplant and chorizo & baby leeks sauce - Copyright Fabios ' restaurant
By Chef Christoph Brunnhuber • Updated : 09 / 03 / 2022
Fabios restaurant in Vienna is the brainchild of Fabio Giacobello . 

His head chef , Christoph Brunnhuber , shares one of their star dishes with The Kitchen : roasted octopus with stewed aubergine and chorizo sauce . 

Octopus is a fundamental component of Mediterranean cuisine and it is , hence , always part of our menu . The dish has become a staple at Fabios , and our kitchen crew regularly presents new interpretations . This one we share with you stands out by the combination of octopus and chorizo , which create a fine harmony . 

Fabios
Fabios ' head chef Christoph BrunnhuberFabios
Polipo Arrosto con Melanzane stufate , Chorizo & Porro Giovane ( Roasted octopus with stewed aubergine , chorizo & baby leek sauce ) 

Serves : 4

Cooking time : 1 hour prepping + 1 to 2 ½ hours on the stove . 

Ingredients


For the octopus

1 fresh octopus , approximately 1 . 2kg .  ( We purchase from the Mediterranean region , especially southern Italy and France .  ) 
50 grams of breadcrumbs
8 baby leeks , cleaned . 
1 bay leaf , if using ( see method ) 
1 teaspoon of white peppercorns , if using ( see method ) 
For the stewed *  * aubergine *  * 

1 aubergine , cut into small dices ( Macédoine cut ) 
1 courgette , cut into small dices ( Macédoine cut ) 
1 sprig of rosemary
1 sprig of thyme
2 tablespoons of parsley ( finely chopped ) 
100 grams of dried tomatoes
1 tablespoon of balsamic vinegar
1 tablespoon of honey
180 ml of olive oil
⅓ cup of vegetable oil
Salt
Cayenne pepper
For the chorizo and baby leeks sauce

1 shallot , minced
1 clove of garlic , minced
50 grams of leeks , cleaned thoroughly and cut into small dices
50 grams of fennel cut into small dices
1 stalk of celery cut into small dices
35 grams of celery root cut into small dices
200 grams of chorizo , cut into small pieces
200 grams butter
15 grams of tomato paste
100 ml Noilly Prat ( French vermouth – alternatively : some other kind of vermouth ) 
500 ml of shellfish stock ( or seafood stock ) 
Method

For the octopus

Preheat your oven to 160°C . 
Clean and wash the octopus , then cut off the tentacles . 
Now cook the octopus , there are two ways of doing this . 
If you have a steam cooker , steam the octopus for two and half hours . If you don ’ t , don ’ t worry . Fill a big pot with salted water and bring it to a boil . Add a bay leaf , the peppercorns and the octopus , reduce the heat to medium-low and simmer the octopus until it is tender , about 45 minutes . Attention , cooking time may be less for smaller tentacles and sometimes more for larger , tougher ones . Your best measurement is to start checking tenderness ( which is easy !  ) after 30 minutes have passed . Once the thickest part of the leg yields the point of a small knife with little resistance , it is done . Do not cook further or it will begin to dry out and toughen again . 
While the star of your dish ( the octopus ) cooks , boil the baby leaks in salted water until soft , about 12 minutes , and put aside . 
For the stewed *  * aubergine *  * 

Salt the cubes of aubergine and courgette and let them drain for about 10 minutes . Dry them off with a paper towel . 
Heat up a large pan with some olive oil and toast the breadcrumbs until crispy . 
Set a large pot with oil ⅓ cup of vegetable oil and fry the aubergine and courgette cubes until golden brown . Let them rest on a paper towel to remove the excess oil . 
Put the rest of the ingredients for the stewed aubergine ( except the olive oil , salt and cayenne pepper ) in a bowl . Now slowly stir in olive oil . Add the fried aubergine and courgette cubes and season with salt and cayenne pepper . Toss to coat and set aside . 
For the chorizo and baby leeks sauce

Heat the same large pot over medium-high heat and add 50 grams of butter . Immediately add the chorizo and brown , about 5 minutes . Add the shallot , garlic , leek , fennel and both kinds of celery to the pot . Let it sweat for approximately 5 minutes . 
Now add the tomato paste and cook for another 2 minutes . Add the vermouth and let it boil until the liquid is reduced . 
Now pour the stock , and let it simmer for about 45 minutes . 
Once 45 minutes have passed , blend everything with a mixer ( yes , the chorizo with garlic , leek , fennel , etc )  . We will make a sauce . Once you mix , pass it through a strainer to get a silky texture . Add the rest of the butter to cream the sauce . 
Time to grill the octopus . 

TIP : During winter , you can grill in the oven with the broiler function , or in a hot , cast-iron pan . For broiling , let the oven door slightly open while broiling to ensure that the heating will stay on continuously and you ' ll get a nice , even temperature . 

So , set the oven or a cast-iron skillet over high heat ( or barbecue if it ’ s hot where you are ) and brown both the steamed octopus and the baby leeks you boiled before . Flip halfway through cooking , once the skin is nice and browned . 
While you grill , reheat the aubergine stew and the sauce . 
Serve

Put a base of the stewed aubergine on a plate and place the grilled tentacles and baby leek on top . Finish off by adding the sauce around the dish , sprinkling the toasted breadcrumbs over it . 

Sausage pasta recipe by British Chef Stevie Parle | The Kitchen
German chef Ann-Sophie Raemisch shares her Pepper / Zucchini / Polenta recipe | The Kitchen
Vienna ’ s Fabios restaurant homemade Tortelli stuffed with Tuscan roast pork recipe | The Kitchen
Pair it with : La Rioja Alta Reserva 2010 , Vina Ardanza . Rioja , Spain . 

This is a fine and spicy wine , both complex and extremely harmonious on the palate . You will find elegant aromas of dark cherries , plums , blackberries and vanilla . 

Michelin says of Fabios :  " The Italian cuisine served in this fashionable city restaurant is just as modern and minimalist as the interior design – two equally good reasons to give it a try !  " 