Herbs to Enhance Your Health
Anise has been used for centuries in both foods and medicines. The ancient
Greeks and Romans recommended it for coughs. It works as a digestive and
helps relieve intestinal gas.
Basil is known to carry a number of healthy effects, particularly on the
cardiovascular system. Because basil is such a good source of vitamin A, the
herb is believed to aid in providing good eyesight, healthy hair and healthy skin.
Bay leaf has been used as an herbal remedy for headaches. It contains
compounds called parthenolides, which have proven useful in the treatment of
migraines. Bay leaf has also been shown to help the body process insulin more
efficiently, which leads to lower blood sugar levels. It has also been used to
reduce the effects of stomach ulcers.
Cardamom increases appetite and soothes the mucous membrane. It relieves
gas and heart-bum caused by garlic and onion. It improves digestion and
stimulates the metabolism. Ground cardamom seed mixed with ginger, cloves
and coriander, is an effective remedy for indigestion.
Cayenne pepper increases metabolism by immediately influencing the venous
structure. It is nothing short of amazing with its effects on the circulatory system
as it feeds the vital elements into the cell structure of capillaries, veins, arteries
and helps adjust blood pressure to normal levels. Cayenne cleans the arteries as
well, helping to rid the body of the bad LDL cholesterol and triglycerides. It is
also great for the stomach and the intestinal tract.
Cilantro is a powerful natural cleansing agent. It has been effectively used to
help remove heavy metals and other toxic agents from the body. It’s powerful
anti-inflammatory benefits may help with symptoms of arthritis. Cilantro helps
reduce nausea, provides relief for stomach gas and is an overall digestive aid.
Cinnamon may help people with Type 2 diabetes control blood sugar levels, and
significantly lower LDL “bad” cholesterol, total cholesterol and triglycerides
(fatty acids in the blood). In some studies, cinnamon has shown an ability to stop
medication-resistant yeast infections. In a study published by researchers at the
U.S. Department of Agriculture in Maryland, cinnamon reduced the proliferation
of leukemia and lymphoma cancer cells. It also has an anti-clotting effect on the
blood.
Cloves are stimulating and have antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal and antiseptic
properties. They are also a natural anesthetic (due to the eugenol oil) and were
often used for dental procedures in centuries past and are still used in some
cultures as a remedy for toothache. The compound eugenol has been found to
prevent blood clots and help with blood circulation.
Cumin has been used for relief of digestive disorders throughout history. It can
help with flatulence, indigestion, diarrhea, nausea and morning sickness. Cumin
is also said to help relieve symptoms of the common cold due to its antiseptic
properties. It is said to be a good salve for boils made by grinding seeds with
water and applying to the affected area. Cumin makes a great tonic for the body
even if you don’t have a specific ailment to cure. It is said to increase the heat in
the body thus making metabolism more efficient. It is also thought to be a
powerful kidney and liver herb and can help boost your immune system.
Dill is high in substances known as monoterpenes which have been shown to
have anti-cancer properties. These monoterpenes exert their effects through a
variety of mechanisms including activating enzymes that detoxify cancer
causing substances. This suggests that dill may help to offset some of the
carcinogenic effects from exposure to everyday pollutants and chemicals. Dill
contains components known as polyacetylenes which have been shown to have
antibacterial and antifungal activity as well as anti-inflammatory effects. Dill
shares a similarity with garlic in preventing bacterial overgrowth. The herb is
rich in calcium, which lowers the bone loss, particularly after menopause and in
some conditions like rheumatoid arthritis. It contains flavanoids and vitamin-B
complex, which stimulate the secretion of enzymes and hormones with
calmative effect. Thus, it helps in having a peaceful sleep. Dill helps in
increasing the amount of urination and thereby, aids the body in getting rid of
toxic elements.
Fennel is a great source of vitamins, minerals and dietary fibers. Its beneficial
effects have been known for centuries. The seeds, leaves and roots of the fennel
plant have been used as medicinal agents as far back as ancient China. It is used
for congestion, conjunctivitis, stimulating appetite, prevention against muscle
spasms and for helping to relieve gas and an upset stomach. Fennel is an
antispasmodic, diuretic, expectorant and stimulant. Fennel contains nutrients
similar to those of celery, which belongs to the same family, but it is the essential
oil that promotes relief for an upset stomach. It is also used for cancer patients
after radiation and chemotherapy treatments to help rebuild the digestive system.
Garlic’s health benefits are substantiated by a wealth of research that confirms
its antiviral, antibacterial and antifungal properties. It is also a powerful
antioxidant and immune booster with anti-inflammatory properties. Scientific
studies reveal benefits for diabetes, cancer and heart disease. Its heart health
traits include lowering bad cholesterol and blood pressure, aiding circulation and
preventing against stroke. One of the most common ailments garlic has been said
to treat is the common cold. Studies have shown that garlic extract improves
immune function, giving our natural defense system a boost, and helping it
conserve the levels of antioxidants in our system. It is this strengthening of the
immune system that aids in its support for other health related conditions.
Ginger has been used medicinally for over 5000 years. Unlike most spices, the
part that has the most medicinal value grows under ground. Often mistakenly
called “ginger root” this is actually more of a subterranean stem than a root.
Although you can use dried ginger and powdered ginger for health benefits,
fresh ginger is preferred. One of ginger’s most touted benefits is for digestive
ailments. It can help digest fatty foods and break down proteins. It is excellent
for reducing gas. Gingers volatile oils, which are also responsible for it’s
pungent taste, cause more digestive enzymes to be produced which helps with
the whole digestion process and neutralizes the acids that can cause nausea,
cramps and even diarrhea. Its warming properties make it effective in
stimulating circulation of the blood and is said to help prevent blood clots from
forming. The warming effects make it a natural decongestant as well as an
antihistamine, making it the perfect remedy for colds. Studies have shown that
ginger might also have a role in lowering LDL cholesterol because the spice can
help reduce the amount of cholesterol that is absorbed.
Lavender is frequently alluded to as a natural remedy for a large variety of
ailments. Lavender is primarily used in connection with insomnia, anxiety,
depression, and mood disturbances. This is due to studies showing lavender’s
effectiveness in producing calming, soothing, and anticonvulsive effects in those
who use it. The oil from lavender may be used externally or topically for a wide
variety of ailments. Aroma therapists frequently use lavender as a promising
tonic for inhalation therapy to help with nervous disorders and exhaustion.
Herbalists have also used lavender oil to treat skin ailments including fungal
infections, burns, wounds, eczema, and even acne. Lavender oil can also be
applied externally for circulatory disorders by adding the oil to a healing bath, or
it is also used as a rub to treat rheumatic ailments.
Marjoram is considered to have the most fragrant essential oil among all herbs
and it is widely used in aromatherapy. It is also used as a warming and soothing
message oil to provide relief for muscular ache. The leaf of the marjoram has
been used to loosen phlegm. It acts as a decongestant and useful in bronchitis,
sinusitis and sinus headaches. Used as a tonic for the nervous system, marjoram
is believed to be more calming than oregano, as it is used to soothe the nerves,
reduce tension and stress. Promoting healthy digestion and treating simple
gastrointestinal disorders, such as loss of appetite, indigestion, nausea and
flatulence is another benefit in using marjoram. Much like the herb peppermint,
it is said to soothe minor digestive upsets and colic. The flavonoids in majoram
may also promote healthy arteries and heart by preventing cholesterol buildup
and improving blood circulation. It is also thought to help individuals with
Alzheimer’s disease.
Mint contains many vitamin and minerals that are vital to maintain a healthy
body and is a powerful antioxidant. This fresh herb is rich in: vitamin A, C, B12,
thiamine, folic acid and riboflavin. Folic acid is important for women as this is
related to optimal hormonal functioning. Mood swings can be directly related to
folic acid deficiency. Essential minerals that mint has include manganese,
copper, potassium, iron, calcium, zinc, phosphorus, fluoride and selenium. Mint
has been used for centuries to aid digestion and relieve indigestion. The
chemical compound menthol is derived from peppermint oil and is well-known
for its healing properties on the chest and respiratory system. It is used to ease
and unblock the breathing and respiratory passages, relieving congestion, head
colds and headaches. Mint has been used to relieve symptoms of indigestion,
heartburn and irritable bowel syndrome as it relaxes the muscles in and around
the intestine. Mint’s antibacterial properties inhibit the growth of bacteria and
fungus. It may protect the body against the formation of cancerous cells.
Oregano is known to have strong antibacterial properties, perhaps as a result of
the volatile oils the herb contains, including thymol and carvacrol. Both of these
substances have been shown to inhibit the growth of many kinds of bacteria,
including some that cause serious food borne illnesses. Researchers have studied
oregano as a treatment for the common bacteria disease known as giardia.
Oregano is also a powerful source of many antioxidant vitamins thought to play
a vital role in the prevention of many forms of cancer, as well as perhaps slowing
down the aging process. Oregano has been shown to have over 42 times the
antioxidant activity as apples, 30 times higher than potatoes and 12 times more
than oranges.
Parsley is a natural diuretic and an excellent source of two vital nutrients that
are also important for the prevention of many diseases: vitamin C and vitamin A.
It is also rich in folic acid, which is a critical nutrient for proper cell division and
therefore vitally important for cancer-prevention in two areas of the body that
contain rapidly dividing cells: the colon and the cervix.
Rosemary has an abundance of properties to promote wellbeing: an analgesic,
antiseptic, antidepressant, anti-inflammatory, expectorant, antiviral, aphrodisiac,
and disinfectant. Its active elements have excellent cleansing effects: stimulating
bile secretion and eliminating it in the intestines, destroying micro-organisms
and increasing the quantity of eliminated urine. It improves blood flow and
refreshes and energizes the mind. Studies indicate that rosemary is an ideal
memory stimulant for both adults and students. Rosemary contains a series of
secondary elements such as carnosol and carnosic acid, which have a reflecting
action in the case of free radicals. Rosemary also has calming effects by working
against fatigue, sadness, anxiety, calming muscle soreness, digestive pains and
also, indigestion caused by stress.
Sage has been used for a variety of culinary and medicinal purposes for
thousands of years. It has been used in connection with sprains, swelling, ulcers,
and bleeding. As a tea, sage has been administered for sore throats and coughs.
Herbalists have also used sage for treating rheumatism, menstrual bleeding,
strengthening the nervous system, improving memory and sharpening the senses.
Clinical studies indicate that the substances found in sage oil may also offer
antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral effects, explaining much of its medicinal
activity.
Tarragon acts as a natural diuretic and supports digestion. It promotes the
production of bile by the liver, which aids in digestion and helps speed the
process of eliminating toxic waste in the body. It is thought to be extremely
valuable in fighting intestinal worms. Tarragon offers healing properties for the
stomach and liver, helps fight off fatigue and calm the nerves. People with high
blood pressure can use tarragon as a salt substitute.
Thyme contains an essential oil that is rich in thymol, a powerful antiseptic,
antibacterial and a strong antioxidant. The oil of thyme is used in mouthwash to
treat inflammations of the mouth and throat infections. It is a common
component of cough drops. Thyme possesses expectorant and bronchial
antispasmodic properties, making it useful in the treatment of acute and chronic
bronchitis, whooping cough, and inflammation of the upper respiratory tract. All
the members of the mint family, including thyme, possess terpenoids which are
recognized for cancer preventive properties.
The health benefits of turmeric lie in the active ingredient called curcumin. This
powerful compound gives turmeric its therapeutic benefits, its yellow color and
its pungent flavor. More specifically, curcumin harbors antioxidant, antiinflammatory, antibacterial, stomach-soothing, and liver-and heart-protecting
effects. Turmeric is thought to reduce inflammation by lowering histamine levels
and it may also stimulate the adrenal glands to increase production of a hormone
that reduces inflammation. It is often used to ease joint pain and inflammation
associated with arthritis. Turmeric has antiplatelet properties, reducing the ability
of the blood to form clots. This action may improve circulation as well as offer
some protection against heart attacks and strokes. Turmeric helps the body digest
fats by stimulating the flow of bile.
This information is solely for informational purposes. IT IS NOT INTENDED
TO PROVIDE MEDICAL ADVICE. The author takes no responsibility for any
possible consequences from any health benefit claim, dietary modification, or
action which results from reading or following the information contained in this
book. The publication of this information does not constitute the practice of
medicine, and this information does not replace the advice of your physician or
other health care provider. Before undertaking any course of treatment, or
dietary modification the reader should seek the advice of their physician or other
health care provider.
About Cooking Oils
Almond Oil: Contains both monounsaturated and linoleic fatty acids.
Combined, these healthy fatty acids work to lower bad cholesterol and ensure a
healthy heart. While you can cook with almond oil, it is better used as a finishing
oil to preserve its subtle flavor. It is a mild, lightweight oil that can be used as a
substitute for olive oil. Its pleasant aroma and nutty flavor works well in
desserts.
Avocado Oil: High in monounsaturated fats and vitamin E, and extremely low in
saturated fat. With a 500°F smoke point, it is a superb high-heat cooking oil.
Delicious in salad dressings, it is also excellent for bread dipping and drizzling
over vegetables.
Coconut Oil: Melts at 76°F and smokes at 350°F. Refined coconut oil has a
higher smoke point of 450°F. Coconut oil, kept at room temperature for a year,
was tested for rancidity and showed no evidence of it. My #1 best oil to cook
with.
Flaxseed Oil: A polyunsaturated fat and good source of omega 3s. Due to its
low smoke point of 225°F, it should not be used for cooking over heat. Try it
stirred into dishes after heating or in salad dressings.
Grape Seed Oil: Often a chef’s favorite cooking oil due to its 485°F smoke
point, so it can be safely used to cook foods at high temperatures. It can also be
included in dressings and sauces, and since it emulsifies very well. My #2 best
oil to cook with.
Olive Oil: A monounsaturated fat with a medium smoke point of 325°F, use this
flavorful oil for light sautéing, salad dressing.
Safflower Oil: A polyunsaturated fat with a low saturated fat level, this oil is a
good all-purpose oil. Its high smoke point of 450°F makes it good for high heat
cooking, like sautéing and frying.
Sunflower Oil: A polyunsaturated fat with a low saturated fat level, sunflower
oil has a high smoke point of 460°F, making it good for high-heat cooking, like
sautéing and frying.
Walnut Oil: A polyunsaturated fat and good source of omega 3s. With a smoke
point of 400°F, this oil is good for baking and sautéing at low to medium-high
heat. Try its nutty flavor drizzled on a salad.
Zucchini Rolls
To make this vegetable roll you will need a mandoline to slice the zucchini.
Make the slices very thin, or you will not be able to roll them around the other
veggies. Be sure to use the safety guide to hold the vegetables whenever you are
using a mandoline.
2 medium zucchini, sliced very thin lengthwise with a mandoline slicer
½ cup sunflower seed sprouts
½ cup micro green sprouts
½ bunch cilantro or watercress
½ cup jicama, sliced thinly
1 yellow beet, sliced thinly
5 asparagus stalks, cut in half
Stack zucchini slices in twos, staggering slightly. Onto each zucchini stack place
a small portion of each of the other ingredients creating a little bouquet on one
side. Roll the zucchini and mixture tightly (securing it with a toothpick if need
be). Trim the stem side flush with the zucchini to create a flat bottom. You can
pour any of the dressings in this book over the rolls or pool beneath for added
flavor. Makes 8-10 rolls.
Note: These quantities of the ingredients are approximate because it depends on
how large the zucchinis are and how many you are going to make. You can
substitute or add your favorite vegetables as well.
Known Health Benefits Jicama is a relative of the potato family. It is a dietary
staple in Latin America and widely grown in Mexico and Central America.
Because jicama can be used either raw or cooked, it is a very versatile
vegetable. It is extremely nutritious because it contains a high amount of
vitamin C and is low in sodium. One adult serving of jicama, which is equal to
approximately one cup of cubed jicama, contains only 45 calories, no fat and
provides 6 grams of fiber.

Warm Vegetable Rolls
Himalayan salt is the purest and most beneficial salt available. Millions of years
ago, a primordial sea was evaporated by the sun, leaving absolutely pristine
crystalline salt that still retains the original qualities of this ancient body of
water.
2 medium zucchini, sliced very thin lengthwise with a mandoline slicer
½ cup zucchini, finely chopped
½ cup butternut squash, finely chopped
½ cup asparagus, finely chopped
¼ cup almonds, chopped
½ cup broccoli sprouts
½ teaspoon coconut oil
Himalayan salt and lemon pepper to taste
In a preheated skillet add ¼ teaspoon of the coconut oil, chopped zucchini,
butternut squash, asparagus and almonds. Sauté over medium heat for 2 minutes
until warmed through. Salt and lemon pepper to taste. Transfer mixture to a bowl
and keep warm. Add the remaining ¼ teaspoon of the coconut oil to the skillet
and sauté the zucchini strips for about 1 minute on each side. Remove from heat.
Gently add the broccoli sprouts to the vegetable mixture. To assemble the rolls,
spoon about 1 tablespoon of the vegetable mixture onto one end of a zucchini
strip and roll it up. Fasten with a toothpick if necessary. Serve immediately,
while still warm. Makes 10-12 rolls.
Known Health Benefits Broccoli sprouts are found to contain the enzyme
sulforaphane, which helps protect cells and prevents their genes from turning
into cancer. Several epidemiological studies that have shown that sprouts
contain significant amounts of vitamins A, C and D.

Cilantro Dip
Instead of chips or crackers, use thinly sliced jicama, squash or radish “sticks”.
However, my favorite vegetable to eat with this dip is broccoli.
2 cups raw almonds, soaked overnight in water
2 bunches cilantro
Juice from 2 lemons
Salt to taste
Soak almonds overnight, making sure they are completely covered with water.
The following day, drain and rinse the almonds, removing as many of the
almond skins as possible. This procedure is not necessary, but does make a
smoother dip. Makes about 2½ cups.
Blend all the ingredients in a food processor until it has the consistency of a paté.
If too thick, add water until you reach the consistency you want. For a spicier
dip, add cayenne pepper to taste.
Known Health Benefits Cilantro (known as coriander outside the U.S.) has a
health-supporting reputation that is high on the list of the healing spices. In
parts of Europe, coriander is known as an “anti-diabetic” plant. In parts of
India, it is used for its anti-inflammatory properties. In the United States,
coriander has recently been studied for its cholesterol-lowering and chelation
effects — helping to rid the body of the heavy metals such as mercury, lead
and aluminum.
Nutritional Nut Milk
Pumpkin seeds are very high in potassium and are a good source of beta
carotene, vitamin C, calcium and fiber.
Hazelnuts and hazelnut oil are the best known sources of vitamin E, which is
essential for a healthy heart and other muscles of the body. Vitamin E prevents
the disintegration of red blood cells and serves as a protection against the blood
deficiency known as anemia.
Almond Milk:
1 cup almonds, soaked overnight
3 cups fresh water
1 cheese cloth
Hazelnut Milk:
1 cup hazelnuts, soaked overnight
3 cups fresh water
1 cheese cloth
Pumpkin and Sunflower Seed Milk:
½ cup pumpkin seeds, soaked overnight
½ cup sunflower seeds, soaked overnight
2½ cups fresh water
1 cheese cloth
For all variations: Place the nuts in a glass bowl, cover with water and soak
overnight. The next day, discard the water and rinse the nuts thoroughly. Place
the nuts and fresh water in a sturdy blender and blend until smooth. Sieve the
mixture through the cheese cloth and refrigerate. Drink cold.
Almond and hazelnut milk are excellent nutritional substitutes for cream for any
soup and are a good base for smoothies and sorbet shakes. For additional flavor,
add cinnamon and/or nutmeg. Pumpkin and sunflower seed milk is a wonderful
nutritional substitute for cream in any soup. For additional flavor add cinnamon
and/or hemp seed.
Known Health Benefits A quarter-cup of almonds contains approximately 100
mg of magnesium and 260 mg of potassium and are a low-glycemic index
good for diabetes and heart disease. Almonds are high in monounsaturated
fats, which have been associated with reduced risk of heart disease. Five large
human epidemiological studies, including the Nurses’ Health Study, the Iowa
Health Study, the Adventist Health Study and the Physicians’ Health Study all
found that nut consumption is linked to a lower risk for heart disease.


Cucumber Shake
Chinese medicinal practitioners have long recognized celery’s potential for
reducing high blood pressure. Celery contains active compounds called
phthalides, which can help relax the muscles around arteries and allow the
vessels to dilate. With more space inside the arteries, the blood can flow at lower
pressure.
1 medium cucumber
1 bunch celery
2 cups spinach
¼ cup almond milk
Hemp seed to garnish (for extra protein)
You will need a juicer for this recipe. Put the cucumber, celery and spinach
through a juicer one at a time. Remove the pulp from the juicer and process it
once more to get extra juice. Transfer the juice to a glass and add the almond
milk, garnish with hemp seed. Drink immediately to prevent oxidation. This
drink is wonderful during a detox. Makes 2 servings.
Known Health Benefits For atherosclerosis and diabetic heart disease, few
foods compare to spinach in the number of helpful nutrients it includes.
Spinach is an excellent source of vitamins C and A. These two nutrients are
important antioxidants that work to reduce free radicals. Spinach is also an
excellent source of folate and magnesium. Magnesium can help lower high
blood pressure and protect against heart disease.

Coconut Spinach Shake
A Thai coconut is a coconut which has been harvested before it is fully mature.
Thai coconuts have thinner husks, making them easier to handle and cut into.
Their interiors are filled with coconut water and a gelatinous meat. The coconut
water can be drunk straight or seasoned in a variety of ways, while the meat may
be eaten as a snack.
1 cup spinach, chopped
Juice of 1 young (Thai) coconut
1 cup ice
Place all the ingredients in a sturdy blender, blending until smooth. This
delicious drink is great for those days that you don’t want to cook. Makes 2
servings.
Known Health Benefits Coconut juice (also referred to as coconut water) is a
natural beverage filled with immune-boosting vitamins and nutrients. This
healthful electrolyte-laden drink has potassium, calcium and magnesium.
Regular consumption of coconut juice can naturally improve immunity,
increase metabolism, alter HDL and detoxify the body. Consistently drinking
coconut juice can also help regulate intestinal function, which is known to
provide a myriad of health benefits including a clearer complexion. The
monolaurin in coconut juice, which acts as an antiviral monoglyceride, has
the ability to kill an assortment of viruses and bacteria in the body.
Maca Drink
The maca plant is cultivated in the Junín plateau of Peru’s Central Highlands and
was highly revered by the Incas. Legend has it that during the height of the Incan
empire, Incan warriors consumed maca to make them fiercely strong before
entering into battle. After conquering a city, however, the warriors were
prohibited from using maca to protect the conquered women from its powerful
sexual effects. For the past 500 years, maca’s reputation for enhancing strength,
libido and fertility has been well established in Peru.
Juice and meat from 1 young coconut (Thai coconut)
1 teaspoon powdered maca
cup raw almonds, soaked in water overnight ¼ cup crushed ice
¼ cup cold water
½ teaspoon cinnamon
Nutmeg, if desired
Extract the juice from the young coconut and place in blender.* Scoop out the
coconut meat with a spoon and add to juice. Add remaining ingredients together,
blend just until smooth (if over-blended the drink will become too thick).
*There are many techniques for opening a coconut. f find that using a Chinese
cleaver works best. Search “how to open a young coconut” online if you need
help.
Known Health Benefits For menopausal women, maca root is often used
instead of hormone replacement therapy (HRT). While HRT stimulates
hormone production and can cause ovaries to atrophy, maca root simply helps
to balance hormones without damaging a woman’s body. According to Dr.
Rebbe Gabriel Cousens, a diplomat of the American Board of Holistic
Medicine, “Maca has proved to be very effective with menopausal patients in
eliminating hot flashes and depression and in increasing energy levels.


Ginger Mint Lemonade
Although still a mystery, it is believed that lemons first grew in India, Burma and
China. Lemons were first introduced to the Americas in 1493 when Christopher
Columbus brought along lemon seeds on his voyages. Primarily used as
ornaments and as medicine, lemons began to be used in cooking and flavoring in
the 1700s.
Juice of 2 lemons
½ cup mint leaves
2 cups water
2” peeled ginger root
4 drops of liquid stevia (KAL brand)
1 cup of ice
Salt to taste
Place all of the ingredients in a sturdy blender, blending until smooth. This
refreshing drink is perfect on a hot summer day. Makes 2 servings.
Known Health Benefits Lemons are rich in vitamin C, an important
antioxidant that helps to neutralize free radicals in the body, both protecting
cells from damage and repairing damaged cells. Lemons contain a flavonol
called limonin, which has been shown to fight cancer of the skin, lung, mouth,
stomach and colon.
V5 Tomato Juice
The shallot is a relative of the onion, but has a sweeter, milder flavor. Like
garlic, shallots are formed in clusters with a head composed of multiple cloves.
Their skin color varies from golden brown to gray to red, and the off-white flesh
is usually tinged with green or magenta. Do not confuse shallots with green
onions or scallions. Look for firm, dry bulbs, free from sprouts. They should be
well covered with a papery skin and no sign of wrinkling or sprouting.
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
1 red bell pepper, chopped
1 garlic clove
½ shallot
½ avocado, optional
½ cup cilantro, chopped
Juice of 1 lime
1½ cup fresh water
1 cup ice
Pinch of salt
Pinch of cayenne pepper
Place all ingredients into a blender, process until smooth and enjoy. Makes 4
small servings.
Known Health Benefits Tomatoes are well known for their high vitamin C
content, but also contain significant amount of vitamin A, B vitamins
including niacin and riboflavin, magnesium, phosphorous and calcium.
Tomatoes are a good source of chromium, folate and fiber. The vitamin B6,
niacin, potassium and folate are potent protectors against heart disease.
Vitamin B6 and folate also work to convert the homocysteine in our bodies
into harmless molecules. Niacin can lower high cholesterol levels and
potassium has been shown to lower high blood pressure and to reduce the risk
of heart disease. High levels of homocysteine are associated with an increased
risk of heart attack and stroke. The fiber in tomatoes helps to lower cholesterol
levels, prevent colon cancer and keep blood sugars at a low level.

Sprouted Lentil Salad
Lentils are an excellent source of protein, especially for those people following a
vegetarian diet. There are several of varieties of lentils. I prefer the Pardina
variety of lentils, which holds its shape after cooking and maintains a nice
texture.
2 cups sprouted lentils
20 cherry tomatoes, cut in half
1 avocado, cubed
2 small shallots, diced
1 cup cilantro, chopped
Juice from 2 lemons
Salt to taste
In a bowl, mix all the ingredients together. If desired, add a little avocado oil or
your choice of any of the dressings included in this book. Makes 4-6 servings.
How to Sprout Lentils: Soak lentils overnight in water. The next day, rinse
thoroughly, drain the lentils and return to the same container. By the third day,
the lentils should be ready to eat. May be stored in the refrigerator for 2 days
maximum.
Add to tossed salads or in wraps and roll-ups (alfalfa, sunflower, radish). Blend
with vegetable juices (cabbage, mung bean, lentil). Use as a replacement for
celery in sandwich spreads (lentil, radish). Eat them fresh and uncooked in a
sprout salad (salad mixes). Puree with peas or beans (mung bean, lentil).
Known Health Benefits Scientists have studied sprouts to understand better
their high levels of disease-preventing phytochemicals and how they contribute
to better health, from disease prevention to the treatment of life-threatening
diseases. Such prestigious organizations as the National Institutes of Health,
the American Cancer Society and Johns Hopkins University have validated the
benefits of sprouts with studies that explored various sprout varieties for their
nutritional properties. Several epidemiological studies that have shown that
sprouts contain significant amounts of vitamins A, C and D.


Beet and Radish Salad
When most people think of peas, they remember them as the food that they
loved to hate when they were children, yet one that was extremely fun to play
with on their plates. Yet, many of these same people, since becoming adults,
have a renewed appreciation for this delicious legume due to its wonderful taste
and texture. There are generally three types of peas that are commonly eaten:
garden or green peas, snow peas and snap peas.
1 cup yellow beet, cut Julienne style
1 cup Daikon radish, cut Julienne style
4 red radishes, sliced
1 cup asparagus, sliced
1 cup bean sprouts
½ cup sugar plum tomato, sliced in half
½ cup cilantro, chopped
½ cup fresh peas
¼ cup sprouted red cloves
Gently toss all ingredients together. Serve with any of the dressings in this book.
My favorite with this salad is the Basil Dressing (recipe on page 36). Makes 6-8
servings.
Known Health Benefits Radishes and radish leaves are an excellent source of
vitamin C. Globe radishes are a very good source of the trace mineral
molybdenum and a good source of folic acid and potassium. Daikons are a
very good source of copper and potassium. The kaiware Daikon radish sprout
is a potent source of antioxidants. Radish leaves are a good source of calcium.
Micro Greens Salad
For years, parents have been right: Eating your broccoli is a good idea. This
hearty, tasty vegetable is rich in dozens of nutrients. In fact, it packs the most
nutritional punch of any vegetable.
2 cups of micro greens
1 avocado, cubed
¼ cup sliced raw almonds
2 teaspoons hemp seed
10 sugar plum tomatoes, sliced
1 cup broccoli, chopped
½ cup cilantro or parsley, chopped
Wash micro greens and gently dry. Place all the ingredients into a bowl and toss
gently. Serve immediately. Makes 2 servings.
This dish is delicious with Herb Dressing (recipe on page 35) or just lemon and
the oil of your choice (I prefer avocado oil).
Known Health Benefits Avocados are the best fruit source of vitamin E, which
promotes antibody production to help protect against many diseases. Avocados
contain vitamins B-6, A, C and E, Folic acid, Zinc, Iron and Selenium; all
nutrients that have a major influence on the health of the immune system. Zinc
helps in wound healing and manufactures white blood cells.

Butter Lettuce Wraps
History has it that the emperor Domitian tormented guests at his banquets by
serving them a head of lettuce to begin the event. Since no one was permitted to
nod off in front of the emperor, guests were forced to fight off their sleepiness
for hours on end.
1 head of butter lettuce
2 large tomatoes, sliced thinly
1 shallot, sliced thinly
1 D’Anjou pear, sliced thinly
1 avocado, sliced thinly
1 zucchini, sliced thinly
½ cup sunflower sprouts
cup raw almonds, sliced
Carefully separate the lettuce leaves. Wash gently and drain on paper towels
(spinning will bruise and break the leaves).
To assemble the wrap, place single lettuce leaves onto plates. Place a tomato
slice in the center of each leaf. In the following order, add shallots, pear,
avocado, zucchini, sprouts and almonds to each serving. I recommend using the
Pear and Citrus Dressing (recipe on page 35).
Known Health Benefits Butter lettuce contains lactucarium which has effects
similar to those of opium. Because of its sedative properties, butter lettuce is
recommended for treating insomnia, intestinal spasms and palpitations. It is
also rich in calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, vitamins A, B, C and K.
Pears are a good source of vitamin C and copper. Both of these nutrients are
antioxidants that help protect cells from oxygen-related damage due to free
radicals. Pears also promote cardiovascular and colon health. The fiber in pears
helps prevent constipation and ensures regularity. Fiber has been shown in a
number of studies to lower high cholesterol levels important to people at risk for
atherosclerosis and/or diabetic heart disease. Fiber in the colon binds to bile
salts and carries them out of the body.


Sprouted Red Quinoa Salad
There are 3 types of quinoa red, beige and black. The most common is the beige
color. I have found that the red quinoa seeds stay firmer and crunchier when you
cook them. Even if overcooked, the red quinoa will still hold its shape unlike
standard quinoa which can become very soft and break apart. This makes red
quinoa more suitable for salads.
1 cup sprouted red quinoa
1 stalk green onion, sliced
1 small bunch cilantro, chopped
1 small yellow bell pepper, cubed
1 small red bell pepper, cubed
1 avocado, sliced or cubed
1 tablespoon fresh tarragon, chopped
¼ teaspoon flax seed oil
Juice of 1 lemon
Salt to taste
Combine all of the ingredients in a bowl. Add oil and lemon and gently toss
together. Serves 2.
How to Sprout Quinoa: Place quinoa in a glass bowl and add enough water to
cover completely. Leave in the counter overnight. The next day, thoroughly rinse
and drain the quinoa. Let the quinoa remain in the bowl on the counter without
water. On the third day, the quinoa will be sprouted and ready to eat.
Known Health Benefits Not only is quinoa high in protein, but the protein it
supplies is complete protein, meaning that it includes all nine essential amino
acids. Not only is quinoa’s amino acid profile well balanced, making it a good
choice for vegans concerned about adequate protein intake, quinoa is
especially well-endowed with the amino acid lysine, which is essential for
tissue growth and repair. In addition to protein, quinoa features other healthbuilding nutrients. Because quinoa is a very good source of manganese as well
as a good source of magnesium, iron, copper and phosphorus, this “grain”
may be especially valuable for persons with migraine headaches, diabetes and
atherosclerosis.

Pear and Citrus Dressing
Whenever I end up with extra salad dressing, I save it by freezing in an ice cube
tray. Keep the “dressing cubes” in a freezer bag and thaw as needed.
1 D’Anjou pear, sliced
Juice of 1 orange
Juice of 1 lemon
2 garlic cloves
½ teaspoon sweet lemon pepper
2 tablespoons grape seed oil
2 tablespoons water
Sea salt to taste
Place all the ingredients into a blender. Process at a medium speed until smooth.
Makes approximately 1½ cups.
I like to use this dressing on the Micro Greens Salad (recipe on page 28) and
Butter Lettuce Wraps (recipe on page 30). It is also excellent as a sauce on a
light white fish.
Herb Dressing
1 bunch Italian flat leaf parsley
1 bunch cilantro
1 small bunch dill
Juice of 2½ lemons
1 garlic clove
2 tablespoons grape seed oil
2 tablespoons water
Sea salt to taste
Place all the ingredients into a blender. Process at a medium speed until smooth.
Makes approximately 1 cup.
This dressing is delicious used over spinach, any green salad or vegetables.
Basil Dressing
There are more than 60 varieties of basil, all of which differ somewhat in
appearance and taste. The two I like best are sweet basil & African basil.
½ cup Italian basil leaves
Juice of 1½ lemons
2 garlic cloves
2 tablespoons grape seed oil
2 tablespoons water
Salt to taste
Place all the ingredients into a blender. Process at a medium speed until smooth.
Makes approximately ¾ cup.
Use as a dressing over spinach or any green salad, quinoa, buckwheat or brown
rice.
Known Health Benefits Basil has been shown to provide protection against
unwanted bacterial growth. One of the primary medicinal uses of basil comes
from BCP, or (E)-beta-caryophyllene, a natural anti-inflammatory compound
also found in oregano. BCP in basil is believed to combat bowel inflammation
and rheumatoid arthritis. An array of flavonoids exist in basil, which help to
protect cells and chromosomes from damage. Studies have shown that two of
these flavonoids in particular, orientin and vicenin, are useful in protecting
cell structures and chromosomes from damage by radiation and oxygen.


Parsley Dressing
The two most popular types of parsley are curly parsley and Italian flat leaf
parsley. The Italian variety has a more fragrant and less bitter taste than the curly
variety.
1 handful Italian parsley, flat leaf
Juice of 1½ lemons
1 garlic clove
⅛ teaspoon sea salt
1 tablespoon grape seed oil
2 tablespoons water
Place all the ingredients, except the oil, into a blender. Once blended, gradually
add in the grape seed oil while continuing to blend on a low speed. Makes
approximately ¾ cup.
This salad dressing is wonderful with any green salad.
Known Health Benefits Parsley is a rich source of antioxidants. The
flavonoids in parsley, especially luteolin, have been shown to function as
antioxidants that combine with highly reactive oxygen-containing molecules
(called oxygen radicals) to help prevent oxygen-based damage to cells. Parsley
is also an excellent source of vitamins C, A and a good source of folic acid,
one of the most important of the B vitamins. Folic acid is a critical nutrient for
proper cell division and is vitally important for cancer prevention in two areas
of the body that contain rapidly dividing cells—the colon, and in women, the
cervix. While parsley plays numerous roles in the body, one of its most critical
is in relation to cardiovascular health.

Cilantro Mint Dressing
Mint is known to promote good digestion. It also soothes the stomach in cases of
indigestion and inflammation. The strong and refreshing aroma of mint is an
excellent and quick remedy for nausea. Oil of mint, crushed fresh mint leaves or
any product with mint flavor should provide relief.
1 small bunch organic cilantro
1 small bunch organic mint
Juice of 1½ lemons
2 garlic cloves
3 Macadamia nuts to sweeten
1 tablespoon grape seed oil
2 tablespoons water
Salt to taste
Place all the ingredients into a blender and process on a medium speed until
smooth. Makes approximately ¾ cup.
This dressing is best used on a spinach salad or over white fish.
Known Health Benefits Cilantro (known as coriander outside the US) have a
health-supporting reputation that is high on the list of the healing spices. In
parts of Europe, coriander is known as an “anti-diabetic” plant. In parts of
India, it is used for its anti-inflammatory properties. In the United States,
coriander has recently been studied for its cholesterol-lowering and chelation
effects.

Broccoli and Asparagus Soup
You can substitute white asparagus for green. Green asparagus is grown above
ground, while white asparagus is cultivated underground. White asparagus has a
milder flavor because it does not contain chlorophyll. It must be peeled before
cooking.
2 cups broccoli stalks, cut into small pieces
2 cups asparagus stalks (thin stalks), cut into pieces
1 teaspoon grape seed oil
3 garlic cloves, minced
1 medium-sized shallot, sliced
1 tablespoon herb seasoning of your choice
1 cup almond milk (recipe on page 14)
1 cup water Salt to taste
Add oil to sauce pan. Sauté broccoli, shallot and asparagus with herb seasoning
(I prefer lemon pepper) and salt. Add water and cook over medium heat for 15
minutes.
Remove from heat and blend in a sturdy blender until creamy. Add almond milk
slowly and continue to blend until you reach the desired consistency. Depending
on the consistency you prefer, reduce or add water or almond milk. Makes 4
servings.
Known Health Benefits Garlic now tops the American National Cancer
Institute’s list of potential cancer-preventative foods. It contains multiple anticancer compounds and antioxidants, such as quercetin, diallyl sulphide, allin
and ajoene. These have the ability to block cancer causing agents such as
nitrosamine and aflatoxin which have been specifically linked to stomach,
lung and liver cancer. Garlic’s ajoene and allicin have also been shown to
retard cancer cells as a type of natural chemotherapy. The presence of
antioxidants in garlic has a very positive effect on the immune system in
general, protecting the body against all types of bacterial and viral attacks.
Creamy Leek and Fennel Soup
Leeks should be firm and straight with dark green leaves and white necks. Good
quality leeks will not be yellowed or wilted, nor have bulbs that are cracked or
bruised. Since overly large leeks are generally more fibrous in texture, purchase
those that have a diameter of 1-1½ inches or less.
2 leeks
2 fennel bulbs, sliced thinly
1 teaspoon grape seed oil
1½ cups water
1½ cups almond milk (recipe on page 14)
Salt and lemon pepper to taste
Chives for garnish
Cut the stalks of the leeks close to its green part, then cut lengthwise into ¼ inch
strips. Wash several times to remove sand.
In a medium-sized saucepan, heat the oil over medium heat. Add the leeks and
fennel and sauté until translucent. Don’t allow the leeks to brown. Add salt,
pepper and water. Remove from the heat and blend in a sturdy blender until
creamy. Add almond milk slowly and continue to blend until you reach the
desired consistency. Depending on the consistency you prefer, reduce or add
water or almond milk. Return to saucepan and heat to desired temperature.
Garnish with fresh chives. Makes 4 servings.
Known Health Benefits Leeks, like garlic and onions, belong to the allium
family of vegetables, which have been shown to lower high blood pressure, a
risk factor for heart attack and stroke. Regular consumption of allium
vegetables—as little as two or more times a week—is associated with a reduced
risk of prostate and colon cancer. Leeks are also a very good source of
manganese, vitamin B6, vitamin C, folate, and iron. Since they not only slow
the absorption of sugars from the intestinal tract, leeks are helpful in
stabilizing blood sugar, helping to ensure that sugars are properly metabolized
in the body.

Bell Pepper and Tomato Soup
Bell peppers, like their relatives chili peppers, are native to South America. They
were carried throughout the world by Spanish and Portuguese explorers who
traveled the continent. Because they are unripe, green bell peppers are less sweet
and slightly more bitter than yellow, orange, red and purple peppers. Bell
peppers are also dried and ground into the spice paprika.
1 red bell pepper, sliced
1 yellow bell pepper, sliced
1 orange bell pepper, sliced
3 medium tomatoes, chopped
2 shallots, sliced
5 garlic cloves, minced
1 teaspoon grape seed oil
1 cup almond milk (recipe on page 14)
Salt and lemon pepper to taste
Heat the oil in a medium-sized saucepan. Over medium heat, sauté shallots and
garlic for 3 minutes. Add tomatoes and bell peppers, cook until tender. Remove
the mixture from the heat and puree in a blender. Add almond milk slowly and
continue blending until you reach the desired consistency. Depending on the
consistency you prefer, reduce or add almond milk. Salt and pepper to taste.
Makes 4 servings.
Known Health Benefits Bell peppers are a good source of vitamin C, thiamine,
vitamin B6, beta carotene, folic acid. Possibly because of their vitamin C and
beta carotene content, bell peppers have also been shown to protect against
cataracts. Just like other nutrient-dense vegetables, bell peppers contain many
different powerful phytochemicals that have exceptional antioxidant activity.
They have also been shown to prevent blood clot formation and reduce the risk
of heart attacks and strokes most likely because of such substances as vitamin
C, capsaicin and flavonoids. Studies indicate that red bell peppers have
significantly higher levels of nutrients than green.

Creamy Summer Squash Soup
Once only found in the summer, they are now available throughout the year.
Summer squash are varieties which are harvested young, while the rind is still
tender and edible. Summer squashes include: Cousa squash, Pattypan squash
(also called Scallop squash), Yellow Crookneck squash, Yellow Summer squash
and Zucchini.
3 yellow squash, cut into 1½ inch pieces
3 green zucchini, cut into 1½ inch pieces
3 medium tomatoes, chopped
2 red bell peppers, sliced
1 teaspoon Chef Shake Blend™
3 small shallots, chopped
6 garlic cloves, chopped
1 teaspoon grape seed or coconut oil
2 cups almond milk (recipe on page 14)
Salt to taste
In a medium-sized sauce pan, sauté shallots and garlic in oil for approximately 2
minutes, just enough to evoke the flavor. Add the remaining ingredients except
the almond milk. Cover and simmer on medium heat. Cook for approximately 10
minutes or until tender. Do not overcook. Remove from the heat and blend in a
sturdy blender until creamy. Add almond milk slowly and continue blending
until you reach the desired consistency. Depending on the consistency you
prefer, reduce or add almond milk. Salt to taste. Makes 4 servings.
Creamy Winter Squash Soup
with Garlic Tomato Sauce
Like “Summer” squash, “Winter” squash are now available year-round. They
were traditionally those types of squash which were harvested in the late
Summer and early Fall and could be saved into the winter months. One of my
favorites is Spaghetti squash. When cooked, the flesh resembles spaghetti
strands and is a great substitute for pasta. Look for larger squash, they have
better flavor and bigger strands.
Soup:
1½ cups acorn squash, peeled and cubed
1½ cups butternut squash, peeled and cubed
½ red bell pepper, sliced
3 garlic cloves, minced
½ yellow onion, sliced
2 cups water
Juice of ½ lemon
Salt and pepper to taste
Sauce:
1 garlic clove, finely diced
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
½ medium shallot, chopped
1 teaspoon grape seed oil
1 cup pumpkin seed milk (recipe on page 14)
Salt and pepper to taste
In a medium-sized saucepan, over medium heat, cook the squash, bell pepper,
garlic and onions in the water until tender. Remove from the heat and liquefy in
a sturdy blender until creamy.
In a medium-sized saucepan, sauté garlic and shallots over medium heat until
tender (about 2 minutes). Add tomatoes and cook until soft. Add pumpkin milk
and bring to simmer. Combine the soup and sauce. Garnish with chopped
cilantro or parsley. Makes 4 servings.
Known Health Benefits Although not as potent as root vegetables such as
burdock, garlic or onion, winter squash, like acorn and butternut, have been
found to have medicinal nutrients that fight cancer. Consuming foods rich in
beta-cryptoxanthin, an orange-red carotenoid found in highest amounts in
pumpkin, papaya, red bell peppers, tangerines, oranges and peaches may
significantly lower one’s risk of developing lung cancer.

Ultimate Vegetable Soup
When you cut into an onion, the destroyed cells release enzymes that react and
get converted into an irritating gas that produces tears.
Here are some tips on how to cut an onion and avoid the tears:
1. Refrigerate the peeled onion for 20 minutes. Temperature affects the enzyme’s
ability to react.
2. fse a very sharp knife when cutting. Fewer cells are destroyed, releasing less
of the irritating enzyme.
3. Keep your face as far away from the onion as possible.
3 zucchini, sliced thinly
2 yellow squash, sliced thinly
1 leek (white part only), sliced thinly
4 tomatoes, cut in small squares
1 red bell pepper, cut in small cubes
1 cup asparagus, sliced in small pieces
½ small onion, diced
2 bunches of cilantro
4 cups water
1 cup raw almond milk (recipe on page 14)
1 tablespoon Herbamare® Organic Herb Seasoning Salt
1 teaspoon turmeric
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper, optional
Place the water into a soup pot and bring to a boil. Add the cilantro and
tomatoes, cover and cook for about 10 minutes over medium heat. Remove the
cilantro and discard. Smash tomatoes with a potato masher until almost puréed.
Add the remaining ingredients and continue cooking for 5 minutes. Remove
from heat. Place half of the soup into a sturdy blender. Process until smooth,
then return to the pot and mix with remaining soup. Add more Herbmare
seasoning if you need more salt. Makes 4-6 servings. Note: Herbamare can be
purchased at Mother’s Kitchen.
Known Health Benefits Asparagus is a very good source of potassium (288 mg
per cup) and is quite low in sodium. Historically, asparagus has been used to
treat problems involving swelling, such as arthritis and rheumatism and for
PMS-related water retention. Asparagus contains inulin that we do not digest.
When our diet contains adequate amounts of inulin, the growth and activity of
health-promoting friendly bacteria in our large intestine, such as Bifidobacteria
and Lactobacilli, increase. Asparagus has been prized for its medicinal
properties for almost 2000 years.
Zucchini Pasta with Tomato Sauce
Sun dried tomatoes are ripe tomatoes which are placed in the sun to remove most
of the water content. Twenty pounds of fresh, ripe tomatoes will dry down to just
1 pound of sun dried tomatoes. Sun dried tomatoes have the same nutritional
value as the fresh tomatoes they are made from: they are high in Lycopene,
antioxidants, vitamin C and low in sodium, fat and calories.
For the “pasta”:
3 medium zucchinis, cut in quarters
For the sauce:
½ jar sun dried tomatoes in oil, (tomatoes and oil)
2 medium tomatoes, sliced and seeded
10 leaves sweet basil (other types of basil are too bitter)
4 garlic cloves
Salt to taste
Use a turning slicer machine to cut the zucchini into spaghetti-like strips. Make
sure the zucchini is firm or the “spaghetti” will be too watery and limp.
Place all of the ingredients for the sauce in a sturdy blender or food processor.
Do not over blend – you want the sauce to be a little chunky. To serve, pour the
sauce over the zucchini pasta. You can add ribbons of sweet basil for added
flavor. An easy and delicious meal for those days you don’t want to cook.
Known Health Benefits Zucchini squash is a good source of vitamins C, A, E, K
and B6. Rich in valuable antioxidants, zucchinis also provide 4 grams of fiber
per cup. Adults should get about 30 grams of fiber per day in their diet. One cup
of zucchini contains about the same amount of potassium as a banana. Eating
plenty of falconoid, vitamin C-rich fruits and vegetables helps to support the
structure of capillaries.


Stuffed Tomatoes
Tomatoes are a member of the deadly nightshade family and, as such, were at
one time considered toxic. In 1820, an eccentric gentleman, Colonel Robert
Gibbon Johnson, demonstrated an amazing display of courage when he shocked
his home-town of Salem by consuming an entire basket of them in front of a
crowd of spectators, who expected him to die any second thereafter. Obviously,
he didn’t and since then tomatoes have become a staple of the American diet.
1 cup quinoa
1¾ cups water or vegetable stock
½ yellow or red bell pepper, diced
¼ cup basil, cilantro or Italian flat parsley, chopped
4 medium tomatoes, cut in half
Salt and pepper to taste
Place quinoa in a medium-sized saucepan, add water and bring to a boil. For a
richer flavor, replace the water with vegetable stock. Cover and reduce heat.
Simmer for 15 minutes. Allow to cool. Mix the quinoa with the diced bell pepper
and herbs. Cut the tomatoes in half and scoop out the insides. Fill them with the
quinoa mixture. Serve with the dressing of your choice. Makes 8 servings
Known Health Benefits The red pigment contained in tomatoes is called
lycopene. This compound appears to act as an antioxidant, neutralizing free
radicals that can damage cells in the body. Only recently, studies have revealed
that lycopene may have twice the punch of another well-known antioxidant,
betacarotene. Studies conducted by Harvard researchers have discovered that
men who consumed 10 servings of tomatoes a week can cut the risk of
developing prostate cancer by 45 percent. Italian researchers have found that
consuming more that 7 servings of raw tomatoes per week may lower the risk of
developing rectal colon or stomach cancers by 60 percent. Researchers have
found that lycopene is a powerful inhibitor of lung, breast, and endometrial
cancer cells.

Grilled Squash and Fennel
Fennel is composed of a white or pale green bulb from which closely
superimposed stalks are arranged. The stalks are topped with feathery green
leaves near which flowers grow and produce fennel seeds. The bulb, stalk,
leaves and seeds are all edible. Fennel is crunchy and has a slightly sweet
licorice taste.
1 fennel bulb, sliced into rounds
1 yellow squash, sliced lengthwise
1 zucchini, sliced lengthwise
1 teaspoon grape seed oil
Garlic pepper
Salt to taste
Preheat a skillet over medium heat, then add oil. Place the fennel, yellow squash
and zucchini in the skillet and cook for 2 minutes on one side until golden
brown. Then flip to the other side, sprinkle with garlic pepper and salt. Cook for
another minute. Serve as a side dish with fish or even as an entrée. Delicious,
very sweet and gentle on your stomach. Serves 4.
Known Health Benefits A high source of vitamins, minerals and dietary fibers,
the beneficial effects of fennel have been known for centuries. The seeds, leaves
and roots of the fennel plant have been used as medicinal agents as far back as
ancient China. It is used for congestion, conjunctivitis, stimulating appetite,
prevention against muscle spasms and for helping to relieve gas and an upset
stomach. Fennel is an antispasmodic, diuretic, expectorant and stimulant.
Fennel contains nutrients similar to those of celery, which belongs to the same
family, but it is the essential oil that promotes relief for an upset stomach. It is
also used for cancer patients after radiation and chemotherapy treatments to
help rebuild the digestive system.
Quinoa, Broccoli & Almond Tart
Native to South America, quinoa was once called “the gold of the Incas,” who
recognized its value in increasing the stamina of their warriors.
1 cup quinoa
1¾ cups water or vegetable stock
½ cup raw broccoli, finely chopped
¼ cup raw almonds, sliced
2 teaspoon Pear and Citrus dressing (recipe on page 35)
Honduras chives for garish
Salt to taste
Place quinoa in a medium-sized saucepan, add water and bring to a boil. For a
richer flavor, replace the water with vegetable stock. Cover and reduce heat.
Simmer for 15 minutes. Mix the quinoa with the broccoli and almonds and add
the Pear and Citrus Dressing to bind all the ingredients together. Shape the
mixture into a tart cylinder, garnish and serve.
Known Health Benefits Broccoli is a fiber find. Not only is it a rich source, but
half of its fiber is insoluble and half is soluble, helping to meet your needs for
both types of fiber. But the story doesn’t end with broccoli’s rich array of
nutrients. Broccoli provides a health bonus in the form of protective substances
that may shield you from disease. Botanically, broccoli belongs to the
cruciferous family. Health organizations have singled out cruciferous vegetables
as must-have foods, recommending we eat them several times a week. They are
linked to lower rates of cancer.


Pardina Lentils and Tomato Sauce
Turmeric, a shrub related to ginger, is grown throughout India, other parts of
Asia and Africa. It’s finger-like underground stems are used like fresh ginger or
are dried and ground into a powder. Known for its warm, bitter taste and golden
color, turmeric is commonly used in foods such as curry powders and mustards.
Lentils:
1 cup Pardina lentils
3 cups water
2 bay leaves
4 garlic cloves, minced
1 teaspoon turmeric
½ teaspoon salt
Tomato Sauce:
2 medium tomatoes, cubed
3 garlic cloves, minced
1 shallot, minced
1 tablespoon grape seed oil
1 teaspoon lemon pepper Chopped cilantro for garnish
Wash the lentils and drain well. Place all the ingredients in a medium-sized
saucepan. Cook over medium heat approximately 20 minutes or until tender.
Remove the bay leaves after the lentils are cooked. If you like a spicier flavor,
add a dash of cayenne pepper!
For the tomato sauce, I use grape seed oil because of its mild flavor (it won’t
overpower the seasonings). Sauté the garlic and shallot in a medium-sized
saucepan for 2 minutes over medium heat to release flavor. Add the tomatoes
and lemon pepper, cook until tender (mash the tomatoes with a fork if too
chunky). Combine the lentils and tomato sauce, garnish and serve hot. Makes 3-
4 servings.
Known Health Benefits Lentils are rich in protein, with over 25% of their
nutritional value being protein. This makes lentils the most popular and
inexpensive source for protein. One cup of cooked lentils contains 18 grams of
protein. Lentils have essential amino acids, dietary fiber, folate, other vitimins
and minerals. The fiber in lentils prevents the sudden hike in blood sugar levels
after a meal. It is also good for preventing digestive disorders, such as irritable
bowel syndrome, diverticulosis and constipation. Its high levels of magnesium
promote cardiovascular health, enhancing the blood flow in the body. Lentils
have good iron content, which is considered an energy supplier. As it contains
flavonoids, lentils are also good for preventing cancer, especially breast cancer.
Sea Bass with Tomato Sauce
Fresh sea bass never smells fishy; it smells fresh like the ocean. When choosing
sea bass steaks or fillets, whether they’re fresh or previously frozen, look for
moist, translucent (never dried out) flesh. Keep sea bass cool on the trip from the
market to your house. Never let it stay unrefrigerated for long.
4 (6-ounce) pieces of sea bass
¼ teaspoon Himalayan salt
½ teaspoon lemon pepper
4 medium tomatoes, chopped
3 garlic cloves, minced
2 shallots, sliced
1 tablespoon fresh basil leaves, chopped
2 teaspoons grape seed oil
Preheat a skillet over medium heat. Add the 1 teaspoon of the oil, tomatoes,
garlic, shallots and salt to taste. Simmer for 10 minutes. Remove from heat. My
Basil Dressing (recipe on page 36) can be combined with this sauce to make it
even more flavorful and delicious.
Wash the fish and pad dry. Season both sides of the fish with lemon pepper and
salt and rub with the remaining 1 teaspoon of oil. Preheat a skillet over medium
heat. Cook the fish until golden brown, about 3 minutes per side. Transfer fish to
a plate. Top with the tomato sauce, garnish with fresh basil and serve
immediately.
Known Health Benefits Seafood is a lean protein that contains the “good” fat,
polyunsaturated omega-3 fatty acids. Seafood is also low in calories and
sodium. If you’re looking for a miracle nutrient, omega-3 fatty acids fit the bill.
A steady stream of medical studies supports the health benefits of omega-3 fatty
acids. Salmon, sea bass, rainbow trout and whitefish are all high in omega-3s.


Salmon with Thai Curry Sauce
Farmed or wild Atlantic salmon should be avoided. Several populations of
Atlantic Salmon are in serious decline, and are listed as endangered under the
Endangered Species Act. Pacific salmon in Alaska is a better choice. It is among
the most intensively managed species in the world, with excellent monitoring of
both the fish populations and the fishery. The current abundance of Alaska
salmon and its habitat reflects the success of the state’s management practices.
2 pounds fresh wild salmon, skin on
1 teaspoon sea salt
2 teaspoon of lemon pepper
1 tablespoon grape seed oil
Wash the salmon and pat dry. Cut the salmon into serving-size pieces. In a small
bowl, combine the salt, oil and lemon pepper. Rub the mixture onto the salmon.
Place the salmon, skin side down, in a preheated skillet over medium heat. Cook
for 4 to 5 minutes (depending on the thickness of the fish). Carefully flip and
cook for an additional 4 to 5 minutes. Make sure the fish is completely cooked.
When fish is done, remove the skin and top with the Thai Curry Sauce (see
recipe on page 68). Makes 4-6 servings.
Health Caution It has been known for some time that farmed fish may contain
toxins from the buildup of environmental pollutants. This can result from the use
of industrial chemicals or pesticides that are now banned but remain in the
environment. Farmed fish are often fed pellets made from fish captured on the
bottom of the ocean, resulting in concentrated contaminants.
Wild salmon has a cleaner bill of health. Because they feed in the open ocean,
they are not exposed to the same concentrations of toxins. However, keep in mind
that the oceans are not as clean as they once were and there is also a risk of
exposure to toxins such as mercury, which is known to affect the nervous system.
Thai Coconut Curry Sauce
Curry is not a single spice like pepper or cinnamon, but is a combination of
many herbs and spices. Red curry paste can be made with dried long red chilies
(prik chee fah), cilantro root, coriander, cumin, garlic, shallots, kaffir lime rind,
white peppercorn, lemongrass, shrimp paste, sea salt and galangal.
1 can coconut milk, or homemade
1 inch ginger, peeled and finely grated
1 teaspoon Thai curry paste
2 tablespoons cilantro, chopped
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
1 shallot, minced
4 cloves garlic, minced
1 teaspoon coconut or grape seed oil
Cayenne pepper (optional)
Sea salt to taste
In a medium-size skillet add oil and sauté shallots, garlic and ginger for 3
minutes. Add tomatoes and cook over medium heat until soft. Add coconut milk,
Thai curry paste, cilantro, green onions and salt. Simmer for about 10 minutes.
Place mixture in a blender and purée until smooth. Serve immediately. Makes
about 2 cups of sauce, which is enough for 8 to 10 servings.
This sauce is wonderful over grilled Sole or Wild Salmon. For garnish, sprinkle
with chopped macadamia nuts or sliced almonds.
Known Health Benefits Cayenne pepper increases metabolism by immediately
influencing the venous structure. It is nothing short of amazing with its effects on
the circulatory system as it feeds the vital elements into the cell structure of
capillaries, veins, arteries and helps adjust blood pressure to normal levels.
Cayenne cleans the arteries as well, helping to rid the body of the bad LDL
cholesterol and triglycerides. It is also great for the stomach and the intestinal
tract.
Kumquat Sauce
Kumquats are small citrus fruits that look like little oval-shaped oranges. They
have a thin, edible rind that is sweeter than the inner flesh. Kumquats are often
used as a garnish, toss slices into fruit salad, or simply eat them as a snack.
1 cup kumquats, thinly sliced
Juice of 1 lemon
Juice of 2 oranges
Juice of 1 ripe mango
2 stalks green onion, chopped
4 garlic cloves, sliced
½ teaspoon garlic pepper
¼ teaspoon coconut oil
Salt to taste
Preheat a skillet over medium heat. Add the oil, garlic and green onion. Cook for
about 2 minutes. Cut mango in half and squeeze the juice into the pan, add the
remaining ingredients and simmer for another 5 minutes. This flavorful sauce is
excellent over any white fish.
Known Health Benefits Like many other citrus fruits, kumquats contain vitamin
C and bioflavonoids, but they also have calcium, potassium, and zinc to offer.
They are also a good source of fiber.

Nena’s Nutty Balls
A lot of people ask me if hemp seeds have any psychoactive properties (or will it
get you high?). The answer is no! Hemp seeds are safe to consume for
individuals of all ages. And they are an amazing source of protein!
1 cup dried figs
1 cup dried wild cherries
½ cup dried cranberries
¼ cup pumpkin seeds
10 Brazil nuts
½ cup hemp seeds
2 tablespoons unsweetened organic coconut, shredded
Place all the ingredients in a food processor and pulse until mixture is like a
cookie dough. Remove dough and form into small balls (about 1¼ inch
diameter). Ready to eat! Makes about 20 balls.
Known Health Benefits Hemp is a high protein seed containing all 9 of the
essential amino acids. It has high amounts of fatty acids and fiber as well as
containing vitamin E and trace minerals. It has a balanced ratio of omega 3 to 6
fats at around a three to one ratio. This won’t help correct your omega balance if
it’s off, but it gives you the right balance to start with. The protein content of the
hemp seed is supposed to be very digestible. Many people have found that hemp
seed protein did not cause bloating or gas, like some of their whey, or other
protein shakes did. Unlike soy, which has very high amounts of phytic acid (an
anti-nutrient that prevents us from absorbing minerals), hemp seed doesn’t
contain phytic acid.
Acknowledgements
I want to give thanks to a special group of ladies that came to my cooking
classes and supported me just about every week:
Twyla Read Martin – Thank you so much for attending every class I had. You
were always there on time and very interested in what I have to share. You are
always so good at testing the recipes and such a great student. And thank you for
hosting classes at your house, too. I had fun going to your house.
Stephanie Mendoza – You are so sweet, always letting me know how much you
like the food.
Sharon McKinnon – Thank you so much for hosting classes at your house. I had
so much fun at those classes. I thought sometimes you wanted to kick me out,
since the classes were so long... Sorry!!!
Olivia R. Able – It was always a joy to see you in class. Thank you for being
there to support me.
Rebecca W. Mclarand – Thank you for coming to support me. I enjoyed having
you in the cooking class. No Garlic!!!
Amy Vieth – Thank you very much for coming to my classes and for hosting
some of them. I really enjoyed going to your house.
Please feel free to contact me with any questions:
email: info@curesfromthekitchen.net
phone: 949-742-4184
website: www.curesfromthekitchen.net
Also, very special thanks to:
My dear Clinton Miller – You’ve spent most of your life insuring that we have
the freedom to determine what enters our bodies – whether it be limiting
chemicals that may be added to our water supply, drugs that may not always be
safe or foods that may be “enhanced” in ways that would reduce or damage
their nutritional value. Almost always, you were speaking against powerful and
moneyed interests, yet your record of success has benefited millions of people
who may never even know your name nor your work.
Today, you are in your 80s and, although less active, you are no less passionate
about your mission. You continue to be my advisor and counselor, for which I am
enormously grateful. May God bless you and give you many more years.
Veronica Sanchez – Thank you so much for being my sue chef, you make my job
so easy! You always make sure I have everything when I need it. Thanks so
much!!!
My husband, Alex, my daughter, Victoria and my son, Patrick – Thank you for
always understanding my absence from home. At times probably you feel
abandoned, but know that I love you all so very much. XXOOXX.
To my wonderful sister – Thank you for being there for me and for all the help
you have provided over the years. I would not be here without you!
Sandy and Betty – Thank you both for always encouraging me to finish this book
and being my cheerleaders.
Garry Tosti from Fuel Design Studio – Thank you so much for designing my
book. It’s so beautiful! And for translating the recipes from my Nicaraguan
English to USA English. I know you had “fun” with that part of the project. I
hope you won’t mind if I give out your info so that you can provide your amazing
services to others: phone: 562.243.4543, emailf garryinlb@gmail.com Notef If
you want the world’s healthiest cookware use only