The Origins Of Some Of India ' s Most Famous Dishes 

Sam Madhu For Homegrown

By Homegrown Staff | Posted Feb 28 2017
We ’ re a nation of hedonists and our choicest guilty pleasure is food . And for all our diversity , our communal love for food is the one common element that unites us all , despite the fact that cuisines from different parts of the country are incredibly varying . Still , you might have wondered while enjoying the rich culinary culture of the country , who developed certain staples like the biryani or a chicken tandoori , and how they came to be ? No ? Well , we weren ’ t either till someone casually told us the story behind biryani , and it got us hooked . 

We ’ re a little etymologically-obsessed here at Homegrown ( check out Hidden Histories : The Stories Behind Some Of Mumbai ’ s Most Frequented Locales as a case-in-point )  , but this time we decided to dig a little deeper than the name . Homegrown cruelly forced its writer to pen this while he was fasting , he did some scouring to find out the history and origins behind some of the most common Indian dishes we have all grown to love . Since some accounts are largely dependent on oral histories , a few facts have gotten blurry as they ’ ve been passed down through the years , so bear with us regarding those that have multiple contradictory theories that even food historians can ’ t agree upon . That said , others are wholly reliable and incontestable . One thing is for sure though , trust us when we say that some of the stories we ’ ve unearthed are going to leave you utterly satiated . 

I . Biryani

The word ‘ biryani ’ originates from the Persian word ‘ birian ’ which means ‘ fried before cooking ’  . Legend has it that Mumtaz Mahal ( 1593-1631 )  , Shah Jahan ’ s queen , once visited army barracks and thought that the soldiers were under-nourished . Therefore , she asked the chef to prepare a special dish , which provided balanced nutrition . After a few rejections , she finally settled on biryani , considering it the ‘ complete meal ’ which could be eaten as a single serving . So while the first origins of this dish have Persian and Afghani influences , the Mughals crafted it within the vast Indian subcontinent they ruled for years , proving the potency of the frequented spice route . Also , the next time you visit the Taj , make sure you give Mumtaz a small whisper of gratitude . Another theory suggests that a rice dish known as “ Oon Soru ” was found in Tamil as early as the year 2 A . D . Oon Soru was composed of rice , ghee , meat , turmeric , coriander , pepper , and bay leaf , and was used to feed military warriors . Other theories involve Timor The Lame bringing biriyani down from Kazakhstan via Afghanistan to Northern India and nomads burrying an earthen pot full of meat , rice and spices in a pit , which was then eventually dug up to become biriyani . 

II . Butter Chicken

The origins of butter chicken can be traced back to Old Delhi . It is said to have been first introduced by a man named Kundan Lal Gujral , who ran a restaurant called Moti Mahal Delux in Peshawar . Shortly after partition , the restaurant called Moti Mahal moved to Delhi , cooked by Chef Simon Mahil Chahal . The story goes something like this : after the restaurant shut down late at night , the restaurant was visited by a VIP guest who asked for ‘ some chicken dish ’ to be prepared for him . The chef looked into his supplies and discovered that he only had half of a Tandoori chicken to cook with . So , hastily , he improvised and tossed it with liberal amounts of butter , tomato , and garam masalas and prepared an unknown dish . What he didn ’ t know was that the dish he had made was for the ruler of Mareelun – who , unsurprisingly , loved it . So , if someone tells you that butter chicken is a ‘ complicated ’ dish , remind them that it was made due to lack of ingredients , and not because of an abundance of them , as the legend goes . Today , even within Moti Mahal , there is no one consistent recipe . After the original owner died , the Moti Mahal in Daryaganj passed out of his family ’ s control . Another chain ran many restaurants under the name of Moti Mahal Deluxe without the involvement of Kundanlal ’ s family . There are now over hundreds of Moti Mahals worldwide . 




Source : Maunika Gowardhan
III . Idli

The earliest story of Idli occurs in the Kannada writing ‘ Vaddaradhane ’ in 970 A . D .  , where it features as one of the eighteen items served to a Brahmachari who visits the home of a lady . Yet , the three elements of modern Idli-making are missing in these references : use of rice grits along with urad dal , the long fermentation of the mix , and steaming the batter to fluffiness . 

To get some answers , we have to travel further back into history . According to the Chinese chronicler Xuang Zang , there were no steaming vessels in India . It is said that the cooks who accompanied the Hindu Kings of Indonesia between 800-1200 AD , brought fermentation and steaming methods and their dish Kedli to South India along with them . While this theory has been speculated by food historian K . T . Acharya , other food historians such as Lizzie Collingham , Kristen Gremillion , and Makhdoom Al-Salaqi ( Syria ) are sceptical , since references found at Cairo ’ s Al-Azhar University Library suggest that Arab traders brought in ‘ rice balls ’ to India when they married and settled down in the southern belt of the country . The Arab settlers were strict in their dietary preferences ; many of them came here when Mohammed was still alive and they were neo-converts to Islam from Paganism . They insisted on halaal food , and Indian food was quite alien to their palate . To avoid all such confusion regarding what is halaal or haraam in food , they began to make rice balls as it was easy to make and was the safest option available . After making the rice balls , they would slightly flatten them and eat with bland coconut paste , sound familiar ? 

IV . Sambar

We all know that Idli and Sambar are inseparable .  [ 1 ]  . 

We can assume that Idli was created sometime between 800-1200 AD , as shown above .  [ 2 ]  . 

Therefore , by [ 1 ] and [ 2 ]  , we could speculate that Sambar probably originated between 800-1200 AD too , right ? Here ’ s a shocker : sambar , as a dish , was created as recently as the 18th century ! It is said that it originated in the kitchen of Thanjavur Marathas ruler Shahuji , who had an immense liking for a dish called amti . The dish was special because it had kokum as one of its main ingredients . However , catastrophe struck when during one particular season , the kokum ( which was imported from the Maratha homeland ) ran out of supply . However , some brilliant adviser in this court suggested that they try tamarind pulp for the sourness–an ingredients locals swore by . Shahji experimented the dish with tuvar dal , vegetables , spices and the tamarind pulp and served his cousin , Sambhaji , who was visiting him . The court loved the dish so much that they created a whole new supply of tamarind , and named the dish sambhar after their guest , Sambhaji . Another theory goes to Maratha ruler Shivaji ’ s son Sambhaji , who attempted to make daal himself when his head chef was away .  “ He added a little tamarind to the dal that he made an the royal kitchen dared to correct him on the fact that tamarind was not used in dal ,  ” says S Suresh , Tamil Nadu state convener of Intach , who gave a lecture on Tanjore Maratha history earlier this week .  “ He loved his own concoction , which was then referred to as sambar ,  ” says Suresh . 

V . Paneer

Paneer is a vital ingredient in most Indian dishes , Palak Paneer being the most famous of them all , especially in the umpteen vegetarian households that speckle the country . However , few people know that paneer , legend has it , was actually an accidental invention . As the theory goes , the Mongols were out on a long trip , riding horses that were carrying milk in Mushkis ( bags made of raw hide )  . However , the heat of deserts and the rennet in the leather turned the milk into paneer . They tasted the resultant product ( kudos to their spirit of adventure ) and found it to be rather delicious . It was brought to India in subsequent years by the Mughals and was mixed with various Indian spices and vegetables , which eventually became a staple as we can all attest to today . Of course , that ’ s not all ! Vedic literature refers to a substance that is interpreted by some authors , such as Sanjeev Kapoor , as a form of paneer . According to Arthur Berriedale Keith , a kind of cheese is “ perhaps referred to ” in the Rigveda . However , another source , Otto Schrader , believes that the Rigveda only mentions “ a skin of sour milk , not cheese in the proper sense ”  . Based on texts such as Charaka Samhita , BN Mathur wrote that the earliest evidence of a heat-acid coagulated milk product in India can be traced to 75-300 CE , in the Kushan-Satavahana era . According to them , paneer is indigenous to the north-western part of South Asia , and was introduced in India by Afghan and Iranian travelers . Paneer may also have a Portuguese influence , with a technique known as “ breaking milk ”  . 

VI . Pav Bhaji 

Pav Bhaji as a dish originated in the city of Mumbai , legend has it . Every day , numerous mill workers would have lunch breaks that were too short for a full meal . As they had to return to rigorous physical labour immediately after , a light lunch was preferred to a heavy one . Noticing the plight of the workers , a local vendor created the dish using leftover ingredients of other dishes available on the menu . Roti or rice , which would be saved for other dishes , was replaced with pav . Curries that usually go with Indian bread or rice were amalgamated into just one spicy mixture , the ‘ bhaji ’  . The tasty , spicy dish was an instant hit with these mill workers , and eventually found its way into restaurants only to become one of the most loved dishes all over the city . The first stalls were located near the old Cotton Exchange , because traders waited for the New York cotton prices ( in the ’ 60s , these were carried prominently in all Bombay papers ) that came in late into the night and early in the morning . But soon the pav bhaji stalls spread all over the city and by the late ’ 60s such restaurants as Tardeo ’ s Sardar Pav Bhaji were packing them in . 

VII . Samosa

The samosa is one of the most famous snacks in India today . However , its origins can be traced back to Central Asia . If legend is to be believed , various traders travelled to India using ancient trade routes from Central Asia . Since heavy food could not be carried around , they started cooking small , crisp mince-filled triangles that were easy to make at the campfire during night halts , and were also convenient to be packed into saddlebags as snacks for the next day ’ s journey . Eventually , it found its way to India through spice route travellers . However , since most Indians were vegetarians , they replaced the mince filling with vegetables or potatoes . Soon , the samosa was a huge hit , both among the locals and kings , as one of the theories goes . It is also said that the triangular potato / meat-filled savoury dish actually has origins in the Middle East . Originally called ‘ sambosa ’  , the Indian samosa was actually introduced to the country sometime between the 13th and 14th century by traders of the Middle East . 


Representational image , source : Simple Recipes
VIII . Vada Pav – The Real Fast Food

Vada pav , like the Pav Bhaji , can also trace its origins back to Bombay . As various food history documentations claim , this dish is credited to Ashok Vaidya , a snack vendor who ran a street stall just outside Dadar station . Since Dadar was an important station , it was constantly spilling over with hordes of commuters . In a moment of culinary innovation , Vaidya reportedly came up with this recipe in 1971 to satiate the hunger of the hustling crowd in desperate need of a snack that could be consumed on-the-go . In a way , it was like his own version of fast food . He served it up with fiery red chutney that could include coconut , peanuts , chillies , garlic and tamarind pulp . Safe to say , the rest is history . 

IX . Kebabs – A Quick Fix

Although Kebabs are the pride of the Middle East and also find a place in the hearts of every Indian , one theory claims that the dish itself was invented during the Medieval Era in Turkey . The story says that in order to save meat during their travels , the soldiers cut it up in small pieces , grilled it on their swords and ate it with some bread . However , curiously , the term ‘ kebab ’ is said to have originated from the Arabic ‘ kabāb ’ which means to char or burn , while the Turkish version of the term is ‘ kebap ’  . Still , it ’ s hard to trace the origins of kebabs in general , since this over-arching dish has many , many different forms , from the shami kebab ( which reportedly comes from Pakistan ) to the shish kebab to the typically Indian hara bhara kebab . The people who believe kebabs come from Turkey insist that soldiers used to grill chunks of freshly hunted animals skewed on swords on open field fires . The name was firstly discovered in a Turkish script of Kyssa-i Yusuf in 1377 , which is the oldest known source where kebab is stated as a food item . 

X . Chicken Tandoori / Chicken Tikka 

Remember the story behind the invention of Butter Chicken ? Well , turns out , the same restaurant gave the world the lip-smacking tandoori chicken too ! It is said that the dish originated in Moti Mahal Delux , of which Kundan Lal Gujaral was the head chef and owner . The chef was known to dabble around with his ingredients and loved his tandoor . So one day , as an experiment , he skewered some chicken , applied the spices , and left it in the tandoor . The result was so marvellous that it even impressed the first Prime Minister of India , Jawaharlal Nehru . He then made sure that Moti Mahal turned into his official banquet , as records claim . 

Visiting dignitaries like American Presidents Richard Nixon and John F . Kennedy , Soviet leaders Nikolai Bulganin and Nikita Khrushchev , the King of Nepal , and the Shah of Iran , all were made to eat Chicken Tandoori by the Prime Minister himself . The subsequent fame of Tandoori chicken led to many variations . Eventually , boneless chicken started being used , and thus Chicken Tikka came into existence . In India , tandoori cooking was traditionally associated with the Punjab and became popular in the mainstream after the 1947 partition when West Punjabis resettled in places such as Delhi , although sources say that the tandoori style of cooking chicken could date back as early as the Mughal era . 


Representational image , source : Rayaan ' s Oriental Restaurant
Feature Image by Sam Madhu For Homegrown 
 
[ Note : This article was originally published on June 30 , 2014 , and some of the theories have been re-verified , updated and corrected since .  ] 