The 20 Most Significant Inventions in the History of Food and Drink
By Megan Garber
SEPTEMBER 15 , 2012
SHARE
Science experts rank the refrigerator as Invention # 1 .  
 
[ optional image description ] 
An Egyptian ploughman , circa 1200 BC ( Wikimedia Commons ) 
The Royal Society , the UK ' s national academy of science , had a question : What are the most meaningful innovations in humanity ' s culinary history ? What mattered more to the development of civilization ' s cultivation of food : the oven ? The fridge ? The plough ? The spork ? 

To answer that question , the Society convened a group of its Fellows -- including , yup , a Nobel Prize Winner -- and asked them to whittle down a list of 100 culinarily innovative tools down to 20 . That list was then voted on by the Fellows and by a group of " experts in the food and drink industry ,  " its tools ranked according to four criteria : accessibility , productivity , aesthetics , and health . 

Below , via Edible Geography ' s Nicola Twilley , are the ranked results of that endeavor . These are -- per the eminent body of the Royal Society -- the top 20 innovations in food and drink , from the dawn of time to the present day . 

1 . Refrigeration
The use of ice to lower the temperature of and thus preserve food dates back to prehistoric times . Machine-based refrigeration , however , was developed as a process starting in the mid 18th century and moving into the 19th . Domestic mechanical refrigerators first became available in the early 20th century . Throughout its long history , refrigeration has allowed humans to preserve food and , with it , nutrition . It has also allowed for a key innovation in human civilization : cold beer . 

2 . Pasteurization / sterilization
Useful for the prevention of bacterial contamination in food , particularly milk . 

3 . Canning
Developed in the early 19th century , canning is a method of preserving food by processing and sealing it in an airtight container . Canning provides a typical shelf life ranging from one to five years . It also provides a fun weekend activity for humans who live in Brooklyn . 

4 . The oven
The earliest ovens , found in Central Europe , date from 29 , 000 BC , and were used , at times , to cook mammoth . Their more contemporary counterparts , gas ovens , were first developed in the early 19th century and were used , at times , to cook buns . 

5 . Irrigation
Irrigation is the artificial application of water to land or soil . It is used to assist in the growing of agricultural crops , and in the revegetation of disturbed soils in dry areas . This is particularly useful during periods of inadequate rainfall . 

6 . Threshing machine / combine harvester
Invented in the late 18th century , the thresher brought more industrialization to farming , allowing for the mechanized separation of grain from stalks from husks . The device was originally called the " thrasher .  " Prior to its invention , farmers had separated grain by hand , with flails . 

7 . Baking
This is a food cooking method that employs prolonged , dry heat to cook food . Baking acts by convection , rather than by thermal radiation , and is typically undertaken in ovens , in hot ashes , or on hot stones . Its results can also be facilitated by invention # 14 . 

8 . Selective breeding / strains
Selective breeding is the process of breeding plants and animals for particular traits . It allows humans to manipulate natural selection among the plants and animals they consume in order to produce food products that are genetically stable . It is also the reason that a bull named Badger-Bluff Fanny Freddie has sired thousands of the dairy cattle in the United States . 

9 . Grinding / milling
Grinding is the process of grinding grain or other materials in a mill . It produces , among other things , flour , which is the main ingredient of bread -- a staple food for many cultures . The milling of grain has been a practice since 6000 BC , enacted by millstones and similar implements -- and replicated pretty much the same way until the late 19th century brought the advent of the steam mill . 

10 . The plough
A plough is a tool ( or , more commonly now , a machine ) that cultivates soil in preparation for sowing seeds . It has existed , in some form , pretty much since the dawn of recorded history , and represents one of the major advances in agriculture . In that regard , it facilitated the rise of sedentary human civilization . 

11 . Fermentation
Beer . More formally ,  " the conversion of carbohydrates to alcohols and carbon dioxide or organic acids using yeasts , bacteria , or a combination thereof , under anaerobic conditions " -- which leads to such products as alcohol , wine , vinegar , yogurt , bread , and cheese . Mostly , though : beer . 

12 . The fishing net
Fishing nets have been used since the stone age , with the oldest known version made from willow and dating back to 8300 BC . The nets are still in wide use today , and currently include casting , drifting , dragging , landing , trawling , and leg-wrapping varieties . 

13 . Crop rotation
The practice of growing a series of dissimilar types of crops in the same area in sequential seasons . 

14 . The pot
The food container was an invention of revolutionary simplicity -- one that allowed for such revolutionarily simple acts as boiling water . Which led to innovations like tea and pasta and cook-in-a-bag omelets . Additionally ,  " the pot " is the culinary innovation with , by far , the most intriguing disambiguation page on Wikipedia . 

15 . The knife
Including , ostensibly , the Ginsu . 

16 . Eating utensils
Excluding , ostensibly , the spork . 

17 . The cork
The cork allowed for the production of wine and beer . Cork ' s elasticity and near-impermeability make it ideal as a material for bottle stoppers . 

18 . The barrel
Same deal : wine and beer . While barrels store other things , too -- water , oil -- they made this list , ostensibly , because of the booze . As a technology , barrels also led to the advent of one of the least-scary forms of clown yet invented . 

19 . The microwave oven
Often colloquially shortened to microwave , this is a kitchen appliance that heats food by a dielectric heating process in which radiation is used to heat the polarized molecules in food . The microwave is notable mostly as a gateway technology , leading to the culinary innovation of the late 20th century : Easy Mac . 

20 . Frying
The cooking of food in oil or another fat originated in ancient Egypt around 2500 BC . Civilization recently combined frying with all of the above 19 innovations to create the product that will probably , somehow , lead to its end : deep-fried beer . 