10 popular vegan restaurants in India
iStock | Last updated on -Aug 27 , 2020 , 10 : 00 ISTShare fbsharetwsharepinshareComments ( 2 ) 
01 / 11Vegan restaurants in India

Every other day , social media is abuzz with the latest trends . Be it fashion , health or food , nothing remains untouched . Looking at the latest trends in the food industry , more and more people are adopting veganism . With this practice , people are prohibiting the eating of animal-related food products . Of late , various celebrities have promoted veganism and recently , even Genelia and Ritesh Deshmukh joined the bandwagon by launching a plant-based meat venture . This change is undoubtedly because of social media , where hundreds of animal cruelty videos are being shared in order to make people aware . Not just that , a lot of people are becoming ‘ Vegan Influencers ’ to promote veganism in India . This trend has led to the opening of various vegan restaurants . If you are also a vegan and looking forward to eating out , here are the top 10 restaurants in India that you must look out for ! 

READMORE
02 / 11Rose Café , Delhi

If you are looking at the best vegan restaurant in the capital city , it ’ s no doubt the Rose Café . The menu at this vegan restaurant includes soups , pizzas , pasta and even sandwiches . So , what are you wondering ? Go for it !  ( Image courtesy : Instagram /  @ rosecafedelhi ) 

03 / 11​Greenr Cafe , Gurugram

This café in Gurgaon serves the best pita bread with salads . It also serves great falafel along with juices . If you are looking for vegan treats in Gurugram , then it ’ s the place .  ( Image courtesy : Instagram /  @ begreenr ) 
04 / 11Kitchen Garden by Suzette , Mumbai

Looking for Insta-worthy dishes ? This is the place for you all ! It ’ s situated in Bandra and you can find all kinds of healthy vegan dishes . From pancakes to salads , sandwiches and delectable desserts , this place will provide all .  ( Image courtesy : Instagram /  @ kitchengardenbysuzette ) 

05 / 11Carrots , Bangalore

As per reports , Carrots is the first-ever vegan restaurant in India . This place is famous for its freshly baked carrot cake . It also has various starters , wraps , pizzas , and delicious Indian gravies that are worth dying for !  ( Image courtesy : Instagram /  @ carrotsrestaurant ) 

06 / 11Krystal Bar , Jaipur

Krystal Bar in Hilton is one of the classiest vegan restaurants that serve food with style . The food here includes delicious pizzas , appetizers and Indian chaat being served as a snack . 

07 / 11The Square , Guwahati

Coming to Eastern India , you might think there are not much options for vegans . However , to prove you wrong , there is a vegan restaurant by the name of The Square by Novotel . The USP of this place is the midnight menu that will amaze you .  ( Image courtesy : Instagram /  @ allaboutelan ) 

08 / 11Wabi Sabi , Kolkata

Wabi Sabi is an amazing place for those looking to have some fun while enjoying their food . This Kolkata-based vegan restaurant is best for romantic dinners or brunches . There are a lot of options to choose from a variety of salads , sandwiches , wraps , sizzlers and main dishes .  ( Image courtesy : Instagram /  @ wabisabi_restaurant ) 

09 / 11Bean Me Up , Goa

You might put a break to your nutrition needs when holidaying . But ,  ‘ Bean Me Up ’ is your best bet when holidaying in Goa . With a great ambience , this restaurant gives you enough options in breakfast , sizzlers , pizzas , wraps and even main dishes . Of all the dishes , you must have pancakes and bruschetta when here ! beanmeup . goa

10 / 11Sequel Bistro & Juice Bar , Mumbai

A one-point stop for all the health-freaks , Sequel Bistro & Juice Bar has a lot of options from which you can choose your favourite dishes . Based in Bandra , you must try their Vegan Protein Bowl that includes oven-baked millet with roasted baby carrots and peas falafel serve with hummus .  ( Image courtesy : Instagram /  @ allabouttheyumm ) 

11 / 11Ahimsa - The Vegan Cafe , Shirdi

Ever since this vegan café has opened its door for the public , the journey to Shirdi has become more amazing . The menu at Ahimsa café includes a global cuisine and is just not limited to salads and sandwiches . Here you can find mouth-watering burgers and pizzas to enjoy with your family .  ( Image courtesy : Instagram @ ahimsathevegancafepinner ) 